Refugee plan is Trudeau’s Obamacare

It is no secret that Justin Trudeau fancies himself as the Canadian Barack Obama. His measured speaking delivery is an obvious, if poor, emulation of the American president’s part-professor, part-preacher speaking style. So is his obsession with rhetoric in support of the “middle class” and his sunny ways message: he has ridden to office over tough economic times upon a wave of hope and optimism.

Now that he’s in office, Trudeau seems to — unwittingly or not — be following Obama’s lead in policy as well. I’m not talking about a specific law or initiative (at least not yet), but rather the way in which both men abandon all measures of fairness and civility toward their opponents when a pet project is under fire, and especially when those opponents are proved right in their criticisms.

Obama’s intransigence has covered many areas, most notably foreign affairs and his relations with Congress. But this quality was at its most prominent when the roll out of his signature legislation, the Affordable Care Act, began to crumble beneath its own contradictions. After having managed to earn the approval of the Supreme Court despite the law’s apparent conflict with the constitution’s commerce clause, the sheer unworkability of the program’s central planks undid its timely implementation. By the time that the president had to answer for how badly his administration bungled the Obamacare rollout, he could only offer platitudes about his opponents, rather than concrete reasons to support what he was doing. What’s worse, Obama refused to permit Republicans in Congress to pass a law allowing Americans to keep their existing health care plans, despite the fact that the same policy was being promulgated via executive order, seemingly because it might suggest that his critics were on to something all along.

The delays of the individual and employer mandates of Obamacare — again, central planks of the health care law — put one in mind of the refugee bonanza here in Canada. As we remember from the summer election, then-candidate Trudeau blew his opponents — including the NDP — out of the water by promising to bring 25,000 refugees by the end of 2015. This was despite the fact, which he must have known, that the ordinary time to resettle refugees from Lebanon was 11 months, and from Turkey 45 months, and that these timelines corresponded with the numbers being taken in under the Harper Government. Trudeau’s policy would have to bring 10 times the number of refugees taken in over two-and-a-half years, and do it in two-and-a-half months.

Like Obamacare, Trudeau’s policy has had to be delayed because of logistics. All of this was predictable, as the two leaders share a view about the ability of government which amounts to an unshakeable article of faith. In both the cases of bringing 30-million uninsured Americans onto health coverage and fast-tracking 25,000 people through immigration, the leaders imagined that the so-called X-factor was not the improvement of logistical capability but a mere belief that anything was possible through a commanded state intervention. The only limits to bureaucratic competence, it would seem, was cynicism, or the refusal to harness it on the basis of bad faith.

Well, as we know, this hope and optimism about efficient bureaucracy turned out to be rubbish. But of course the progressive-to-the-core leaders of our two countries could scarcely admit this openly. The closest was when Obama said, amid the wreckage, that, “What we’re also discovering is that insurance is complicated to buy.” (!). Nowadays, Justin is taking a page out of Barry’s playbook: the refugees won’t all be here by Christmas, but they’ll still be coming. It’s just delayed. And, the reason is that, in the words of the minister for the (recently-renamed) department of Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship, “Canadians want us to do it right.” Nothing about how the 25,000 plan was in the first place, and in fact remains in its revised form, completely cockamamie.

Justin even has an equivalent for “If you like your plan, you can keep your plan.” It’s the idea that security is either not relevant to the discussion, or that if it’s relevant at all, the protocols in place are adequate to ensure that there will be no negative consequences. Nothing to worry about, we are to be confident. But as with the sudden discovery that millions of Americans had lost their existing insurance coverage that did not make the cut, what will the prime minister say when some of the refugees end up plotting, perhaps successfully, against Canada? Murphy’s Law, that all plans conceived of by humans can and will go wrong at some point, is an absolute.

If Obama’s behaviour during the ACA saga is any indication, Trudeau will just continue doubling down with what has become the one-trick pony media strategy of left-wing governments: announce that anyone who disagrees with them is a bigot. Republicans weren’t against Obamacare because it was a fundamentally flawed policy which did not relate to the way insurance actually works, but because they didn’t want poor people to have healthcare. Or so the line went. Now we see prominent Liberals like Ontario Premier Kathleen Wynne coming out and saying openly that the reason many people oppose the current refugee plan is due to “closet racism.”

And perhaps the worst of all is how they manage to revise their bad ideas without giving even a hint that those who predicted their failures were right in the first place. When both Thomas Mulcair and Stephen Harper limited themselves to refugee promises that were realistic, Trudeau accosted them for their cynicism and lack of compassion. Whoops! Sorry, not sorry — too bad that the leaders of those parties did not scruple to make promises that could not be kept. Now we can expect that as the refugee deadlines are revised again in March, when the bureaucracy will still be unable to perform miracles at the boss’s order, it will be attributed to Justin’s infinite wisdom, and not his unwillingness to hear the other side.

“What we’re finding out is that resettling refugees is complicated.” Just you wait.

–

The Prince Arthur Herald

Photo credit: Wikimedia Commons