COMMERCE CITY — Colorado Academy caps off its second straight undefeated season with a 4-2 win over No. 3 The Classical Academy for the Class 3A state boys soccer title Saturday at Dick’s Sporting Goods Park.

The Mustangs finished the year with a record of 19-0-1, the same as it garnered in 2012 under coach JC Pritchard.

“It was a special day for these boys, a really special day for Colorado Academy,” Mustangs coach Gabe Bernstein said. “For a first year coach, you never really know what to expect. This was a great group of seniors.”

The game matched 3A’s most potent offense against its stingiest defense. The Titans led the class with 100 goals entering the game, while Colorado Academy allowed just two goals.

Offense prevailed early as the Titans broke through with a goal by freshman Titus Grant in the fourth minute to give TCA the early lead. A minute later, Colorado Academy senior Robert Wright responded to tie the game. In the 10th minute, Wright added a second goal to make it 2-1.

“Throughout this entire season, we had trouble scoring the ball. Our defense has really held us in these games,” Wright said. We have a fantastic goalkeeper in Jack Thomas so we felt this was our time to bring some goals to the table and we were able to capitalize.”

The Mustangs kept up the pressure through the first, getting 10 shots on goal and another goal from JJ Meyers in the 23rd minute to make it 3-1 going into the half.

In the second, the Titans made adjustments and were able to create more opportunities. Grant scored his second goal of the game in the 53rd minute to cut Colorado Academy’s lead down to one.

“We knew they were going to be a really organized team, so it was primarily our focus to attack smartly and throw them out of their organization,” Titans coach Blake Galvin said. “I think we had moments where we were able to do that very well. The unfortunate thing was that we were unable to keep that up for a full 80 minutes.”

A late goal by Mustangs midfielder Alex Clinkscales brought the lead back to two and put the game away.

“It’s unbelievable. I can’t put words to it,” Wright said. “It’s been a while since I’ve lost, so I was thinking how horrible it would be to go out on that note.”

Joe Nguyen: jnguyen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/byjoenguyen