Buy Photo Cathi Grinaldi (Photo: Lee Rood/The Register)Buy Photo

Cathi Grinaldi understands that most of us know little or nothing about how we are billed for medical visits and procedures.

Because she does know, the veteran West Des Moines nurse felt obligated to appeal a $265 charge for a doctor’s visit that never happened.

“Upcoding,” the practice of applying a billing code that results in a higher reimbursement rate to medical providers than is justified, is a common problem in the health care industry. Grinaldi, who references that coding sometimes in her work for an insurance company, believes she is a victim.

After contacting several people for months at UnityPoint Health and getting no response, she contacted the Iowa Attorney General’s Office, Iowa's Insurance Division, Sen. Chuck Grassley’s Office and the Reader’s Watchdog.

UnityPoint is now reviewing the matter.

Here’s what Grinaldi says happened:

Grinaldi made an appointment at UnityPoint Health last March in West Des Moines after she recognized that the pain and other symptoms she was experiencing were likely caused by a kidney stone.

She weighed in and had her blood pressure taken at the clinic. But since she arrived late on a Friday afternoon, she says nurse practitioner Tiffany Matheny advised her to go directly to an emergency room.

The talk with Matheny lasted around 5 minutes, Grinaldi said.

The charge on the bill from UnityPoint: $265.

Baffled, Grinaldi obtained an itemized bill to look into the “CPT” code applied for her visit. Current Procedural Terminology codes are numbers assigned to every task and service a medical practitioner provides to determine the reimbursement from insurers, Medicaid and Medicare.

Since everyone uses the same codes, they are supposed to ensure uniformity.

But the code UnityPoint applied to Grinaldi’s short stop at the clinic was 99215. In the medical world, that code is used for a doctor evaluation that typically lasts around 40 minutes.

By definition, a health care provider would have needed to have done two of the following three things to apply that code correctly: Take a comprehensive medical history or perform a comprehensive examination; make a medical decision of “high complexity,” or counsel or coordinate care with other providers.

Grinaldi says none of that happened on her brief visit. Any medical history and notes existed before she stopped in.

Grinaldi tried to reach out to the doctor’s office, the billing office, the clinic administrator and the legal department. One time, she said, someone in the billing office offered her a 20 percent discount if she would pay up and go away.

When she got no answers, she refused to pay her portion of the bill — $180 — and formally appealed the charge with UnityPoint four months ago. UnityPoint did not respond and referred her case to a collections agency.

Grinaldi said another more appropriate CPT code for a quick appointment with no consultation with a doctor was never used. The code that was applied to her brief drop-in was the highest-paying one that could have been selected.

“The thing is, they’ve been so arrogant. They haven’t even bothered to respond,” she said. “It’s been months.”

I sent details of Grinald's concerns to Amy Varcoe, a spokeswoman for UnityPoint. I also sent Varcoe a release written and signed by Grinaldi giving permission for someone to explain what happened with the bill, as I have done in other Watchdog columns involving medical issues.

Varcoe said the hand-written consent form was not considered "valid written authorization" and "therefore, does not allow us to comment on her case."

She said the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) prohibited UnityPoint from commenting on any patient’s treatment or bills.

"We have procedures in place to review concerns raised by patients about bills received related to care at our facilities," she wrote in a statement.

"A phone number is printed on every bill so any patient with a question or concern can call and speak with someone directly for assistance."

I told Varcoe that didn't really explain what patients are supposed to do when they get no response about billing concerns from UnityPoint. I also asked her to send me an authorization form the the company would accept for future columns.

But Grinaldi did get results: She told me Thursday she got a call from Matt Romanin, UnityPoint's regional vice president for clinic operations. She said he was very polite and apologized at length for letting her down as a patient.

Romanin said he would put a stop to the collections effort while UnityPoint looks into what happened with the coding on the bill.

"I told him it's too bad I had to go to this extent to get someone to listen to me," Grinaldi said.

Satisfied for now, Grinaldi said she would let us know what happens.

Get an itemized bill

If you obtain an itemized bill from your medical provider, you can review it to make sure procedures and services were actually provided.

CPT codes, short for Current Procedural Terminology, will be listed for each. Each CPT code is given a value that is submitted to insurers for reimbursement. The values reflect Medicare payment amounts. If you have private insurance, the amount paid to the provider may be more or less, depending on negotiations.

If you don’t feel that a code was applied correctly, you may appeal.

Go here to see definitions of different CPT codes in Iowa: http://tinyurl.com/zv5xvsk

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1OxI060