What has been described as a “once-in-a-generation opportunity” for Scottish independence didn’t quite resonate with the majority of voters. Scotland will remain a part of the United Kingdom following a historic vote Thursday, when 55 percent of voters declined to split Scotland from the U.K. versus 45 percent who voted for autonomy.

“The people of Scotland have spoken, and it is a clear result. They have kept our country of four nations together, and like millions of other people, I am delighted,” British Prime Minister David Cameron said in a news conference Friday. “It would have broken my heart to see our United Kingdom come to an end.”

Instead, the broken hearts fall to a surprisingly strong Yes campaign for Scottish Independence. Led by Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond, the Yes campaign gained ground in recent weeks, creating a much closer final vote than many had expected. An early September poll from YouGov market research firm showed that a majority of Scots – 51 percent – were in favor of Scottish secession.

But that’s not how the country voted Thursday in a historic election in which 97 percent of the country’s 5.3 million people were registered to vote, according to The Guardian. A reported 84.6 percent turned out to the polls, according to CBC News, which far outstrips the about 56 percent of Americans who turned out in the 2012 presidential election.

“Scotland has by majority decided not, at this stage, to become an independent country,” Salmond said Friday, according to CBC News. “I accept that verdict of the people, and I call on all of Scotland to follow suit in accepting the democratic verdict of the people of Scotland.”

One voting center remained uncounted Friday morning, but the majority of Scots had by then voted not to pursue independence. The first six centers counted were all No-majority, according to CBC News. Only four centers were Yes-majority.

“There can be no disputes, no reruns,” Cameron said Friday, according to Reuters. “We have heard the settled will of the Scottish people.”

A final Ipsos-Mori poll released Thursday showed 53 percent of Scottish voters in the No camp, with 47 percent pro-Independence, according to the Guardian.

Scotland votes to keep the United Kingdom united. http://t.co/Fs749bbcN8 #indyref #5Things #NewDay pic.twitter.com/yxuJXpsuVO — New Day (@NewDay) September 19, 2014



Salmond and Cameron signed a referendum back in 2012 that guaranteed Scotland a right to vote for its independence by the end of 2014, threatening to break up a relationship with England that dates back to 1707.

“Today is a momentous result for Scotland and also for the United Kingdom as a whole,” said Alistair Darling, chair of the Better Together campaign, according to USA Today. “By confirming our place within the Union, we have reaffirmed all that we have in common and the bonds that tie us together. Let them never be broken.”

Pro-secession Scots argued independence from the U.K. would allow for more autonomy in social and domestic affairs related to economic, energy and social policies, according to the Scottish National Party.

The Scots already have their own Parliament, along with their own judicial and education systems. But energy and economic policies are still shaped by the U.K., in which Scotland only accounts 59 seats in the 650-member Parliament, according to CBC News.

Cameron has been criticized by some Scottish business leaders for budget-slashing, according to The Associated Press. Some Scottish business leaders in support of the Yes campaign argued that independence would allow for more freedom to tap and price Scotland’s oil and gas reserves.

As the Yes campaign gathered steam, British politicians hurriedly promised more economic and social freedoms to Scotland, along with Wales and Northern Ireland, according to Reuters. As he accepted defeat Friday, Salmond told British politicians that he had not forgotten about their promises.

We know there'll be a majority for 'No'. I call on all of Scotland to "accept the democratic verdict" - @AlexSalmond pic.twitter.com/T3tuUTei2f — BBC Radio 4 Today (@BBCr4today) September 19, 2014



“Scotland will expect these to be honored in rapid course,” Salmond said Friday, according to Reuters.

Salmond’s defeat ended up being a victory for the British pound, which had been on a roller coaster path in the build up to a secession that could have had serious implications on economic policy beyond affording Scotland more freedom.

The pound rose sharply Friday morning before dipping off to $1.6394, according to The New York Times. The pound plummeted in early September to its lowest value since November 2013 as the financial world eyed Scotland’s potential divorce from the United Kingdom.

London stock index FTSE 100 gained 0.8 percent Friday, while the Nikkei index shot up 1.6 percent and the Hang Seng rose 0.6 percent. The news of a unified U.K. was a good one for institutions like the Royal Bank of Scotland, the Lloyds Banking Group and other firms that had threatened to reincorporate out of Scotland and into London in the event of a successful secession.

“That contingency plan is no longer required,” the R.B.S. said in a statement Friday, according to the Times. “Following the result, it is business as usual for all our customers across the U.K. and R.B.S.”

The same cannot be said for Cameron and the British Parliament, who may now face the daunting task of reconstructing the U.K.'s political system as it relates to Scotland, England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Cameron said Friday he believed the individual regions' should be able to vote "on their [independent] issues of tax, spending and welfare," according to Reuters.