Photo

To the Editor:

Re “Six Officers Charged in Baltimore Death” (front page, May 2):

The state’s attorney for Baltimore City, Marilyn J. Mosby, will be attacked from many sides for many reasons. But there are two charges that most of her colleagues in other cities have been criticized for that will not hold up for her: benign neglect and tacitly protecting the Police Department.

Just for taking action quickly and forcibly, she should be commended. We will still wait for the facts of the case, but at least this time we are not wondering if the normal cover-up will prevail.

STEPHEN SCHREIBER

Princeton, N.J.

To the Editor:

As executive directors of the Justice Policy Institute and the Prison Policy Initiative, respectively, whose report was referred to in a May 3 front-page article (“A Hard but Hopeful Home to ‘a Lot of Freddies’ ”), we agree that Freddie Gray, a black man who was arrested and died in police custody in Baltimore, was not an outlier but one of many who experience barriers to success in the Sandtown-Winchester section of the city. There is a dire need to focus on the real challenges facing his neighborhood, and reinvest dollars to build stronger, safer communities.

Our research showed that along with higher unemployment, higher rates of chronic school absence, and a lower life expectancy than the city average, Mr. Gray’s community of Sandtown-Winchester and the Harlem Park neighborhood send the most people to prison of any neighborhoods in the city.

Taxpayers spent $17 million in one year incarcerating people from these communities, and nearly $300 million incarcerating people across Baltimore.

The numbers underline the need for policy makers to re-evaluate their approach to policing and corrections and begin investing more in what we know will work: a public health approach to substance abuse and real opportunities for decent housing, education and employment.

MARC SCHINDLER

PETER WAGNER

Washington

To the Editor:

Closing Camden Yards and playing a baseball game without fans is unprecedented. The photo image (Sports pages, April 30) sends a horrible and lasting message of how not to deal with racial issues in the context of allegations of police misconduct.

It sadly demonstrates the lack of political, civic and Major League Baseball leadership.

Excluding rather than including Baltimore residents from attending and watching the game is not the way to react to the death of Freddie Gray, the legitimate protests and even the wrongful violence.

Addressing the systemic issues like the need for an independent special prosecutor to prosecute police officers accused of misconduct and a public preliminary hearing to determine whether to indict an officer rather than or in addition to the secret grand jury proceedings is the way to proceed if we are truly committed to overcoming this longtime fundamental problem.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A residency requirement for police officers with housing subsidies or a tax deduction and better training and increased pay for officers are among other needed reforms.

NORMAN SIEGEL

New York

The writer is a civil rights lawyer.

To the Editor:

N. D. B. Connolly (“Black Culture Is Not the Problem,” Op-Ed, May 1) gives us a new illustration of the Rashomon effect.

He saw Toya Graham’s physical discipline in getting her son away from the riot scene as “black-on-black violence.” But many see it as an example of parental love and concern, and extreme but necessary action.

ALAN SAGNER

Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.

To the Editor:

Re “What Black Moms Know,” by Ylonda Gault Caviness (Sunday Review, May 3):

There may have been valid reasons for “tough love” during slavery and Jim Crow. But now, whipping a child to the point of raising welts is not “tough love”; it’s child abuse. It needs to stop.

LOUIS SCHWARTZ

Brooklyn