In June 2015 when Donald Trump announced his bid for the Republican nomination, he was the laughing stock of liberals and conservatives alike. What seemed like a sick joke, quickly evolved into the most dangerous threat to liberty America has ever faced.

Trump, who would otherwise be written off as a farce, gained legitimacy from the deplorable state of American politics. The “Trump Phenomenon,” as it has come to be known, is an historical recurrence that wields consequences too detrimental to ignore.

In the past seven years the U.S. has grown increasingly more vulnerable, both economically and physically. The country has been subjected to chaotic changes in its already hectic political and sociological climate.

In addition the Republican Party has neglected to lobby the will of their constituents in congress. As a result, much of the party feels delegitimized and disenfranchised, enough that in 2009 America saw the formation of groups like the Tea Party.

The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that the employment-population ratio has dropped from 62.9 in 2008 to 59.8 in 2016. The unemployment rate doesn’t take into account people who have stopped looking for work.

The fabricated number that Obama brags so much about neglects that the labor force participation rate, which is how many people are working or trying to find work, has dropped 3.3 points since he took office.

The reality is people don’t have jobs and the economy is not “bouncing back.” Regardless of the propaganda being shoved down their throats, Americans are struggling to provide for themselves and their families.

Trump capitalizes on these struggles all too well playing GOP voters for fools. When he shouts about America needing to beat countries like China and Japan in trade, he’s plucking strings right at the heart of the GOP base.

Americans are scared and rightfully so. Around the world her enemies grow bolder with every passing day Obama is in office. The president’s foreign policy is weak.

America’s allies no longer have faith that she will be there to protect them while ISIS and the Iranian government test the limits of what they can get away with.

President Obama promised Americans that if Iran were to violate any part of the newly implemented nuclear deal, previously imposed sanctions would snap back immediately. But Legal Insurrection reported that, “Iran continues to violate the Nuclear Deal,” and the U.S. Treasury department only blacklisted two Iranian companies in the country’s missile program.

GOP voters are tired of not feeling safe and the U.S. failing to have a strong military posture. After Obama’s feeble intervention in Libya that resulted in the Benghazi incident, world powers don’t respect American military power.

The Hill reported that Trump feels the nuclear deal with Iran is so bad, he is close to wondering whether it was done poorly on purpose.

“I can’t believe they didn’t walk from that negotiation,” Trump said. “People want, not that phony Obama change, people want strength, they want competence.”

People know Trump is no military mastermind, but he talks a big game when it comes to support of the troops and the U.S. having a strong presence around the world.

The lame duck republicans who control congress right now strengthen Trump’s anti-establishment appeal.

After taking control in 2014, grassroots republicans expected to see at least a little push back against the liberal agenda that had been running wild for the past eight years. Such was the case when presidential hopeful Ted Cruz, introduced Kate’s Law that was blocked by Senate Democratic Leader Sen. Harry Reid.

Trump is the unfortunate overcorrection being made by the Republican base that experienced the past seven years of loss after loss in the political theater. From the Affordable Care Act to the President’s recent unilateral action on gun control, GOP voters are tired of losing.

The current chaos of the GOP is what makes Trump such a threat to American liberty. In the past, fascist dictators have used chaos to their advantage just as Trump is doing now.

Hitler came to power while Germany was suffering in the wake of World War I. Lenin came to power during a time when Russian monarchs ignored the needs of their suffering people. The list goes on, from Mao Zedong to Pol Pot, history bears witness to the rise of men who are a threat to freedom and America’s current political climate is far too parallel to ignore the similarities.

Trump embodies qualities from all these men. It’s not only what he says or does but how he does it. Trump has no regard for freedom of speech or press, a staple of American liberty that has defended her from tyranny in past, which is absolutely one of his more menacing qualities.

At Trump rallies he pens up the press in boxes that hinder their ability to accurately report what is happening and if anyone presents an opposing view he quickly has them removed. Trump’s Campaign Manager Corey Lewandowski has even been charged with assault and battery of a reporter who writes for Breitbart News, a traditionally conservative news source, and Trump stands by him.

Donald J. Trump is the biggest threat to national security, not ISIS or Iran or even climate change. The Republicans and the American people deserve a better front-runner than Trump. It’s time for people to understand how critical the situation has become, and that the manifestation of the “Trump Phenomenon” did not happen by chance. It was Edmund Burk who said, “The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing.”