The ongoing FIFA World Cup is an occasion for fans to congregate in bars and yell at the television — and a time when multinational corporations get to market their brands far and wide through players’ jerseys and billboards on the field. But the official sponsors of the championship are also key players in another arena: K Street.

Six companies paid an average $30 million per year for four years for the honor of being World Cup “partners,” while eight second-tier “sponsors” paid $10-25 million a year. How does that compare to what they spend on influencing lawmakers in Washington? In most cases, the corporations are willing to shell out far more for global recognition in the soccer world than for a voice in the nation’s capital.

Adidas

Adidas AG, the German sports equipment company and a World Cup “partner” responsible for the wacky, $160 “Brazuca” ball, doesn’t seem worried about policymakers in D.C. It spent just $40,000 last year on lobbying, less than half what it paid out in 2009, when it joined the huddle of companies trying to place an earmark in a miscellaneous tariff suspension bill, which passed in 2010.

Coca-Cola

Coca Cola, renowned for its World Cup commercials, is also one of FiFA’s six “partners.” Its lobbying spending has fizzled since 2009, when it spent a record $9.4 million on K Street. It has worked to influence bills related to labeling requirements, nutrition guidelines for food served in schools, and the debate over whether soda should be an allowable purchase under the food stamp program.

Hyundai

A “partner” and manufacturer of several funky national team buses, the Korean car maker has revved up its lobbying expenditures in recent years. Hyundai Motor Co. spent more than ever in 2011, exceeding $1 million the same year Congress approved the U.S.-Korea Trade Agreement. Since then, Hyundai’s efforts have dropped back; it paid out about $700,000 last year.

Sony

As part of its “partner,” contract, the Japanese electronics company has banned athletes from wearing competitors’ headphones on the stadium. (Still, there have been sightings of athletes sporting the flashy “Beats” created by rapper Dr. Dre.) But Sony Corp. is a winner on K Street, where it has spent huge amounts to defend copyright laws. It spent a record $3.5 million in 2007, when it pushed for Congress to include a provision to combat peer-to-peer file sharing on college networks as part of a 2008 higher education financial aid bill. In 2011, it lobbied heavily on the SOPA/PIPA bills that aimed to fight online privacy. Last year, its federal lobbying spending dropped to just over $2 million, leaving more money to help pay for its “partnership” in Brazil.

VISA

The credit card company is a World Cup “partner” that has also burned the plastic on K Street. Last year, it racked up $5.2 million on its lobbying tab. And in 2011 it spent $6.9 million trying to influence lawmakers as they considered the SOPA/PIPA bills. Visa Inc. lobbied extensively on the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act as well as a 2009 credit card reform bill which increased regulations on interest rates.

Anheuser-Busch InBev

The maker of Budweiser, Anheuser-Busch Inbev is a World Cup sponsor that has already been splattered by a controversy. In order to allow the brewer to distribute samples during the championship, FIFA pressured Brazil into modifying its laws to allow beer at soccer games. But that’s not the first time the company has imposed its clout on lawmakers. Its has spent increasing amounts on lobbying since the early 2000’s, culminating in a $4.3 million price tag last year. In 2006, pressure from the brewer helped persuade Congress to remove language that discouraged on-campus alcohol ads from a bill to combat underage drinking. Anheuser-Busch Inbev has also lobbied for lower beer taxes, most recently through two bills introduced last year that would reduce excise taxes.

BP

BP, the British oil and gas multinational and owner of the World Cup sponsor Castrol, was one of the biggest lobbying clients in Washington in 2009, when it spent close to $16 million. And for good cause: That year, Congress considered the cap-and-trade regulations that ultimately failed to pass in the Senate. Last year, BP spent about $8 million on K Street.

Continental AG

Continental, a German auto parts company and a designated sponsor of the World Cup, only started lobbying Washington last year. It spent a relatively modest $170,000 to influence members of Congress and the Commerce Department on topics including greenhouse gas emission standards for cars and a reform of export regulations.

Johnson & Johnson

Despite a continuing downturn across industries in lobbying spending, this drug maker is in robust health. Johnson & Johnson, an official sponsor of the soccer championship, spent $5.6 million last year, with a peak lobbying spending spree of $7.7 million in 2007. The company weighed in on the 2010 extension of unemployment benefits, and has also been proactive on several bills related to Medicare, safety provisions on food and drugs and research tax credits.

McDonald’s

McDonald’s Corp, an official sponsor of the competition, is loving its influence in Washington. It lobbying budget reached $2.3 million in 2013, the highest level ever. It has lobbied on many food-related issues, including a 2009 nutrition labeling requirements bill — but also tried to influence last year’s immigration reform bill and the 2009 Affordable Care Act.

Disney

Walt Disney Co., which paid $100 million to broadcast the soccer games on ESPN, is far from mousey when it comes to influencing lawmakers. It spent $3.6 million on lobbying last year and an all-time high of $5.9 million in 2008. Intellectual property policy is paramount for the entertainment company, but it has also lobbied on the Dodd-Frank Act and other matters.

Nike

Though not among the official sponsors, the Oregon-headquartered sports giant is competing with Adidas to supply popular teams and legendary players. It lost Karim Benzema and Lionel Messi to its rival but won Cristiano Ronaldo. Nike, though, does not run a very high lobbying tab. It has supported several bills to fund fitness programs, but spent just $780,000 on K Street last year.

Why invest so much more on partnerships, sponsorships and ads than on buying influence in D.C.? Maybe because 24 percent of U.S. adults — and 62 percent of those who follow soccer — will notice who sponsors their favorite teams, according to a Harris poll. In addition, influence in Washington is a relative steal: A little money goes a long way. So, next time Messi scores a goal, check out what bills his sponsors have lobbied on — after cheering your lungs out, of course.

Follow Lalita on Twitter at @lalitaclozel