GIRLS BASKETBALL: Leap-frogging the opposition

CANDO, N.D.—North Star jumped two spots in this week's North Dakota Class B girls high school basketball poll. The Bearcats climbed from fourth to No. 2 by going head-to-head with teams in front of them and beating them both.

Last Monday, North Star beat then third-ranked Park River/Fordville-Lankin 45-36. The Bearcats followed that with a 53-40 win against Rugby, which was ranked second last week.

"To see two teams of that caliber on your schedule (back to back) like that probably isn't common,'' North Star coach Jill Vote said. "But it was a great tune-up for us heading into tournaments.

"We don't put a lot into the rankings. We just knew they were both good teams. We felt we matched up well with both teams. We knew it wouldn't be easy. Fortunately, we were able to jump out ahead early in both games, weather their runs and hold our leads.''

North Star, which trails only 18-0 Thompson in this week's poll, takes an 18-1 record and a 13-game winning streak into the District 8 tournament. The Bearcats are the No. 1 seed in the tournament, which opens Friday in Rolla.

Success has come with a more balanced attack than last season's Region 2 runner-up team.

North Star knew it had a dominant player returning in 6-foot-5 Macey Kvilvang. The junior is averaging 26.2 points, 12.5 rebounds and 4 blocks a game.

"We expected to lean on Macey,'' Vote said. "She's a hard matchup for teams. You can't coach 6-5. She's very difficult to defend. And she's not just tall; she's a skilled player. We're comfortable with her shooting the 3-pointer and she's a very good passer.''

Kvilvang and Sarah Hagler were the one-two punch on last season's team, dominating the offense. With Hagler graduating, Kvilvang has increased her scoring by almost eight points a game.

And Stephanie Miller (18.5 ppg, 6.6 rpg) and Brenna Logie (10.2 ppg) also have become consistent scorers, each more than doubling her scoring average from last season. Logie is the lone senior in the starting lineup.

Miller is a first cousin to Hagler. "It's no surprise she can shoot,'' Vote said. "She's a gym rat, a very good shooter. She and Macey are a dangerous duo.

"But teams can't key on two players. We put five girls out there who can score. We've had multiple games in which we've had four players scoring in double figures.''

Peyton Halverson and Madison Borstad round out the starting lineup for a team that already has equaled last season's total of 18 wins.

"Sarah was a very good player,'' Vote said. "We've had a whole group of girls stepping up to replace her.''