Mesa resident Denis LeBlanc passes campaign signs for Ralph Heap and Bob Worsley on Friday. Heap and Worsley, running for state Senate in District 25, are involved in a race using tricks that mirror previous elections for the same seat. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

The Mesa where Dea Montague chose to make his home nearly 50 years ago was "kinder and gentler" — at least when it came to politics.

"I remember a day when there were three people running for the same seat," the civic activist and lawyer said. "And they helped each other put up signs."

Fast forward to recent elections to see why Montague speaks in the wistful past tense.

Take 2011, which saw the historic recall of then-state Senate President Russell Pearce, the Mesa Republican who wrote the contentious Senate Bill 1070 and got slammed for accepting nearly $40,000 in trips, tickets and other perks from the Fiesta Bowl.

Pearce's defeat came despite the use of tactics so bold they bordered on comical: One infamous campaign mailer falsely alleged opponent Jerry Lewis stole backpacks from homeless children; another move involved supporters putting up sham candidate Olivia Cortes to siphon votes from Lewis.

The recall signaled the majority of Mesa voters were ready to move away from Pearce's single-minded focus on immigration and to see legislators tackle a broader set of issues. Prominent Mesa Mormons in particular lined up to support Lewis, who, like Pearce, is a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. Pearce's "enforcement only" policies ran contrary to the church's official position on immigration, they said.

OPINION: Mesa: Where nasty, nice politics collide

The following year, Pearce attempted a comeback. Lewis' seat had been drawn into another district, so SkyMall founder and moderate Republican Bob Worsley stepped in to run against Pearce. After a heated primary campaign, Worsley trounced Pearce with 56 percent of the vote.

But the 44 percent of voters who had supported Pearce didn't evaporate.

This year, Worsley's District 25 re-election bid has placed him squarely in the middle of arguably the most hostile race of the primary-election season — and to many onlookers, its "centrist vs. far right" dynamic is a replay of 2012 and the 2011 recall.

This time, Worsley's competitor is Ralph Heap, a prominent orthopedic surgeon and active LDS church member who believes government's role in strengthening the economy is "to stay out of the way."

Locally, the race represents a battle for the ideological soul of Mesa, where leaders have been trying to shake the city's extremist political image in the hope of attracting high-profile companies, economic-development opportunities and tourism. The race's dynamics mirror those playing out between moderate and far-right conservatives both at the Arizona Legislature and throughout the nation, according to veteran pollster and Arizona political scientist Bruce Merrill.

"There's a sort of a side battle that has been occurring for some time in the Republican Party, in terms of the conflict between the more institutional, or traditional, right and the far right," said Merrill, an independent. "The average Republican voter is fairly conservative, of course, but the extreme right of the party falls way to the right of the mainstream."

Merrill estimated "ultra-right-wing" residents make up about 20 percent of Mesa's population, but they tend to be represented in disproportionately large numbers come election day. Given the makeup of Arizona's 30 legislative districts, where Republicans dominate, the outcome in the primaries generally sets the direction for the next Legislature.

"The reason we have a Legislature in Arizona that isn't at all close to the average voter in Arizona is that the average voter in Arizona is pretty moderate, but they don't go to the polls," Merrill said.

Average voter turnout for primaries nationwide is less than 20 percent, he said, and most of those voters are "ideologues."

"The intensity when you have somebody like Heap and Worsley fighting, that's really interesting, because I'd think, given Worsley's religion, education and experience, he'd be very conservative already," Merrill said. "I think it'll be very important to see how that race comes out."

On the attack

Heap did not respond to questions from The Arizona Republic, despite nearly two weeks of e-mails exchanged with campaign manager Barbara Parker. The Republic offered to do an off-hour call with Heap to accommodate his surgery schedule, as well as meet in person.

Parker on Aug. 5 said she would "work to get (answering questions) as a priority on our schedule," but the campaign was "very busy with prior commitments on our calendar."

An online summary of Heap's platform says he will "look for ways to reduce the size and cost of state government by eliminating waste and asking the tough questions about spending that you should expect from your state senator."

It describes Heap as an "unwavering supporter of the Second Amendment" and says he vows to "always vote 100 percent pro-life in the Arizona Senate."

Heap's statement in the Citizens Clean Elections Commission Voter Education Guide mentions education as a top priority, accompanied by a promise to "defend local control of our standards and curriculum."

Beyond promoting his own merits, Heap has not shied away from criticizing Worsley's voting record, which he described in a campaign letter as "remarkably bad for a man who promised to vote like a conservative." The letter charged Worsley had "voted to spend our tax dollars on college scholarships for illegal aliens," a claim an azcentral.com Fact Check deemed unsupported.

Heap and allies have hammered Worsley for supporting a Medicaid expansion and the state's involvement with the Common Core academic standards for schools — two major initiatives pushed by Republican Gov. Jan Brewer, who has endorsed Worsley. The Arizona Free Enterprise Club, an anonymous-donor, or "dark money," group, has spent thousands targeting Worsley and other so-called "legis-traitors" who voted for the Medicaid expansion.

Campaign-finance records link Pearce to the attacks as well, detailing the nearly $4,300 he donated to the Arizona Taxpayer's Action Committee. The committee posted signs claiming Worsley had voted for "Obamacare, Common Core, higher taxes, funding abortion (and) medical for illegals." Pearce did not return a call seeking comment.

Heap's campaign-finance reports also list thousands of dollars in payments to the company of political consultant Constantin Querard, a Pearce ally who was widely linked to the Cortes sham candidacy, though he denied involvement. Querard confirmed via e-mail that "we were on board with Heap briefly last year in a consulting capacity, but we haven't been since."

When asked about this year's payments from Heap, Querard said his company offers television, radio, direct-mail and tech services in addition to consulting, and the funds had gone to phone-banking products.

Heap supporter Tom Brown, who recently hosted an open house for the candidate, said he hasn't "been wholly comfortable with all the signs that have been up there," but he identified with general sentiments related to Worsley straying too far from the party.

The Mesa resident and Tempe business owner said he'd publicly supported Worsley in 2012 but had since "had a few disappointments along the way."

"The more I looked into it and did my homework, I started seeing that Heap's position on many things" — such as avoiding "crony capitalism" and eliminating a reliance on unions — "was much closer to what I was looking for," Brown said.

Worsley plays defense

Worsley isn't hurting for supporters, however — in Mesa or elsewhere. He recently scored a rare endorsement from former Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney, who said, "Arizona needs the conservative leadership and experience Bob possesses."

Worsley said he ran in 2012 on a platform of "elevating the policies and bills that we run at the Capitol" and overhauling the "image that, as a state, we are extremists." This year, his goal is the same.

"We have a lot of things we need to work on, from water to energy to really substantive issues like the education system and balancing our budget," he said. "I feel there's just not enough effort in terms of thinking more deeply about where we're going as a state."

Worsley said he wasn't surprised by the race's volatile climate, given that Pearce and his supporters "had two years to plot how they're going to approach this time."

But "unsurprised" isn't the same as "unfazed." As the negative signs against him multiplied — a recent addition labeled the conservative lawmaker a "pro-union liberal," again highlighting the idea that Worsley betrays his party — Worsley hired an attorney to research the claims and prepare a detailed report debunking many of the charges.

At least one independent organization, the Arizona Business Coalition, has stepped in with a counterattack in Worsley's defense, releasing a TV spot titled "Hypocrite Heap" that blasts Heap for profiting off "Obamacare" while criticizing it.

The Arizona Business Coalition is not required to name its donors but has voluntarily disclosed its membership, which includes the Arizona Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Greater Phoenix Chamber of Commerce and Greater Phoenix Leadership.

Lewis, who lost his Senate race in his new district in 2012, said he fears the same kinds of tactics that were used against him in the Pearce recall have re-emerged. He has been circulating the legal analysis Worsley commissioned with District 25 voters, saying, "There's no reason the race couldn't be a discussion centered on ideas about public policy."

Montague, too, has fretted about the effects of what he called "bully politics" and the resurgence of conservative infighting this year. Though he is a Worsley supporter, he said Heap is his family surgeon and they have a friendly relationship as well.

"I think the name-calling and labeling has been going on too long," he said. "For someone to determine that Bob Worsley is a liberal because he disagreed with the Republican caucus on a handful of votes out of hundreds of votes — I think that's a disservice to him and to the party. We're not voting for puppets to go in there."

The more "lockstep" a Republican candidate has to be to win the support of the district's Republican Party, the more independents the district will have, Montague said.

"If more and more 'traditional' Republicans are alienated by what I call 'small tent' or more radical Republicans, then the Republican Party is going to lose influence rather than gain," he said.

Republic reporter Mary Jo Pitzl contributed to this article.

Candidates at a glance

Incumbent: Bob Worsley

Age: 58.

Occupation: Entrepreneur, founder of SkyMall.

Family: Wife, Christi; six children; 22 grandchildren.

Website: bobworsleyforsenate.com.

Campaign phone: 480-382-8427.

Challenger: Ralph Heap

Age: 62.

Occupation: Surgeon.

Family: Wife, Denise; three children; seven grandchildren.

Website: ralphheap.com.

Campaign phone: 480-825-7718.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1oomKbe