A Lyft car with its trademarked pink mustache in San Francisco

An executive who recently left Lyft to join ridesharing rival Uber is being accused of taking secret documents with him.

Lyft said it has sued Travis VanderZanden, its former chief operating officer, for breaching a confidentiality agreement he signed upon joining the company last year. In a copy of the complaint reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, Lyft argues that VanderZanden, who left in August and joined Uber in October, violated a contract by downloading confidential documents containing financial projections and product plans to his personal Dropbox account before his departure.

The dispute highlights the fiercely competitive battle unfolding between Uber and Lyft, who have kept close tabs on each others’ plans and, at times, outright copied one another as they fight to gain share of the fast-growing market for ridesharing apps. The rivals have undercut each other’s prices, poached drivers and engaged in a public war of words.

Lyft’s complaint alleges that VanderZanden downloaded “Lyft’s historic and future financial information, strategic planning materials like marketing plans and product plans, customer lists and data, international growth documents, and private personnel information.” He violated a confidentiality agreement by retaining possession of these documents after Aug. 15, his last day of employment at Lyft, the company said.

Lyft said it discovered some of the documents VanderZanden took because he had synchronized his personal Dropbox account to a company-issued laptop he returned to Lyft after his departure.

VanderZanden, who is now vice president of international growth at Uber, denied Lyft’s allegations in a series of tweets on Thursday, writing that he did not take any confidential data to Uber and deleted all the documents listed in the complaint before joining the company. He called the lawsuit an “audacious attack” on his reputation. VanderZanden did not respond to requests for further comment left on his voicemail.

The executive joined Lyft when the company acquired his startup, a car-washing service called Cherry, last year.

Lyft also claims VanderZanden refused to sign a termination agreement that is designed to ensure a departing employee will adhere to a promise to keep company documents confidential.

The company further alleges VanderZanden solicited Lyft employees despite a confidentiality agreement prohibiting him from doing so for a period of one year after leaving the company.

The lawsuit seeks an injunction requiring him to return the confidential materials to Lyft, as well as unspecified damages and an award of lost profits.

In an emailed statement, a Lyft spokeswoman said the company is “disappointed to have to take this step, but this unusual situation has left us no choice but to take the necessary legal action to protect our confidential information.”