Many Americans believe more business-minded politicians are what the country needs for better government, according to a recent Gallup poll.

Four out of five respondents said that business and management experience are desirable qualities in elected officials.

The poll represents the responses of more than 1,000 people, age 18 and older, who were interviewed July 12-13 both by cell phone and land-line phone. Some interviews were conducted in Spanish.

Business leaders without political aspirations could still use this data to get some leadership insight.

For example, at a time of Congressional gridlock, 63% of respondents said it is more important to compromise to get things done compared to 56% who said standing on principle is more important. Leaders could figure out which way they lean and use that information in building a company culture.

Another important trend that the poll showed was the increased desire to see more women in leadership positions. About 63% of respondents said more women are needed in political office, an increase from 57% who thought so in 1995 and 2000.

Outside of politics, the movement to increase the number of female business leaders has grown in recent years thanks to organizations like Lean In and high profile female executives like Yahoo CEO, Marissa Mayer.

Though businesses may benefit from this poll data, Gallup pollsters note that these opinions expressed by people across the political and demographic spectrum may not be deciding factors when it comes to casting a ballot. In 2012 President Barack Obama, for instance, defeated his rival, Mitt Romney, whose campaign emphasized his successful business career.

And the representation of women in Congress remains well below their proportion of the population. Currently Gallup reports there are 79 U.S. House members, 20 U.S. Senators and five state governors in office that are women.

As 2016 approaches Gallup pollsters expect more attention and fundraising will be directed to female candidates considering a run for office.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments