Healthcare reform will support revenue growth as it extends coverage to more people.

While the Brand Name Pharmaceutical Manufacturing industry may have been resilient against the recession, competition from generic drugs has hampered its performance over the past five years. Industry revenue is forecast to decrease at an annualized rate of 1.5% to $165.0 billion, with revenue declining 2.0% in 2013. “Historically, sales have been bolstered by favorable demographic trends and the use of medication as a significant component of healthcare in the United States,” according to IBISWorld Industry Analyst Sarah Turk. However, the industry is facing mounting competition from generic pharmaceuticals. Since the patent cliff in 2011 and 2012, many major products, such as Lipitor, have lost patent protection. Because generics are sold at a significant discount as compared to brand-name drugs, companies came under pricing pressure from downstream customers, causing operating profit to decrease.

Players in the industry have tried to adapt to expiring patents by investing more in biological drugs. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 allowed the US Food and Drug Administration to approve generic biologics, but also initiated a 12-year patent period on these types of drugs. “While this legislation increases the threat from generic pharmaceutical manufacturers in this segment of the industry, it also provides a clearer path for operators to manufacture generic biologic drugs,” says Turk. Consequently, biologics will continue to play an important role in shaping this industry's future.

Healthcare reform is also expected to boost sales as more individuals gain prescription drug coverage in 2014. To maintain profitability, industry operators are anticipated to continue consolidating and reducing costs, mainly through reductions in employment and research and development expenditure.

For more information, visit IBISWorld’s Brand Name Pharmaceutical Manufacturing in the US industry report page.

Follow IBISWorld on Twitter: https://twitter.com/#!/IBISWorld

Friend IBISWorld on Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/pages/IBISWorld/121347533189

IBISWorld industry Report Key Topics

Pharmaceutical manufacturers develop prescription and over-the-counter products that are used to prevent or treat illnesses in humans or animals. Brand-name drugs and medication have patent protection. This industry does not include nutritional supplement or cosmetic product manufacturers.

Industry Performance

Executive Summary

Key External Drivers

Current Performance

Industry Outlook

Industry Life Cycle

Products & Markets

Supply Chain

Products & Services

Major Markets

Globalization & Trade

Business Locations

Competitive Landscape

Market Share Concentration

Key Success Factors

Cost Structure Benchmarks

Barriers to Entry

Major Companies

Operating Conditions

Capital Intensity

Key Statistics

Industry Data

Annual Change

Key Ratios

About IBISWorld Inc.

Recognized as the nation’s most trusted independent source of industry and market research, IBISWorld offers a comprehensive database of unique information and analysis on every US industry. With an extensive online portfolio, valued for its depth and scope, the company equips clients with the insight necessary to make better business decisions. Headquartered in Los Angeles, IBISWorld serves a range of business, professional service and government organizations through more than 10 locations worldwide. For more information, visit http://www.ibisworld.com or call 1-800-330-3772.