We're creeping up on the debt ceiling deadline, an alleged terrorist has his day in court in New York, and a soldier who darted into the line of fire (multiple times) to retrieve his fallen and injured comrades will receive the Medal of Honor.

It's Tuesday, and here are the “5 Things to Know for Your New Day."

Every weekday morning around 6, we’ll hit the top five stories of the day, clue you in on a few other buzzy items and let you know about some of the must-watch stories coming up on CNN’s morning show, “New Day.”

1. SHUTDOWN SHOWDOWN

Watch your head with that low ceiling: We’re T-minus two days until we hit the debt ceiling, which means the U.S. is getting closer and closer to not being able to pay all its bills.

The Senate’s Democratic and Republican leaders say they’re optimistic we might actually avoid default and get out of the partial government shutdown in the coming days.

But the main sticking points come down to how long an agreement would fund the government (to end the shutdown) and how long to extend the debt limit.

Going to call my bank tomorrow and ask them to raise my debt ceiling. Apparently that's all you have to do when you owe money and have none — Anonymoose (@RumBraker) October 15, 2013

While plans for a deal are still squishy as a blobfish, Democratic sources say the latest plan involves:

– Funding the government through January 15, but requiring budget negotiators to come up with a funding deal in December;

– Increasing the debt ceiling through February 15;

– Adding a way to verify incomes for Obamacare subsidies;

– And Delaying Obamacare’s “transitional reinsurance fee,” which would cost employers about $65 per employee per year for three years.

(Yes, you read that right – there may be a few Obamacare concessions.)

Now we’ll wait and see what Senate Republicans think after they meet at 9 a.m. today. House Republicans will meet at the same time to figure out what they want to do.

And if everyone agrees, we may finally have fiscal kumbayah.

I predict my days end tomorrow they will have a plan in place to open the government as well as raise the debt ceiling. — Uncle Sam Daily (@unclesamdaily) October 15, 2013

We’ll have a team of reporters at the top of the 6, 7 and 8 o’clock hours to tell us how close we are (or aren’t) to ending the shutdown and reaching a debt ceiling deal.

2. AL LIBI IN NEW YORK

The long arm of the law: So a team of U.S. special operations forces swooped into Libya and nabbed a suspected al Qaeda operative accused in the 1998 U.S. Embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania.

That made a lot of U.S. officials happy. But now, some are peeved that Abu Anas al Libi, who was held for days and interrogated aboard a Navy ship, is now in New York.

Rep. Peter King, R-New York, said it’s "unfortunate that al Libi is on American soil.”

"It shows the inherent flaws in the U.S. policy decision to try (terror suspects) in the U.S. because once you arrive on U.S. soil, that ends the interrogation of these high-value detainees," he said, adding that would not have happened if al Libi had been sent to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and faced a military commission there.

But State Department deputy spokeswoman Marie Harf said last week that there was no chance that al Libi would end up at Guantanamo.

"The administration's position on Guantanamo is clear. Our goal is not to add to the population, it's to reduce it, which we've done,” she said.

A U.S. official said al Libi received care at a medical facility in New York for a pre-existing medical condition and is "doing better."

@DonteStallworth Even suspected terrorist get free healthcare? Thoughts? http://t.co/vQMQj1J5z9 — pam grimes (@pambelina35) October 15, 2013

Al Libi is expected to appear in a New York federal court today.

Deborah Feyerick will be live from Lower Manhattan's federal courthouse in the 6 and 8 o’clock hours to tell us what's next for al Libi.

3. MISSOURI ALLEGED RAPE

Retaliation for rape claim? It’s a horrible tale we’ve heard before – a teen girl drinks too much in the company of an older boy, passes out and may have gotten raped.

But Daisy Coleman’s story is different. Even though the 17-year-old boy she was with was arrested, the sexual assault charge against him was dropped. And his friend, who was charged with recording part of the incident on an iPhone, was also cleared.

The local prosecutor told The Kansas City Star there wasn’t enough evidence.

The local sheriff said authorities couldn’t move forward because the Coleman family’s stories have changed.

The Colemans say that’s not true. What’s worse, the family says, is the cyberbullying and threats they’ve received. Mom Melinda Coleman said she was fired from her job. The Colemans said they had to move out of Maryville, Missouri.

Now the hacker-activist group Anonymous is getting involved, calling on authorities to reopen the case.

Some small-town Sheriff isn't just going down this. The state politicians who can do something, but refuse, will be named. #OpMaryville — Anonymous (@YourAnonNews) October 15, 2013

Melinda Coleman says on @CNN other girls have come forward to her, admitting rape occurred, involving the same men. #Justice4Daisy — Anonymous (@YourAnonNews) October 14, 2013

The boy Daisy was with was a high school football player, stirring memories of the rape case in Steubenville, Ohio, in which two high school football players were convicted of raping a drunk 16-year-old girl.

Ana Cabrera will be live in the 8 o’clock hour to tell us more about Daisy’s case and how the family says it was driven out of town.

4. CARNIVAL CRUISE DROWNING

Tragedy on a ship: A 6-year-old boy drowned on a Carnival cruise ship pool, even though plenty of other vacationers were nearby.

Revelers were dancing to music by the mid-ship pool when a DJ noticed the boy struggle, passenger Deshaun Christian said.

A guest then jumped into the pool with his clothes on and pulled the boy out, followed by a crew member who tried to revive him, Christian said. But the boy was pronounced dead shortly later.

The question is, why wasn’t anyone watching over the young boy? The Miami-Dade Police Department said it is still investigating the drowning, which appeared to be accidental. Police said the boy was in the pool with his 10-year-old brother when he was found submerged.

A Carnival spokeswoman said the company does not have lifeguards on duty at its pools, and parental supervision is required for children under 13.

Florida boy, 6, drowns in Carnival cruise pool http://t.co/PedrCObGm7 Terrible! Where were his parents? Why are 80% of drown victims male? — Marita La Palm مريتا (@maritalp) October 14, 2013

In the 6 o’clock hour, hear from a passenger who helped pull the boy out of the water.

5. MEDAL OF HONOR

Finally, some good news out of Washington: Four years after he was outnumbered and outgunned in a brutal battle in Afghanistan, retired U.S. Army Capt. William Swenson will be awarded the highest military honor in a presidential ceremony Tuesday.

Swenson risked his life to recover the bodies of his fellow soldiers in the Battle of Ganjgal Valley, where five Americans died.

"In seven hours of continuous fighting, Swenson braved intense enemy fire, and willfully put his life in danger against the enemy's main effort, multiple times in service of his fallen and wounded comrades, his unit, his country, and his endangered Afghan partners,” the nomination statement reads.

Swenson spoke out after the 2009 battle, criticizing his leadership for failing to provide him with adequate air support after multiple radio requests. The Army later backed up his claims.

Captain William D. Swenson exemplified the highest ideals of an American Soldier http://t.co/aKVHC01TFU — Guinevere Pherson (@guinpherson) October 15, 2013

Those are your five biggies for the day. Here are a few others that are brewing and have the Internet buzzing:

- Gold is the new black: Remember that terrible but unforgettable song “Friday” by pop star wannabe Rebecca Black? Nothing could be worse, right? Try "Chinese Food” by Alison Gold. Gold teamed up with same production team that assaulted our ears with "Friday." This sadly-destined-to-be-viral video gives us a new buffet of cringe-worthy moments: A teen girl frolicking with a grown man in a panda suit; that same man rapping at a teen slumber party; and Gold pointing at a giant bowl of “chow ma, ma, ma, ma, mein" in the sky. Enjoy.

- Who’s that turkey in the window?: That’s what this turkey’s probably thinking as it tries to peck its own reflection. Our guess? He realized for the first time that he’s a turkey and knows all too well how close we are to Thanksgiving. So sad.

- Cyrus gets schooled: Recent attempts to give Miley Cyrus advice have failed miserably. We’re looking at you, Sinead O’Connor. Now, here comes indie darling Sufjan Stevens with some grammar advice for the “Wrecking Ball” singer. Stevens has a soft touch, so maybe this’ll end nicely. “Dear Miley, I can’t stop listening to #GetitRight (great song, great message, great body), but maybe you need a quick grammar lesson.” For one thing, you “lie” in your bed; not “lay,” he tells her. And to add a special touch of irony, a Vice editor then pens an open letter correcting Sufjan's open letter to Miley. Isn't the Internet wonderful?

- Cooler than 'Gravity': This new video gives us a first-person perspective of Austrian daredevil Felix Baumgartner’s recent jump from the stratosphere. It also answers the question of what a man sees when he jumps from the edge of space. Spoiler alert: The answer is a big slice of awesome!

- Clothed monkey grooms cat: The real question here is not why this monkey’s wearing an oh-so-cool T-shirt. The burning question is not why this monkey’s eating the stuff he’s taking off of this cat. And while puzzling, the question’s not how can this cat stay asleep while it’s being manhandled by a trendy-T-shirt-wearing monkey. The real question here is: What in the hell is this monkey saying throughout this video? WHAT IS THE MONKEY SAYING!?

There you go. All you need to know to get an early start to your morning.

Be sure to tune in to "New Day" from 6 to 9 a.m. ET. Join us at NewDayCNN.com and go and have a GREAT NEW DAY!