Health Costs: Imagine a health reform plan that gives a boost to big insurance companies while leaving patients less able to pay their medical bills. Think progressives would cheer about it? They will if it’s called ObamaCare.

Once upon a time Democrats championed ObamaCare as “taking on” big insurance while protecting families from big medical bills. So how are those promises working out?

A Gallup survey released late last week found that 33% reported putting off medical treatments this year “because of the cost you would have to pay.”

That’s higher than any time since Gallup starting asking this question back in 2001, and three points higher than it was last year — before ObamaCare’s insurance regulations went into effect.

What’s more, the share who put off treatment for a serious condition because of cost hit 22% this year, up from 17% when President Obama took office.

Even more interesting, the poll found that having insurance apparently offered less financial protection. The share of those with insurance who said they couldn’t afford at least one medical procedure jumped from 25% in 2013 to 34% in 2014.

Gallup suspects part of the reason is the fact that ObamaCare plans deployed narrow networks and steep deductibles, which kept premium costs down but exposed patients to big health bills.

At the other end of the spectrum, ObamaCare appears to be a windfall for Big Insurance. Over the first three years the law was in effect, the insurance market actually got more concentrated, according to a new Government Accountability Office report.

Between 2010 and 2013, for example, the number of states where the top three insurers controlled 80% of the individual insurance market or more went from 30 to 38. The GAO data go only through 2013, and so don’t fully account for changes in the market thanks to the ObamaCare exchanges.

But it’s not as though ObamaCare has so far made any meaningful impact. A Kaiser Family Foundation study looked at seven states and found that it was pretty much a wash this year — some were more competitive, some less, others didn’t change.

And a GAO report released earlier this year found that the biggest insurers either held on to or increased their market share in 40 states under ObamaCare. It also found that small insurers became increasingly rare.

Yes, there are more insurance companies competing for business in the exchanges in ObamaCare’s second open enrollment season. But so far, the overall impact of the law has been to direct billions of taxpayer subsidies to insurance companies for benefits that don’t seem to be trickling down to patients.