Buy Photo A variety of colorful birds flock to a bird feeder in a Chester backyard. (Photo: Susan Bloom/Correspondent)Buy Photo

Though winter may be casting a decided shade of gray and white over much of the New Jersey landscape, a birdfeeder can bring a flurry of colorful activity to your yard in the form of the many birds it attracts.

According to Pete Bacinski, program director of 'all things birds' at New Jersey Audubon in Bernardsville, "birds you can expect to see in the Morris County area in the wintertime include chickadees, white-breasted nuthatches, northern cardinals, three types of woodpeckers (red-bellied, downy and hairy), house finches, mourning doves and a number of sparrows."

And while some experts debate the importance or value of feeding birds, "bird feeding in the 'winter' — specifically from October to May — is a necessity," Bacinski said. "There are other food options available to birds in the spring and summer, such as insects, berries and seeds, but things are barren and often snow-covered in the winter and birds need our help to get through those hard times and survive."

Though bird feeding may be considered 'supplemental' during different seasons, "feeding birds, especially in the winter, does help their populations to stay at a higher level and thrive," said Richard Cole, founder of Kennesaw, Georgia-based Cole's Wild Bird Products, a 25-year-old company specializing in wild bird feed and accessories. "But perhaps one of the best reasons to feed birds is to bring them closer to you so that you can observe and enjoy them," he said.

Cole and Bacinski share tips for winter bird feeding that will bring out the best in your property's fine-feathered friends:

Plan accordingly

Cole favors platform feeders and advises homeowners to "mount or hang them in a place where birds can seek shelter from the weather and predators, such as near plants or evergreens," he said.

Provide high energy

"In the winter, have an extra stock of food that provides more fat and calories for birds, such as sunflower meats as opposed to just seeds, since some birds like wrens can't crack sunflower shells," Cole explained. "A blend of bird food that includes nuts and both in and out-of-the-shell seeds is a good option."

Another is suet, the fat rendered from around animal kidneys, which can be mixed with a blend of seeds, nuts, corn and flour to form cakes and other treats and helps birds generate enough energy to survive winter's harsh conditions and more limited food options.

Finally, because birds naturally eat a variety of insects, "dried mealworms are a great choice — they're dehydrated, so they're easier for consumers to handle, but are very nutritious for birds," Cole said. "Or you can make your own treats for birds from blends of seeds, dried fruit and nuts with softening agents like peanut butter or a little cooking oil."

A cardinal perches on a feeder filled with suet kibbles. (Photo: Photo courtesy of Cole’s Wild Bird Products)

Be consistent

While he said that birds are opportunistic feeders that will move around a territory to look for food, "birds can get into a routine with your feeder and you'll have more success if food is presented consistently," Cole said. "Keep feeders filled," said Bacinski, "because birds can become reliant on your food in the winter."

Focus on quality

"Be sure to buy quality seed, including good black oil sunflower seeds for a variety of birds, as well as nyjer seed for goldfinches, and avoid cheap grades containing red millet or milo, which birds don't like and will leave behind," Bacinski said.

"Junk seed doesn't help birds and many won't eat it," said Cole, a bird lover and expert who created his company's 15 different bird seed blends, four varieties of suet cakes, sunflower meats and meal worm products in the mid-1980s after extensively observing and feeding birds to learn what they liked and didn't like.

Support local hummingbirds

As more western varieties move into the east coast over the past 20 years, Cole said that hummingbirds are out and about throughout the winter in New Jersey and need food that mimics their natural high-sugar diet of insects, nectar and sap.

"Special hummingbird feeders can be filled with a solution comprised of four parts water to one part sugar, similar to the composition of nectar, and which won't freeze until it gets below 27 degrees," Cole said. "And if you see hummingbirds," he added, "you can also report them to your local Audubon or licensed bander for tagging so that their presence can be monitored."

Manage other guests

As many well-meaning homeowners have learned the hard way, "squirrels eat bird seed too," said Cole.

If you want to avoid squirrels from helping themselves to bird food, "you can prevent them from getting access with mechanical baffles or special feeders," Cole said, adding that the choice of cuisine you serve can also be a deterrent. "At Cole's, for example, we offer a blend of sunflower meats infused with habanero pepper called 'Hot Meats' — birds don't have a mechanism that enables them to taste the heat, but squirrels do and they don't like it," he said.

Buy Photo A variety of birds, including a downy woodpecker, enjoys black oil sunflower seeds at a Chester bird feeder. (Photo: Susan Bloom/Correspondent)

Don't break bread

"Don't put out bread, because it will only attract starlings, pigeons and other aggressive birds that will chase away the birds you do want coming to the bird feeder," Bacinski said.

Water is welcome

In addition to food, both experts advise that homeowners make water available to their winged cohabitants in the winter.

"Birds need water and love to bathe, even in the winter, because it keeps their feathers fluffy," Cole said. "If it's not below freezing, birds will really appreciate a pan of water nearby," Bacinski said, "or you could consider buying a special heater to place near birdbaths or water stations to keep a water supply from freezing."

"Bird feeding in the winter supports birds in their survivability, but it also helps to bring them in so we can feel a part of their world and be more akin to nature," said Cole. "It gives us a larger perspective and makes us more sensitive to the environment, which are all great lessons for kids to learn as well."

"Bird feeding makes people appreciate birds and nature more," Bacinski added, "and may spark more people to become bird watchers."

For more information on Cole's Wild Bird Products, visit www.coleswildbird.com. For more information on New Jersey Audubon or its upcoming events, visit www.njaudubon.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1EoYrOJ