Topics: Abortion, abortion rights, anti-choice movement, antiabortion movement, Conservatives, hb 2, health and safety, Mississippi, Religious Right, reproductive health, reproductive justice, Social conservatives, Texas, The Right, TRAP laws, Women's Health, Politics News

Last week, a federal court struck down the two provisions of Texas’ sweeping antiabortion law that would have shuttered all but eight clinics in the state. It was happy news to take into the long weekend, but it was an admittedly narrow victory. As soon as the decision came down, Texas appealed it to the conservative 5th Circuit Court of Appeals, which has a mixed record on the Texas law and similar restrictions in other states. (Remember when driving fast was offered up as a solution to hundreds of miles between Texans and their nearest clinic? That was the 5th Circuit. Remember when Mississippi was blocked from outsourcing its constitutional obligations by closing its last clinic? That was the 5th Circuit, too.) There were more than 40 clinics in Texas in 2013, but that number has dropped to 19 in the wake of the omnibus law. Things remain dire, even while this decision holds.

But something significant, even if small, is shifting. Doctors, major medical associations and reproductive rights advocates have long been clear about the safety of abortion and the underlying motives behind each new restriction, and now the the right’s thin (like, super-paper-thin) cloak of respectability is slipping as its claims about patient safety and medical standards are dispatched in courts and even inside the antiabortion movement.

In his decision on the Texas law, U.S. District Court Judge Lee Yeakel didn’t just declare the admitting privileges and ambulatory surgical standard requirements unconstitutional, he methodically called out the state’s double speak about protecting patient health and safety. In its defense of the law, Texas claimed that the regulations were about protecting patients while also claiming that sending patients to other states without similar regulations on the books — regulations that were apparently essential for patient safety — somehow resolved the problem of access.

“If the State’s true purpose in enacting the ambulatory-surgical-center requirement is to protect the health and safety of Texas women who seek abortions, it is disingenuous and incompatible with that goal to argue that Texas women can seek abortion care in a state with lesser regulations,” Yeakel wrote in his decision. “If, however, the State’s underlying purpose in enacting the requirement was to reduce or eliminate abortion in parts or all of Texas, the State’s position is perfectly congruent with such a goal.”

But perhaps more surprising than a Bush appointee becoming a de facto champion of abortion rights is a recent admission from the president of a national antiabortion organization that the Texas law doesn’t make abortion — which is already incredibly safe — any safer. In an interview with ABC’s “This Week,” National Right to Life president Carol Tobias was asked if the Texas law was about restricting access to abortion or safety. “It’s about both. We want to protect unborn children from death. But we also want to protect the women who are going to be harmed by abortion,” she said. “It might not be an immediate physical reaction. There are long-term physical consequences. There are long-term mental and emotional consequences to abortion. This is about protecting women and children.”