LAWRENCE — Congress is more productive and less partisan in 2015 than it has been in a dozen years, U.S. Rep. Lynn Jenkins told a crowd Sunday at The University of Kansas.

“We’ve passed more legislation through the House than most recent Congresses, we’ve had more votes and we’ve had more bills actually signed into law,” Jenkins said.

Jenkins, a Republican, was elected to a fourth term in November. She told the crowd at KU that Congress was gridlocked for her first term.

“That was a tough couple of years,” Jenkins said. “You don’t run for Congress to sit on the sidelines, you run for Congress to save the world.”

But an influx of new lawmakers has changed the culture in Washington, Jenkins said.

“It’s kind of a new day in Washington, and it’s given me renewed hope and faith that we are past this and we are able to work again,” she added.

Jenkins gave the 2015 Dole Lecture at the Dole Institute of Politics. The annual lecture is held on or around April 14, the day former Sen. Bob Dole was wounded in Italy during World War II.

The lecture took the form of a question and answer session. The first round of questions was asked by Bill Lacy, the institute’s director, and a second round of questions was asked by members of the audience.

Several of Lacy’s questions honed in on challenges female candidates and politicians face. Jenkins said women often have to be talked into running for office, while it seems to come naturally to men.

“I think men sometimes just wake up one day, look in the mirror and say, ‘Darn, I am so good, I’m running for Congress,’” Jenkins said, a line that was met with laughter from the crowd.

“I sure wish women would learn to be more aggressive and assured that they have something to offer,” she added.

Citing 2016 Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton and imminent Republican candidate Carly Fiorina, Lacy asked for Jenkins’ thoughts on a female president or vice president.

“I really think it’s time,” Jenkins said. “I’m not a big fan of voting for someone just because they’re a woman or because they’re not a man. I want the best person for the job.”

Jenkins said politicians, including Republicans, have become more welcoming towards women.

“I hear from a lot of Kansans that Republicans are just a party of grumpy old white guys. Well, sorry, but the facts just don’t bear that out,” Jenkins said, referring specifically to Mia Love, R-Utah, whom she called “a rock star.”

Jenkins on Sunday often cited her rural adolescent on a dairy farm in Holton. When asked by Lacy what the most difficult part of her job is, Jenkins pointed to the constant travel.

“For me, personally, it’s just getting up every weekend and traveling to Washington, D.C,” she said. “I’m not a city girl. I’m a simple country girl.”

Before the event, a lone protester awaited Jenkins’ arrival outside the Dole Institute. Lawrence resident Mary Swayne held a poster depicting Jenkins as an exotic dancer being paid by Wichita businessmen Charles and David Koch.

“I believe Lynn Jenkins does not care about anyone but Lynn Jenkins,” Swayne said.

Swayne later attended the lecture and asked Jenkins if she would support legislation to allow students to refinance student loans at zero-percent interest.

“Right now, when the nation is 18 trillion dollars in debt, I don’t think the answer is to move that (student loan) debt over to the federal government and taxpayers,” Jenkins responded.

Questions from the crowd of about 100 attendees were often contentious, covering controversial topics such as gun control and climate change, along with broader issues of Constitutional interpretations and campaign contribution limits.

When asked near the end of the lecture why Republicans and Democrats in Washington don’t share the friendships that politicians did in decades past, Jenkins said it is because fewer members of Congress live in the nation’s capital.

“As we saw in the last election cycle, if somebody doesn’t come home every weekend, they’re likely to be in political hot water,” Jenkins said, likely referring to U.S. Sen. Pat Roberts, R-Kan., who often was criticized last year for living in Virginia. “So I come home every weekend, number one because I want to and this is my home, but number two, I think it’s the politically expedient thing to do.”