When most of us hear the words “Affordable Care Act,” better known as “Obamacare,” it brings feelings of confusion and frustration. Every time we turn around there’s another change or clarification to the Affordable Care Act (ACA), a program most people have never understood in the first place. Instinct tells us that when the government gets involved it’s likely to be ineffective, cumbersome and expensive. And so far, the folks in Washington have done nothing to change my mind.

Healthcare to small business owners has long been a major pain point. Whether you are a solo entrepreneur or a small business owner with employees, obtaining and providing healthcare has been perhaps the biggest obstacle — to profitability, to attracting a quality workforce and for ensuring a healthy workforce. It’s not uncommon for an individual with pre-existing conditions to pay $1,500 a month for basic coverage with a high deductible. It’s also not uncommon for many employees to be older, pushing rates higher to the point where business owners must choose between reducing coverage or eliminating it all together.

When the ACA was passed, many of us had no doubt that the Supreme Court would declare the new law unconstitutional. When that didn’t happen, the landscape of healthcare in America was changed forever. Rather than waste valuable time and energy lamenting what nearly everyone believes is going to be the most expensive and behemoth tax increase ever on small businesses, the Arizona Small Business Association set out to find solutions for business owners in Arizona. When life gives you lemons, you make lemonade. And we think we may have some tasty lemonade for you.

Part of the ACA allowed for non-profits to apply for loans from the federal government to start a cooperative, non-profit health insurance company. Of the 24 non-profits around the country that applied for the loans and received them, one of them happens to be in Arizona: Tempe-based Meritus Health Partners, led by two former hospital administrators who understand the Arizona healthcare market better than most.

A locally-based healthcare cooperative will provide downward pressure on rates while reinvesting profits to either improve benefits or lower rates. No insane salaries, no overpaid board of directors, and Meritus doesn’t have a huge corporate headquarters in some other state. Everything is homegrown and based here in Arizona. And while Meritus’ focus is healthcare coverage for all Arizonans, one segment they have specifically targeted is the small business market.

Recognizing this opportunity, ASBA and Meritus Health Partners have entered into a partnership to offer a variety of PPO, HMO and HSA health plans for small businesses with as few as two employees. Even if you are a solo entrepreneur, you will still be able to get an individual policy through the ASBA/Meritus partnership. The rates will be highly competitive and the network is the biggest in the state. As someone with a pre-existing condition, I can tell you this is perhaps one of the more encouraging signs that all may not be lost when it comes to healthcare and small business.

Just like any small business, ASBA needs to be nimble and adjust to the challenges in order to remain relevant. While no one really knows what the ACA will look like a year from now, it defines the landscape we must navigate within today. I believe this partnership with Meritus Health Partners gives both ASBA and our member businesses the best possible option when it comes healthcare.

For more information on Meritus Health Partners and the ASBA Health Insurance Plan, go to ASBA.com and click on the Meritus logo.

Rick Murray is the CEO of ASBA. He can be reached at 602-306-4000.