Second Berthoud officer would serve Turner Middle School

Larimer County Sheriff's office deputy Ray Meyer, left, the school resource officer at Berthoud High School, chats with freshman Ty Beaman, 14, right, during lunch period at the school Friday. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Turner Middle School in Berthoud may get its own school resource officer for the second half of the school year if officials from three entities approve the plan.

Preliminary discussions have begun for adding a second Larimer County Sheriff's Deputy to the school resource team in Berthoud in January, and so far, both the county commissioners and town board have indicated their support. They and the school board all must approve the new officer.

The cost would be split by the Thompson School District and Berthoud, which contracts with the Sheriff's Office for law enforcement services.

Berthoud currently has one school resource officer, who is assigned to the high school but is also trying to be a liaison with students at the middle school.

"The one officer was trying to go back and forth between the two schools, and it was just stretching that officer too much," said Mike Hart, Berthoud town administrator.

Hart approached Superintendent Stan Scheer to ask about the possibility of adding a second resource officer, and school board member Pam Howard also requested the district look into the addition after learning the schools in Berthoud had just one.

"That's just not enough coverage," Howard said.

No single incident or particular issue led to the proposal, but Berthoud and the number of students enrolled there is growing, so there was a need for another officer, Scheer explained.

Advertisement

"We've moved into that new era where security has to part of what a school district does," Howard added. "That's the reality of this day and age. We have to address it. We absolutely have to have our kids safe."

Resource officers spend time in the schools, creating relationships with students to prevent small incidents from snowballing into larger cases. While they do investigate incidents, a larger part of their responsibilities is being a liaison with the students.

The Thompson School District currently has eight school resource officers, seven from the Loveland Police Department and one from the Sheriff's Office. Four Loveland officers are split between the high schools, and three cover the middle schools.

The cost of the program is split between the law enforcement agency and the school district.

In Berthoud, the town and the district share the costs because the town pays the Sheriff's Office a contracted amount for law enforcement services.

Hart said the $108,000 yearly cost of adding a second officer would be split by the district and the town, while Berthoud would pay another $62,000 for a patrol vehicle, uniform and other equipment.

Currently, the district pays nearly $250,000 per year for its share of all the school resource officers, including Loveland and Berthoud. If the new Berthoud officer is approved, it would add about $25,000 for the second half of the school year to the already-approved 2015-16 budget then about $50,000 per year for subsequent years, according to information from the district.

After a work session on the issue this week, the county commissioners said they were in favor of allowing the addition of another officer, which they must approve even though the program does not cost any county money outside of training. They will be asked to officially approve the position at an upcoming meeting.

Hart said the town has already supported the measure and will include the money in its 2016 budget as soon as the school district and county give the go-ahead.

And the proposal is expected to go before the Thompson School District sometime within the next month.

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/RHPamelaJ.