Chaz Morgan (left) is presented the Clyde and Elizabeth Smith Scholarship on Saturday by Louisiana College President Argile Smith Saturday. Paige Dubois, the 2014 winner, looks on. (Photo: Emily Lansing/Wildcats Media.)

A home-school student from Baton Rouge was the winner of Louisiana College’s prestigious Clyde and Elizabeth Smith Scholarship Competition on Saturday.

Chaz Morgan beat out 13 other invitees to win the scholarship that covers every expense at LC, including tuition, fees, books, residence and meals. Each student who competed also received a substantial scholarship offer for being among the top applicants of the 2015 freshman class.

“I really wanted to win because it would be such an honor to be able to represent the school,” Morgan said. “When they announced my name, I said, ‘Thank you, Lord.’”

Morgan, whose parents are Charles and Carletta Morgan, is the fifth home-schooled student to win the competition in the last seven years. He plans to major in pre-law at LC and has set a goal to one day become a judge. His sister, Kaeli, is also a sophomore at LC and is majoring in pre-med.

The Smith Scholarship began in the 1970s after an endowment donation from Tom and Beverly Dunham to honor Beverly’s mother, Elizabeth Smith. To be invited to compete, a student must have applied for admission to LC and scored a 28 or better on the ACT.

During the actual competition, students went through panel interviews where they answered questions about their academic accomplishments as well as their Christian faith.

Morgan said he had developed an interest in attending LC a number of years ago when he represented his church youth group in state Bible drills held on the campus.

“It’s the perfect place for me,” Morgan said. “Being home-schooled, I’ve been given a firm foundation and taught in Christianity to prepare for my life in the world. LC is just a great place for me to come.”

Read or Share this story: http://www.thetowntalk.com/story/news/local/2015/02/01/baton-rouge-student-wins-la-colleges-smith-scholarship/22698805/