Behind the tax scam numbers

With help from Toby Eckert

ABOUT THOSE IMPERSONATION SCAMS: Sen. Chuck Grassley, the Iowa Republican who once led the Finance Committee, sent out a letter recently that might have raised a few eyebrows — essentially wondering why federal authorities were prosecuting astonishingly few tax scammers.

Story Continued Below

Why would that be a surprise? For one thing, the IRS has made battling identity theft a top priority, and has even circulated releases extolling its top 10 identity theft prosecutions. The Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse at Syracuse University, which compiles a plethora of government data, also said in a report a couple years back that the greatest increase in IRS criminal prosecutions over fiscal 2013 was under the statute for “fraud and related activity — ID documents.” Those prosecutions rose 580 percent over that one year, and a full 7,550 percent over five years.

As it turns out, Grassley’s letter to the Justice Department focused on a very specific type of fraud, his office told Morning Tax, one that the Treasury inspector general for tax administration has only been tracking since October 2013. But it’s also the sort of phone scam — taxpayers receiving calls seemingly out of the blue claiming they’ll be arrested unless they immediately pay a tax debt — that’s gotten a lot of attention in recent months.

A spokeswoman for Grassley said they were only able to find three indictments for those sorts of scams, under statutes for conspiracy to impersonate an officer, conspiracy to commit wire fraud, conspiracy to commit extortion affecting interstate commerce and the use of unauthorized access devices to obtain $1,000 or more.

A Justice Department spokeswoman declined to dispute Grassley’s characterization that federal authorities had “prosecuted a very limited number” of people for the scams. “This is an issue the Department takes seriously and will respond to the letter,” the spokeswoman said. “The Justice Department is committed to working with our federal law enforcement partners in investigating these crimes and identifying and prosecuting the individuals involved.”

WELCOME TO TUESDAY, where we’re celebrating the 24th anniversary of one of the most presidential quotes of all time — Bill Clinton’s “I didn’t inhale” comment about trying marijuana. (Yes, we know Clinton wasn’t president yet.)

Give us your tips, feedback or the latest state revenue score for legal marijuana. Email: bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com, bfaler@politico.com, kodonnell@politico.com. Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

SCORE ONE FOR THE BIG GUYS: A federal judge sided with Wal-Mart over Puerto Rico on Monday, striking down a tax that the island’s governor said would raise $100 million for a government facing steep fiscal challenges, The Associated Press reports. "Now I have to look for that money somewhere else,” said Gov. Alejandro Garcia Padilla, who added he would appeal the decision “immediately.” http://yhoo.it/1MNMQw8

Wal-Mart, Puerto Rico’s largest employer, had previously complained that the commonwealth’s move to more than triple a tax on goods imported from distributors off the island would leave it with an effective income tax rate of 91.5 percent. Jose Antonio Fuste, the judge in the case, left no doubt that he had little sympathy for the Puerto Rican officials who had sought the tax hike, per the Financial Times. The tax, Fuste wrote, “is a legislative money grab pure and simple, funding the personal account of Puerto Rico’s insolvent Treasury from the presumably deeper pockets of large multistate corporations and their local affiliates.” http://on.ft.com/1UXUsmw

NOT THERE BY A LONG SHOT: The IRS’s data security efforts are still falling short, the Government Accountability Office said Monday. (Or in GAO-speak, as relayed by our Katy O’Donnell: The IRS “had a significant deficiency in internal control over financial reporting systems for fiscal year 2015.”) Other problems facing the IRS include “unpatched and outdated software” that leaves the agency vulnerable and the IRS’s own lackluster corrections to previously identified weaknesses. GAO’s verdict comes as the IRS is under increasing pressure from cyber thieves, and after the agency has acknowledged attacks that affected hundreds of thousands of taxpayers. More from Katy: http://politico.pro/1Rwx6je

KEEP AN EYE OUT: Sens. John Thune of South Dakota, a member of GOP leadership and a tax writer, and Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, one of the more vulnerable Republican incumbents this year, recently came out with a new bill that would exempt health savings accounts from Obamacare’s “Cadillac tax” on pricey employer-sponsored insurance plans.

The tax is on pause, due to December’s flurry of legislating, and might never come back. But as our Brian Faler pointed out all the way back in August, HSAs could easily fall prey as companies move heaven and Earth to avoid the 40 percent tax. “They’ll be one of the first things to go,” said one health care actuary. http://politi.co/1UYnFgU

BERKELEY GROUP GOES ALL IN: The Ecology Center, the California group from the home of the country’s first soda tax, is now ramping up its efforts to get similar levies in place around the world. The group has a new 13-minute video, subtly titled Berkeley vs. Big Soda, that explains their success. And there’s certainly interest elsewhere: The United Kingdom just went forward with a soda tax, and Philadelphia’s mayor has shown an interest in a massive tax hike on sugary drinks. http://politico.pro/1Tfis4y

INTERNATIONAL UPDATE —

MORE LOBBYING FOR LEW: The Financial Accountability and Corporate Transparency Coalition became the latest group to get on Treasury Secretary Jack Lew to crack down more on corporate inversions, as Katy reports. Specifically, the FACT Coalition said Treasury “could take further steps to prevent inversions through the use of its regulatory authority under Sections 956 and 7701 of the U.S. Tax Code.” (Section 956 could further limit the so-called hopscotch loans that are a nice benefit for inverted companies, and 7701 could deal with the so-called de-controlling strategy for controlled foreign corporations that allows a new foreign parent company to avoid U.S. taxes.) FACT joins Americans for Tax Fairness and Sen. Bernie Sanders in calling for more action from Treasury. Katy’s piece: http://politico.pro/1SrXrRQ The letter: http://bit.ly/1ShZwgF

STATE NEWS —

NEW TACK ON TAMPON TAX: Several Cleveland-area women aren’t waiting for the Ohio Legislature to vote on a couple of bills that would end taxation on feminine hygiene products. They’ve filed suit in the Ohio Court of Claims seeking class-action status for their effort to end collection of the sales tax and for refunds of at least $66 million, the Columbus Dispatch reports. “‘A tax on tampons and pads is a tax on women,’ the complaint reads,” according to the Dispatch. “Ohio exempts prescription drugs, durable medical equipment and similar items from the sales tax. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration classifies tampons and pads as ‘medical devices,’ but 40 states continue to tax them.” http://bit.ly/22I7gUa

ROLE REVERSAL: After decades of relying on the oil industry to fill its coffers, Alaska is returning the favor — so to speak. Because of the free fall in oil prices, “the state now projects to pay oil companies about as much in tax credits as it receives in revenue from the industry,” Anchorage’s KTUU-TV says. “According to a spring forecast released last week by the governor's Revenue Department, the state will collect $1 billion from the industry during fiscal year 2017, mainly from royalties, production tax, petroleum property tax, and corporate income tax. $691 million will be directed into the unrestricted general fund while the rest is required by law to go into the permanent fund, public school fund, and constitutional budget reserve. Over the same time period, the state expects to pay oil companies $825 million in credits, according to Revenue Commissioner Randall Hoffbeck.” Gov. Bill Walker’s solution? Boost the production tax to 5 percent from 4 percent and reduce the credits. Predictably, that plan is running into strong headwinds from the petroleum lobby. http://bit.ly/1RLJaTk.

(All that sound vaguely familiar? Louisiana, currently facing its own budget nightmare, is giving up more to corporations in subsidies than it’s collecting in revenue.)

ASK NOT WHAT YOU CAN DO FOR YALE: Ask what Yale can do for Connecticut’s revenue situation. The mayor of New Haven, Yale’s home for three centuries, is backing a new bill that would make it easier to tax the college’s real estate holdings, The Associated Press reports. Toni Harp, the mayor, said cities needed more guidance on that front because taxing real estate is all they’re allowed to do by Connecticut law, and that Yale now takes up roughly 1,000 acres in the city.

But Yale isn’t taking that proposal lying down, or the idea of taxing earnings on the Ivy League school’s roughly $25 billion endowment. "Given Yale's unparalleled commitment to New Haven, and the gains made by the City of New Haven and Yale in building employment, expanding the tax base, and strengthening neighborhoods and schools, the proposal to single out Yale by imposing unprecedented, ambiguous, and sweeping new taxes on the university is troubling," said Richard Jacob, a Yale associate vice president. http://bit.ly/1XZao78

QUICK LINK

— The provision allowing tax-free charitable donations from retirement accounts by people at 70.5 years of age — more complicated than it might seem. http://on.wsj.com/1Rwuoue

DID YOU KNOW? August Vollmer, who led Berkeley’s police department for two decades in the early 20th century, was the first chief to put officers on bicycles, motorcycles and patrol cars, and to use lie detectors.