Topics: chicken wings, chickens, Editor's Picks, factory farming, meat industry, poultry, Super Bowl, Super Bowl Sunday, Sustainable food, Sustainability News

Just in time for Superbowl XLVIII – that high holiday of chicken wing consumption – the National Chicken Council has come out with its 2014 Wing Report. Among its many exciting findings (51 percent of wing-consuming adults prefer ranch dressing over blue cheese; women are just as likely as men to prefer Buffalo-style flavoring), the report touts this mind-boggling stat: During the course of Sunday’s game, American consumers will devour a total of 1.25 billions wings. That’s up from last year’s estimate, of 1.23 billion, and evidence that “The Great Chicken Wing Shortage of 2013” is officially over.

Ironically, all this industry-promoted fuss is being made over what used to be one of the least desirable parts of the chicken. Wings, the unwanted byproduct of poultry’s choice cuts, began to appear on bar menus precisely because they were so cheap and readily available. Now, according to the NCC, they’re second in price only to the boneless, skinless meat of the breast. In the United States, the chicken wing franchise industry is growing at a faster rate than frozen yogurt chains. At some point in the past 50 years, chicken wings became synonymous not just with Super Bowl Sunday, but with American food culture as a whole.

That should be our first warning sign. Chicken wings don’t just represent a quintessentially American way of eating. In many ways, they epitomize the ways in which American eating is broken.

To begin with, some basic math: Chicken wings are divided into three parts, two of which we consume as “wings” — the “drummette,” a mini-drumstick that attaches the wing to the body, and the flat, two-boned middle segment. The wing tips, unpopular in the U.S., are usually shipped to Asia. Every four wings in your typical bucket, then, are equivalent to one fully grown chicken.

Those in the wing industry like to quip that, until science finds a way to invent a six-winged chicken, that’s all we’ll be able to get out of them. Wings are, however, getting bigger – the result of efforts to raise fatter, more profitable birds. This ends up being problematic for sellers, who are suddenly serving more meat on the same number of wings. In some cases, restaurants have begun serving wings by size instead of by number in order to keep the price down. But until that becomes common practice, more wing consumption will require more dead chickens — a particularly cringe-worthy calculation for those for advocate abstaining from meat altogether (and who, when contacted by Salon, were quick to recommend vegan substitutes).

Even those who are OK with eating some meat might want to pay attention to just how many dead animals Sunday’s wing binge requires: about 312.5 million dead chickens, if the NCC’s figures are correct. The rest of the bird will be eaten or otherwise put to use, too (more on that later), but animal rights advocates argue that thinking of chickens only in terms of their parts obscures that massive death toll. Andrew Gunther, the program director for Animal Welfare Approved, an NGO that independently audits and certifies family farms that meet its high standards for animal welfare and environmental sustainability, put it this way: “We’re almost at a tipping point where we use an animal for its bits and forget, in theory, the whole animal.”

So when the NCC boasts that the number of wings eaten this year will be “enough to put 572 wings on every seat in all 32 NFL stadiums,” we could easily adapt their example and visualize, instead, 143 chickens crammed onto each and every one of those seats. Contrast that to all that can be done with the purchase of one, whole chicken: Its prime cuts can be enjoyed as the centerpiece of a meal (and its four wing segments eaten while the game plays); the less-great parts can be added to dishes that require chicken; and the rest can be tossed in a pot to make stock.

In order to meet the rabid demand touted by the NCC, poultry plants need to be extremely efficient. And efficiency, for the meat industry, often comes at a tremendous cost to human health, the environment and animal welfare. Antibiotic resistance, arising in part from the widespread use of the drugs in commercial livestock, is a growing problem that’s yet to be properly addressed. The USDA’s plans to roll out a new, sped-up poultry inspection process is only the most recent example of what can end up being missed in the interest of speeding up processing lines by 20 percent: namely, “tremendous” chunks of feces left on the meat headed to grocery stores, and birds inadvertently boiled alive.