AUSTIN, Texas--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Today, Tango Health announced it has successfully assisted multiple employers in furnishing 1095-C forms covering more than 2.5 million individuals, meeting new health care data reporting requirements well in advance of the IRS deadline. These employers include Alabama State Employees’ Insurance Board, American Capital, the City of Baltimore, Princeton University, Rice University, the State of West Virginia, and Turner Industries.

These clients are overcoming the unprecedented challenges of the Affordable Care Act by utilizing Tango's ACA Compliance Concierge Suite, a combination of powerful technology with first-class service for medium- to large-size companies. The deadline for employers to furnish forms 1095-C to individuals is March 31, 2016.

"Employers across the country have found themselves behind the curve and overwhelmed when it comes to ACA compliance. Their existing HR applications were not designed for ACA compliance, and getting accurate data out of these systems is a challenge," said Todd Praisner, CEO of Tango Health. "With Tango's ACA Compliance Concierge Suite, our clients are leveraging the tools and expertise they need to overcome this challenge."

Because each enterprise is different, Tango tailors a compliance solution to meet the needs of each specific workforce no matter how complex. The Tango ACA Compliance Concierge Suite is a comprehensive, easy-to-understand dashboard that allows compliance teams to monitor accessibility of benefits for eligible employees, monthly tracking for offering or terminating benefits coverage; forecasting for resource trends and needs; and calculated affordability for benefits-eligible employees.

Tango also assigns a dedicated ACA Client Manager who supports clients through the lifetime of the relationship, assisting in the data quality process, conducting monthly reviews of reports and findings, and answering questions on core topics.

Once employers furnish 1095-C forms to individual employees, a summary of the health insurance data is then transmitted to the IRS via 1094-C forms, which are due by June 30. Tango is also assisting clients with this ACA compliance requirement.

About Tango Health

Tango Health provides software and services to help enterprises achieve, maintain and report on ACA compliance, as well as decision support tools to ensure that employees are choosing the most appropriate health coverage.

Tango delivers significant cost savings to employees and employers by combining a high-touch services approach with adaptable software that can accommodate any data source, and deep knowledge of both healthcare regulations and human behavior.