Sessions on clinical, behavioral and technological advances will cover all aspects of diabetes care April 16-17 in Boston, when The American Journal of Managed Care and Joslin Diabetes Center will partner to present Patient-Centered Diabetes Care 2015. The program and faculty of this conference, to be held at the Renaissance Waterfront Boston, are not to be missed.

The Patient’s Toolbox for Better Decision Making

The Digital Path to Improved Patient Engagement in Self-Care

Panel Discussion / Community as Part of the Prescription: Social Media in Diabetes Care

Does Nutrition Policy Matter? 2015 Diet and Nutrition Guideline Review

Panel Discussion / The Role of Clinicians and Diabetes Educators in Lifestyle Management

Personalizing Diabetes Care: Matching Patients With Therapies

Panel Discussion / Integrated Delivery Networks and Adherence Intervention

Finding the Balance in Lipid Management

Panel Discussion / Weighing the Value of Novel Treatments in Diabetes

Debate / Is Two Better Than One? The Use of Combination Therapies in Diabetes Care

PLAINSBORO, N.J. and BOSTON, Mass.—Everything from the merits of newer combination therapies, to the role of social media, to cutting-edge clinical work in lipid management—it’s all part of the agenda at Patient-Centered Diabetes Care 2015, the multistakeholder meeting to be presented by The American Journal of Managed Care and Joslin Diabetes Center . To register, visit http://www.ajmc.com/meetings/pcdc15 This one-of-a-kind conference, set for April 16-17, 2015 , at the Renaissance Waterfront Boston, starts by bringing together payers, providers, patient advocates, diabetes educators, researchers, technology experts, and leaders from the pharmaceutical sector. The presenters, led by meeting chairman and keynote speaker Robert A. Gabbay, MD, PhD the chief medical officer at Joslin, have created a program that combines today’s essential clinical, behavioral, and technological innovations with a focus on what brings value to patients with diabetes.The format includes panel discussions that feature payers, patient advocates, policy leaders and clinical experts, as well as presentations with individual speakers. The schedule, from Thursday afternoon to midday Friday, includes a networking reception and many opportunities to meet fellow attendees. Presentations and panel discussions include:For more information, including lists of faculty presenters and panelists participating in the conference, please click here. The American Journal of Managed Care celebrates its 20th year in 2015 as the leading peer-reviewed journal dedicated to issues in managed care. Other titles in the franchise include The American Journal of Pharmacy Benefits, which provides pharmacy and formulary decision-makers with information to improve the efficiency and health outcomes in managing pharmaceutical care, and The American Journal of Accountable Care, which publishes research and commentary on new healthcare delivery models facilitated by the 2010 Affordable Care Act. AJMC’s news publications, the Evidence-Based series, bring together stakeholder views from payers, providers, policymakers and pharmaceutical leaders in oncology and diabetes management. To order reprints of articles appearing in AJMC publications, please call (609) 716-7777, x 131.Joslin Diabetes Center, based in Boston, Massachusetts, undertakes diabetes research, clinical care, education and health and wellness programs on a global scale. Joslin is dedicated to ensuring that people with diabetes live long, healthy lives and offers real progress in preventing and curing diabetes. Joslin is an independent, nonprofit institution affiliated with Harvard Medical School, and is recognized worldwide for driving innovative solutions in diabetes prevention, research, education, and care.Our mission is to prevent, treat and cure diabetes. Our vision is a world free of diabetes and its complications. For more information, visit http://www.joslin.org/ Nicole Beagin (609) 716-7777 x 131