If John Elway slashed the salary of his Hall of Fame quarterback by $4 million after Peyton Manning threw 39 touchdown passes in 2014, then you know Elway won’t blink while staring down receiver Demaryius Thomas during the heat of contract negotiations.

There for a minute Thursday, while Elway was bashing Thomas for boycotting offseason workouts during a salary dispute, his lack of empathy for a player made Elway sound Belichickian, with a hard-line stance that would do Baltimore’s Ozzie Newsome or any coldhearted NFL executive proud.

“To be dead honest, I see absolutely zero value in him being away from here. Zero value for him,” said Elway, who recently slapped Thomas with a franchise tag that guarantees $12.8 million for a single season, in a league where security can be as tenuous as one wicked tackle to a receiver’s exposed knee.

Seeking top dollar in a long-term deal, it seems to me Thomas is applying what little leverage a player has by withholding his services. But Thomas also has committed the bad mistake of doing a passive-aggressive dance with Elway, a straightforward dude who never waltzes around any issue.

If Thomas thinks his worth as Manning’s top target is $14 million per season, then he needs to stand up, state his case to Elway and pound out a deal. Instead, it appears he is waiting for Dez Bryant to sign with Dallas, in the hope the Cowboys star sets the market for D.T. in Denver. Here’s betting that ain’t gonna fly with Elway.

So now Elway has sent a clear, direct and combative message to Thomas: Quit this big, hot fuss about money and get your butt back to the team’s Dove Valley headquarters, so everybody can start learning the tricks of new coach Gary Kubiak in preparation for a Super Bowl or bust season.

But, to be dead honest, the irritation in the voice of Elway made the message sound a little too personal, especially when you consider that while Thomas is a receiver who’s unafraid to catch a football over the middle, he does need more tender, loving care to feel appreciated than some mentally tougher NFL athletes.

“As far as negotiations and his new deal and what’s going on, we’d like to get something done,” Elway said. “By him being away from here, there is zero value not only to us, but also to him. To me, it makes no sense. That actually has no effect on anything that we’re talking about trying to get a contract done with him.”

Winning and losing is personal to Elway, whether we’re keeping score on the football field or at the negotiating table. The raw competitiveness that crackles as hot as a ruptured power line is what makes Elway so great.

In the business of the NFL, however, money can never get personal, because the resulting fallout can undermine the sense of all-for-one and nobody-for-himself cohesiveness that’s essential to a championship locker room.

While Elway will be beloved forever by Broncomaniacs for fourth-quarter heroics as a quarterback, his throwing hand has quickly morphed to an iron fist since assuming front-office duties in 2011. Disappoint him on the field, and Elway will send you packing, even if you are as popular as Tim Tebow. Challenge Elway in contract negotiations, and you can kiss Denver goodbye, Elvis Dumervil.

There’s nothing warm and fuzzy about the job of general manager, which is precisely why it would be no shocker if Thomas got slapped with a franchise tag again for the 2016 season, should he fail to sign a long-term deal on Elway’s terms. But it’s also bad business for an NFL executive who pounds the table with an iron fist in contract talks to deliver a critical lecture to the Broncos after a loss, as Elway was known to do on occasion under coach John Fox’s regime, because reception of the football message can get mixed with fears about the waiver wire or resentment regarding a pay cut.

Thomas cannot win in this money spat, because Elway refuses to be beaten in a salary dispute with the same intensity he brought to scrambling for the first-down marker. Translation: Don’t get in the way of what Elway wants, unless you’re begging to get hurt.

With a new offense to install and the championship window closing on Denver’s 39-year-old quarterback, is the stubbornness displayed by both Elway and Thomas in this contract dispute penny smart but football foolish?

Let’s hope the Broncos don’t lose their last, best shot to win a Super Bowl with Manning while his boss and No. 1 receiver quarrel over money.

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla