Knee-high striped socks were popular with more than 13,000 people who attended New Belgium Brewing’s Tour de Fat at City Park on Saturday.

So were banana outfits.

“We want to make people aware that there’s a lot of people in Denver who want to ride bikes,” said tour carny Pete Limbach, high-fiving cyclists as they passed the starting line.

The annual bicycle parade and beer festival, named for the brewery’s signature beer, Fat Tire, has grown each of its six years in Denver, according to Mike Craft, a director for nonprofit relations at New Belgium.

“Twenty-two years ago, we put bicycles on the Fat Tire labels because we all love bikes,” Craft said. “I don’t think anybody thought it’d turn into this.”

Mario characters, superheroes, flamingos and horse-headed men pedaled down East 17th Avenue from York Street to Monaco Parkway alongside other bicyclists who chose to wear less flamboyant garb.

At the starting line, one man rushed to slip into his banana suit and catch the back end of the parade at 11:15 a.m.

Organizers have encouraged costumes since the parade’s beginning 14 years ago in Fort Collins. Different groups of bicyclists are more likely to interact, Craft said, when they’re not wearing racing uniforms and workout gear.

“People who love mountain bikes and only talk about mountain bikes can talk to the cruisers,” Craft said. “And I think less Lycra at a biking event is probably good for everybody.”

The event brings together local government officials and the biking community to raise $75,000 this year for a more bike-friendly Denver. Beer and souvenir proceeds benefited BikeDenver, a nonprofit organization that advocates bicycle safety.

The group helped plan the protected bike lane that Denver City Council and Public Works recently installed on 15th Street, said Eliza Lanman, one of 13 BikeDenver board members. The lane opened Aug. 29.

Denver City Councilman Albus Brooks led the parade down East 17th Avenue on Saturday, pedaling “the bike with beats,” a disco-blaring road bike courtesy of BikeDenver.

Mary Beth Susman, president of the council, rode her own bicycle alongside him. Like Brooks, she wore city and county of Denver bike gear. The two were involved in approving the 15th Street Bikeway and said a similar project is planned for 19th and 20th streets from Lincoln to Park Avenue.

Alison Noon: 303-954-1223, anoon@denverpost.com