Now that the Republican Ed Gillespie has closed to within single digits in his race to oust Democrat Mark Warner from the United States Senate, is PolitiFact – one of the now ubiquitous so-called “fact checking” operations – trying to move the race back in the other direction?

At issue is an ad the Gillespie campaign has put up that includes footage of Warner saying back in August of 2009, “Let me make clear, I’m not going to support a health care reform plan that’s going to take away health care that you’ve got right now or a health care plan that you like."

It’s a statement the Gillespie ad labels the “Lie of the Year,” a description with which PolitiFact Virginia has taken issue.

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

"The Lie of the Year is awarded each December by our colleagues at PolitiFact National,” Politifact Virginia says on its Website. “Gillespie’s claim that Warner took the title last year was news to us because the dubious distinction went to President Barack Obama’s statements that under [the Affordable Care Act], ‘If you like your health care plan, you can keep it.’ Obama had repeated that vow at least 37 times since 2009, including during his re-election campaign in 2012.”

As PolitiFact Virginia goes on to admit, “Those promises unraveled last fall when insurers informed millions of Americans who buy their own coverage – as opposed to getting it through work – that their policies were being cancelled because they did not meet the ACA’s minimum standards.”

For a variety of reasons, despite how close Warner’s claim parallels what President Barack Obama said not once or twice but on many occasions, PolitiFact Virginia has labelled the Gillespie ad false.

This is not sitting well with media watchers, who say the group is trying to claw back its earlier designation for the benefit of a now apparently endangered Democratic incumbent. Newsbusters, a conservative group that critiques the media, is one that has taken issue with the PolitiFact Virginia designation, saying it is absolutely fair to link what Warner said to Obama’s promise.

“Somehow, GOP challenger Ed Gillespie is judged as wrong to suggest Politifact called this the ‘Lie of the Year,’ or suggesting it applies to every Democrat pushing Obamacare, not just Obama. Warren Fiske – a reporter with the Richmond Times-Dispatch – lamely claimed that only Obama is the subject of the original designation,” Newsbusters said. ”Fiske also claimed that somehow, when Senator Warner pushed his colleagues to vote for Obamacare, he was somehow victimized and surprised when Obama made a lie out of the original promise."

[MORE: Cartoons on Obamacare]

“Can you imagine a newspaper reporter trying to claim that if you voted for the Iraq war, you're not really responsible for how the war unfolds when you run for re-election, since the president 'surprised' you when it didn't go as planned? These liberal media 'fact checker' websites define 'fact' in an incredibly elastic and politicized way – just the way they report the rest of the news,” Newsbusters concluded.

The Gillespie campaign isn’t backing down in the face of the criticism. It posted a letter of its own, signed by campaign manager Chris Leavitt, that reads, “PolitiFact didn’t designate President Obama the 'liar of the year.' They deemed 'lie of the year' the false statement made by President Obama, Mark Warner and many others that if you like your health care plan, you can keep your health plan.”

According to the campaign (and in the interests of full disclosure, let me add that my daughter is an unpaid volunteer) and the letter, “Up to 250,000 Virginians will receive cancellation notices this fall after being assured by Mark Warner and President Obama that wouldn’t happen. Mark Warner broke his promise to Virginians when he made the statement PolitiFact national deemed lie of the year. We rate PolitiFact Virginia’s false rating 'false,' and so will a majority of Virginia voters in November.”