Stormont-Vail Regional Health Center and St. Francis Health Center have announced plans to combine their neonatal and pediatric staffs in a move they said will improve service to patients.

Stormont-Vail spokeswoman Nancy Burkhardt said Friday no positions are being eliminated as a result of the plan, in which the hospitals would share physicians but retain separate staff members in nursing and other positions.

Stormont-Vail currently has three pediatric hospitalists and four doctors specializing in neonatology, she said, and St. Francis has one permanent staff member in pediatrics and two temporary physicians. The combined doctors will provide 24-hour coverage of both hospitals.

The partnership will go into effect by Dec. 18, St. Francis spokesman Ben Bauman said. The hospital systems already operate the Life Star air ambulance service together and previously owned Kansas Dialysis and the MRI Center of Kansas together.

“We are called to be more creative, accountable and innovative in delivering the highest quality of care and the most value for those that we are privileged to serve in our ministry,” Robert Erickson, president and CEO of St. Francis, said in a news release. “We did not have to look far to find a partner to collaborate in this endeavor. It is a new day, and we look forward to working together for the benefit of our patients and the communities we collectively serve in northeast Kansas.”

The hospitals provide slightly different services to their youngest patients. St. Francis has a “special care nursery,” which can serve babies who are having trouble maintaining body temperature or taking oral feedings, but who were born at least 32 weeks into the pregnancy and who weigh at least 1,500 grams, or about 3 pounds and 5 ounces. Stormont-Vail has a neonatal intensive care unit, which can treat newborns who are more severely ill.

Bauman and Burkhardt said the partnership is intended to allow more children to stay in Topeka, easing the burden on their families. Transfers to a lower level of care probably won’t be common, Bauman said, but the partnership would allow newborns whose conditions have improved to more easily go to the special care nursery if the NICU were overfilled.

“Topeka is a health care hub for our region,” Randy Peterson, president and CEO of Stormont-Vail, said in a news release. “By working together, we will be able to maintain, grow and enhance the services offered here in Topeka.”