2015 looks likely to be another good year for stocks. We are still recovering from the events of 2008 but the pace of recovery looks, if recent data are to be believed, to be accelerating. The Fed has made it clear that while rate rises are likely this year, they will be incremental in nature, and the transparency regarding the possible timing of a rate hike means that much of the effect is already priced into the market. There will no doubt be some shocks that cause volatility, there always are, but as the year begins the fundamental outlook for U.S. stocks, at least, remains positive.

That doesn't mean that the rising tide will necessarily lift all boats. There will no doubt be a great deal of variance between sectors. That is always the case, but following a few years of spectacular gains and as markets move to new record highs, the spread between the good and the bad will be exaggerated. That was the case last year; based on the performance of the SPDR ETFs that track the S&P sectors, the two worst performing were energy (XLE) at -8.85% and materials (XLB) at +6.11%. The two best performing were utilities (XLU), up 26.88% and healthcare (XLV) that gained 24.29%.

Those who follow markets understand that they have a tendency over time to return to the mean, so it is always tempting to look at the worst performing sectors for any given year and recommend them for the next 12 months and advise caution on the previous year’s best performers. This year, however, it isn’t that simple and each sector must be looked at separately.

In some cases that rule of thumb applies. Utilities, for example, the best performing sector last year is probably one to avoid in the coming year. There was an element of “catch-up” to the strength there this year after a few years of disappointing returns, so from a longer term view the strength there is hardly a surge. Ironically, it was fear of rising interest rates that kept utilities under pressure prior to the second half of this year, something that will almost certainly come to pass this year. As mentioned above, the Fed has indicated a rate hike in 2015, and that will put pressure on the sector.

Lower fuel prices have also helped utilities, while putting pressure on energy stocks. There will no doubt be a correction in oil at some point, but don’t hold your breath. There is no reason that oil prices cannot continue to fall early in the year, and while a recovery is likely, it is unlikely to be rapid. There will no doubt be some great opportunities in the sector once that recovery begins, but in the meantime there is some serious shaking out to be done. Linn Energy (LINE) probably set the stage this week when they announced a massive cut in distributions and capex. Others are likely to follow and those that don’t could find themselves in even deeper trouble.

So utilities, the best performing sector last year, and energy, the worst, both face a difficult 2015. The other sectors in the top and bottom two, however, healthcare and materials, offer the prospect of performing well.

Healthcare has outperformed the broader market for a few years and looks like continuing to do so. We are an aging population and advances continue in cures for the things that ail us. At some point costs will have to be reined in but with the political fight concentrating on the future of Obamacare that is unlikely to be a focus this year. Meanwhile, new therapies, particularly in the biotech field, will drive significant growth.

One word of warning, though; in the second half of this year the market woke up to the fact that not everything with the label “biotech” or “immunotherapy” would be a success. There will, I am sure, be some more high-profile failures, so larger companies in the field, such as Amgen (AMGN) and Gilead (GILD) would be favored over smaller plays. Their broad pipelines and established sales will allow them some degree of failure, and as more and more therapies come to late stage trials that cushion will be needed.

Materials are more of a straight out contrarian play for 2015. There is still a feeling that global growth will be slowing significantly this year, and obviously if that is the case, the materials sector would suffer. The case for buying in is, in part, about disagreeing with that and anticipating decent growth, but it is also about a basic truism regarding markets; they overreact to fear. Materials lagged last year on the prospect of lower growth this year. It may come about, but such is the power of fear that a pretty dismal world economy is already priced into the sector, leaving a decent upside and very little downside.

Last year’s best and worst performing sectors are a mixed bag when it comes to this year’s prospects. Even performance within them is likely to be spotty, indicating that this will be a year when paying attention to sector trends is more important than sticking to a view. Overall, though, the best advice, as always, is to remain diversified. Stocks in general should have a good year; don’t blow that by concentrating too hard on looking for sectors to beat the market.