Minimum liability car insurance is a great bargain ... until you actually have to use it. Editor's note: This article first appeared on CarInsurance.com and is reprinted here with their permission. Click here for the original post. Opting for your state's minimum liability car insurance may be fine if you only want to comply with the insurance laws required to get behind the wheel. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to PropertyCasualty360.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited PropertyCasualty360.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical PropertyCasualty360.com information including educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, National Underwriter, Claims, and PropertyCasualty360.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including BenefitsPro.com, LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

2. Hail damage Hail is just one of the hazards that bad weather can bring. Penny Gusner, the consumer analyst for Insure.com, says you'll need optional comprehensive coverage to repair hail or other weather-related problems.

3. Accident damage caused by you or another driver You'll need optional collision insurance to repair or replace your car after an accident.

4. Damage from striking a deer or other animal Comprehensive is required if you hit a deer. Or have other problems caused by animals, such as marauding bears eager for loot.

5. Damage from hitting a pole in the parking lot Parking lot accidents can sneak up on you, especially during the heavy shopping days surrounding the holidays. What if you hit a pole or another obstacle while maneuvering through a crowded lot? You'll need collision coverage.

6. Replacing a stolen vehicle Stolen car? You'll need comprehensive. "It covers the theft of your whole vehicle and parts or equipment that are permanently attached or installed to your vehicle," Gusner says.

7. Flooding damage Comprehensive covers it, which is especially important in high rainfall or hurricane regions like Florida and the Gulf states. Beyond flooding damage, comprehensive can also help with havoc from tornadoes and even volcanic eruptions.

8. Damages caused by an uninsured driver Salvatore says drivers should consider adding uninsured motorist (UM) or underinsured motorist coverage (UIM) to their policy. She explains that UM coverage will reimburse you, a member of your family, or a designated driver for bodily injuries caused by an uninsured motorist or a hit-and-run driver. UIM comes into play when an at-fault driver has insufficient insurance to pay for your total loss. UIM also provides coverage if you're walking and hit by a car.

(Photo: KellyNelson / Shutterstock.com)