Summa Health System is backing off, at least for the time being, its squabble with the physician-investor group with which it co-owns Western Reserve Hospital in Cuyahoga Falls.



Summa spokesman Mike Bernstein on Wednesday, Sept. 23, confirmed that the health system has withdrawn its request for a preliminary injunction against Western Reserve Hospital Partners. The hospital system had asked the court to immediately force Western Reserve Hospital Partners to be more transparent in how the for-profit hospital is run. Instead, both parties are moving toward a trial date scheduled for next year.



Western Reserve Hospital Partners voted last year to strip Summa of its 40% stake in Western Reserve Hospital, alleging the Akron-based hospital system violated the operating agreement by selling a minority stake of its enterprise to HealthSpan Partners, an auxiliary organization of Cincinnati-based Mercy Health. Summa last February went on to file its own lawsuit against the group of about 200 physicians, demanding reinstatement to the hospital’s board of directors. It appeared both parties had settled their issues earlier this year, though earlier this month, Summa renewed the legal fight.



In short, Summa alleged that despite initial agreements, all of its requests have fallen on deaf ears, particularly on those of Dr. Robert Kent, Western Reserve Hospital’s president and CEO. In a strongly worded letter to employees sent earlier this month, Summa chief operating officer Valerie Gibson said Summa renewed its lawsuit because Kent and the physician-investors’ leadership team have refused to open up their books — something required as part of the hospital’s joint operating agreement.



Summa contends that, as a joint owner, it has the right to ensure the hospital complies with state and federal regulations, particularly as it relates to contracts the hospital entered into during the period Summa lacked representation on its board.



Moreover, Summa has said it may have to evict the hospital from its current property because both parties can’t agree on a selling price for the facility. That’s not a desirable outcome — particularly as it relates to patients or Summa’s own business interest in the joint venture — but one that might be necessary because of strict federal laws.



In a statement issued to Crain’s on Wednesday, Bernstein said that at a hearing last week “the parties began to negotiate a resolution of issues, including a sale of the building and addressing partnership concerns. While the parties did not settle the dispute, Summa remains committed to offering a resolution that will ensure the hospital remains an important part of the community.



A Western Reserve spokesman declined comment, citing the pending litigation. However, when news broke earlier this month that Summa had reignited the legal fight, Kent said in a fiery statement that Summa’s actions were the acts of a “big bully trying to push the little guy around.”



It’s only a matter of time before the Western Reserve-Summa partnership completely unwinds, though the Affordable Care Act has complicated matters.



Summa officials say they need a good look at the hospital’s books before they can sell off their stake in the venture. Because of provisions of the Affordable Care Act, Summa simply can’t sell its stake to Western Reserve’s physician-investors because of a moratorium on physician ownership. Summa would have to sell its stake to a non-physician-owned enterprise.