Jay Rudman (Photo: provided)

Jay Rudman didn't wear a doctor's white coat and didn't see patients, but he was involved in their treatment through the nearly 14 years he led Trillium Health.

As president and chief executive officer, Rudman put the patient first and developed a system to address medical and other needs. Patient-centered is the current buzz in health care but has been the hallmark of Trillium Health from when it focused on HIV-positive people to now when it also offers primary care to the general community.

"The difference we've made is really to give people the most comprehensive range of services and to do it in one-stop shop where people can access those services easily, and do it in a way that puts the customer first," he said.

Rudman, 65, announced Friday he was retiring as CEO on Dec. 31. He will continue as a consultant in 2015 to the new CEO. A search is underway.

Rudman called himself just one part of the enterprise, but colleagues said that he brought Trillium Health to financial stability and his influence was felt in the board room and the exam room.

"He brought our organizational vision to life and and sustained it," said Dr. William Valenti, co-founder of the Community Health Network, a precursor to Trillium Health. "We still very much are an HIV program and Jay continues to support that. He had a vision to move beyond HIV, to other people in the community who need health care."

Rudman guided the merger of AIDS Community Health Center and AIDS Rochester to form AIDS Care in 2010, and the rebranding of the organization to Trillium Health in 2013. He led expansion of services, including primary care to the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community, as well as people who chose Trillium after gaining health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

Rudman said Trillium has more than 1,000 patients and helps many more with care management and supportive services such as transportation, food and housing — what increasingly are being given more importance in a person's physical health.

"What he and this organization have done is made our health much better in Rochester," said Rev. Roosevelt Dixon, a member of the board of directors. "It made it so that people who probably never would have gotten health care are able to get it."

Dixon and Valenti described Rudman as a friend and someone who is easy to work with.

"We like each other, we respect each other," said Valenti, senior vice president for organizational advancement and staff physician. "And he leaves me alone."

Rudman said discussions about his retirement started with the formation of AIDS Care.

"This is the right time for me personally," he said. "It's the right time for the organization."

Rudman said he has 4 ½ months left of work to do, plus the transition to the new CEO.

"It's not cold turkey for me," he said. "It's not a total split in terms of the organization."

As for future growth, Trillium is seeking status as a federally qualified health center, which would provide more funding opportunities, and also is seeking to provide dental care.

"I have great confidence in them to take it to another level," he said of the management team. "The best compliment I could have as to my leadership is to have the people in place to to continue to advance the organization."

PSINGER@DemocratandChronicle.com

Twitter.com/PattiSingerRoc

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1skmyeX