Sen. Marco Rubio’s entrance into the 2016 presidential race Monday is in many ways an audacious act of political defiance.

After the freshman Florida Republican’s botched attempt at bipartisan immigration reform in 2013, his polling numbers hemorrhaged.

When Jeb Bush sent signals late last year he was stirring to fulfill his own White House ambitions, the chances of a Rubio run were roundly downgraded by party strategists in his own home state.



And when word trickled out last week that Hillary Clinton would beat him to the campaign starting gate by a day, there was speculation he would get bigfooted.



But Rubio hasn’t flinched.

And his formal launch Monday evening – complete with a straightforward speech at the historic and decadent Freedom Tower in Miami – shows that if nothing else, Rubio is confident enough in his own raw talent to believe he can prove the naysayers wrong again.

“Now the time has come for our generation to lead the way toward a new American century,” Rubio said in the climax of an announcement speech that produced chants of “Marco, Marco.” “This election is not just about what laws we will pass. It is a generational choice about what kind of country we will be.”

At 43 – the precise age John F. Kennedy was when elected to the presidency – Rubio is expected to be the youngest contender in the hunt for the White House in 2016.

It’s already becoming apparent his youthfulness is what his team will use to separate him from the rest of the emerging Republican pack – as well as from Clinton, who at 67 is 24 years his elder.

“The contrast on that with Marco and Hillary is excellent,” says Sid Dinerstein, a former chairman of the Palm Beach County Republican Party in Florida, who says he is neutral in the primary at this point. “She’ll look older in a head-to-head with Marco than with other candidates. It’s always been important in American optics.”

The theme of Rubio’s bid – “A New American Century” – conjures up an eagerness to turn the page away from a generation of leaders who have dominated the past two decades, most pointedly the Clintons and Bushes.

He made one reference to Clinton in his speech, without mentioning her name.

“Now just yesterday, a leader from yesterday began a campaign for president by promising to take us back to yesterday. Yesterday is over,” he said, delivering the sound bite that will be played in contrast to Clinton’s newly minted candidacy.

As early as last summer, Rubio dubbed Clinton “a 20th-century candidate” – a label he could easily affix to Bush but won’t until he has to. When he’s been asked about the former Florida governor – a supporter, mentor and friend – he retreats to the customary answer that his candidacy is about him, not anyone else.



“I’m not running against Jeb Bush,” he told reporters in February.

But he will eventually need to confront that thorny conflict once Bush pulls the trigger on his budding candidacy in the coming months. And his move into the race despite public pressure from Florida’s top political players to stand down indicates he won’t be reluctant to make a crisp distinction if and when it’s required.

Beyond the generational chasm, Rubio associates believe their candidate’s powerful oratory, compelling Cuban-American heritage and disciplined, policy-driven focus will carve out a unique niche for him in a sprawling field. But there’s a limit to that calculation.

Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, the first GOP entrant into the 2016 race, is arguably just as rhetorically gifted and also is the son of Cuban immigrants, as he mentioned in a statement Monday welcoming Rubio to the fray. Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal is Indian-American and arguably equally as wonky.

Rubio begins the GOP primary contest muddled in single digits in the early nominating states as well as nationally, but his growth potential is apparent. Republican voters like him, as demonstrated by his high personal favorability ratings and the reactions he yields after he performs in a room.

He can speak fluidly about foreign policy and has advocated for a mighty, active response to the world’s most insidious threats. He will also have money. One Miami donor has floated spending $10 million on his behalf through a super PAC, and Rubio has molded a reputation for being able to woo well-heeled contributors in private settings.

But youth can easily be tied to inexperience, and that’s the risk Rubio’s bid ultimately faces. Is he too fresh-faced to manage the towering threats that face the country? After Barack Obama – once a first-term senator who won the presidency at the age of 47 – is the country ready to take another chance on someone so unseasoned?



There were hints of Rubio's political naiveté in his handling of his immigration position, which he switched in order to tend to the political reality of conservative recalcitrance. When he eventually came out in opposition to the bill he helped craft, it looked like a flip-flop akin to John Kerry’s infamous 2004 remark on war funding: “I actually did vote for the $87 billion, before I voted against it.”

Rubio’s allies like to cite that unlike Obama, he was speaker of the Florida House before advancing to the U.S. Senate. But if Rubio convinces voters he’s ready, it’s difficult to imagine it’ll be due to his tenure at the helm of a legislative body in Tallahassee.

His candidacy is truly audacious because it holds considerable risk. He is giving up his Senate seat in a pivotal swing state that Republicans will have to scramble to defend. In 19 months, Rubio will either be president or a private citizen, and it could be over much quicker than that.

But just as he was an overwhelming underdog in his initial 2010 race to get to the U.S. Senate, he will relish the underdog role in the wide-open 2016 race.