Medicaid reform isn't on agenda

By Joseph Stango





With Donald Trump the presumptive Republican presidential nominee and Hillary Clinton on her way to the Demo-cratic Party's nomination, the nation's eyes begin to turn to November. Clinton has been moving to the left to attract Bernie Sanders supporters, while Trump sounded more libertarian in his attempt to make peace with Ted Cruz supporters. The United States may be in store for a race unlike any other since 1984, when conservative President Ronald Reagan and liberal former Vice President Walter Mondale perfectly contrasted one another — highlighting the differences separating the two ideologies.



Issues such as Obamacare and trade will dominate the campaign, but no issue defines the contrasting views of the two ideologies more starkly than Medicaid. If the websites of either candidate are any measure, Medicaid reform will not get a mention in the thousands of speeches, sound bites and newscasts that are coming our way.



When Medicaid became law in 1965, it was signature legislation for the Democratic Party. However, it reflected then, as it does now, the intent by "big government" to control the lives of people under the program's care. Medicaid offered the best and worst big government had to offer. To the Demo-crats' credit, the program provided general health care as well as long-term care.



However, the mandate for long-term care ignored freedom and individual choice while eliminating the rights of families and the role of physicians in the manner of care. This mandate was simple: permanently institutionalize everyone who needed care.



The Republican response, in theory, would have been to honor liberty, freedom and the rights of the individual by offering market-based solutions. However, Republicans backed into the Medicaid issue and never addressed the issue of "liberty for all."



Julie Beckett, who desired to care for her disabled daughter Katie at home in Iowa, played into Reagan's theme of "getting the government off the backs of the American people." When presented with the story of Julie Beckett's fight to keep Katie, then an infant, at home rather than in an institution, Reagan signed an executive order creating the first waiver to mandated institutional care. Foolishly, Republicans never have made this their signature issue.



If history is any indication of what is to come, neither presidential candidate will make much of the issue. Trump's "Issues" page ignores Medicaid.



Clinton's website highlights the need for LGBT rights, women's rights, voting rights and disability rights, but only as they pertain to the private sector. Clinton never mentions the rights of senior citizens and persons with disabilities within the scope of Medicaid.



What is it about Medicaid's restrictive policies that discourages Republicans from touting the benefits of market-based solutions, which provide cost savings to strained budgets and restore individual liberty? What is it about this issue that discourages Democrats from applying the "civil-rights" label to it?



When I pointed this out to one governor, he remarked, "Americans in general don't want to hear about civil rights of seniors! They only care that we are taking care of the elderly."



"That's true," I replied, "until they become the senior or person with disability!"



Joseph Stango of Southbury is founder of Dora's Hope (www.dorashope.org).

Follow Us