By Justin Katz | Watchdog Arena

An acquaintance investigating health insurance pricing through the website of HealthSource RI—Rhode Island’s health benefits exchange under the Affordable Care Act (ACA; ObamaCare)—became caught in one of those torturous loops people encounter on the Internet from time to time, whether by user error or a technical glitch. The various forms on the site just would not work for him.

After two-and-a-half hours on hold waiting to interact with a human being through that old-fashioned device, the telephone, the clock ran out on HealthSource’s business hours, and not wanting to remain on hold over night, he hung up and emailed his friends in frustration.

Recent news coverage makes clear that his was not a unique experience.

“There isn’t a day that goes by that we don’t hear some complaints,” acknowledged former HealthSource Director Anya Rader Wallack the week before she hopped departments to head up the state’s Medicaid operations, less than a year before she started at the helm of the exchange. Before taking the job in Rhode Island, Wallack was a key figure in Vermont government as single-payer healthcare turned out to be a fantasy with no viable funding mechanism.

Funding is at the heart of HealthSource’s woes, too. With federal funding drying up for the state-run exchange, in her budget for the current fiscal year, Governor Gina Raimondo (D) proposed a new tax on all individual and small-employer plans in the state. Unlike the fee structure to fund federal exchanges, which is a 3.5-percent fee on all plans sold through the exchange, redistributed evenly across all similar plans, the HealthSource tax would start with the agency’s budget and simply spread the burden across the market.

If calculated in the same way as the federal fee, the HealthSource tax would have been over nine percent in the first year, perhaps growing to more than 13 percent thereafter. However, wary of the unrelenting controversy surrounding the exchange’s funding, Democrat Speaker of the House Nicholas Mattiello insisted that the exchange be funded as it would be if the federal government were to take it over, but with a $2.6 million buffer from general revenue.

Hence Wallack’s complaint that “as we have scaled back significantly at the call center to live within this budget, we’ve seen the impact on our customers.”

The bottom line is that the bottom line is not enough. The State of Rhode Island lacks the scale of the federal government, so even extending the fee to all individual and small-group health plans in and out of the exchange doesn’t dilute the cost enough to make it less painful for those paying it.

This assessment is no surprise, even to the state government of Rhode Island. In 2009, then-Lieutenant Governor Elizabeth Roberts led an investigation of the exchange idea, dubbed HealthHub RI. Unless politicians were willing to force all insurance to be purchased through the government exchange, a final report warned, there would be “insufficient scale to justify investment.”

That forbidding assessment didn’t even include the possibility that so many people using the exchange would discover that they were eligible for Medicaid, which has been the dominant product on HealthSource, surpassing projections by a large margin.

Rhode Island’s news cycles are currently dominated by too many problems, scandals, and major policy disputes for continued funding of the exchange to have raised many questions while the legislature is out of session. If, as looks likely, the cost promises to increase greatly for the next fiscal year, the groups and legislators who had made the exchange controversial to begin with will no doubt resume their call to transfer it to the federal government.

However, HealthSource is a central piece of the state’s Unified Health Infrastructure Project (UHIP), which will link all government services and welfare programs through a single exchange. The state government is therefore sure to find some way to keep it under local control for another year, and then another. Under UHIP, with all services flowing through the same processes, the state might achieve some degree of scale, but perhaps more significantly, the exchange will just become part of the ballooning costs of social services in the Ocean State.

Whether that will improve customer service for health insurance consumers cannot yet be known. One certainty, though, is that much of the price of actually providing the service will be hidden.