Advertisement - story continues below

The Supreme Court ruled Monday that the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals must rehear Notre Dame’s religious liberty objections to the Affordable Care Act’s contraception mandate.

Last year, the circuit court in Chicago upheld a lower federal court’s ruling dismissing Notre Dame’s suit. The court found that the Obama administration’s “accommodation” rule for religious organizations precluded Notre Dame from claiming its religious liberties were being violated.

The accommodation rule requires religious institutions, like Notre Dame, to notify the Department of Health and Human Services or their insurer of their objection to the contraception mandate. After their objection is certified by HHS, the health care insurer must then pay for the mandated coverage.

Advertisement – story continues below

Notre Dame, and other religious organizations, object to the mandate and the accommodation on the grounds that the health care plans their institutions are required to provide are still the means used to furnish abortion-inducing drugs, whether the institutions pay directly for that specific portion of the coverage or indirectly (through higher premiums, etc.).

Notre Dame further argues that in order for them to follow the certification process required by HHS for the accommodation, they are still, in effect, giving the insurer the green light to provide the means to take a human life.

The Supreme Court, in reversing the 7th Circuit’s decision, instructed the lower court to revisit the Notre Dame case in light of the high court’s ruling in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby last year. The circuit court ruled against Notre Dame prior to the Hobby Lobby decision. In that case, the Supreme Court decided that owners of closely-held private companies could not be required to provide abortion-inducing drugs if doing so ran contrary to their religious beliefs.

Advertisement – story continues below

Given the high court’s ruling in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby to exempt business owners from the HHS mandate altogether, it seems very likely the justices will uphold Notre Dame’s and other religious groups’ right to be exempted, as well.

Notre Dame’s Vice President for Public Affairs Paul J. Brown said they are “gratified” by the Supreme Court’s action. He said it allows them “to seek relief” from the policy. “Notre Dame continues to challenge the federal mandate as an infringement on our fundamental right to the free exercise of our Catholic faith,” he said.