F&M Poll: Wolf Receives Good Numbers in First Survey of His Tenure

Written by Abby Smith, Contributing Writer

Newly-elected Gov. Tom Wolf’s got his first report card, so to speak.

A new Franklin & Marshall College poll out Thursday finds nearly two in five Pennsylvania voters (38 percent) consider the governor’s job performance to be “excellent” or “good.”

The results split along party lines as expected, with 58 percent of Democrats saying Wolf is doing an “excellent/good” job and 61 percent of Republicans saying he is performing “only fair/poor.”

When ranked with his predecessors, Wolf fairs better than recently-ousted Republican Gov. Tom Corbett, who hovered at just 30 percent “excellent/good” job performance at the beginning of his term. But stacked against popular former Governors Ed Rendell and Tom Ridge, Wolf falters a bit — Rendell and Ridge began their terms with just below and just above 50 percent of voters, respectively, considering their job performance “excellent/good.”

Wolf’s approval rating remained stagnate at 40 percent, the same as the college’s October 2014 survey. There was a slight uptick in the number of Pennsylvania voters undecided about Wolf, rising from 18 to 22 percent since the last poll.

The best news for Wolf, however, lies in the number of Pennsylvanians who believe the state is headed in the right direction. Though more Pennsylvanians (47 percent) responded that the state was off on the wrong track, the 39 percent who do believe the state is moving forward is the highest percentage since the college’s February 2010 survey.

Just last October, only 28 percent of Pennsylvanians were positive about the state’s future, while a solid majority (61 percent) were pessimistic.

Another win for Wolf? His budget plan is much better liked by the people of Pennsylvania than the Republicans in the legislature. A majority (59 percent) support the plan proposed in Wolf’s first budget address.

The Franklin & Marshall poll surveyed 597 Pennsylvania voters from March 17 to 23 and has a margin of error of +/- 4.2 percent.

March 26th, 2015 | Posted in Front Page Stories, Governor, Poll, Top Stories | 11 Comments