On Saturday, 27-year-old Antwan Bailey walked more than 4 miles from his home off Emerson Street to Hemming Park. A group called Fishers of Men said it would march downtown to celebrate fathers and connect them to entrepreneurs. It was exactly what Bailey thought he needed.

A boy and his father should be close.

Bailey and his father are not close. His dad, a Navy man, lived far away in Virginia, while Bailey grew up in Jacksonville in what he calls a rough neighborhood not far from Andrew Jackson High School. He dropped out of that high school, and after he turned 20, he found out his ex-girlfriend had a 6-month-old son, Michael.

Bailey was a father, whether he knew how to be or not.

Since then, Bailey moved to a nicer neighborhood on the Southside. He worked a job serving wealthy people in the club suites at EverBank Field. Seven years passed. Bailey earned his GED, and his son enrolled in a nice elementary school. Three weeks ago, another ex-girlfriend gave birth to his daughter, Telaysia. Bailey dreamed bigger. He enrolled in college and started a clothing line. He admits no one ever taught him how to run a business.

Saturday’s event organizers said the march was connected with President Barack Obama’s fatherhood initiative, and the leader of the group, Alvin King, said he was tired of hearing about deadbeat dads. He wanted to do something to celebrate the good patriarchs. The march would end at a lot next to an organization that helps entrepreneurs. The dads would recite the president’s fatherhood pledge, and then they would pray together, and then they’d network with a few business owners.

It was exactly what Bailey needed.

So on a Saturday with Father’s Day approaching, he woke early, and he walked 4 miles.

He was the only one.

No one, except the march’s few leaders and Bailey, showed.

How could people not march and celebrate fathers. Where, he asked, are their priorities? What do they take pride in?

Bailey marched anyway.

He wore faded green jeans and two wristwatches and a 1990s-style Jacksonville Jaguars cap with his slogan written in gold marker under the bill of the cap: “$ makes ¢.” Money, he explained, makes sense.

He talked to the leaders and explained that he wanted to get his business going. He paints individual T-shirts and sells them for $25 to $30. He also paints murals, and apartment buildings and businesses pay him for it. He takes fashion management classes at the Art Institute of Jacksonville. Though the for-profit school is closing, the school promised to finish his education.

As Bailey walked to the networking event, a former college basketball player who started a few businesses stopped him.

“You have to have a marketing plan,” the man told Bailey. “The essence of the march is about the empowering of men to influence the things they can touch. One of the things that’s missing is the mental approach of doing that.”

Anthony Butler, the director of E3 Business Group, the entrepreneurship organization, asked if anyone had questions. Bailey did.

“I want to know,” Bailey said. “How do I get involved in the program?”

“If you follow up and take the initiative to call me, I’ll take the initiative to try to help you. Is that fair?” Butler said.

His organization, Butler explained, gives financial and marketing advice for business owners. For new startups, he said, he usually charges them $225. The membership helps them figure out the organization of running a business.

“I’m just starting a business,” Bailey said. “I’m trying to learn every aspect of it. How can I?”

“Come out to events like this,” Butler said. “Just shadow us.”

Butler collected business cards from the woman selling energy drinks and the woman who said she has a business of connecting people with Obamacare. He talked to multiple men who said they were financial advisers or life coaches or marketing consultants.

He pitched his idea to anyone who’d listen.

“I’m thinking of doing clothing on a massive scale,” Bailey said. Once he starts getting orders for 100 shirts, he figures he’ll have to stop painting the shirts by hand and use screen prints.

“I have connections and contacts,” said Alvin King, a financial adviser.

Bailey wants to teach his kids how to be a success. He didn’t plan on becoming a father at 20, but he said it made him learn he had to mature. He learned he had to leave his friends who he said were a negative influence. He had to work hard, and he had to earn respect.

During the school year, his son stays with him. During the summer, Michael stays with his mom.

Bailey wants his business to succeed, in part, because he wants to send his son to a private school and then to college.

“Every child needs that male influence,” he said. “Everything I missed out on, I can give to my son.”

Andrew Pantazi: (904) 359-4310