Jordan hangs two terrorists in response to ISIS atrocities. What will Obama do?

posted at 8:01 am on February 4, 2015 by Jazz Shaw

Now we’re talking.

After the unspeakable act of burning a Jordanian pilot alive was revealed this week, the people of Jordan rose up with the exact type of indignation and outrage which seems to be missing from the response in Washington. Last night two terrorists were hanged in reply to the actions of the terrorists.

Jordan executed two Al Qaeda prisoners early Wednesday in response to a graphic video released by the ISIS terror group that showed a captured Jordanian pilot being burned alive in a cage. The release of the video sparked outrage and anti-ISIS demonstrations in Jordan, while Syrian activists reported that the terrorists gleefully played the grisly footage on big-screen televisions in their de facto capital, Raqqa. Government spokesman Mohammed al-Momani confirmed to the Associated Press that Jordan had executed Sajida al-Rishawi and Ziad al-Karbouly, two Iraqis linked to Al Qaeda. Another official told the AP that both prisoners had been hanged. The executions took place at Swaqa prison about 50 miles south of the Jordanian capital of Amman. At sunrise, two ambulances carrying the bodies of al-Rishawi and al-Karbouly drove away from the prison with security escorts.

As you may recall, Jordan had been discussing releasing al Rishawi in a trade for the pilot. We later found out that the ISIS negotiators had been lying all along and the pilot had been dead for nearly a month.

Obviously, some will say that this has no effect on ISIS because they don’t care if their own people die. They will just write them off as martyrs to the cause. Well, just to go on the record here, I don’t care either. We should be executing these monsters wherever they are found. But that’s not going to have any long term effect on the battle.

The President’s response to the burning of Lt. Muath al-Kaseasbeh was completely inadequate.

[The killing] will redouble the vigilance and determination on the part of a global coalition to make sure that they are degraded and ultimately defeated. It also indicates the degree to which, whatever ideology they’re operating under, it’s bankrupt,” said Obama.

Sorry to say, but this is not the time for talk of making sure that the terrorists are degraded and ultimately defeated, Mr. President. This is the time to seize the initiative. The world – including those always most prone to stay on the sidelines – is experiencing a moment of outrage and you need to seize on it. Jordan is rushing out captives to hang them in the public square. Even the Japanese (!) are vowing action and revenge. This is the moment, and it calls for a stand reminiscent of George H. W. Bush at the dawn of the first Gulf War. Call for a tally of all of our allies and those who waver to declare who is on our side and who is on the side of the monsters. Go back into Iraq and into Syria. I know that you ran two campaigns on the promise that we would not have “boots on the ground” over there, but you will be forgiven in light of world events. And you won’t have to “go it alone.” The nations of the world will send their troops to march, including even some Arab states. The time is now, but the moment will slip away if we let it.

Unfortunately, I don’t believe that Barack Obama or his advisers will listen to this advice. The world is ready to go and an army could be led onto the field in Iraq and Syria in numbers which haven’t been seen in a generation. ISIS claims they want a fight with the west. This is the moment when a true leader could show them (and Iran, North Korea and the rest of the world) that you should be careful what you wish for. In this case I hope that Barack Obama proves me wrongs and steps up to lead. If he does, I’ll be behind him.

Related Posts: