Louisiana governor Bobby Jindal speaks to guests at the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) at the Donald E. Stephens Convention Center on June 8 in Rosemont, Illinois. CPAC is being hosted by the American Conservative Union. Scott Olson / Getty Images file

EXCLUSIVE: Chuck Todd sits down for an exclusive interview with Gov. Bobby Jindal (R-LA), an outspoken opponent of the Affordable Care Act and a potential Republican candidate for president in 2016. They’ll discuss his decision to not expand Medicaid in the state, the politics of the Keystone XL pipeline, immigration and his 2016 ambitions.

Director of the White House Office of Management and Budget, Sylvia Mathews Burwell, arrives at her confirmation hearing before the Senate Health Committee on May 8. If confirmed, Burwell will succeed Kathleen Sebelius to become the next secretary of Health and Human Services. Alex Wong / Getty Images

EXCLUSIVE: Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell will talk about the Supreme Court’s decision to hear another Affordable Care Act case and the second open enrollment period of President Obama’s health care law. Plus, Secretary Burwell on immigration reform and the status of the numerous undocumented children who crossed the Southern border this year.

POLITICAL PANEL: With a Republican-controlled Congress, what are the prospects of the President and the GOP working together to tackle some of the key issues including immigration and climate change?

Carly Fiorina

Fmr. CEO, Hewlett-Packard

Reid Wilson

Reporter, Washington Post

Helene Cooper

Pentagon Correspondent, The New York Times

Chris Matthews

Host, MSNBC’s ‘Hardball’

HEALTH CARE PANEL: The panel will take a dive into health care policy and the future for Obamacare.

Neera Tanden

President, Center for American Progress

Avik Roy

Opinion Editor, Forbes

Dr. Toby Cosgrove

President and CEO, Cleveland Clinic

ALSO SUNDAY:

-Chuck Todd examines how President Obama and the GOP will clash over climate change, immigration and the rules of the internet in the new political landscape. What are the political ramifications if President Obama uses his power to act alone?

-This week at the Nerd Screen, Chuck dissects the low turnout numbers from the midterm and what it means for 2016.

-NBC News’ Anne Thompson looks at two states, Illinois and Texas, and how they have responded to Obamacare.