Our golden summer: the best Ashes moments in pictures

IT was the series when an Australian captain told England's worst sledger to "get ready for a broken f**king arm".

And this Ashes series exploded when a rampant Mitchell Johnson almost did break a bone with a yorker to the foot of England's most dangerous bowler, Stuart Broad.

It was the series when a "retired" wicketkeeper strode onto the pitch of the Sydney Cricket Ground with his two-year-old daughter, whose desperate battle with cancer he credits with his return to playing.

It was the series when an English player went home after one Test, and another retired just after Australia pasted his team to take a 3-0 lead.

It was the summer of Mitchell Johnson's moustache, and of kids' faces painted with handlebars.

It was the first series in the absence of giants Tony Greig, Richie Benaud and Bill Lawry, until Bill made a return in Melbourne, where a record crowd flocked.

It was the series when dozens of Richie Benauds, or at least spectators wearing Benaud wigs and carrying foam microphones, drew the cameras to an 84-year-old former Australian prime minister cheerfully skolling beer for the Sydney crowd.

This was our sensational summer of Ashes cricket, when Australia whitewashed England in a 5-blot series, records were broken and everyone had fun (except the Poms).

Clarke giving it to Anderson 1:16 Play video The Ashes can be a heated contest and it was on display late on Day 4 of the first test match as Australian captain Michael Clarke had some choice words for England's Jimmy Anderson.

England's greatest sledger, pace bowler Jimmy Anderson, was up to his old tricks when he threatened Australian batsman George Bailey.

It was day four of a tense first Test at the Gabba in Brisbane, and Australia was sweeping to a crushing 381 run win with a day to spare.

The sledge didn't hang in the air for long.

Bailey's captain Michael Clarke leapt to his defence and told Anderson to "get ready for a broken f**king arm".

Stump cam recorded the comment, Clarke was fined $4000 and was widely, but quietly applauded.

It was late November and the fiery first test of the Ashes series was barely over when English batsman Jonathan Trott announced he would be returning home to England and would not play cricket "for the foreseeable future" due to a "stress-related illness".

The South African-born number three had been targeted relentlessly by an Australian pace attack from Mitchell Johnson, Ryan Harris and Peter Siddle.

Unable to perform under a barrage of short-pitched deliveries, Trott crumbled.

Shortly thereafter his departure was announced and England Cricket managing director Hugh Morris asked people to respect Trott's privacy and give him "the time, support and space he needs to recover."

It's a coveted honour and it means you are really part of the team.

Off-spinner, Nathan Lyon, who had been dropped twice from the Australian team last year, finally proved his worth in the Ashes opener in Brisbane, where he delivered crucial wickets in both innings.

Passed the treasured baton of being team song custodian, with hymn sheet in hand, Lyon led the team song.

The 26-year-old did so again even more joyously in Perth after Australia won the series 3-0.

The moustachioed return of Mitchell Johnson's mojo led to much comment - and mimicry by young spectators - as he embarked on what would prove to be a cracking summer of bowling.

The handlebar moustache, reminiscent of fast bowler Dennis Lillee's, seemed to herald a return to form for Johnson, who was ridiculed for his performance in the 2009 and 2010-11 Ashes series.

With little kids sporting black texta-taches and homemade handlebars from Daily Telegraph cut-outs watching on, Johnson bowled like a demon.

As Australia nudged towards a 5-0 series whitewash, Johnson scored himself a place in history with 37 wickets, a record for the most wickets by an Australian fast bowler in a five match Ashes series.

Michael Clarke's "broken arm" comment seemed like a sledge come true when Mitchell Johnson delivered what was almost literally a cracking delivery, striking the foot of Stuart Broad.

The seam bowler and handy batsman left the field under the shadow of a possible broken bone in his foot.

But X-rays later revealed no breakage.

Luckily for England, a bruised Broad would be cleared to return to the field to bat and, later, in the final test in Sydney, would save his team from a humiliating follow on as Australia marched towards its 5-0 victory.

But first Australia had to celebrate winning the Ashes back from England, and in Perth the defeat of our greatest cricketing adversaries was by a decisive 150 runs.

The final wicket to win the series was that of sledger Jimmy Anderson.

Victory was sweet.

No sooner has Australia humiliated England, their own spin bowler Graeme Swann sensationally announced his retirement - effective immediately - from all forms of the game.

The 34-year-old had been one of several underperforming players in the English squad.

In his parting moments he took a swipe at players who were "up" themselves, and then delivered a defeatist assessment of his team.

"I came to Australia in the hope of winning our fourth Ashes series on the trot but that's now impossible," Swann told UK newspaper The Sun.

"So it's time for someone else to buckle in and enjoy the ride. I could have made myself available for the last two Tests and maybe had a bit of a send-off from the Barmy Army.

"But that's no reason to hang on for two more games. I like to be the centre of attention - but for the right reason by winning games of cricket."

They came, they saw, they applauded.

The biggest crowd in cricketing history - a final total of 91,092 spectators, including a beaten but unbowed barmy army - flocked to the MCG for day one of the fourth test.

That was 292 more than the 90,800 who watched Australia battle the West Indies on February 11, 1961, during a hugely popular and successful tour.

The MCG is the birthplace of Test cricket; the first match was played there in March 1877, when Australia beat England by 45 runs.

England again struggled at the crease, and Mitchell Johnson duly delivered a blistering attack.

For the television audience watching on, the first summer of the absence of the legendary commentary line-up following Tony Greig's death and Richie Benaud's car accident was somewhat ameliorated by the return of Bill Lawry to the commentary box at the MCG.

Amid whispers of his impending retirement, Australian wicketkeeper Brad Haddin returned to cricket and at the SCG he carried his young daughter, Mia, onto the fabled field.

Thirteen months after Mia had been diagnosed with the childhood cancer, neuroblastoma, and Haddin had given up cricket to care for her, he returned.

Haddin credited his second coming as an Australian cricketer to the perspective offered by his daughter's battle against cancer.

And his sparkling return to form - rescuing Australia several times by sticking at the crease after the collapse of the top order - sets him up to satisfy a fervent desire to play on until at least the 2015 World Cup and then the defence of the Ashes in England that year.

Haddin appeared to enjoy the special moment with Mia after what he and his wife, Karina, had been through with her.

Six years after his wife, Jane, died of breast cancer and eight years after his own retirement from Test cricket as a fast bowler, Glenn McGrath scored a ton of a different sort with the charity named in his wife's honour raising enough money to hire the fund's hundredth breast care nurse for cancer sufferers.

And perhaps the greatest Ashes image goes to that of former Australian prime minister Bob Hawke skolling a beer in a crowd of "Richie Benauds" at the Sydney Cricket Ground.

In the absence of the great commentator, fans including dozens of Richies wearing silver wigs and carrying foam microphones, gathered at the SCG.

It was day two and with cameras trained on the Richies, Hawkie, schooner in hand, suddenly hove into view for TV viewers.

The 84-year-old downed his ale in about ten seconds.

In 1955, while a student Oxford, Hawke set a world record by downed 2.5 imperial pints (1.4 l litres), or a yard glass of ale in 11 seconds.

###