The Tribune offers final endorsements today in contested races for the Illinois House.

81st District: Rep. Ron Sandack of Downers Grove is an outspoken, policy-driven Republican. In May, he delivered a daylong, line-by-line inquisition of the Democrats' unbalanced state budget. Democrats passed it over the objections of Sandack and other Republicans. Sandack has taken some bold votes, including in favor of same-sex marriage, which prompted a tough GOP primary challenge. Democrat Liz Chaplin of Downers Grove has a solid fiscal record as a DuPage County Board member, but Sandack is a rising star in the legislature. He is endorsed.

84th District: "When we pay over 20 percent of the budget to pension payments, that's money that is not going to the disabled or to education," says freshman Democratic Rep. Stephanie Kifowit of Oswego, explaining why she voted for pension reform. She bucked pressure from party leaders and refused to support a phony spending plan for the state. She has pushed House Speaker Michael Madigan to allow a floor vote on combining the offices of treasurer and comptroller. Here's hoping Kifowit, a Marine veteran, will stand up to Madigan more often. She is endorsed over Republican businessman Krishna Bansal of Naperville.

86th District: We were pleasantly surprised when Rep. Larry Walsh Jr. of Elwood voted for pension reform. The Democrat's district includes Joliet, a strong union town. Some labor leaders have stopped talking to him. The pension changes, he says, needed to get to the courts for a ruling on constitutionality. He's right. Walsh also worked on legislation to help Will County expand its courthouse and to fund a program that provides foster children with extra counseling. He is endorsed over Republican Diane Harris of Joliet.

91st District: GOP Rep. Michael Unes of East Peoria and Democrat Chad Schmidgall of Pekin didn't participate in our endorsement process.

96th District: Republican Michael Bell of Edinburg and Democratic Rep. Sue Scherer of Decatur didn't participate in our endorsement process.

97th District: Rep. Tom Cross' run for treasurer leaves this seat open. Democrats are swooping in at the last minute to help Will County prosecutor Moira Dunn of Shorewood take on Republican Mark Batinick, a real estate broker from Plainfield. Dunn replaced Dennis Grosskopf on the ballot when he dropped out in June. Dunn is bright, sincere — and bankrolled by Michael Madigan. Batinick organized a grass-roots effort to block the construction of an unneeded new building for Wheatland Township. He wants to amend the constitution to make it easier for citizen initiatives to get on the ballot. He has proved he would be tight with taxpayer dollars. Batinick is endorsed.

98th District: Democratic Rep. Natalie Manley of Joliet grew up in Blue Island with a single mother and her Italian grandparents. She was a single mother herself after she left what she says was an abusive marriage. Today she's an accountant whose budget expertise has been useful in Springfield. She voted for pension reform and Medicaid cuts. She was one of only a few Democrats who voted against an expansion of Medicaid under Obamacare. "I can't support something that is going to leave us vulnerable," she says. Manley is endorsed over Republican Yvonne Bolton of Joliet, who is Plainfield Township's tax collector.

100th District: Democrat Josh Evans of Jerseyville is a military veteran and a law student. He wants to cut legislators' salaries and eliminate their pension system, and press for more Medicaid reform. He is endorsed over the unimpressive Republican Rep. C.D. Davidsmeyer of Jacksonville.

102nd District: We like what we see in another young Democratic challenger, Matt Forcum, who works in real estate and with a family excavating business. He promises to take a tough line on taxes and will serve no more than eight years in the House. Forcum is endorsed over GOP Rep. Adam Brown of Champaign, who has been a backbencher.

103rd District: The retirement of Rep. Naomi Jakobbson opens this Champaign-Urbana seat, and two strong candidates hope to replace her. Democrat Carol Ammons serves on the Urbana City Council. Republican Kristin Williamson works in public relations. Williamson has some interesting ideas to promote small-business expansion in her community and across the state, and she is endorsed.

Candidates did not participate in our endorsement process in the downstate 106th, 107th, 112th, 113th and 115th districts.

Join in the discussion on the Chicago Tribune Editorial Board’s Facebook page or on Twitter by following @Trib_Ed_Board.