Buy Photo Presidential candidate Bernie Sanders speaks at a rally at Big League Dreams in Cathedral City on May 25, 2016. (Photo: Omar Ornelas/The Desert Sun, Omar Ornelas, The Desert Sun)Buy Photo

A crowd of more than 1,000 people filled a Cathedral City ballfield on Wednesday to hear Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders. For many of them, the rally was a first.

The Coachella Valley doesn't see presidential candidates often. Some visit for fundraisers, but public rallies like Wednesday's are rare because of California's June primary date and its reputation for voting blue in November elections.

Cathedral City resident Joe Bagmara said the last one he went to was to support George McGovern in 1972. Jesus Ortiz, 23, said afterward, "It was awesome. The feeling was intense — when he started speaking, my heart went to my stomach." He mimed a swelling feeling in his chest.

The content, however, was standard Sanders fare. The senator from Vermont delivered his stump speech, which touched on raising the minimum wage, updating U.S. infrastructure, treating drug addicts and addressing climate change. The crowd cheered loudest when he described his proposal to make public colleges and universities free and booed loudest when he asked if they carried student loans.

READ MORE: Young crowd cheers Sanders in Cathedral City

"This is nuts," Sanders proclaimed from a podium near the center of the Big League Dreams ballfield. "We should not be punishing people for doing the right thing and getting an education."

Buy Photo Bernie Sanders speaks to the crowd during his campaign rally in Cathedral City, May 25, 2016. (Photo: Jay Calderon/The Desert Sun)

Though Sanders trails fellow Democrat Hillary Clinton in the number of delegates he's accumulated during primary season, he insisted to supporters Wednesday that, "if we have a large voter turnout, we are going to win the California primary."

On May 25, a Real Clear Politics polling average estimated that Clinton was currently polling at 51 percent in California, compared to Sanders' 41.5 percent.

Clinton, Sanders and Republican Donald Trump have been campaigning throughout California over the past week as they seek more votes ahead of the June 7 primary, which also includes New Mexico. Clinton and Sanders campaigned separately in Riverside on Tuesday while Clinton and Trump held rallies in Orange County on Wednesday.

In line before the Cathedral City rally on Wednesday, Bobby Harris said he has a daughter approaching college age and worries about the debt she could take on.

"You go to school to better yourself and end up with crazy debt," Harris said. He thinks Sanders "is talking about lifting her burden."

Income inequality has arguably been the leading theme of Sanders' campaign, and as mayor pro-tem Greg Pettis pointed out in his opening remarks, the senator picked an appropriate place to deliver his well-worn 50-minute pitch to voters.

Buy Photo A fired-up crowd listens to Bernie Sanders speak during his campaign rally in Cathedral City, May 25, 2016. (Photo: Jay Calderon/The Desert Sun)

"Cathedral City and its residents embody so much of the spirit Sanders has spoken about in this campaign. Working-class people, immigrants, veterans, gays, lesbians, transgender people," Pettis said. "We work hard, we love our country, but sometimes we feel Congress has forgotten the ones who elected them in the first place."

READ MORE: 'The strangest election': Is Trump driving voter registration?

Income disparities in the Coachella Valley are no secret. Indian Wells and Rancho Mirage both have median household income levels above $70,000, according to U.S. Census Bureau data, while household incomes in Desert Hot Springs and Mecca have medians below $35,000.

Big League Dreams, the venue where Sanders spoke on Wednesday, sits half a mile south of a mobile home park and beside the city's public library. Just a mile away, however, is Mission Hills Country Club, which marks the edge of Rancho Mirage.

Cathedral City's median household income is about $43,000, 25 percent below the median across Riverside County. Its biggest employers, by far, are in the low-paying retail and hospitality sectors, according to census data.

READ MORE: Sanders talks climate change, inequality in Riverside on Tuesday

And though Sanders' lines at the top of his speech about the "rigged economy" elicited loud cheers from the crowd, individual supporters identified a variety of issues they cared most about. Most were already committed to voting for Sanders in the primary, and they proclaimed it in buttons, T-shirts, baseball caps and repeated chants.

When Sanders proclaimed that, if he lived in California, he would vote to legalize marijuana, the crowd roared.

Ortiz, 23, of Indio, said his political priority is immigration reform. He fears a Donald Trump presidency could jeopardize his plans to become a citizen — he's a permanent resident now and will be eligible next year — and "break apart my family."

Ortiz can't vote in the June 7 primary, nor in the general election, but he said he's helped more than 10 of his friends register to vote. He even brought his 14-year-old sister to Wednesday's Bernie Sanders rally, the Coachella Valley's first of the election season, to help expose her to the political process.

"If you're not there at the election booth, it doesn't matter what you share on Facebook," Ortiz said. "As soon as I can, I'm going to get (my citizenship)."

READ MORE: Fear of Trump presidency driving citizenship applications

Constance Browning of Indio, who attended the rally with her adult son, said she signed up for health insurance for the first time last year through Covered California and said she likes Sanders' proposal of a single-payer health insurance system. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has also promised to expand the Affordable Care Act, or "Obamacare," but Browning said she "doesn't trust Hillary."

Sanders mentioned Clinton, his opponent in the Democratic race, only once during his speech, when he called her support for fracking in the past "wrong."

READ MORE: Clinton tells Riverside crowd that 'you're fired' won't work in the White House

For Sanders volunteers in the Coachella Valley, turnout is be the name of the primary game. Craig Scott, a co-founder of Coachella Valley for Bernie Sanders, believes Clinton has a lock on most Democratic votes in the western valley. So the group has focused instead on registering new voters.

Other members of Scott's group said they'd canvassed throughout Indio and registered voters at the Indio Swap Meet, Cardenas grocery stores and the University of California, Riverside campus in Palm Desert.

"We've done a lot of outreach, particularly in the east valley, a lot of voter registration, because the local Democratic establishment just hasn't bothered with that," Scott said. "It's mostly older white people in the local Democrats and we wanted to move outside of that."

Rosalie Murphy covers real estate and business at The Desert Sun. Reach her at rosalie.murphy@desertsun.com or on Twitter @rozmurph.

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1TFebpK