.......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ..........

Presbyterian Medical Group has a shortage of doctors in Rio Rancho, but officials are optimistic that situation will change.

Some Presbyterian patients who are new or haven’t been to see their doctor in years have been advised to find a provider in the network but outside Rio Rancho. Presbyterian Medical Group is the part of Presbyterian Healthcare Services that runs medical clinics.

“What’s happening in Rio Rancho is not necessarily unique to Rio Rancho,” said Dr. David Arredondo, Presbyterian Medical Group executive medical director.

For a long time, he said, New Mexico and the nation have had a shortage of family practitioners and internal medicine doctors. When many more people abruptly became insured under the Affordable Care Act, there weren’t enough doctors to go around.

When patients need a new doctor, Arredondo said, Presbyterian tries to assign them to a clinic near their homes or of their choice. If the providers in those facilities can’t handle new patients, they’re sent to other area clinics.

Presbyterian Medical Group Primary Care Director Dion Gallant said he’s doing a lot of recruiting for primary care physicians.

“We just need to get through the current stress on the system,” he said.

As one generation of providers retires, the company has to hire the next generation. Recruiting can take a while, Gallant said, but he is finding physicians who want to work in Rio Rancho.

“It’s one provider at a time,” he said.

Meanwhile, Presbyterian is offering other ways to access to health care.

For one, Arredondo said, the nonprofit is hiring “access providers” who can address immediate needs with same-day appointments for people who can’t get in to see their primary care physician soon enough.

Presbyterian is also hiring more advanced-practice clinicians, such as certified nurse practitioners and behaviorists. These providers aren’t doctors, but they can see and treat patients.

Video and phone visits are also available. Patients can talk with a doctor from wherever they have phone, mobile data or wireless Internet access, saving them from having to take time off work or find child care. Those visits are often free under Presbyterian insurance.

Using MyChart, a secure connection through the electronic medical records system, Arredondo said, patients can ask questions or request refills. The provider then reviews the request promptly and responds.

“It’s remarkable how much of our practice is shifting to MyChart, for patient convenience,” Gallant said. There’s also no co-pay for MyChart use.