According to a recent Gallup poll, Republican approval of the Supreme Court’s work was at 18 percent, a record low. Democratic approval was at its highest — 76 percent. ( Jacquelyn Martin /AP)

It is not often that the liberals at Netroots Nation and tea party favorite Ted Cruz would both convene tribunals to investigate a group they consider a threat to America’s future.

So a tip of the hat to the Supreme Court of the United States, bringing people together.

Or at least upending presumptions. When the nine justices broke camp and went off to their summer pursuits at the end of last month, they left behind a political world knocked akilter by the court’s recent decisions.

As has been the case for decades, the court still has a majority appointed by Republican presidents. But a recent Gallup poll showed Republican approval of the court’s work at 18 percent, a record low. Democratic approval was at its highest — 76 percent — creating the largest gap in partisan opinion about the court in the poll’s history.

Political scientists and Supreme Court observers consider the court conservative. But a CNN poll showed that 37 percent of Americans say the court is too liberal, the highest share to say this since the network started asking the question in 1993. (Twenty percent said it is too conservative.)

Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. was once seen by Republican politicians as the archetype of an ideal Supreme Court nominee. But Cruz, the Republican senator from Texas, said Roberts has traded the referee persona he offered at his confirmation hearings in 2005 for “an Obama jersey.” In the Gallup poll, 43 percent of Republicans had an unfavorable opinion of Roberts — far more than those with a favorable feeling — while only 15 percent of Democrats were down on him.

And even when the court takes a position that seems to be in line with popular opinion, the public has its doubts.

Before the court’s 5-to-4 decision in Obergefell v. Hodges, which said that states may not bar gay couples from marrying, a Washington Post-ABC poll showed 61 percent of Americans approved of same-sex marriage.

But a Post poll taken after the decision said only 52 percent favored the court’s decision legalizing same-sex marriage nationwide, and an Associated Press poll showed the public more closely divided than that.

The court’s just-completed term will be defined by the marriage ruling and a separate 6-to-3 decision upholding a portion of the Affordable Care Act that was facing what could have been a debilitating challenge. These cases were among a surprising number of wins by the court’s usually outnumbered liberals. Roberts was a dissenter on same-sex marriage and wrote the majority decision protecting Obamacare.

Public opinion of the court is always most strongly affected by what it has done lately, and conservative reaction to both decisions was so strong it probably influenced those who might otherwise have been more sanguine about the court’s rulings.

Cruz, a former Supreme Court clerk and practitioner who of course is seeking the Republican nomination for president, labeled the back-to-back rulings “some of the darkest 24 hours in our nation’s history.” He titled last Wednesday’s Senate Judiciary subcommittee hearing “With Prejudice: Supreme Court Activism and Possible Solutions.”

“The court crossed a line, continued its long descent into lawlessness to a level that I believe demands action,” Cruz said solemnly in his opening statement.

Democrats countered with the court’s decisions in Citizens United v. FEC in 2010, which loosened restrictions on corporate political spending, and Shelby County v. Holder in 2013, which weakened federal authority over some states under the Voting Rights Act. Those were brought up at the Netroots discussion “The First 10 Years of the Roberts Court — and How to Change its Direction,” and by Senate Democrats.

“When the Supreme Court’s decisions served Republicans’ political interests, I heard nothing about” curbing the court’s power, Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-Vt.) said in a statement.

How much the justices care about the controversy is probably somewhere between a little and not that much. Everyone wants to be well-thought-of, of course, and the justices would surely be wary of proposals such as one of Cruz’s that would call for national retention votes for the court’s members. But that has little support.

The justices sometimes take a bit of perverse pride in unpopular decisions, saying they prove the value of an independent judiciary. The worst that can be said of justices, Justice Stephen G. Breyer has said, is that they become “junior varsity politicians.”

Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, who wrote the majority opinion in the same-sex marriage case, said in a recent speech to judges of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit that more-controversial rulings have faded with time. He was in the majority in the court’s 1989 ruling that flag-burning was protected free speech.

“Eighty senators went to the floor of the Senate to denounce the court,” Kennedy said, according to an Associated Press report. “President Bush took the week off and visited flag factories, but I noticed that after two or three months people began thinking about the issues.”

Kennedy, who just turned 79 and has served on the court for 27 years, said there is a rhythm to the process.

“We have to reflect on what these issues mean, and when we have a controversial case — and a very difficult case like [same-sex marriage] — we draw down on a capital of trust, a deposit of trust,” Kennedy said. “We spend that capital of trust, and we have to rebuild that capital. We have to put new deposits, new substance into this reservoir of trust.”

Conservatives roll their eyes at such talk, especially from Kennedy, who is the least reliable conservative vote among the Republican appointees. There is no doubt that the past term was one of the most successful for liberals in years.

But affirmative action, election laws and challenges to organized labor’s authority are lined up for next fall’s docket. The left is already sounding the alarm.