Approximately 130 dachshunds, mixes race Saturday in the 'Running of the Wieners'

One-year-old Lucky Guinness, front, pulls away from the pack at the start of a heat Saturday during the 3rd Annual Running of the Wieners daschund races at Blown Spoke Hard Cider Co. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

When Lucky Guinness gets going, he shows off his dashing dachshund personality and makes a run for it.

The black-and-tan dachshund won first place in the 0-1 age division Saturday during the 3rd annual "Running of the Wieners" dachshund races.

"We had a pretty good idea he would do well. He chases rabbits, and he's pretty darn fast," said Tara Brunin of Windsor, pet owner of Lucky, named for his birthday on St. Patrick's Day.

Lucky was one of approximately 130 dachshund and dachshund mixes to compete in the races hosted by Big Beaver Brewing Co. and Blown Spoke Hard Cider Co. The barbecue, brew and cider event, held at Blown Spoke, benefitted the Fort Collins Cat Rescue & Spay/Neuter Clinic, which offers low-cost spay-and-neuter clinics for both cats and dogs to help prevent pet overpopulation in Larimer County.

"I think a lot of people haven't seen dachshund races before. It's something new and hilarious," said KatiLyn Vannosdall, marketing director of Big Beaver Brewing Co.

The dachshunds and mixes raced in several heats of up to eight dogs at a time for each age division — 0-1, 2-5, 6-8 and 9 and older, plus mixed breeds — and the winners of each heat raced for a first-place medal in their division. The division winners raced one another to determine the first, second and third-place trophy winners.

For each heat, two handlers worked with the dogs to get them moving as soon as the green flag lowered, one at the starting line to let the dogs loose and the other at the finish line, calling out their names and squeaking toys.

Advertisement

The races lasted a few seconds up to a minute or more, depending on whether the dogs ran forward, instead of running off to the side, sitting on their haunches or backtracking due to some distraction.

"The first heats were rather interesting. At the beginning, we had two heats where no dogs made it to the finish line," said Craig Kozak, the announcer for the event.

Douglas Timothy was one of the puppies who sat out the race, though he was supposed to run.

"He got a little distracted by the other dogs and big crowds," said Spencer Kirwin of Arvada, a former Loveland resident. "He's just a puppy. They have a very short attention span."

Sir Henry, age four, knew what he was doing and won the division for 2-5-year-olds.

"With so many people yelling, I thought it would be harder," said Henry's owner Levi Nash of Loveland, whose birthday was that day. "Henry's doing it for me, too."

Kozak said the dachshunds were "the wiliest wieners in Colorado."

"We're going to have to make this bigger next year," he said. "It's growing. It's popular. It's fun for everyone."

Last year, 87 dachshunds competed and 60 the first year.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.