Maybe you're one of those people who — unlike me — are constantly being told they look younger than their chronological age.

If so, you might enjoy flirting with a new website that uses facial recognition technology to decide whether your friends are just being nice.

A big disclaimer right upfront: The academic researchers behind the Face My Age database are still tinkering with their algorithms, as well as the site's stability and workability. At this point, the user interface can best be seen as a fun party game.

Fun, that is, if you enjoy taking a brightly lit, unsmiling, full-face, no-make-up photo of yourself, blotches and all, and having it stare back at you from the screen while you answer a bunch of lifestyle questions.

In future versions, this technology will become more sophisticated at scanning the contours of your mug and calculating how long you might expect to remain among the living. The creators are developing a product for insurance actuaries. And there's another in the works to help plastic surgeons show patients where they could most do with a lift.

"It's actually quite dramatic," said Jay Olshansky, a demographer at the University of Illinois at Chicago and one of the brains behind Face My Age. "I ran a picture of Joan Rivers through our system — her face age came out as in her mid-50s. I think she's 81."

(She is; I checked. I also put Hillary Clinton's photo through — guessing about whether she smokes or sunbathes — and the site gave the 66-year-old a face age of 55.)

After a Washington Post story ran July 2, the site has been "crazy inundated," Olshansky said. The researchers had hoped the publicity would provide them with the 20,000 or so faces they need to finesse their formula. But when I spoke to him this week they were at 200,000 faces and counting. A large share of submissions were coming from Italy, Spain, Chile, France and Argentina.

"I guess Brazil hasn't heard about us yet," Olshansky said.

If you're game to try, here's how it works: Go to www.facemyage.com (at this point, the "www" is still important). You plug in your age when the photo was taken, your gender, your ethnicity and your birthdate. Then you upload your photo. If all goes smoothly, you'll map your face by locating your eyes, nose and chin, then click through questions about health habits and whether you've had any cosmetic work done. (I assumed "recreational drugs" did not include a glass or two of white wine.)

The site then will give you your "face age," as compared to other folks in the database. It will also give you your life expectancy, down to the number of days you probably have remaining.

These stats are taken from the life expectancy tables insurance companies use, kind of a crude guestimate. Olshansky said the endgame of the site is to refine the connection known to exist between face age and longevity.

"Until we get the algorithm right, we're not going to use it," he said. For now, "The technology basically does what your eyes do. It's amazingly accurate, actually better than what the insurance companies do."

Olshansky suggested I run my own 59-year-old face through with and without makeup, to see the difference. He rejected my first photo as too blurry and softly lit (shadows read as age spots). Though it was hardly a glamor shot, I took a far, far harsher one that the system accepted — kind of.

One browser balked halfway through the process; another kept losing the image. My iPhone got an "internal server error." Finally, a third browser did the trick ... I think.

With makeup, the site declared, my face age was 38; bare naked, it was 44.

No way, said my blunt husband. Sadly, I have to agree.

Of course, Face My Age was kind enough to take no notice of my gray hair or gravity-compliant neckline, which certainly would add years to my score. Maybe that, too, will be addressed in future versions of this cool new wrinkle.