Dr. Kimberlydawn Wisdom, Senior Vice President of Community Health & Equity and Chief Wellness Officer Henry Ford Health System, is the recipient of this year’s Eleanor Josaitis Unsung Hero Award. Kimberly P. Mitchell, Detroit Free Press

Buy Photo Kimberlydawn Wisdom, MD, MS, Senior Vice President, Community Health and Equity, Chief Wellness and Diversity Officer. (Photo: Salwan Georges Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

A week in a Detroit hospital emergency room can be an education.

Dr. Kimberlydawn Wisdom worked in one for 20 years.

She encountered nearly every possible injury and ailment during her decades as an emergency department doctor with the Henry Ford Health System.

• Full coverage: Shining Light Award winners 2015

The most frustrating cases for her involved diseases and tragedies that might have been prevented through better personal behaviors and public health campaigns.

“Seeing the types of challenges that came in, that really informed a lot of my work,” Wisdom, the former Michigan surgeon general, recalled recently. “I realized that if we’re really going to improve health, we need to step outside of the four walls of the health system and go into the community and effect change there.”

That epiphany would guide Wisdom through the next phase of her career in public service and health care administration, developing programs that have improved the lives of thousands of Michigan men, women and children. She became the first state-level surgeon general in the country and, at the conclusion of her terms, returned to the Henry Ford Health System, where she is now an executive in charge of community-level wellness initiatives.

Today, her programs are making progress in improving Detroit’s high infant mortality rate, preventing unintended pregnancies, combating obesity and boosting fruit and vegetable consumption among low-income school children.

Wisdom, 58, is the recipient of this year’s Eleanor Josaitis Unsung Hero Award, sponsored by the Detroit Free Press and the Metropolitan Affairs Coalition.

“She has the ability to make quick, decisive decisions that comes from her experience as an emergency department physician,” said Robert Riney, chief operating officer for the Henry Ford Health System, “but she also has the patience to understand how you have to navigate through the political process when you’re trying to really create policy or financial infrastructure for an initiative.”

As Henry Ford’s senior vice president of community health and equity and the chief wellness and diversity officer, Wisdom is focused on improving the many “social determinants” of health among metro Detroit residents, such as access to nutritional foods and to prenatal care for expectant mothers.

One of her programs aimed at eliminating race and class inequities in health care last month won the national Equity of Care Award from the American Hospital Association.

“There are many social determinants of health that are outside of the medical arena,” Wisdom explained in an interview from her office at Henry Ford’s Detroit headquarters. “That means we can have the finest highest-quality medical care, but if we don’t help people with jobs and transportation and access to healthy foods, then we’re not going to have the outcomes that we need to see.”

She is extremely passionate about lowering the infant mortality rate in Detroit, where an average of 200 babies a year were once dying before their first birthday, a rate that rivaled that of some third-world countries.

Wisdom convened a regional infant mortality task force, which led to the creation of the Women-Inspired Neighborhood Network alliance between metro Detroit hospitals and health care providers. This alliance aims to help expectant mothers from Detroit’s most underserved neighborhoods.

Preliminary data show that there were no infant deaths among the first 200 babies born between 2012 and 2013 whose mothers enrolled in the alliance network.

Wisdom grew up in Groton, Conn., where her father was an architectural engineer who helped design the USS Nautilus, the world’s first nuclear-powered submarine. She was one of the few black girls in her school and dreamed of becoming a doctor, despite the advice of a school guidance counselor who had warned that “there’s no such thing as a Negro doctor. No such thing as a woman doctor, you should choose a profession in keeping with your race,” she recalled.

Undeterred, she went on to college at the University of Pennsylvania and later to medical school at the University of Michigan. But it was in Henry Ford’s emergency rooms in New Center and Dearborn that Wisdom encountered the sort of health problems that became the focus of her later work. This included preventable blindness and amputations from Type 2 diabetes.

“Where I really received a major education was in that emergency department,” Wisdom said.

In 2003, she was tapped by then-Gov. Jennifer Granholm for the new position of Michigan surgeon general. Until that time, no state had its own surgeon general. She served until the end of the Granholm administration in December 2010.

“I accepted the challenge and felt very honored and privileged to serve in that post and to continue to drive change at the state level on many of the same initiatives — chronic diseases, childhood obesity reduction, infant mortality, teen pregnancy prevention — that I cared about here in the (Henry Ford) system,” Wisdom said.

As surgeon general, Wisdom launched public health initiatives to combat obesity, childhood lead poisoning, unintended teen pregnancies and to reduce smoking. She gave more than 400 speeches across the state and advocated for the 2004 increase to the tobacco tax.

She helped start Generation with Promise, an initiative that educates students from low-income families in Detroit and Macomb County about boosting their fruit and vegetable consumption and physical activity.

Wisdom was recruited back to Henry Ford at the end of her time as surgeon general. She brought the Generation with Promise initiative with her, which now serves more than 20,800 individuals a year, or twice as many as in 2012.

“Beyond all of her clinical and administrative skills, it’s her personal passion for equity of care, for eliminating disparities and for health and prevention that are probably her greatest gifts,” Riney said.

In February 2012, President Barack Obama appointed Wisdom to be a member of the Advisory Group on Prevention, Health Promotion and Integrative and Public Health — a creation of the Affordable Care Act.

Gov. Rick Snyder did not continue Michigan’s surgeon general position when his administration took office, “but I’m still hopeful that he will consider it at some point,” Wisdom said.

“This is about the health of communities and is a nonpartisan issue,” she said. “We all should care about the health of our young people, our seniors, our community, because a healthier community drives a healthier economy.”

Contact JC Reindl: jcreindl@freepress.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1Jd2uRR