SARASOTA — Kelli Jaco isn't quite sure how she and her husband, Adam, did it last year — host a 24-hour boxing event to raise money for a school for kids with autism.

But this year the husband and wife co-owners of Jaco's Boxing are once again hosting the Jaco's vs. Autism 24-hour event. Starting at 4 p.m. Friday, participants can spar or work-out with the Jacos and other trainers in half-hour time slots until 4 p.m. on Saturday. Others can also attend a kick-off party Friday, free workout and yoga classes scheduled throughout the 24-hour event and a benefit party planned for the final hours on Saturday afternoon.

Last year, the event raised $20,000 for the ABA Academy, a nonprofit school in Bradenton for children with autism. It will be nonstop action for the husband and wife who own the gym on Lawton Drive. How will they manage?

"A lot of caffeine," Kelli Jaco, 32, says. "Right now, we’re in the preparation. We’re running on adrenaline. We’re really excited about the event. So it's really moral support. It’s being with our friends and our supporters and our clients. And when it's all over, we'll go home and sleep for 15 hours."

That's not all. Also on the agenda is a promise from event co-chairs Jaco and Amy Tanaka to do a burpee for every dollar donated to a GoFundMe page. Donations so far have them doing more than 1,700 burpees in 24 hours, in between the coaching circuits, that is.

"That part has really exploded," Kelli Jaco said. "It works out to be about 100 burpees an hour if we reach 2,400."

The Jacos had long wanted to do a 24-hour boxing marathon to support a charity before they debuted this event last year, Kelli Jaco said, and autism seemed like the right fit.

"We have many clients and friends who have children who have been diagnosed with autism or are on the autism spectrum," Jaco said.

If you go:

Kick-off party, 4 p.m. to 8 p.m on April 24: Free, and includes a boot camp, yoga classes, pizza, Lulu Lemon Athletics representatives and more.

Benefit, 1 p.m. to 4 p.m. on April 25: Free, and includes an auction and raffle that includes more than 30 items, including acupuncture gift certificates, ZZ Top and Buccaneers tickets, salon baskets and more. Also: live music, food and drink.

Want to donate to the GoFundMe burpee page? Click here.

Want to sign up for a boxing slot? (It's a $100 donation.) Click here.