MACKINAC ISLAND, MI — U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, speaking Saturday to a crowd of Michigan Republicans that included plenty of "establishment" figures, positioned himself as the grassroots presidential candidate of choice.

"If you see a candidate that Washington embraces, run and hide," Cruz said during a keynote address at the Mackinac Republican Leadership Conference.

"...If you think things are going great in Washington, if you think we need to continue heading in the same basic direction -- just kind of fiddle around the edges -- then I ain't your guy."

Cruz, wearing an open-collard shirt, blazer and cowboy boots at the island confab, promised an aggressive presidential agenda on day one, which he'd start by rescinding "every single illegal and unconstitutional executive action" taken by President Barack Obama.

Cruz said he would order an investigation into Planned Parenthood "and those horrible videos," and he'd tell federal agencies that the "persecution of religious liberty ends today."

And, doubling down on comments he made in Wednesday's Republican presidential debate on CNN, Cruz said he would "rip to shreds the catastrophic Iranian nuclear deal" negotiated by the Obama administration.

The big difference between Cruz and other candidates in Wednesday's debate? "I'll do exactly what I said I'd do."

And he said he'd do a lot. In "the days that follow," Cruz repeatedly said, he'd "repeal every word of Obamacare, fight common core, secure the border, end sanctuary cities, take on the EPA and abolish the IRS.

Speaking with reporters on the porch of the Grand Hotel following his speech, Cruz described himself as the most "consistent" conservative in the race, suggesting that Republicans know what they are going to get if they vote for him.

"We're going to win Michigan," he said, praising his in-state team, which includes former Michigan GOP Chairman Saul Anuzis, state Sen. Patrick Colbeck and grassroots organizer Wendy Day.

Cruz finished sixth in the latest Michigan poll of the GOP presidential field, but with a crowded field showing signs that it may soon thin, Anuzis said Cruz is well positioned to pick up support.

"In a field of 17 candidates, being a lot of people's second choice is not a bad place to be," Anuzis said. "And that's part of what we're trying to do."

Cruz was the second of five presidential candidates scheduled to speak at the Mackinac Republican Leadership Conference, a biennial confab attended by at least 2,200 registered guests this weekend.

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush spoke on Friday night, and Ohio Gov. John Kasich followed Cruz on Saturday. Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky and former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina are expected to deliver keynote addresses Saturday evening.

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.