Like many Republicans, I’ve spent a fair amount of time contemplating how we, as a party, might show women that voting for Republicans is a good idea. I even became a volunteer for a new GOP women’s political action committee, hoping and believing that I could help with its goal of appealing to young women voters.

By dedicating time and thought to this challenge, I’ve learned what so many political consultants already know but perhaps are not readily confessing: With no clear way to message on abortion in a way that will appeal to the 50 percent of women who are pro-abortion rights, we are really, really stuck.

I’ve discovered that brainstorming on the topic of women and the GOP is like the film “Groundhog Day”: I have to start over every time the topic of abortion comes around. As a result, I feel stumped, unable to come up with anything better than phrases like “economic strength” and “affordable health care.” I’ve even spent time trying to develop a message on the concept of “independence,” thinking maybe I can play this off of a “Fifty Shades of Grey” theme: “Fifty Shades of Dependence: Women Who Love Big Government” versus “Fifty Shades of Freedom: Women Who Like to Do it Themselves.”

[SEE: Political Cartoons about the Republican Party]

But you know what? None of it really works. Independence, economic opportunity, affordable health insurance – these messages aren’t specific to women, and they can’t compete with an emotionally charged phrase like “women’s health.”

The funny thing is that when I talk to women in my everyday life who are pro-abortion rights (neighbors, college classmates, people I meet at parties), it is so easy. I simply tell them that I share their desire to keep abortion safe, legal and rare, but it doesn’t impact the way I vote since I’m so confident that abortion rights are here to stay. I’ll confirm that these women friends or acquaintances understand how unlikely it is that another Roe v. Wade-type case will ever make it to the Supreme Court, and how, even if Roe were overturned, abortion would not be immediately banned, but would simply be left to the states where, like so many other complex social issues, it probably belongs.

I’ll remind women that we’ve had many years of Republican presidents and Republican majorities in Congress without abortion rights being taken away. And then I’ll point out that I think we, as women, are being manipulated by interest groups on both sides of the issue. Most women will readily recognize that both sides are trying to scare us into writing a check or casting a vote. I will often note that I, personally, don’t appreciate being talked to like I’m nothing more than a set of reproductive organs. I’ll make them laugh by telling them that Democrats make me feel like saying, “Hey, my eyes are up here.”

[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Democratic Party]

If I’m getting a few nods at that point in the conversation, I sometimes ask women to take abortion off the table and then tell me how they feel about politics. Once that issue is put aside, I find there is all kinds of room to find common ground on issues like the economy, health care, the size of government, national defense, lawsuit abuse, et cetera.

But a campaign to reach out to women isn’t a cocktail-party conversation. It’s got to take the shape of talking points and bumper stickers and 30-second television ads. Oh, and P.S., Republicans would rather lose elections than raise a white flag of surrender on abortion. Publicly, anyway. But, wait, what if the conversation among women on this issue could be private and separate from the party platform?

What if Republican women could, off the record, reassure undecided women voters that they should base their vote on issues other than abortion? Show them that their right to choose is not actually being seriously threatened and that thousands of Republicans are privately, quietly pro-abortion rights, while still comfortable being part of the GOP because they know it’s actually a nonissue? What if we simply spread the word that it’s okay to set yourself free from the fear and guilt of the abortion lobby; that it’s necessary to take control of your own vote the way you want to keep control over your own body?

Maybe the campaign idea I’ve been searching for is #takeitoffthetable. As in: Take abortion rights off the table, then tell me what you’re comfortable with when it comes to the size of government. Take it off the table, then think about what’s best for our economy. Take it off the table, then tell me how you want America kept safe. Take abortion off the table, then talk about the cost and limited choices of health insurance under Obamacare.

If it sounds like the language of negotiation, it is. When you’re making amends for mistakes, sometimes you have to negotiate. Republicans have made mistakes in this area. It’s time to make amends and negotiate a way forward.

A tough negotiation can also benefit from a proxy. In this case, the professional negotiators need to be women. Because girlfriends need to hear the truth on abortion from their own, sister to sister.

I think the best advice I have is just this: If you are a pro-abortion rights Republican woman who is frustrated by seeing her friends vote for Democrats based on one intractable issue, think about starting your own #takeitoffthetable campaign where you take women aside, literally or figuratively, and tell them that the abortion issue is safely decided. Tell them that it’s off the table. We can think about other issues now.

Ladies, I won’t tell the party leadership if you won’t. This is just between us girls, and the results could change the direction of a nation.