Photo

WASHINGTON — Military guards may continue to touch the groins of detainees at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, when they search for contraband before the prisoners are moved to speak with their lawyers, a federal appeals court ruled Friday. Because of the procedure, which was put in place in May 2013, some inmates have stopped meeting with or calling their lawyers.

In July 2013, Judge Royce C. Lamberth of United States District Court for the District of Columbia ordered the military to stop the searches, in which guards wedge their hands between the genitals and thighs of detainees as many as four times when moving them to a meeting and back to their cells. Judge Lamberth said the practice was unnecessary and intended to “actively discourage” the prisoners from meeting with lawyers.

The practice was allowed to continue after the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia stayed Judge Lamberth’s order. But on Friday, a three-judge panel of the court unanimously reversed his ruling, saying the judiciary must defer to the government’s assertions that, for security reasons, guards needed to conduct more thorough searches; under the old procedures, guards shook inmates’ underwear to dislodge any contraband but did not touch their buttocks or genitals.

“Although we must not give prison administrators a free hand to disregard fundamental rights, this case is a far cry from instances where administrators have acknowledged their intent to extinguish prisoner rights and acted accordingly,” Judge Thomas B. Griffith wrote. “The tenuous evidence of an improper motive to obstruct access to counsel in this case cannot overcome the legitimate, rational connection between the security needs of Guantánamo Bay and thorough searches of detainees.”

The opinion was joined by Chief Judge Merrick B. Garland, an appointee of President Bill Clinton, and Judge Karen LeCraft Henderson, who was appointed by President George Bush. Judge Griffith was appointed by President George W. Bush.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Lawyers for the detainees said they had not yet decided whether to appeal the ruling to the full appeals court or to the Supreme Court. They have contended that the military warden at the time, Col. John Bogdan, instituted the new procedures to punish detainees for participating in a hunger strike and to dissuade them from talking to their lawyers.

“It’s a really disturbing and quite frankly a disgusting decision,” said David Muraskin, who represents two Yemeni detainees who were among those challenging the procedures.

Lt. Col. Myles B. Caggins III, a Pentagon spokesman, said: “The Defense Department is aware of the judge’s ruling. We believe it provides additional flexibility to ensure the safety of our troops and the detainees.”

Colonel Bogdan had pointed to two issues to justify his decision to institute more invasive procedures. In September 2012, a detainee committed suicide by swallowing an overdose of medication that he had managed to hoard, raising speculation that he had hidden the pills in his underwear; and, in April 2013, guards found improvised weapons in a raid in which they forced protesting detainees into lockdown in their individual cells.

Judge Lamberth, an appointee of President Ronald Reagan, concluded that the groin searches were an “exaggerated response” to those issues and that they inhibited prisoners’ right to legal representation.

But the Obama administration said the policies were necessary for operational reasons. The appeals court adopted a more deferential standard to the government than Judge Lamberth, concluding that the groin searches were reasonable.