iStock

In what appears to be an about face, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services has revised a controversial provision of the Open Payments program and will now require companies to report payments to physicians who speak at, or attend, continuing medical education seminars.

The change comes less than two months after the agency declared there are circumstances in which such payments would not have to be disclosed. In fact, this marks the fifth time that CMS has offered yet another interpretation of its final rule on disclosing CME payments.

“This appears to be one of the biggest flip flops I have ever seen,” says John Kamp, who heads the Coalition for Healthcare Communication, a trade group for ad agencies and medical publishers that supported an exemption for disclosing CME payments to physicians.

[UPDATE: In a phone conversation, Shantanu Agrawal, director of Center for Program Integrity at CMS, tells us that the agency has not actually changed its position and believes “we’ve been entirely consistent” in attempting to craft a final rule. “We embarked on the rule-making process specifically to remove the exemption” that would have blocked disclosure of payments for CME.]

At issue is the extent to which CME payments should be included in the Open Payments system, which maintains a federal database of payments made by drug and device makers to physicians. The program was created as part of the Affordable Care Act in response to concerns that financial ties may unduly influence medical practice and research.

These CME payments are made by drug and device makers, as well as group purchasing organizations, to CME providers, which are either commercial firms or non-profits that organize courses for physicians. From there, payments may be made to physicians who speak at or attend CME events.

As a result, these are referred to as indirect payments, but increased scrutiny of financial ties between companies and physicians has caused a shift – 83% of all CME courses are now funded by non-commercial providers, according to the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education.

As noted previously, consumers groups argue that indirect payments for speaking at and attending CME courses should be included in the Open Payments database and fought against industry efforts to exclude such payments from reporting requirements.

“This new clarification is in line with the intent of the Sunshine Act which is to disclose financial relationships between companies and doctors,” says Danny Carlat, who until recently headed the Prescription Project at The Pew Charitable Trusts, which argued for including CME payments.

The latest change “will accomplished enhanced disclosure of the true nature of the relationships between drug and device companies and physicians,” says Carlat, who is now an associate clinical professor of psychiatry at Tufts Medical School and runs a company that publishes CME newsletters for mental health practitioners.

There may be loopholes, though. For instance, the latest rule includes examples of reporting requirements and one indicates that a drug or device maker does not have to report payments made to physicians if the funds given to the CME provider were part of an unrestricted grant.

The language suggests that companies could avoid reporting payments, depending upon how they dole out funds. But this is causing confusion, because it also appears to contradict reporting requirements stipulated elsewhere in the CME rule change.

“We’re still trying to figure out what CMS means,” says Andrew Rosenberg of the CME Coalition, a group of more than two dozen CME providers. “The examples [of what must be reported] are in almost diametric opposition to what they came out with a month before.”

How companies will react is unclear. Kamp, for instance, believes the pharmaceutical industry will err on the side of caution and act conservatively. And Carlat says companies will not want to risk incurring sanctions, especially since CMS will be looking for violations. “It’s a question of what’s credible,” he says.

[UPDATE: For his part, Agrawal notes that “we rely on stakeholders to interpret [rules] accurately and not skirt the rules. People have to be good actors.” And he adds that CMS does have “audit authority” to pursue suspected violations.]

Meanwhile, the final rule on CME payment disclosure does not go into effect until 2016, which means there is time for still more changes. The CME Coalition, in fact, hopes to meet with CMS officials to sort out the latest change and persuade the agency to reconsider.

“This is anything but over,” says Kamp. “We need to see if CMS just made a mistake or actually means what they issued. If they do mean it, I think there’ll be a court challenge or more likely some kind of legislation on Capitol Hill to reverse it.”