Not feeling my usual peppy self recently, I made an appointment to see my primary care physician, on whom I could always rely for a quick, once-over diagnosis or referral, and even a same-day appointment at his Central Park West office on my way into work. Until now.

That's because since my last visit Dr. K had changed to a “concierge medical practice.” In order to continue receiving his healing touch, I would need to pay an annual “membership fee” of $2,500.

I learned this while being examined by his perky new nurse practitioner Maggie, who handed me Dr. K's brochure, “Putting Patients at the Center of Health Care.” As a paid-up member, I could count on such benefits as a custom-tailored wellness plan; on-time, “unhurried” appointments; the doctor’s 24/7 availability by phone, email or text; and to top it off, Dr. K's “undivided attention.” I could even secure visits for friends and family—all for just $6.75 per day.

Nurse Maggie comforted me with the knowledge that if I opted for non-membership, Dr. K would still oversee my care, just at a distance, without actually seeing me. And I could continue to take advantage of everything his rabbit-warren office has to offer, which I took to mean a free supply of tongue depressors and blood pressure tests for the asking.

Feeling around my lymph glands, Maggie thought I might have a low-grade infection and jet lag from a recent trip to California. She suggested I take zinc and Vitamin D—and pick up a contract form at the front desk if I was interested in joining Dr. K's inner circle of patients.

Bumping into the doc on my way out, I asked him what's what. He immediately swooshed me into an examining room and explained his switch.

"You gotta understand—this is the only viable economic model for me to continue practicing," he said. "I'm an internist—not a surgeon replacing hips and knees at $25,000 a pop, or a GI guy racking up colonoscopies and endoscopies. All I have to offer is my time and advice, and under Obamacare, I'm earning $40 an hour to service everyone who walks in the door. After nearly 30 years I can't operate like that any longer."

But everything on his members’ checklist were items I expected already as a longtime patient, I explained. Did I suddenly want hurried visits or his divided attention?

“You're a reasonably healthy guy, who comes in a few times a year for this or that and doesn’t require a lot of attention. In all honesty, you probably don't need this level of elevated care,” he admitted.

“But for the millennials and older patients, and those who have a lot of questions and special needs and touch points, this package is really a great deal and will let me stay in business with a core group of patients willing to pay for premium service,” he said in as much time as it could have taken to check out my symptoms.

He had a point: Like everything else, you get what you pay for. However, I already was paying a hefty premium of $2,500 a month for the privilege of seeing him under my Oxford Freedom Plan policy. If Dr. K was now calling himself a concierge, couldn’t I at least expect him to score tickets to Hamilton or a reservation at Pasquale Jones, rather than merely offering his cellphone number?

Being in the service business myself, I wonder if I could convince clients to switch to my concierge PR practice. They’re welcome to avail themselves of my state-of-the-art phone and media database (sorry, my fax is on the fritz). But if they want my brilliant insights or their calls returned, that'll be extra on top of the retainer. I doubt I’d get any takers.

Of course, there’s no payer system like health care, where a third-party warps the relationship between buyer and seller. Imagine if you could subscribe to a service called Oxford Freedom Dining for $30,000 a year, ensuring a seat and covering the cost of a meal at hundreds of restaurants around town; you’d only be obliged to drop a $30 co-pay for your octopus salad with hearts of palm. Sounds great, but don't expect the hostess to seat you right away or the waiter to be so quick with the giant pepper mill. It wouldn’t be long before every chef and restaurateur would shift to members-only dining, drawing a sizable following.

The trend in breakaway MD practices is certain to climb, especially among solo practitioners and small groups forced to take higher patient populations with smaller reimbursement.

Concierge Medicine Today, an Atlanta news site covering the niche, reports a steady growth of members-only practices in the New York area over the last several years, including many with specialties in cardiology, gerontology, pain management and other areas in addition to internal medicine. The site estimates a count of around 140 verified practices in the New York area and perhaps as many “under the radar” offerings, since concierge medicine for now remains a branded business model and not a certified designation or one recognized by the American Medical Association. Nationally, Concierge Medicine Today projects as many as 6,000 concierge doctors.

It may not be long before whole stretches of Park and Fifth Avenue become known as Concierge Row, or when a theater-goer is stricken to hear the call go out: “Is there a concierge in the house?”

I just wasn’t ready to join the club. And so, I bid farewell to Dr. “Not So Special” K. But I was still feeling lethargic and wondered where to turn. Urgent care? Nah—they’re just ER rooms with nice carpeting. One of those house-call specialists? I didn’t feel that sick.

I decided to call on a family friend, an old-fashioned general practitioner affiliated with Columbia University Medical Center. At a first visit, Dr. M. gave me a total work-up—bloods, urine and EKG included—and called me first thing the next morning to deliver his diagnosis: “Whatever you’re feeling will go away in a few days. You’re a healthy man,” he assured. Plus, he gave me a great stock tip.

After thanking him for such quality care, I asked him nervously if he would ever convert to a concierge practice. “Sure,” he replied. “I always wanted to work at the Ritz-Carlton.”

Allan Ripp runs a press relations firm in New York.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments