When he decided not to run for a third term this year as Winter Park’s mayor, Ken Bradley left the field of politics and elected office to return to his position as the CEO of the city’s largest employer, Winter Park Memorial Hospital.

But even in that position, Bradley is dealing with one of the most controversial political issues of recent years, the Affordable Care Act, also referred to as ObamaCare.

A federal statute signed into law by President Barack Obama in March 2010, ACA represents the largest and most significant regulatory overhaul of the U.S. healthcare system since the passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965. It was enacted to increase the quality and affordability of health insurance, lower the uninsured rate by expanding public and private insurance coverage, and reduce the costs of healthcare.

Speaking to the public at the Good Morning Winter Park program hosted by the Winter Park Chamber of Commerce, Bradley noted that ACA will play a critical role at his hospital.

The perception many have since the passage of ACA, Bradley said, is that it provides everyone in this country with the coverage needed to ensure they get health care treatment.

“So you’re in a new age, where everyone has insurance, everyone is covered, right?” Bradley asked. “Here are a few facts about the Affordable Care Act. There are more people insured today than two years ago.”

But the law may be facing serious challenges when it comes to financing that widespread coverage, he added.

“Here is the dirty little secret about it,” he said. “We need more healthy people in the system to pay for it.”

The law has also increased pressure on all hospitals to ensure they have the best physicians, he said, making it more competitive to secure them.

“There is a fight for the heart and soul of our doctors,” he said, adding that the legal challenges to the law have had a chilling effect on some physicians who rely on the ACA to cover their payments.

“Who would you rather come see you at 3 in the morning when you have appendicitis and are in the emergency room – John Morgan or your own physician,” Bradley said. Morgan is an Orlando trial attorney.

In fact, Bradley said since the ACA was approved, new patients often ask how to find a physician in this complex system.

“People ask, ‘Who should I go to,’ and I say, ‘Ask your doctor, do you still enjoy what you’re doing,’ “ he said.

If they say no, the system has gotten too cumbersome, find another physician, he said – one who still has a passion for providing medical care.

“I think it’s very, very important to keep our physicians,” Bradley said. “Now there is a tremendous renewed focus on cost and quality – and this is a big ‘Duh.’ “

Hospitals like Winter Park Memorial, he said, are also focusing more on what he called “Population Health” – or finding ways to ensure the steady good health of the entire community, by promoting healthy living like exercising, nutritious eating, and so on.

“What that’s saying is I don’t just have to worry about you coming into my office today, but about the people coming into our office tomorrow,” Bradley said. “I have to worry about the weight of the community. I have to worry about the stress of the community.”

mwfreeman@sun-sentinel.com or 407-420-5290