Topics: Ben Carson, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Free Speech, Missouri, political correctness, Yale, Elections News, News

Disgruntled because of things debate moderators said, Republican presidential candidates convened earlier this month to construct a list of regulations for future debates, while the RNC publicly decried moderators’ “gotcha” questions and called for replacement moderators.

Let me reframe this scenario to make it more palatable for the present media climate: imagine the Republican presidential candidates are a group of college students petitioning to a regulatory authority because they were angered by oppositional speech and not mature enough to respond with poise and civility. So they sought to fire or replace oppositional voices with friendly voices that flattered their ideas and policies. The outcome they sought, then, was one in which their positions would go unchallenged and they could have nice feelings about themselves (unfortunately this is not a hypothetical; the next debate actually turned out that way).

Indeed, the candidates’ “demands” included prohibition of things like “candidate-to-candidate questioning” and “allow[ing] members of the audience to wear political messages,” while the RNC-generated talking points suggested moderators shouldn’t be allowed to ask candidates “gotcha” questions about things the candidates said and details of candidates’ policy proposals. While Ben Carson—who proposes a neo-McCarthyist policy of federal government policing of campus speech—rails against student protesters at Yale and University of Missouri, he and his fellow candidates appear unaware that, in full-on adulthood, they still haven’t learned the lessons they’re trying to teach.

It’s tempting to call this hypocrisy, but something else important is happening here. When it comes to speech and policy, the Republican candidates operate in a deep gulf between theory and practice. Carson has a sense of what free discourse in an ideal world should look like, and Trump has a sense that he can impose his foreign-policy will through sheer bravado, but when it comes to practical concerns—like policy details, or handling aggressive debate moderators—the ideal falls apart.

This is the point we need to understand if we’re going to understand the relationship between protests against racism at Yale and University of Missouri and the national politics of race and free speech. Free speech absolutism is an elegant idea premised on the expectation that a free, thoughtful, self-reflexive and educated populace has far more to gain from talking through offensive and oppositional speech than practicing censorship. The reality, however, is that very few of us—educated or not, young or old—turn out to be very good at operating under extreme or overwhelming verbal attack, or understanding when something is better left unsaid.

This doesn’t mean we should practice censorship, rather we should expect degrees of compromise as well as error when real-world forces like power imbalances, threats, and systematic offenses exert influence on what we mistakenly call “merely” the exchange of words and ideas.