Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) speaks at the Georgia Republican Convention on Friday in Athens, Ga. (David Goldman/AP)

Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) wants to kill Obamacare, but he admitted that he might have to sign up for it after his wife took a leave from her job and its benefits.

As it turns out, Cruz never signed up for Obamacare. He purchased his family's health insurance off the open market.

Cruz and his wife, Heidi, purchased a private health insurance plan from Texas Blue Cross and Blue Shield, campaign spokesman Rick Tyler said Saturday.

"They didn't buy it off the exchange," Tyler said. There was no gap between coverage, and the Cruz family never enrolled in a plan through the Affordable Care Act. He would not give details on the plan the Cruz family has, nor discuss the cost.

[Read: Now Ted Cruz says he’s probably signing up for Obamacare, and he’s definitely still trying to kill it.]

Cruz has said he plans to make his presidential campaign a "national referendum on repealing Obamacare," which, as a senator, is Cruz's work plan. When Heidi Cruz took a leave from her job at Goldman Sachs to help her husband run for president, she left behind the benefits that covered the couple and their two young daughters.

"As a consequence, we're like a lot of other people who are transitioning between jobs looking for health care, and we are transitioning over. We will in all likelihood get health care through my employer," Cruz said on "The Mike Gallagher Show" in March.

Critics jumped on the contradiction of a man who wants to repeal the law potentially obtaining health care through it, and the family instead decided to go on the open market.

"It just made the most sense for them," Tyler said.

And make no mistake: Cruz still wants to abolish Obamacare.

"He continues to have an opposition to the ACA, and he’s very vocal about that," Tyler said. "It’s definitely part of the campaign, running against Obamacare. He has continually said he’d like to repeal every word of it."