SACRAMENTO — Rest assured: There is a faction of individuals reveling in George Karl’s misery.

But does anyone deserve this?

It could be that he’s coaching the final 27 games of his tenure with the Sacramento Kings, the most dysfunctional organization in the NBA. In the past month alone, they’ve let it leak that he would be fired, only to meet with him and not fire him, only to then come back and suddenly fire one of his assistant coaches in what, from the outside, appears to be the most juvenile form of forcing someone to just throw his hands up and quit.

If Karl quits, the Kings wouldn’t have to pay him the rest of his $10 million contract. Karl won’t let that happen.

Sacramento is at the top of the heap in NBA soap operas this season. And that’s saying something when you have:

• The Rockets firing head coach Kevin McHale 11 games into the season. Then reports of James Harden and Dwight Howard not getting along. Then the team trying as hard as any team could try to trade a player (Howard), only to fail and now have to learn to live together in the aftermath of that the remainder of the season.

• The Phoenix Suns firing two assistant coaches under then-coach Jeff Hornacek, then firing Hornacek, then getting incidents such as Markieff Morris going after teammate Archie Goodwin, pushing him on the bench during a game. Then, the Suns traded Morris.

• The L.A. Clippers’ Blake Griffin saga in which the big man punched equipment staffer Matias Testi, touching off a series of trade rumors and angst from management. Finally, two days before the trade deadline, Clippers coach and president of basketball operations Doc Rivers, put the trade rumors to rest.

Karl’s situation tops all of that. Which is amazing.

He has his own hand in things going wrong. He has openly apologized about how he started his relationship with star center DeMarcus Cousins. There were the “No player is untradeable” comments. Then there was the locker-room blowup earlier this season in which Cousins had some choice words for Karl. That relationship has always been on thin ice. Karl rubbing star players — or players, in general — the wrong way isn’t a new phenomenon.

Still, Sacramento doesn’t exactly bring out the best in the individuals charged with coaching or playing. There’s friction between majority owner Vivek Ranadive and the minority owners of the team. There has been a revolving door of head coaches. Communication — which their former coach, Michael Malone, can attest to — isn’t anywhere near what it should be for a franchise to thrive.

“If you want to have an organizational belief and identity and vision, all parties must be involved and all parties must be together in that,” Malone said. “You’re not always going to agree — it would be naive to think that. But as long as you walk out that door unified and having each other’s back, good things are going to happen.”

Malone didn’t have that when he was in Sacramento. Karl doesn’t have it now. The irony of Malone’s return to Sacramento on Friday with the Nuggets was the frustration so many have had with the Kings defensively of late. Defense wasn’t an issue under Malone.

Now it’s Karl’s turn to fully understand why Sacramento has been just a shell of the team that used to thrill its fan base with winning teams in the early 2000s. There’s no organization in the organization. This is no way for a coach with over 1,000 victories to have to work. Karl will make them get rid of him, and he should.

And then he’ll celebrate being gone.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey @denverpost.com or @dempseypost

Spotlight on …

Damian Lillard, G, Portland

It was a short week coming off the all-star break, but it was still long enough to celebrate Portland’s Damian Lillard, who is The Post’s player of the week on the back of one Herculean performance against Golden State.

What’s up: In the first game back after the break, Lillard went completely bonkers against Golden State, scoring a career-high 51 points in a win. But that wasn’t all. Lillard added seven assists, six steals and no turnovers in one of the best single-game individual performances by any player in the NBA this season.

Background: Lillard controlled everything on the court. He was so good, he overshadowed the hardest-to-top player in the league — Golden State’s Stephen Curry, who had a strong game, scoring 31 points, but all that got him was a shocking minus-20 against his opposite number. Lillard hit 18-of-28 shots from the field, including nine 3-pointers.

Dempsey’s take: Even though Lillard’s newest Adidas commercial advances the ridiculous notion that he continues to have “haters” out there, he has found himself on the outside looking in on some accolades because of playing a position that is stacked. But the fact is he remains one of the elite point guards — everyone recognizes that — and he’ll be the reason the Blazers qualify for the playoffs if they get there. Going into Saturday’s games, he ranked fifth in the NBA in scoring (24.9) and sixth in assists (7.3).