Rod Lamkey Jr. for POLITICO Scott will 'most likely' endorse before Fla. primary

Florida Gov. Rick Scott on Friday laid out what he’s looking for in the next president but declined to offer support for Sunshine State hopefuls Jeb Bush or Marco Rubio.

The Republican, who talked up his state’s economic recovery at length at POLITICO’s Fifth Annual State Solutions Conference in Washington, suggested that the next occupant of the White House should take a more aggressive tack at home and abroad than President Barack Obama.

Story Continued Below

“Let’s get our economy going. Let’s defend our country from terrorism. Let’s fix Obamacare. Let’s pick someone who brags about our country,” Scott said at the conference, just before the opening of the National Governors Association winter meeting.

Scott praised Rubio, the Florida Republican senator, as a “very good partner,” and said he has talked recently with Bush, who served as governor from 1999-2007.

But Scott, who said he would “most likely” endorse a GOP candidate before the state’s primary in March 2016, offered his highest praise for former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, saying he was Florida’s “biggest competitor” for jobs and calling the Lone Star State “the gold standard” for employment policy.

“Rick is a ball to be with. He has a lot of energy,” Scott said, prompting laughter from the crowd.

He added that of all the potential 2016 contenders, he speaks to Perry and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal most frequently.

Scott, who boasted about Florida throughout the discussion — on everything from job openings to Friday’s high temperature in his hometown of Naples — added that it would be a positive for the state if Rubio and Bush decided to run.

“I think anybody from Florida running for president is good for Florida,” he said. “They’re going to talk about how great we’re doing.”

Scott said Sen. Marco Rubio should run for president if he wants to but declined to say whether the senator should also run for reelection simultaneously. The senator has said in the past that he would not contest Florida law disallowing him from being on the ballot for two different offices.

Toward the end of the discussion, Scott said he opposes the Obama administration’s moves to normalize relations with Cuba, a divisive issue in his state, which is home to a large number of Cuban-Americans. The only way Cuba will make human rights reforms and become a democracy, Scott said, is if the U.S. maintains the embargo and trade sanctions.

Kyle Cheney contributed to this report.