Obamacare sign-ups underway with more providers, fewer options; Ashland congregation regroups after church leveled by arsonist; 12 more Wisconsin news stories

Obamacare sign-ups underway with more providers, fewer options; Ashland congregation regroups after church leveled by arsonist; 12 more Wisconsin news stories

Obamacare sign-ups underway with more providers, fewer options; Ashland congregation regroups after church leveled by arsonist; 12 more Wisconsin news stories

The third year of Obamacare began in earnest Monday, as more than 200,000 Wisconsin residents start signing up for next year's coverage in the federal purchasing exchange.

The open enrollment period officially began Sunday at www.healthcare.gov.

Sixteen private health insurers in Wisconsin are offering plans for next year under the Affordable Care Act. That's one more than a year ago, but there are fewer options.

The new menu has 60 qualified plans, down from 84 the previous year.

A family of four earning $60,000 can expect to pay $405 a month for coverage if they're eligible for the Obamacare tax credits. That's $43 more than a year ago for the second-lowest "Silver" plan.

Twenty-seven year old singles making $25,000 will pay a state average of $143 after the tax credit.

Outreach coordinator AyLee Her of the Bridge Community Clinic in Wausau said people will have a more streamlined application and a smoother process. Her says clients will need to do some homework before they reapply. That includes shopping for plans and providers which have changed over the past year.

Facilitators will help people apply at numerous locations throughout Wisconsin, but Her said they'll need to bring basic information like family sizes and incomes.

-- Raymond Neupert, WSAU, Wausau

Ashland Baptist church reorganizing after arson blaze

ASHLAND -- Leaders at northern Wisconsin church planned to start mapping out its future Monday, after its building was heavily damaged in a weekend fire.

Ashland Police arrested one man for an apparent arson at Salem Baptist Church, 1616 Beaser Ave., discovered about 8:30 p.m., Saturday.

By the time the fire was reported to the Ashland County 911 emergency dispatcher, flames were already shooting out the front of the building, and when firefighters arrived a few minutes later, the building was engulfed in flame, the Ashland Daily Press reported.

About 100 people gathered across the street from the church Sunday for their weekly worship service.

Senior pastor Rod Larson told WDIO TV of Duluth-Superior that the alleged arsonist was a young man with a troubled mind, and his family were church members.

Larson said Salem Baptist was planning a new building to handle a growing membership. Construction was to begin next spring, but Larson says the timetable will be sped up.

The church has about 500 total members.

The fire was the second major fire on Halloween in as many years. On Halloween night of 2014, a historic three-story brick structure at 720 Main Street West, known as the E.C. Smith Building was destroyed by fire. Authorities said that blaze was also a case of arson. There have been no arrests made in connection with that fire.

The church building was empty at the time of the fire.

Ashland firefighters had help from Mason and Washburn fire departments.

Ashland Police Captain Jim Gregoire credited help from the public so officers could apprehend the suspect, a 29-year-old Ashland man, less than eight hours after the fire was discovered, the Press reported.

“The arrest was due to really good witnesses and the public keeping their eyes open,” Gregoire said. “That’s what drove this investigation; the citizens of Ashland, those who were around were phenomenal in being able to identify and pick out certain details. It was just amazing, just amazing”

Formal charges are expected to be filed by the end of this week.

“This is important; when a church gets burned in the community, it affects the community deeply. I think the entire community looks at it and says ‘That could be me, these are my fellow family members,’ really. So, yeah, we take it very seriously," said Gregoire.

Ryan: My family time does not justify paid leave mandate for all

WASHINGTON D.C. -- New House Speaker Paul Ryan went on the national Sunday TV news shows and was asked to justify his weekend family time in Janesville, while insisting it does not equate to making businesses give mandated family leave to their workers.

Democrats are calling Ryan a hypocrite for refusing to give up his own weekend family time while taking on the extra duties of speaker and not supporting a law to make employers pay their workers for family emergencies and such.

On Fox News Sunday, the Republican Ryan said he was not elected speaker to take more money from taxpayers to create a new unfunded "federal entitlement."

Democratic National Committee chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz says no one can fault Ryan for wanting weekend family time, but she adds it's "disappointing that he refused to extend that right to all Americans."

Wasserman Schultz says the GOP should "level the playing field" for workers.

In the course of other interviews since being elected House Speaker, Ryan said he thinks the former General Motors property should be taken over by the City of Janesville for redevelopment.

A new union contract includes plans to close the 4 million square foot plant permanently. Ryan said he’d rather see the property go to the local community than be sold.

Joint Finance will vote Wednesday on highway bonding issue

MADISON -- The state Legislature's Joint Finance Committee is scheduled Wednesday to consider borrowing an extra $200 million to shorten delays in the completions of some major highway projects.

It remains uncertain whether majority Republicans have enough votes to push through the borrowing.

Committee co-chair John Nygren said Assembly GOP panel members generally support the extra bonding, which is part of the new state budget but needs committee approval to be released.

Co-chair Alberta Darling said Senate Republicans remain skeptical about the request, saying it would use general state tax dollars to pay back the borrowing instead of transportation revenues.

Gov. Scott Walker and the DOT are pushing for the $200 million.

Supporters say it would reduce delays from two years to one year, the completion of five ongoing projects -- including an expansion of Interstate 39-90 south of Madison, and improvements on the Highway 10-441 freeway in the Fox Valley.

Republicans expect to pass tighter food stamp rules

MADISON -- Republicans in the Wisconsin Assembly plan to pass a series of bills affecting food stamp recipients when they gather at the Capitol Tuesday.

Three of the measures target people who participate in FoodShare. The fourth bill would stop unemployment benefits for seven years if a person pretends to be someone else or lies when applying.

Advocates for the poor say this will make it harder for people in need to get food.

Republicans say they are not trying to hurt poor people, just those who get benefits they are not entitled to receive.

Three dozen federal inmates released in state

MILWAUKEE -- The majority of the 36 federal prison inmates released are said to be in the Milwaukee area. All have been living in halfway houses.

They are part of more than 6,100 federal prisoners released nationwide. The prison doors opened Friday, with the last of the inmates to be set free Monday.

Federal authorities say the inmates affected were convicted of non-violent offenses, mostly drug-related crimes.

Changes were made last year to drug sentencing guidelines by the U.S. Sentencing Commission.

Lawmaker gains trucking industry knowledge with new post

MARSHFIELD -- A member of the Wisconsin Assembly's Transportation Committee is about to get some more experience with the national trucking industry.

Marshfield Republican John Spiros has been elected to a two-year term as president of the Trucking Industry Defense Association.

The organization serves U.S. and Canadian trucking firms on safety- and claims' issues.

Spiros said it's the only group that has a skills and cargo training period for new personnel in the industry.

He's completing his third year in the Assembly, and he's the vice-president of safety and claims for Roehl Transport of Marshfield.

Spiros been involved with those issues for 27 years. He says his new role is a good fit with his post on the Assembly transportation panel, because they often deal with the same concerns like commercial vehicle issues.

-- Terry Pezl, WSAU, Wausau

Body found on Lake Michigan shore

KENOSHA -- Kenosha County authorities are investigating a body that washed up on the Lake Michigan shore.

Media reports say a walker spotted the body while on a beach Sunday morning. Other details were not immediately released, including the victim's name.

Racine man charged in 1994 tavern killing

RACINE -- A Racine man has been jailed in Illinois for the 1994 murder of a 24-year-old man in Wisconsin.

John Clay, 45, is expected to be extradited to Wisconsin to face a Racine County charge of first-degree intentional homicide.

He was arrested late last week near Chicago for the shooting death of Andre McKinstry at Steve & B's Tavern in Racine in August, 1994.

Police say they've spent the last six years reviewing unsolved murders that date back to 1970, using newer DNA technology and what they call "other solvability factors."

'Freakfest' largely peaceful, just 9 arrested

MADISON -- Madison's Halloween bash continues to be much more peaceful than its predecessors.

Only nine arrests were reported, and two people landed in jail on Halloween Night at the city's Freakfest. Most citations were violating a ban on glass, or having open alcohol on the streets.

Police said a gun was taken away when a concealed weapons permit holder tried entering the festival while drunk. One woman fell from a curb and broke a leg.

More than 34,000 people bought tickets for Freakfest, which the city organized in 2006 after years of near-riots when the bars closed on Madison's State Street and police and business windows were damaged. There have no major incidents since Freakfest began.

Man accused of rescue hoax could face hefty bill

STEVENS POINT -- A 20-year-old man could end up paying thousands of dollars if he's convicted of calling rescuers for a boating emergency that never happened.

Zachary Linzmeier of Wisconsin Rapids is due back in Portage County Circuit Court next Monday in connection with the incident.

Stevens Point Fire Chief Robert Finn said he has prepared an invoice for $2,600, which covers an hour of wages for 13 firefighters and their related costs.

Stevens Point Police say an entire shift of officers responded to the fake emergency. As of last week, they were uncertain whether to bill Linzmeier.

He called 9-1-1 early last Sunday morning to report that a boat capsized on the Wisconsin River near the Verso paper mill, and that two people were missing in the water.

Authorities said they determined it was all a hoax after learning that he damaged several windows and cut off power generation at the mill and he may have tried covering up for his underage drinking. His blood alcohol level at the time was .13.

-- Raymond Neupert, WSAU, Wausau

Milwaukee officer shoots, injures man allegedly trying to run him down

MILWAUKEE -- Milwaukee police report an officer was injured when he was hit by a car while investigating a report Saturday afternoon.

Officers arrested two suspects, one who was armed. The officer was struck when a third suspect drove his car from the scene.

The officer shot the unnamed 27-year-old Milwaukee man, who was caught a short distance away. His injuries aren’t thought to be life-threatening.

The 45-year-old officer reportedly has 12 years of service on the Milwaukee police force. He has been placed on administrative leave as the shooting is investigated.

His injuries weren’t life-threatening either and his name hasn’t been released.

Solon Springs facing decision: Raise revenue or close school

SOLON SPRINGS -- Donna Smith’s fourth-grade classroom is filled with pumpkins, polka dots and Mickey Mouse.

The Solon Springs teacher wants her room to be a homey place for students to learn — somewhere they’ll feel safe and happy.

"You’re not just a number here, you actually have a face and a name," she said. "A face and a place."

The small school, with only 259 students in grades 4K-12, is a focal point for the community.

"It’s hard to explain that feeling you get when you just open the doors and it’s like, ‘Our family is here,’ " Smith said. "Just walking through, can you not sense the community pride, the community bond? It’s not just another school; this is where the community meets. Their children are here. Their heart is here."

But now the future of Solon Springs School is in question.

For the past decade the school district has watched its funding dwindle. The district’s expenses now exceed its revenue, and it will run out of money in 2019 unless action is taken.

The Solon Springs School Board is discussing final details for a referendum to exceed the revenue cap, but it has yet to decide whether it will be on a recurring or nonrecurring basis.

Romine Deming, Board president, said the challenge is to balance the needs of the school with the increased burden on taxpayers.

"We are in some financial straits," he said. "We aren’t as bad as we could be, but we can do better."

A nonrecurring referendum allows a district to levy a tax above the allowable limit for a given number of years. Once the referendum expires, the district must go back to referendum to exceed the allowable limit.

A recurring referendum allows a district to exceed the allowable limit by a set amount indefinitely.

The School Board has debated the referendum at length, but Deming said it’s a struggle to find the right balance.

A public meeting to discuss the referendum will be held at 5:30 p.m. Nov. 16 in the library at Solon Springs School. The regular meeting of the School Board will follow, during which members will finalize details of the referendum. The referendum will appear on the April 5 ballot.

-- Emily Kram, Superior Telegram

Ticket buyer at Wabeno won $1 million prize

MADISON -- For the second time in 10 days, somebody has won the Wisconsin Megabucks jackpot.

A ticket sold in Wabeno matched all six numbers to win a one-million-dollar top prize on Saturday night.

Wabeno, located in the Nicolet National Forest, is about 15 miles southeast of Crandon.

Powerball, tickets sold in Hayward and Onalaska each won the $50,000 third prize.