Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell used a 'King Day' speech at a breakfast hosted by Al Sharpton to promote Obamacare.

Burwell, who was one of two Obama administration officials to speak, asked attendees of the National Action Network breakfast to 'tell your neighbors and tell your friends' to sign up for health care insurance.

'In the spirit of Dr. King, we're asking you to help us again, in big ways and small,' Obama's health czar told the activist organization, calling on them to help HHS sign up as many African Americans as possible before the Feb. 15 close of the current open enrollment period.

Scroll down for video

Sylvia Burwell, Health and Human Services Secretary, is pictured here on Meet the Press in the November. At a breakfast today in Washington, D.C. hosted by Al Sharpton, she called on the mostly black audience to encourage their friends to sign up for Obamacare 'inn the spirit of Dr. King'

NAN was a vehicle for Obamacare sign ups in 2013, utilizing its 75 chapters to host enrollment events all across the country, and worked directly with the White House and HHS on its advocacy efforts.

Blasting the GOP as the ' "Party of No" without any concrete alternatives for resolving many of our major dilemmas today' the National Action Network said in a memo earlier this month that the Republican Party, now in control of Congress, was attempting to 'reverse much of what we have gained.'

'Their first order of business: repealing health care reform. Our first order of business: ensuring that they do not succeed,' it said, referring to Republican leaders' promises that one of their first votes in the new legislative session would be to repeal Obamacare.

'If the Republican-led Congress has its way...all of President Obama’s efforts would have been in vain. And all of our futures, and our children’s futures will be held in the balance. Once our collective health deteriorates, so does the nucleus of our country,' the memo said.

In her remarks Burwell explained that blacks still have the lowest life expediencies of all Americans, and black women are 40 percent more likely to die of breast cancer.

African Americans are also more likely to be uninsured than white Americans, she said.

'Our lingering disparities are clear,' she contended.

But 'thanks to the Affordable Care Act,' she said, '7.8 million African Americans with private insurance now have access to expanded preventative services with no cost sharing.'

From October of 2013 to June 2014, Burwell said, 1.7 million African Americans ages 18-64 gained health insurance coverage - a 6.8 percent drop in the uninsured over that time.

'These changes are helping people all over the country get the care that they need,' she added.

'This progress was made possible because people like you all helped us make this a reality. You stood with us when no one thought a bill was going to happen,' she told the roughly 225 breakfast-goers.

Continuing, she said, 'You stood with us through the first health care employment....And I thank you for standing with us now.

'You are ambassadors to our communities, and you are the voices that people trust.'

Encouraging the attendees to spread the word about Obamacare, Burwell said it's 'easier than ever' to sign up now online, in person or over the phone.

'Financial help is available. This can be affordable,' she said, revealing that 87 percent of enrollees in Obamacare this year are receiving financial aid from the government.

Surrounded by members of Eric Garner's family, Reverend Al Sharpton is pictured here at a press conference in late December at National Action Network headquarters to denounce the violence done in Mr. Garner's name. Sharpton said today that his organization would pay tribute to two New York police officers who were murdered in retaliation for the black man's death at the hands of police

Sharpton also lauded Obamacare during his introductory remarks, and Burwell's efforts to keep it from going off the skids, telling the mostly-black audience that 'she has not just shown a real commitment to making sure that one of the most historic, progressive moves of this president [will] bear the fruit that it was designed to bear.'

'Against great odds and against every effort to undermine,' he said, Burwell 'delivered for the millions of people around this country that depended on this president to keep this commitment.'

Burwell's 'not on the front page unless somethin' messes up, but she does the work,,' he said, 'and makes sure that the vision of this president, around providing health care, is a reality in the lives of millions of lives of millions of people who wouldn't have it.'

Sharpton said, 'Martin Luther King Day, if it means anything, is serving the unserved, and giving security to those that live every day in anxiety. And on King on day, no one had done that more than our Secretary of Health and Human Services.'

Burwell and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro were featured speakers at the Washington, D.C. event honoring the life and work of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.

Castro said the country was at a moment of 'momentum in our economy,' citing the decreasing unemployment rate.

He credited President Barack Obama with America's 'economic comeback.'

Speaking of his own department's work, he reminded the audience of Obama's newly announced reduction in FHA loan premiums, which the administration hopes will allow a 'person of low means' to come up with the funding to buy his or her first home.

'We still know there is tremendous work to be done out there,' however, he said.

Sharpton said that the activists in the room must keep the issues plaguing the black community 'out front' until they are resolved.

'And if you don't do that, people are not going to deal with those issues in the dark,' he added.

'Our job is to put the lights on where they don't want to go,' Sharpton said. 'We're hitting situations that most people don't want hit.'

At a lunch time event today at NAN's New York City headquarters, Sharpton will be joined by New York Sens. Kirsten Gillibrand and Chuck Schumer, both Democrats, as well as NYC Mayor Bill de Blasio.

Afterward Sharpton, along with the family of chokehold victim Eric Garner, and 'hundreds' of others, according to National Action Network, will be bused to the spot where New York City police officers Wenjian Liu and Rafael Ramos were murdered in retaliation for Garner's death. There they will hold a wreath laying ceremony for the slain officers.

'Dr. King was about fighting for justice, but he was also about standing against senseless violence,' Sharpton said this morning.

'It's important on King Day that we send a message. That yes, we want to see justice in specific cases. But that we're not anti-police. Most police are good, and risk their lives every day,' he said.

This evening Sharpton and Garner's family will also hold a vigil at the site where Garner was confronted by police just before he died.

'In the spirit of Dr. King, we start with those who have influence, we go to New York with the mayors and others, and then we go to show that we denounce the violence against police, but we have the right to question specific cases.