2 years ago

Washington (CNN) – Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will make a multi-day swing through California in April, speaking at events in San Francisco, San Jose and San Diego that are sure to spark more talk about whether the former first lady will run for president in 2016.

The trip, which has Clinton appearing in front of an array of business and corporate groups, will likely happen behind closed doors, however, as all three appearances are closed to the press.



Follow @politicalticker Follow @danmericacnn

Clinton will be one of the keynote speakers at The Marketing Nation Summit, a three-day meeting of marketing experts from across the country, on April 8 at the Moscone Center in San Francisco.

The speech, her first of the trip, is being put on by Marketo, a company that makes software for marketing departments in all companies. The conference of around 5,000 people costs attendees upwards of $1,195 to attend.

"We are delighted that Secretary Clinton will deliver the keynote address at our annual Marketing Nation Summit," said Phil Fernandez, Marketo president and CEO.

On April 10, Clinton will be part of the Unique Lives & Experiences speaker series. Clinton's speech is being billed as a "special event" for the group and Howard Szigeti, the event's promoter, said the former first lady was booked because of her life story and the "crowds she can command."

Szigeti, who said he had worked with Clinton before, was clear in stating the event was "not a political rally."

The speech will take place at the San Jose State University Event Center. At capacity, the space – which usually hosts San Jose State University basketball games – fits 5,000 people. Tickets to the event run from $50 to $200.

The promoter would not discuss whether Unique Lives & Experiences – a group that brings inspirational speakers to different cities – was paying Clinton and said the speech would likely be closed to the press.

The next day, April 11, Clinton will venture south to San Diego for remarks to the Western Health Care Leadership Academy, a meeting that brings together physicians, students and other medical professionals for a three-day conference.

Among the topics being discussed at the event is the implementation of the Affordable Care Act – President Barack Obama's sweeping healthcare law that has been hampered by a faulty roll-out. A spokeswomen for the group said she anticipates Clinton will talk about healthcare "given [the audience] is a largely physician audience," but said her remarks would be closed to the press.

"With the Affordable Care Act rolling out, that is a huge portion of what we will talk about," the spokeswoman said.

Tickets for the conference run from $95 for medical students and residents to $1,195 to physicians or attorneys who are not a member of the California Medical Association.

CNN asked Clinton's office for comment on the events and the possibility of other speaking engagements, but did not receive a response.

Ready for Hillary, the super PAC that is urging Clinton to run, told CNN that they "intend to have a presence at each event" which will likely include volunteers signing up supporters and passing out Ready for Hillary merchandise.

Clinton's last sustained swing through California came in November, when the former secretary of state made a two-day trip to Los Angeles and San Francisco for a mix of corporate speaking engagements and award ceremonies.

Shortly after leaving her State Department post in early 2013, Clinton signed on with the Harry Walker Agency as her representative for speaking engagements. She is a highly sought speaker who likely earns in the six-figure range per appearance.

Although Clinton has publicly said she is still mulling whether to run for president – last year, she said she would decide by the end of 2014 – the former secretary of state kept up an active schedule in 2013.

A cohort of former Clinton staffers and supporters has also been working to help urge Clinton to run for office. These efforts include raising money, meeting with political contacts and defending Clinton's record while she considers a run. All of these efforts, say coordinators, are aimed at making her possible bid easier.

California is a stridently Democratic state where Clinton remains popular. According to a June 2013 Field Poll, 56% of Californians have a positive opinion of Clinton and 30% of the state's voters state they have a negative opinion of the former senator.