-- Dizzy L. Warren of Kalamazoo was named Consumer Health Advocate of the Year at the annual Families USA Health Action Conference last week in Washington, D.C.

The award, presented every year since 1998 by Families USA, the national organization for health care consumers, recognizes outstanding contributions made on behalf of the nation’s health care consumers.



"The award is being presented to Warren for her work in bringing together diverse groups across the state to forge a common voice and common effort in the fight for quality, affordable health coverage for all Michiganders," according to information provided by the organization.



Warren is community outreach manager for Michigan Consumers for Healthcare, which Warren joined in July 2011. It provides a coordinated voice for Michigan’s consumers in health policy discussions.



As community outreach manager, Warren has traveled the state to bring together a coalition of consumers, stakeholders and policy makers to embrace the health coverage opportunities provided by the Affordable Care Act, Families USA stated. Her work has also connected local grassroots organizations across Michigan, developing their state-wide presence

In November, Warren relocated from the Ann Arbor area back to Kalamazoo after a 10-year absence. In the 20 years she and her family lived here prior to that, she worked as a substance abuse and prevention worker for the Greater Kalamazoo United Way, as a district representative for late U.S. Rep. Howard Wolpe, as a marketing and new business development director for Cumulus Broadcasting and as president and chief executive officer of the Urban League of Battle Creek.

“Dizzy likes to say that she measures her work in the number of miles on her car,” Ron Pollack, executive director of Families USA, said in a press release. “In honoring her, we use a different measurement — the great distance that Dizzy has helped bring Michigan toward the goal of universal, quality, affordable health care — and we know it’s been both a terribly frustrating and an incredibly rewarding trip."

He said it has been Warren’s role to get essential organizations on board for that journey, and she has done so with "unflagging commitment."

Before joining Michigan Consumers for Healthcare, Warren was executive director of the National Resource Center for the Healing of Racism and chief executive officer of the Urban League of Battle Creek.



She has an undergraduate degree in business administration from Nazareth College in Kalamazoo and a master's degree in psychology from Cleveland State University.

In addition to her role with MCH, Warren is also project director for the Enroll Michigan Navigator Program.



Contact business writer Al Jones may at ajones5@mlive.com. Follow him on Twitter at ajones5_al.