Topics: Alicia Vikander, Amy Schumer, Carol, cate blanchett, Film, Golden Globes, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Leonardo DiCaprio, Melissa McCarthy, patricia arquette, saorise ronan, Tina Fey, TV, Entertainment News

I can think of no better confirmation of “Inside Amy Schumer’s” brilliant bit “Last Fuckable Day” than the news item, earlier this week, reporting that Oscar front-runner Leonardo DiCaprio only dates women between the ages of 20 and 25. Looking over his catalogued relationship history, you can see how there’s a point up to which it made perfect sense that all of DiCaprio’s partners were in their early 20s (and blond, and supermodels, but OK)—he was of a similar age, and a handsome young man in Hollywood, and life is only so short, after all. But then DiCaprio ages out of his early 30s, but the women stay the same age, and it just keeps going, and going, until Slate notices and writes a piece about it. But as weird as it feels, from the outside, this is Hollywood—where, over the course of a few years, 1990-born Jennifer Lawrence played opposite romantic leads Bradley Cooper (1975), Christian Bale (1974), and Édgar Ramírez (1977).

In the “Inside Amy Schumer” sketch, Schumer (34) runs into Tina Fey (45), Patricia Arquette (47), and Julia Louis-Dreyfus (54). The three are celebrating Louis-Dreyus’ “last fuckable day,” the day where the entertainment industry no longer deems a woman fit for romantic interest opposite a man. As the three older women patiently explain to Schumer, there is no equivalent for men, even when they’re “like a hundred, and only white spiders coming out.” But unsaid in the sketch is that while the women are talking about Hollywood as a whole, they are specifically talking about film, in opposition to television, the medium they’re currently on.

Arquette, who had just won an Academy Award for “Boyhood” and devoted her onstage speech to sexism in Hollywood—after an Oscar campaign where an insider speaking to the Hollywood Reporter confessed to voting for her because she pledged not to have plastic surgery for the 12 years the movie was filming—spent the years between 2005 and 2011 paying the bills with “Medium,” an NBC drama where she played a psychic. Julia Louis-Dreyfus has just been in a handful of films, but has won six Emmys over 20 years for her television roles, and currently is the lead on one of HBO’s most acclaimed comedies. And though Tina Fey has become a film actress on other people’s projects, with lightweight comedies like “Sisters,” “Baby Mama” and “Date Night,” she is in charge on television, as a writer and showrunner—first with “Saturday Night Live” and “30 Rock,” and now with “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt.” There is a difference between the “rules” for women in film and women in TV.

This year’s Golden Globes—our annual chance to look at both television and film accolades side by side—put that on incredible display. We know that one of the reasons television has drawn very talented mid-career actresses is because they were able to find employment there, when they couldn’t in film. What is perhaps more surprising is that nearly a decade after the mid-aughts, when film actresses like Arquette, Kyra Sedgwick, Helen Mirren and more found a place on television after aging out of Hollywood’s romantic-lead standards, the age gap between Hollywood’s men and women in film—and between women in film and women in television—is still astonishingly wide.

And this brings me back to Leonardo DiCaprio. Nowhere is this age disparity more apparent, this year, than in the most prestigious category of the Golden Globes—motion picture, drama. The median age of the nominees for best actor is 41, with DiCaprio, who is nominated for “The Revenant.” The median age for the best actress nominees? Twenty-seven, with Alicia Vikander, for “The Danish Girl.” Saoirse Ronan is just 20; Brie Larson is 26. The next oldest is Rooney Mara, at 30. Cate Blanchett has proven to be a rare gem of a performer, both with her on-screen work like “Carol” and her off-screen glamour. But her greatest feat yet might be making it to the best actress nominees this year at the apparent ripe old age of 46.

Median ages for 2016 Golden Globes nominees, by category:

FILM

Best actress, motion picture, drama: 27, Alicia Vikander

Best actor, motion picture, drama: 41, Leonardo DiCaprio

Best actress, motion picture, comedy: 34, Amy Schumer

Best actor, motion picture, comedy: 48, Mark Ruffalo

Supporting actor, motion picture: 53, Jennifer Jason leigh

Supporting actor, motion picture: 43, Idris Elba