After just two years, Elisabeth Hasselbeck is leaving Fox News' "Fox & Friends." Here's why, and a look back...

Change the conversation, change the world

Share this

Saturday Night Live won't have Elisabeth Hasselbeck to mock for much longer. The co-host of "Fox & Friends" is leaving the Fox News morning show to spend more time with her three children, the AP reports.

The conservative former co-host of "The View" will remain on the Fox set through December 22, three days before Christmas. She initially joined Fox in September of 2013.

We here at The New Civil Rights Movement will miss Hasselbeck, and thank her for providing us with a wealth of material with which to push back against her conservative agenda – or just plain ignorance – along with some surprising moments of support for equality. But mostly for the former.

It was just one year ago that Hasselbeck and Fox sent out this tweet...

2014 has been a year full of things we don’t want to see in the New Year. What are YOU over? Comment with #OverIt2014 pic.twitter.com/FjE8C989d3 — FOX & Friends (@foxandfriends) December 30, 2014

...which of course all but implored others to adopt the #OverIt2014 hashtag for far more interesting uses, like this:

Over .@FoxNews pretending to be a "news organization" and not a racist sexist homophobic xenophobic conservative PR machinery. #OverIt2014 — shubhankar.c (@monkeypreneur) December 31, 2014

Surprisingly, we owe Hasselbeck thanks for voicing support of same-sex marriage way back in 2010, and for transgender kids in 2012. Thank you, Elisabeth.

We'll miss French TV mocking Fox News' "Barbie and Ken" for false reporting on Paris.

We won't miss Hasselbeck's claim that Obamacare is causing "many" pregnant elderly women to lose their doctors, or her insistence that there be a citizenship test voters must pass before they can be allowed to vote.

We will miss Hasselbeck slamming Bristol Palin for attacking President Obama's comments supporting same-sex marriage, and for slamming Michele Bachmann for basically dismissing an 8-year old over same-sex marriage.

But we won't miss Hasselbeck laughing at the suggestion the message of the video showing Ray Rice assaulting his then-fiancé is "take the stairs."

Or that calling out racists "undermines racism." Or asking if making anti-gay bakers obey the law really is "freedom?"

Yes, it's been a wild ride, but Elisabeth Hasselbeck at least has given us the opportunity to expose lies and falsehoods and ridiculous ways of thinking. And for all that, and more we sincerely say thanks, Elisabeth, and best of luck.

Image via FOX & Friends/Twitter