If you have tried to contact the IRS to resolve a tax issue or to ask questions concerning a form, the wait time to speak with a live person has been horrendous.

Wait times are exceeding two hours when calling into the IRS. There have been numerous times that after 2 1/2 hours of waiting the phone call drops and I’ve had to start the process over.

Tax professionals have access to the Priority Hotline, but this number has also resulted in two hours or more of wait time and dropped calls.

The IRS website offers a lot of information for completing forms and obtaining needed forms; however, when dealing with collection issues, the website falls short.

So why is this year so different from other years and getting assistance from the IRS?

The IRS is reporting that the Affordable Care Act has taken most of the IRS’s resources to enact. Additional budget cuts also factor into reduced assistance from the IRS.

The best days and time to call the IRS with shorter wait times are Wednesdays and Thursdays early morning or late afternoon.

If wanting to be put on a payment arrangement and the tax debt is lower than $50,000 a taxpayer can go online and request a payment arrangement at www.irs.gov and put payment arrangement into the search engine. In order to qualify for a payment arrangement the taxpayer cannot have defaulted on a previous arrangement and must have all tax returns filed for previous years.

For those taxpayers submitting the Innocent or Injured Spouse requests, the turnaround time for a resolution is greater than nine months. This area of the IRS has been extremely slow in resolving the requests. Even with the extended wait times it is important for taxpayers to try and contact the IRS to help resolve issues, especially tax debt.

Ignoring or doing nothing will only result in liens or levies being placed on a taxpayer’s property. To get the lien or levy lifted is another long process.

When a taxpayer owes a tax debt, calling the number on the notices received will help the taxpayer connect to the proper department and the person assigned to the case. Going directly to a service center is not always the best option. The service centers have been affected by the budget cuts and the wait times in these centers have been very long. In addition, the centers are not familiar with the taxpayer’s case and this can result in addition visits being needed to get the needed information to the center.

For the best results in getting a tax issue resolved, first visit the IRS’s website to see if the information can be obtained online. If the taxpayer cannot get the needed information and has received a notice from the IRS call the number in the upper right hand corner of the letter.

If a phone call is dropped, call back or call on an alternate day that may be less busy. If the taxpayer has received a certified letter, going to the service center may be helpful to get the taxpayer’s account noted and placed on a collection hold until all information or arrangements can be made.

A final thought is to document all attempts to contact the IRS with time and dates and make copies of any correspondence mailed or faxed. If visiting a service center, make sure that the visit and results are notated into the taxpayer’s tax account. Most importantly, write down the representative’s name and ID number when calling the IRS or visiting a service center.

Tracy Bunner is an enrolled agent and tax preparer with an office in Harrisville. She can be reached at 801-686-1995 or at tracy.bunner@hrblock.com.