Fourth-term Boulder congressman seeks a way forward on contentious issues from fracking to trade to immigration

During the congressional spring recess, U.S. Rep. Jared Polis of Boulder found time to stop by the Daily Camera on April 9 and sit down with editorial page editor Dave Krieger for a wide-ranging, 45-minute conversation. The following is a transcript of the discussion edited for space and clarity.

Q: Let's start with a subject that's generating a fair amount of controversy. The Trans-Pacific Partnership, which I guess is not yet in final form before the Congress, but you held an interesting event at CU. Give me your thoughts on what you've heard about the proposal and then also your thoughts on the reaction you've gotten back here in the district.

A: Well, I think it's very exciting to a lot of local small businesses and others that we might have access to markets that have traditionally been closed to American products, like Japan. My goal throughout the process has been to bring our trade negotiators to hear from our own local residents, businesses, civil society groups, so that our concerns here in the second congressional district of Colorado can be addressed in the trade treaty. So we had USTR [U.S. Trade Representative] reps meet with local small businesses last year. They met with concerned citizens this year in a forum at CU. We've had several telephone town halls where we've invited officials from the U.S. Trade Office and from the White House to listen to concerns that residents of our area have about trade.

In general, I think the residents of our district believe in commercial ties and trade between countries. They want to see those ties strengthened. They also believe that America should play a leadership role in making sure that some of the things we stand for as a country — whether that means the rights of workers, whether that means environmental protections — should be reflected in our trade arrangements across the world.

Q: You've gotten some pushback from the Communication Workers and others in organized labor. What's your take on their position? Can you bring them around or are they persuasive to you on any level?

A: Well, you know, trade affects different areas of the country in different ways. And so this is a district and a state that's generally seen a lot of the positive impacts of trade. We have a very strong export-based economy, a lot of small, medium and large businesses that have sales globally that do a lot of business. There's no doubt that there's other representatives from other areas of the country where they've seen the side of trade where it's led to loss of jobs in their area. But the trade-supported economy in our district represents tens of thousands of jobs and has an enormous opportunity to grow through access to new markets in the fast-growing Pacific Rim.

Q:Another controversial subject: Immigration reform. Generally speaking, what are you doing on that topic right now?

A: So there's a lot happening in the realm of immigration. Now, it's not all happening legislatively. With the current Congress, they're not putting forward a comprehensive immigration reform bill. There's bits and pieces that we might be able to work on in a bipartisan way. I'm the lead sponsor of a category called EB-5, which are investor visas, which generate capital for American projects, developments, and I also am involved with H-1B, and other high-skills categories.

However, the biggest progress with regard to addressing the issue of immigration has been made by the President through executive action. So he had the DACA, or deferred action program [Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals], and now DAPA [Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents], which is scheduled to be four or five times larger. So the first executive action applied to the dreamers — young people who grew up in this country, knew no other country — and provided them with a temporary work permit.

This new executive action applies to, in effect, their parents — parents of American children — and provides them a route to have a work permit card and at least a temporary ability to work legally in our country. We have scheduled over a dozen clinics across schools, community centers across Colorado. At one of our kickoff briefings at Boulder High, over 600 people attended, just to show the level of interest in being able to normalize and get people who are undergoing a background check that would allow them to work legally. Yesterday we met with the Mexican consul who works out of Denver. They've cooperated with us and are working very hard to help get at least Mexican-American families the paperwork they need to qualify, usually involving access to birth certificates, passports, other information they may not have with them. And we look forward to having dozens more of these sessions across the state to help make sure that Coloradans are well poised to take advantage of the new DAPA law, which is currently tied up in the court but we hope will be unblocked within the next month or two.

Q: Do you have any idea roughly in terms of numbers how big a population are we talking about, first with respect to the dreamers and then second with respect to the parents?

A: We're expecting that the new DAPA program will affect, between 60,000 and 80,000 Coloradans will be eligible for it. That's a large number of applications to process. Just as we did with DACA, we want Colorado to lead the way in our pro rata percentage. We did a similar effort with DACA. We had a number of clinics and we helped people register. We can get you the exact numbers. And this is four to five times the size of DACA. So we really have to be ready to make sure that people have access to advice about how they can do it, that they're not giving their money to unscrupulous individuals who are trying to advise in this way, and that they can assemble their paperwork and apply.

Q: Let's talk about education, starting with testing. What's your take on not only the common core but all the stuff that the state has piled on?

A: What we need to do in public education is get accountability and transparency right. So it doesn't mean taking a step backward from transparency and accountability, throwing up our arms and saying, "Look, what we need to do is have less visibility into what's occurring in public schools." What it does mean is that we need more meaningful visibility, and at the same time we need to be cognizant of the amount of testing that occurs so we can minimize the amount of testing we need to get to the policy and pedagogical objectives of that testing.

Testing can serve several purposes. It can serve a classroom purpose of informing a teacher about areas they need to focus on with particular students. It can provide information to a school district with regard to whether new initiatives of the district are working and how the district is positioned vis-à-vis other schools and other states. It can provide information to a state with regard to a statewide accountability system. And from the federal perspective, since some federal dollars are paid, particularly through special education and in the free and reduced lunch program, federal policy has the objective of making sure that there is attention to the civil rights aspects of education in closing the achievement gap between students of color and the socioeconomic learning gap that exists. Prior to the implementation of universal testing, there was anecdotal evidence of these persistent learning gaps, but they were conveniently swept under the rug by those who lacked the political will to address the issues of race and socioeconomic differences in our society.

At the same time, the tests have piled on one another. So there are state tests that are federally mandated, there are many state tests that are not federally mandated. There are district tests on top of that and then of course there's classroom assessment from teachers on top of that. I think the most logical answer is to find how we can have better testing that meets multiple goals and therefore achieve more time for instruction and less time overall for testing. Can we establish a test that meets the needs of a teacher in the classroom and also meets district or state objectives? The current federally-mandated testing, as well as the state testing, is entirely useless to teachers because they don't get the results back until the students are no longer in their class. So it's not so much that we hear complaints about the concept of testing in general. It's really just that it seems like a very inefficient and overly time-consuming manner that we currently have the testing regime set up, in large part because we haven't had the right communications and synergy between the local, state and federal level.

Q: What about the complaints from teachers that the incentives for them now are to teach to the test?

A: Well, at a base level, kids need to be able to read and write and do arithmetic. These are the basic skills that they need to have. If a test is a high-quality test, it will accurately measure whether kids are able to do these basic skills. In terms of how teachers are evaluated and offered professional development opportunities, there can be some role that the improvements in student achievement over the course of the year can play in helping determine where a teacher might need additional professional development or assistance, but it clearly isn't the entire picture. There's other aspects to that as well and most districts, including Boulder Valley School District and St. Vrain's have an assessment policy that is very comprehensive with regard to their teachers.

Q: Tell me a little bit about your student data privacy initiative and the meetings that you've been having here in Colorado on that.

A: Well, as education technology has become more prevalent and more students have access to a personalized education through online education, through being able to do their homework and read their text books online, families have articulated a lot of concerns about what's being done with all the data that their student generates, when their student enters under their own login ID information about what they like to do or their hobbies or information about what level they might be at in a particular academic field, is that information being sold to companies? Are they being targeted for specific advertising without parental consent as a minor? And the answer is that there really isn't a legal framework that provides parents with a level of privacy that they can be confident in. As a result, there's been a little bit of a brushback, and we saw that in JeffCo with the backlash against the inBloom data system that the district had implemented to parse student data in new ways. To recognize the promise of educational technology, we need to do a better job establishing a framework for privacy so parents can be confident that they know how the information is being used that their child enters and they have some rights to opt out or delete it.

Q: So this isn't necessarily a reaction to abuses that you've seen? It's more preventive at this point?

A: Yeah, there's a lack of visibility into abuses that may or may not have occurred right now. Me and my colleague Luke Messer from Indiana, who's a Republican, have implemented a best-practices document that we've had over 100 companies sign, that are really the best actors and have agreed to abide by reasonable privacy protocols. But the reason we believe it needs to be in statute is it should also apply to bad actors who might not sign a privacy pledge so that parents can have the confidence that the information that their kids enter in school is used appropriately, not inappropriately.

Q: Let me sort of back the camera up and take a wider view and ask you about the general atmosphere in Washington. What's your big-picture analysis of the partisan dysfunction and its roots?

A: I think the roots of the Washington dysfunction are its reflection of the divisions in broader society. I think that at any given point in time the composition of Congress is largely a mirror image of our society as a whole, particularly in the House of Representatives, where the entire House is up for election every two years. We're very likely to have the same kinds of divisions that we have in Congress that we have between your uncle, who only watches Fox News, and your great aunt, who only watches MSNBC, and how do they even have a conversation?

Q: What about the argument that because of gerrymandered congressional districts, Congress is actually more polarized than the country? If you had an impartial election commission, as some countries do, that intentionally created districts that were as competitive and balanced as possible, would you provide incentives for people to move to the middle instead of to their respective bases?

A: I strongly support having a non-partisan redistricting process. In fact, we have a federal bill, the lead sponsor is John Delaney [of Maryland], that would do that. But we have seen demographically in society over the last several decades, people, areas, purifying ideologically. So even if you took out the gerrymandering piece, people are more likely to live next to a neighbor that has the same political outlook that they do than they were 20 or 30 years ago.

Now, the gerrymandering piece makes that a lot worse. If you took that out, instead of having maybe 10 percent of congressional seats that were competitive, maybe you'd get to 30 percent of congressional seats. But you still would have an issue that no matter what you do to East Los Angeles or western Nebraska, it's really a one-party area.

Jared Polis during an interview at the Daily Camera on April 9. (Mark Leffingwell/ Daily Camera) "I think the roots of the Washington dysfunction are its reflection of the divisions in broader society. I think that at any given point in time the composition of Congress is largely a mirror image of our society as a whole ... ." -- Jared Polis on partisan polarization

* * *

Q: You mentioned the 24-hour cable news networks. To what extent do you think media are responsible for this polarization that you just described?

A: Well, media also reflects the demands of society. It's only successful insofar as it has viewership, and it tends to give people what they want. Unfortunately, we have a society that seems to want this bifurcation, people who want to have their preexisting notions reinforced rather than challenged to think in critical ways about issues.

Q: You have Republican co-sponsors as you've described on your student data initiative and others. What's it like on the ground trying to work with members of the other party?

A: I don't think that there are problems with the interpersonal relationships between members of the opposite parties. I certainly get along just as well with my Republican colleagues as I do Democrats. That's the case for many members. And of course we know that for anything to succeed legislatively, it needs to be bipartisan. So while on the big national issues there are divisions, there's also a lot of common-sense efforts to work together on issues that are very important, like student data privacy, and there was a bipartisan draft of No Child Left Behind reauthorization released from the Senate just two days ago. So there's a lot of these efforts that are occurring, but the media again tends to cover the divisive and partisan issues. It's not as exciting when a Democrat or Republican come out together and say, "Hey, we're working together on this." I mean, what's the story? What's the conflict? Why is it interesting?

I think that representatives in Congress — Democrat, Republican — they're all patriotic people, their heart is in the right place, they all want to make the world a better place. They just have very different values and visions about where we should go as a society.

Q: Has it changed much since the Senate turned over, now that the Congress is entirely controlled by Republicans?

A: The Senate still plays a similar role, albeit to a lesser extent, in that it was really the role articulated by the founding fathers as the cooling pot for the hotheaded House, which not only served shorter terms but is a larger body. So the House passed a lot of legislation in the prior session that was never brought to a vote in the Senate. So, too, a lot of legislation this cycle which requires 60 votes in the Senate still requires some bipartisanship. So at the least the more extreme measures that are passed by the House are unlikely to pass the 60-vote threshold in the Senate. And of course there's the backstop of the President, who's already exerted his veto over issues like the pipeline project, and it seems unlikely that the Republicans would be able to attract enough Democrats to their point of view to overturn a president's vetoes on key environmental or civil society or social safety net issues.

Q: What's your position on Keystone?

A: Well, I voted against bypassing the approval process for Keystone a number of times. What the Republicans are attempting to do is to say rather than have the approval process for a pipeline that we ourselves in Congress set up, and that the president and the various agencies are currently in review of, we are going to legislatively, through what is really a legislative earmark, bypass the normal procedures and build the pipeline without the adequate review.

Q: So you don't have a final position on whether the pipeline should be built, you just have a position that the process needs to be followed?

A: I have confidence in the process. I'm sure there's some improvements to the process that can be made and whether it's accepted or rejected, I think it's fair to say, "Why is it taking so long?" that's a fair question to ask. Some of that related to ongoing litigation in Nebraska that only recently was resolved. The President indicated that a decision before the litigation was resolved would have been impossible. So, again, I sympathize with those who are worried about the timeline for these kinds of decisions, but I think it's critical to look at everything from environmental impact to impact on the ground to is it in our national interests and a variety of other issues before major national projects like the pipeline are approved.

Q: Let's talk about the fracking measures you helped put on the ballot in Colorado and agreed to remove last year. You've seen the oil and gas task force recommendations. You issued a statement indicating you weren't thrilled with those. Where does that stand now and do those ballot issues come back in 2016?

A: Well, the issue is still front and foremost in the minds of my constituents. Just last week at a town hall meeting in Fort Collins, there was a young couple from Timnath who was in tears over their dream being destroyed as they have a young child and there's fracking occurring near their neighborhood elementary school and scheduled to occur near their home. And until these issues are resolved, this will remain a challenge to both residents of the area, to communities, as well as to the oil and gas industry itself.

I filed an amicus brief in the Fort Collins moratorium case, which was accepted by the court, and we will be hearing from the courts with regard to the legality of some of the steps that municipalities have taken, including municipalities like Longmont and Fort Collins. Lafayette went even further. Based on those court decisions with regard to interpreting under current statutes the role that municipal governments can play, will determine whether municipal governments have the tools in place now to address fracking within their borders. Boulder County has also been very aggressive in working on both fracking regulations as well as a fracking moratorium and a lot of this will be played out in the legal arena.

I personally believe it's better to solve things in the political arena than the legal arena. While our communities may win or may lose in the legal arena, it's a bit more arbitrary than a thoughtful, deliberative process that the political arena at its best can provide. So we've been a constructive part of the state dialogue, and I was very happy with a number of recommendations that a strong majority of the commission agreed to. The oil and gas industry, however, has not agreed to those recommendations. So I will continue to urge the COGCC [Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission] to adopt what a strong majority of the commission recommended with regards to local control, with regards to modifying the mission of the COGCC to administer rather than foster oil and gas development, and to clearly stipulate the role that communities can play in the approval process and planning around extraction activities within their borders.

Governor John Hickenlooper watches Congressman Jared Polis at a news conference announcing a deal to remove competing fracking initiatives from the 2014 ballot last August at the State Capitol building in Denver. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera) "People have been disenfranchised with regard to fracking and the extraction industry and they've felt that they haven't had a say because the decisions have been made by some panel down in Denver rather than by members of their own community." -- Jared Polis on fracking

* * *

Q: Given that the statute does now say that it fosters, the prospects for legal victory aren't very strong, are they?

A: Well, I've read a number of the briefs that our communities have entered. As I said, I filed an amicus brief in the Fort Collins case and we'll see what the decision of the court is, what the courts are, and what precedent it sets. There are some strong precedents for greater degrees of local control, but obviously when you bring it to the level of a moratorium or a ban it's a whole other question.

Q: Would you agree that so far the decisions that have come down from the courts have not been encouraging?

A: A lot of the precedents that are out there were before we were dealing with hydraulic fracturing and this urban interface issue. There is a case, Bowen/Edwards [Board of County Commissioners, La Plata County, v. Bowen/Edwards Associates, 1992], and in fact part of what our efforts through the commission were targeted towards was putting into statute some of the favorable precedents that already exist regarding the role of local government to deal with surface conflict, which is at the core of the conflict.

Local governments — cities and counties — are very good at dealing with surface conflicts. It's really their bread and butter. Where should a skyscraper go? Where should the height limit be waived in the city of Boulder? What should we do with our central park off of 13th? These are the types of things that local governments do. It doesn't make everybody happy. If you've ever been to a county planning board meeting, you know they're going to hear from 100 people on one side and 100 people on the other side and some of them are going to walk away disappointed, but at least it was members of that community that were making those decisions.

People have been disenfranchised with regard to fracking and the extraction industry and they've felt that they haven't had a say because the decisions have been made by some panel down in Denver rather than by members of their own community. And that's why we really need to restore the extraction activities to the same level of local involvement that every other kind of economic development has, whether it's somebody who wants to build a new home in your neighborhood, or somebody who wants to site a factory in an area that was zoned for residential, or decisions about whether you're allowed to have five chickens in your back yard.

Q: Andrew Cuomo bans fracking throughout New York State, and over a significant deposit, the Marcellus Shale. Colorado takes pretty much the opposite view, encouraging fracking as much as it can. From an environmental standpoint, where do you come down on that? Is it OK with you that we drag as much carbon out of the ground as we can?

A: Well, I don't think that even the strongest proponents of fracking and the natural gas economy would say that this is some kind long-term solution to our carbon emission issues. Of course, transitioning from coal to natural gas can reduce carbon emissions, but the real answer is to move to renewable energy. Part of the problem with some of the calculations that were done about converting to natural gas is they didn't take into account the emissions associated with the extraction process itself. When you weigh it, you'll find that it's a close call with regard to any carbon savings from natural gas.

But the real answer, even those who are most optimistic about natural gas, see it as a bridge fuel to get to a renewable energy economy. I've been focused on trying to bring about the renewable energy economy as quickly as possible and that means both looking at proven power sources like solar and wind as well as continuing to do research into new areas like tidal power and harnessing more geothermal power.

Q: What about the health and safety issues with respect to fracking itself, the fluids and earthquakes and all of that. Do you agree with Gov. Cuomo that we don't know enough to authorize it? Do you agree with the industry that there's no proof that it's not safe?

A: Well, that's why I think there are a lot of factors that local communities should consider in deciding whether they want fracking and if they do, where they want it. I think those decisions are appropriately made at the local level. If Weld County wants to base their economy around fracking and live with the consequences of that, I believe that they should be able to. If Boulder County doesn't want to have any fracking, they ought to be able to do that too.

There's no necessarily right answer. Of course, fracking has externalities and can affect the quality of life, can and will have toxic leaks from time to time. And of course on the other hand it would also create revenues for the county and perhaps create some jobs. So it's really up to communities to decide what they want the future of their community to be like. And it's reasonable that communities might have different values that inform those decisions.

Q: Let's touch on a couple of world topics before we run out of time. The controversy with Bibi Netanyahu coming over and making his speech to Congress, the President's tentative deal with Iran right now, what Putin is doing in Ukraine and Crimea, what's the area that concerns you the most?

A: Well, the world has become a more chaotic place. The field of international relations was easier to get your arms around during the bilateral Cold War when it was simply the Soviet Union and the United States. Now there are so many players that are challenging American hegemony in so many complex and different ways.

For instance, take the Middle East alone, one of the more turbulent areas. You have a terrorist organization, ISIS, that's occupying large parts of Syria and Iraq. The main two nation-states involved with fighting ISIS day-to-day are Syria and Iran, Iran largely through their influence in Iraq. America is not allied with any of the parties in this regard, and yet we have a strong interest in seeing ISIS defeated because of their threats against Western civilization as a whole. The enemy of your enemy is not always your friend. As we observe the increased conflicts not only between Shiites and Sunnis, but between moderate Islam and radical Islam, it really is shaping the safety of global civilization over the course of this century.

Q: How do you characterize it? Do you agree with the President that it should not be characterized as Islamic extremism, but as generic terrorism, or do you think that the roots in Islam that have produced this sort of extremism need to be examined in that context?

A: Well, Islam, like Judaism and Christianity, are fundamentally peaceful religions, but they are all subject to misinterpretation and have been misinterpreted throughout history by those who would use them to subjugate or kill those who don't share their version of their belief system.

Jared Polis speaks at the Boulder Public Library in April 2013. (Mark Leffingwell/ Daily Camera) "I am of the belief that Congress will not solve the deficit problem of its own volition and that therefore we should pass a constitutional amendment that requires a balanced budget." -- Jared Polis on the national debt

* * *

Q: Let's talk budget. The deficit goes up and down but the national debt just keeps on growing. Is there any fiscal fix on the horizon or do we just keep piling up debt for our children as far into the future as one can see?

A: The glass-is-half-full news is that the deficit has gone from over $1.1 trillion to just over $400 billion, so it's fallen by almost two-thirds, largely due to several factors: the economic recovery, the sequester and the end of any stimulus spending at the federal level. However, even at $400 billion, it continues to increase the debt-to-GDP ratio of our country, which is really the key indicator you look at. We're becoming more in debt rather than less in debt.

I am of the belief that Congress will not solve the deficit problem of its own volition and that therefore we should pass a constitutional amendment that requires a balanced budget. I'm the co-sponsor of such an amendment. It's certainly not ideal from a policy perspective. The best thing would be for Congress to simply do it on their own, but if Congress refuses to balance the budget and it's for reasons that are grounded in politics — people like the spending associated with government and they don't like the taxes associated with government — so Congress is likely to try to provide people their cake and let them eat it too as long as they can, until they are prevented from doing so by a constitutional amendment, which does allow for deficit spending in times of national emergency and so forth.

Q: What about entitlements? Is there a fix there?

A: While we focus a lot on balancing what we call our current accounts deficit, which is our spending over our yearly revenue, the larger federal budget issue is actually the unfunded liabilities within our entitlement programs, namely the fact that the Social Security Trust Fund and Medicare trust funds are scheduled to become insolvent in the near future, in the 10-20 year time frame. So I have been an advocate of making relatively minor changes now, like raising the cap on the income level limit for contributions to social security that would shore up social security rather than simply burying our head in the sand, waiting 15 or 20 years until these programs are in crisis, and at that point the only likely solutions will probably involve cutting benefits to current beneficiaries at that time. Having looked at the data, I'm highly confident that Medicare and social security can be put on good footing for the next two generations without cutting benefits to current beneficiaries as long as we act in the next few years.

Q: Would you means test for social security?

A: You don't even have to do that. You simply have to raise the cap on contributions to social security to insure the solvency of the Social Security Trust Fund for 50 more years.

Q: But wouldn't that make sense?

A: That would be an alternative approach. You can raise the cap on the income. Right now, it's $118,500. Some bipartisan proposals, like the Simpson-Bowles Commission, recommended raising that to the first $250,000 of your income. Others suggest lifting the cap altogether and subjecting all income to the social security payroll tax.

Q: You're saying that by itself would take care of it.

A: That's enough. If somebody opposed doing that, you could certainly propose various other forms, like means testing. But the one that I've historically supported that would work is lifting the cap on contributions. As somebody who wants to solve this issue now rather than let it linger for 10 or 15 until it's a crisis, I would be very open to looking at other methods of doing that.

Q: What about health care? Is Obamacare working from your point of view? Should it be maintained in its current form or if you got rid of the political polarization could you design a better system?

A: Clearly we could design a better system. I believe that Obamacare is a significant improvement over what predated it. I also believe that it's high time for Democrats and Republicans to work together on trying to improve the Affordable Care Act rather than just have this discussion of repealing it or keeping it exactly as it is. It has allowed more than 10 million more Americans to have coverage. It has brought down costs even more than initially projected. And it has increased the ability of Americans, particularly Americans who work for small businesses and entrepreneurs, to switch employers without worrying about their health-care coverage.

On the other hand, its rollout has been better in some states than other states. The states, of course, that denied their own citizens the Medicaid expansion have left an enormous gap for themselves and their lower-income families. But I am hopeful that, at least in the future, Congress will be able to work together around improving the Affordable Care Act to make it work even better.

Q: Let's touch on politics before we go. A lot of discussion about why Hillary has become sort of inevitable for the Democrats, why there isn't much competition. What's your take on the presidential race in your party?

A: Well, I think Hillary Clinton would make an excellent president of the United States. She has the qualifications and the vision to be a good leader, a strong leader for our country. There are certainly other Democratic contenders that will be able to get their vision and articulate why they think that they're a good choice, out there.

The Republican field is a lot less settled. There's a lot of variety. There's a lot of soul-searching on the Republican side about what kind of party they are. There's very different visions offered by people like Rand Paul and Ted Cruz and Jeb Bush. Republican caucus-goers and primary voters across the country will have the opportunity to direct not only where their party goes but what they want their face to be with regard to the general election.

Democrats will have that same opportunity. Hillary Clinton starts with a lot of respect and support from Democratic constituencies, but of course there are several other candidates that will be running as well.

Q: Does a Bush-Clinton race, from a dynastic standpoint, worry you at all?

A: Well, I think one thing people have to keep in mind is it's not the same people that ran before. They have different life experiences and they're different individuals. I think it speaks to how hard it is to mount a national campaign in this day and age. And it speaks to the over-importance of the role of money in politics. The fact that there is a rarefied strata of individuals that can put together the over $1 billion that it takes to run for president of the United States, and among that rarefied strata are family members of those who have the kinds of connections to do it.

That's one of the reasons I believe in campaign finance reform and trying to find a more egalitarian way for our country to fund elections. But I don't think it should be viewed as a negative mark on any of the candidates that happen to have those surnames. I think it should be viewed as a question for society about why we make it so hard to run for president of the United States and in doing so limit it to a handful of individuals that can raise a billion dollars.

Dave Krieger: 303-473-1354, kriegerd@dailycamera.com