TOP STORIES

A great great great summary of the state of the ACA as Sunday’s third-round of open enrollment kicked off. While insurers have seen growth new membership, “much of that growth has been unprofitable. Health insurers lost a total of $2.5 billion, or on average $163 per consumer enrolled, in the individual market in 2014, McKinsey found. A number are also expecting to lose money on their marketplace business for 2015.” – The Wall Street Journal

LIFE SCIENCES

The Valeant pile-on continues.

More Charlie Munger attacks. Valeant’s “practice of acquiring rights to treatments and boosting prices legal but “deeply immoral” and “similar to the worst abuses in for-profit education.” – Bloomberg

“Short-term returns are ultimately critical, of course, because Valeant is in reality a pharmaceutical company in name only.” – Financial Times

You may not like their selling tactics. But have you checked out Valeant’s debt? – Forbes

On the bright side(?), expect no bombshell from Citron’s report today. – MarketWatch

Here’s a nice overview of the challenges facing Sanofi, GSK and Roche as they all face investors days this week. “Roche probably has the easiest job, since we know they have good data with new multiple sclerosis (MS) and oncology drugs, whereas GSK and Sanofi have quite a lot to prove,” Berenberg Bank analyst Alistair Campbell said. – Reuters

60 Minutes starts the night examining heroin. But it somehow winds up criticizing the pharma industry. – Forbes

TECH

Dr. Peter Antall has joined American Well as its chief medical officer. Antall helped establish the first national telehealth medical network: The Online Care Group. – American Well

eClinicalWorks is expanding into the United Kingdom. –BusinessWire

POLITICS

There’s compromise looming on the Cadillac Tax – or so they say. It may just be election-year bluster. – The Hill

A LITTLE BIT EXTRA

Hats off to the healthcare team at SHIFT Communications. Their Halloween costumes? ICD-10 codes.

Photo: Getty Images