President Obama and former Health and Human Services secretary Kathleen Sebelius (Charles Dharapak/Associated Press)

President Obama enjoys elbowing Fox News from time to time. One such time came yesterday afternoon in an address at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill.: “There’s a reason fewer Republicans you hear them running about Obamacare — because while good, affordable health care might seem like a fanged threat to the freedom of the American people on Fox News, it turns out it’s working pretty well in the real world,” said the commander in chief.

That slight comes on top of the president slamming Fox News for obliterating common ground in American politics; for bringing a “destructive” viewpoint to politics; for propagating conspiracy theories.

The attacks signal that Fox News irks the president — that the network’s frequent attacks against him aren’t beneath contempt. Being in the cable-news business, Fox Newsers well understand that a tweak from the president elevates their network. In a blog post on the fantastic GretaWire, Fox News host Greta Van Susteren noted that the attention amounts to “free promo for Fox!” And on her show, Van Susteren repeated the boast about promotion, then segued into the heart of the matter: “In these very troubling times, from Ebola to beheadings, we need the president to act presidential, that means not blaming others or acting cool in front of a bunch of students, by blaming Fox for whatever ails him or his administration …”

Van Susteren also wrote on her blog: “There is a lot of VERY SERIOUS stuff going on in the world. That’s what the President should be talking about.”

Greta Van Susteren, try unloading that whole very-serious-stuff argument on Dean Angstadt. He’s the Pennsylvania logger who allowed Fox News to help shape his outlook on Obamacare. He had needed to have a heart valve replaced but lacked health insurance. Having heard all manner of negative information on Obamacare, Angstadt resisted signing up until a friend all but forced him to do so. Asked by the Erik Wemple Blog whether he had gotten his impression of the law from Fox News, Angstadt replied, ““Yeah, yeah — they get people fired up. You know what, I really do have a different outlook on it. It’s really wrong that people are making it into a political thing. To me, it is a life-and-death thing.”

That’s serious stuff.