Topics: From the Wires, News, Politics News

AUSTIN, Texas (AP) — Donald Trump has New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, and Marco Rubio is backed by South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley. But Ted Cruz’s only gubernatorial endorsement is a former mentor who’s still making a name outside Texas.

The stakes for Cruz to dominate his home state on Super Tuesday are high. Texas is the crown jewel of 11 states holding primaries Tuesday, and following third-place finishes in Nevada and South Carolina, Cruz can’t afford to share the state’s 155 delegates as Rubio muscles toward becoming perhaps Trump’s only obstacle to the nomination.

Some polling suggests that Cruz’s own turf may not be safe from Trump, who chose Fort Worth to announce that Christie was joining his side. But Cruz is banking on his former boss, Gov. Greg Abbott, being the bigger draw in Texas. Abbott has tried making waves in his first 15 months but denies being another Texas governor with White House ambitions.

Abbott, the state’s former attorney general, hired Cruz as Texas’ solicitor general in 2003. He lacks the national celebrity of Christie or Haley, whose backing of Rubio before her state’s primary last week was seen as helping push the Florida senator to second place.

But anything short of first in Texas would likely doom Cruz, who on Monday will campaign across the state with Abbott and bet on the governor’s reputation for winning over both restless conservative activists and party standard-bearers.

“He’s exceptionally popular. Governor Abbott and Ted Cruz are the two most popular Republicans in the state,” said Steve Munisteri, the former longtime chairman of the Texas Republican Party and a former adviser to Sen. Rand Paul’s presidential campaign. “Governor Abbott’s been on the scene a very long time and has built a very loyal base.”

Political longevity — Abbott has climbed the ranks of elected office for 20 years — has been toxic to Republican voters in an election year fueled by anti-incumbent resentment. But Abbott’s relentless suing of the Obama administration has preserved credibility among the tea party, while his even temper and experience has long won admirers with the elite GOP donor class, including some who heavily backed former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush.