A certain company is making a big push into digital health with a new watch you might have heard of. (AP Photo/Marcio Jose Sanchez)

Last month's launch of the Apple Watch is indicative of the big potential that companies are seeing in digital health. And the market is buying into digital health in a big way, judging by the record amount of money these firms have been raising this year.

Through the first nine months of 2014, digital health companies have raised $5 billion, almost double what they did in all of 2013, according to publicly reported data compiled by StartUp Health. The actual number of deals are on a slower pace this year, which StartUp Health says is an indication that the relatively young market is maturing.



(StartUp Health Insights)

For the sake of clarification, here's how the the publisher of the Digital Health Post defines what counts as "digital health." It's a lot:

The lexicon of Digital Health is extensive and includes all or elements of mHealth (aka Mobile Health), Wireless Health, Health 2.0, eHealth, Health IT, Big Data, Health Data, Cloud Computing, e-Patients, Quantified Self and Self-tracking, Wearable Computing, Gamification, Telehealth & Telemedicine, Precision and Personalized Medicine, plus Connected Health.

Health care has been notoriously slow to go digital — it's still struggling to get electronic health records right, after all — but that's been changing due to a number of factors. Starting this year, millions more are gaining health insurance through the Affordable Care Act. At the same time, patients are being asked to contribute more toward their care, and there's more pressure than ever to meet health-care's so-called triple aim: better care, healthier patients and lower costs.

Companies in the Big Data and analytics space are the biggest fundraisers this year, with 77 deals totaling $1.17 billion, according to StartUp Health. That's followed by companies that help navigate the health-care system (40 deals, $794 million) and practice management (26 deals, $598 million).

This isn't just a San Francisco phenomenon either, though that city leads the country in digital health funding this year (62 deals, raising $948 million). It's followed by New York ($584 million, 33 deals) and the D.C./Maryland area ($536 million, 14 deals). You can see here where the funding is clustered:



(StartUp Health Insights)

There's a pretty major shift in the way that patients, care providers and payers are all thinking about health care. At one-sixth of the nation's economy, that makes for a pretty big opportunity that the market is trying to capitalize on.