John Koehler

Age: 47

Occupation: District wildlife manager/wildlife officer for Colorado Parks and Wildlife

How many years have you been in the St. Vrain Valley? I've been in the St. Vrain Valley since 2005.

What brought you here? What has kept you here? I was born and raised in Colorado. I moved to this area as it is a little quieter than the Denver metro area.

What are some of the law enforcement aspects of your job? Non-law enforcement? As district wildlife managers/wildlife officers, we are P.O.S.T. Certified, Level 1 Peace officers with the ability to enforce all laws of the state of Colorado. Our primary focus, however, is wildlife law enforcement. In addition to being state officers, we are also deputy federal agents for the U.S Fish and Wildlife Service and thus are capable of conducting wildlife law enforcement nationwide. It is our job to enforce laws and regulations related to hunting, fishing, trapping, land use and other areas related to natural resources in the interest of human safety and wildlife conservation. In addition to law enforcement, district wildlife managers conduct a wide variety of work related to wildlife management wildlife education and the assessment and preservation of wildlife habitat. We play a significant role in setting hunting license numbers, assisting staff on natural resource issues and concerns. We provide education on topics like coexisting with wildlife, hunting and fishing wildlife watching, ecology and the life histories of Colorado's numerous wildlife species. District wildlife managers serve the public in providing customer service on all matter relating to wildlife, including management and handling of nuisance and/or injured wildlife.

What are the most rewarding things about your work? I love my job because I get to work with a wide variety of people and animals. I enjoy helping people and doing what I can to preserve and enhance our state's remarkable wildlife resources. Wildlife management and law enforcement have always been and will continue to be a challenge and for me; no two days are ever the same. I really look forward to getting up and going to work every day.