Tweet Tue., Dec. 8, 2015 Report Details Massive Government PR Spending By Jon Gingerich The federal government has dropped more than $4 billion on PR work since 2007, according to a report conducted by non-profit Open the Books, a nonpartisan watchdog dedicated to transparency in public spending. Those findings were reported today by political site The Hill. The Open the Books report, titled “The Department of Self-Promotion: How Federal Agency PR Spending Advances Their Interests Rather Than the Public Interest,” shows the federal government spent $4.35 billion in combined public affairs salaries, bonuses and outside PR contract work between 2007 and 2015. These figures account for more than $2.3 billion in salaries, as well as “performance bonuses” totaling nearly $11 million given to federal public affairs officers in the last eight years. In 2014 alone, more than 3,000 federal public affairs officers were employed by more than 200 federal agencies, and more than half — 1,858 public affairs officers — took a base salary of at least $100,000. Given the number of public affairs officers on its payroll, the report claims the U.S. government is now the “second largest public relations firm in the world.” Despite boasting such a massive in-house PR staff, however, about half the money the federal government spent on PR in the last eight years has gone to outside PR firms. More than $2 billion has been spent by 139 government agencies on contracts with outside PR firms since 2007, according to the report, accounting for 2,403 PR vendors and 16,249 transactions. The biggest federal spenders on outside PR contracts include The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the U.S. Army, the EPA, FEMA, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, the Navy and the National Institutes of Health, among others. According to the report, the ten biggest federal agency spenders dropped more than $50 million in outside PR consulting in the last eight years, which represents almost 70 percent of all outside PR spends made during that period. The most common services paid to outside PR consulting firms are “market research and public opinion” and “public relations services.” United States Government Public Relations Contract Spending, 2007-2014. Source: Openthebooks.com The Open the Books report shows more than half of those private PR spends went to some of the country's largest PR agencies: Laughlin, Marinaccio & Owens, Inc., $87.98M; Young & Rubicam Inc., $57.5M; Ogilvy PR Worldwide, $47.93M; Fleishman-Hillard, Inc., $42.4M; and Gallup $42.0M. Reviewing U.S. General Services Administration labor supply contracts, the Open the Books report discovered in the fees several bloated employee salaries. Boos Allen Hamilton billed the government at a rate of $525.62 per hour for an “executive manager" (equal to weekly pay of $21,025, or an annual salary of $1,093,290). Ketchum billed up to $88.26 per hour (or a salary of $183,581 per year) for a position titled “intern.” The report claims outside PR costs have skyrocketed under the Obama administration, revealing a 47 percent difference between the highest two years for PR costs during Obama's tenure, compared to spending during the last two years of the Bush administration. Government PR positions have grown 15 percent in the last seven years — or about more than 400 employees — from 2,688 to its current roster of 3,092 employees. PR salary spending has increased by more than 22 percent per year, according to the report. In October, Republicans in the Senate Budget Committee launched a probe into the federal government's spending on outside PR work. The Senate Finance Committee has since requested that the Obama administration divulge information related to PR and ad spending related to the Affordable Care Act. Open the Books claims its report is intended to examine "cases when federal agencies go beyond making information available and engage in self-promotion." A PDF of the entire report can be found here. Category: Public Affairs

Return to Dec. 8, 2015 News

Return to Latest News



Click here to print

Tell us what you think

Name E-mail (will not be published) Website Enter Image Text:

Responses: Ronald N. Levy (Dec. 11, 2015):

Joe, faulting national leaders of either party for promoting what they believe in is like faulting a clergyman for not telling both the pro and anti sides when preaching about God's will.



More to be feared are national leaders who are slavishly inclined to go with what the pollsters say people want. This could seem democratic but the public doesn't know as much as a well-informed national leader. So sometimes the leader's obligation is to make a public case that influences the polls, not just let the polls dictate public policy.



People used to tell me "you always think you're right." It was true.



Thinking you're wrong but staying with the position--after getting and weighing the facts then listening to others--would be crazy!



I had excellent managers who always thought they were right, and sometimes they weren't. But what makes managers and national leaders excellent is being right an excellent proportion of the time. Joe Honick (Dec. 10, 2015):

This is hardly the whole story on government PR huge investments, especially those of the Bush boys to help "market" the Iraq misadventure that continues in one way or another and that spread to Afghanistan.



You might look back to a story titled WHAT HAVE WE WROUGHT, 11/24/2009 and a few before as the administration of the time spent more than a few billion to justify what was going on and got considerable PR support from the list of key defense contractors who collected the kind of dough the late President Eisenhower warned re: the military industrial complex. Ronald N. Levy (Dec. 9, 2015):

For years I wished hard that I could motivate account people, writers and administrators as well as Byron Reimus. He didn't do it with fear nor by paying more than other leaders at Ruder Finn, he did it by effective COMMUNICATION. That's what our government communicators do and it's what the government of a great, free nation SHOULD be doing.



There are other firms that should also have been used by government--certainly including Edelman, Burson, Hill and Knowlton, Ketchum, Ruder Finn and whatever Mark Penn's present firm is called--but perhaps these firms were used and not named by the self-appointed "watchdog" (that barks like it needs flea powder). Byron Reimus (Dec. 9, 2015):

Truly, whether you're on the left, right or somewhere in the middle politically, this $4B+ has to be one of the worst ROIs, even for a bloated government bureaucracy. I've been an Obama supporter most of the time during this period, but his admin ranks among the all-around worst communicators in modern memory so this gargantuan tab and spike in spending is, well, bizarre. Now here's real grist for yet another Arthur Page study? :) Ronald N. Levy (Dec. 9, 2015):

Wisely this newsletter has the PR savvy to say that the report "claims" the federal government is now the world's "second-largest PR firm." We can see that's a false claim (as these accusers could make false claims against any of us) because we know our federal government has no clients except for the citizens so it is not a PR firm at all.



Fortunately although our government is not the "second largest public relations firm," America is the world's largest democracy--#1--so (a) even uninformed critics have freedom of speech, and (b) our government uses PR to do three things that a democracy owes it to the public to do.



1. SAVE LIVES, admirable work done by what the report calls the "biggest spenders" on public information--"The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the U.S. Army, FEMA, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, the Navy and the National Institutes of Health." Thank God for these organizations.



2. REPORT TO THE PUBLIC what these and other organizations are doing with taxpayer dollars, what problems the American public is facing in each area, and what opportunities the public has.



3. GET MAXIMUM VALUE--the very best or damn close--when going outside for consulting firms. I'm not familiar with Laughlin but the other four firms named--Young & Rubicam, Ogilvy, FleishmanHillard and Gallup--have been carefully selected by many of the largest and most savvy corporations and governments on earth.



The self-designated "watchdog" may not be fully aware about the duties of a democratic government nor the identity of the world's leading PR consultants but is the self-described "watchdog" modest enough and accurate? Bitching does not a watchdog make. Bill Huey (Dec. 8, 2015):

I say open the purses as well as the books when it comes to informing Americans about their choices and options under The Affordable Care Act, and put an end to armed forces and DOD spending on phony, pay-to-play patriotic displays at ball games, NASCAR races and other sporting events.



NEED HELP? john@odwyerpr.com Subscribe to O'Dwyer's website | Editorial Contacts | Order O'Dwyer Publications | Advertising Info | Contact O'Dwyer's | Terms and Conditions Copyright © 1998-2016 J.R. O'Dwyer Company, Inc.

271 Madison Ave., #600, New York, NY 10016; Tel: 212/679-2471 or Toll Free: 866/395-7710