The United Guns of America

The United Guns of America

After every mass shooting, we hear the same cries from the most fervent gun rights supporters. This shooting will be the one that Obama and the "libs" will use to take away their guns. There is no remorse or sympathy for the victims' families. There is, however, blame and contempt toward the victims for not carrying a firearm, and an unfounded fear that the government is going to take their guns.

These are the same people who claim that government cannot do anything right. Let that sink in for a minute: The government that is so incompetent that it cannot be trusted to provide even the most basic services is somehow going to come and take away their guns. The sheer ridiculousness of this argument is, well, insane.

As of 2007, there were an estimated 270 million privately owned firearms in this country. That number is most likely low, as there is no way to know for sure just how many guns there really are. There is no database listing each gun owner and the number of guns they own. There is no list of registered gun owners and in some states like Wisconsin, the names of citizens who have concealed carry licenses cannot be disclosed.



The [Wisconsin] Department [of Justice] maintains a database of concealed carry license holders but access to it is strictly limited. Even law enforcement officers could not routinely check, say, whether a person they are stopping in connection with a violent crime has a license to carry.

After President Obama's second inaugural address, National Rifle Association executive vice president Wayne LaPierre stated:

[President Obama] wants to put every private, personal transaction under the thumb of the federal government, and he wants to keep all those names in a massive federal registry. There are only two reasons for that federal list of gun owners—to tax them or take them.

That is the head of the NRA stoking the fears of its members. Read on to see what President Obama's plan , proposed in January 2013, actually included.