Updated at 4:49 pm ET

I mean, really. I don’t play golf, so maybe I don’t get it. But you golfers out there, is this not obsessive?

If Obama went to church two out of every three days on vacation – I know this would never happen, but stick with me here – wouldn’t he be labeled A RELIGIOUS FANATIC and watched carefully by the MSM for signs that he’s a lunatic?

Obama is golfing like there’s no tomorrow – and who knows? Given his foreign policy, he may be right – playing today in Hawaii for the eighth time on a vacation that’s 13 days old, for the second time in a year that’s two days old, and for the 159th time in a presidency that’s getting old.

Obama is golfing with New Zealand Prime Minister John Key, the prime minister’s teen-aged son, Max Key, and White House aide Marvin Nicholson. The New Zealand media has reported that Mr. Key owns a home in Hawaii.

Obama was not as successful in front of the pool as he was yesterday. From the pool report:

At 9:56 a.m., the pool was escorted to the second green of the Kaneohe Bay golf course to glimpse President Obama on the course. The foursome pulled up in two golf carts with the president and the prime minister riding together. Obama, in a lavender golf shirt, khaki pants and khaki baseball cap, grabbed two clubs from his bag before striding toward the green. The group joked as they golfed and appeared to be playing a fairly casual round. Obama initially putted from just off the green, announcing that he was opting to putt. When he left his ball well short of the flag, Obama said, “I guess I should have chipped it after all.” The president’s second putt rolled close to the hole, and he opted for a gimme shot rather than putting a third time. Nicholson and Max Key appeared to be partners. When Max sank a putt, Obama joked, “He’s doing it in front of the cameras, too.” Obama told Max it was a good shot and gave him a high five. The four continued to banter as they played, with Obama ribbing Nicholson when a putt went astray. As the pool was led away from the green, Obama was joking with the prime minister about the challenge of beating the younger players in their group.

The round with the New Zealand PM is a rare example of Obama combining some work with play on the fairway. He usually golfs with youngish aides when at the White House or friends while traveling.