Protect the Salinas River from fracking operations

On March 12, members of Protect Monterey County took their initiative to the street to ban fracking in Monterey County.

This David and Goliath effort against big oil offers all citizens of your county to stand up and demand the Salinas River shall forever stand clean and vibrant. Vibrant and strong to protect the needs of agriculture, the backbone of our economy with its 73,000 jobs.

To stand up to the lack of regulations that have allowed oil and gas companies to ravage your environment with complete impunity.

To stand up to your local politicians and your governor of deaf ears.

To stand up and demand that your children may pass to their children the wonders of this incredible place you are so fortunate to call home.

Look for us.

— Ron Horner, Pacific Grove

Sea otters are wild and fragile; leave them be

I was so happy to see the March 13 article about the sea otters.

Everyone feels affection for sea otters, especially the moms with babies, and it is natural to want to see them up close.

The article did not fully explain the importance of not approaching sea otters too closely. Sea otters are always struggling to get enough food. Once disturbed, a sea otter’s metabolism increases, which leads to needing even more food to maintain health. Mother sea otters also have increased demands for even more food to keep up milk production, and for some, the stress is so great that they die from insufficient nutrition.

We have heard stories of the rare instance of the sea otter that climbed on a kayak. These stories have led to the misconception that they are friendly and it’s OK to approach them. These few sea otters have become comfortable with people, and their actions have led to this misconception. They are wild and fragile animals, so they need to be respected. They are important to the Monterey Bay and we all need to do everything that we can to assure their safe living conditions here.

— Connie Rose, Monterey

Working class hit with health premium increases

The Affordable Care Act is now law? Affordable to whom?

We buy our medical insurance through a group plan, one of the largest in the state, and our premiums went up 21 percent starting Jan. 1. The increase amounts to thousands annually for just two people. How is this affordable?

The current temporary occupant of the White House loves to extoll the virtues of his fabled health care plan. As usual, he refuses to talk about the down side as people who worked hard their whole lives to enjoy a reasonable retirement are hit with outlandish premium increases. Oh yes, he thinks we need to be paying “our fair share.” With co-pays and deductibles, we’re paying a lot more than a fair share.

Advertisement

Now Monterey County must enact a hiring freeze because of deficits and high costs. A significant part of those high costs is the 21 percent increase in health insurance premiums for employees. For the county, the increase alone amounts to millions more of our tax dollars.

Thus ends the fantasy of affordable health care.

— Demetrius A. Kastros, Monterey

Fire department, county help in time of need

On March 6 our property, off Laureles Grade, sustained significant mudslide damage. The debris flowing down adjacent hillsides overwhelmed the channel that protected the property for the previous 12 years. Mud was nearly 2 feet high on our redwood deck and against one wall of the house.

I called 911 and within 15 minutes an engine company from Monterey County Regional Fire District was on scene. The Gavilán Fire Crew assisted with sandbagging and debris removal. Their service was magnificent and much appreciated. They saved our home.

The next few days we were visited many times by crews from the county’s road department. They were hardworking as they protected the road by directing the mud and water and sandbagging adjacent property. Despite limited manpower at their disposal, they worked miracles.

I want to express my thanks to those dedicated public employees who helped us in protecting our property, and whose efforts prevented much greater damage. My thanks also to Supervisor Dave Potter and his staff for their responsiveness and assistance in our time of need.

— Len Foster, Salinas