Sylvia Burwell could do with a few more friends like David Moyer.



The Westwood man joined Burwell, the secretary of the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Tuesday at Newark City Hall to promote the ongoing open enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act.



The act — Obamacare — gets mixed reviews from the public. The latest Kaiser Family Foundation poll from November shows that close to half of American adults take a dim view of the law.



But not Moyer.



The 32-year-old Moyer, who moved to New Jersey this summer from Texas, said, prior to Obamacare, he had a skimpy plan with a $12,000 deductible and gaps in coverage.



It was almost like not having insurance,” he said.



Through Obamacare, however, Moyer said he was able to purchase a mid-level plan offered by Horizon Blue Cross and Blue Shield that costs $300 a month, after tax credits, and has an affordable deductible and co-payment costs.



As a flat-out fan of the law, Moyer said he managed to lock in a policy in the first few days of the first open enrollment period last year, defying odds that defeated most Americans who tried to enroll during the system’s early malfunctions. Once he moved to New Jersey, he said, he was able to apply for an exemption that allowed him to buy a plan here.



Now, the Horizon coverage gives him and his wife peace of mind.



“All the complaints I’ve heard don’t outweigh the benefits that I’ve gotten,” said Moyer, the director of humanities at a school in Closter. “It is impossible to put a price on knowing that my wife and I can afford our health care.



“In fact,” he added, “the actual price is affordable.”



Burwell acknowledged that affordability is still a high hurdle for many, however. Affordability, whether in the cost of the premium, the deductible, co-payments or co-insurance “is one of the fundamental issues” keeping people from getting health insurance, she said.



“We need to work on putting downward pressure on those costs,” Burwell said.



The act has contributed to the slowing of medical inflation, particularly Medicare, she said. The health care program for the elderly spent $116 billion less than expected between 2009-2012, a Medicare Trustees report shows.



During her brief stop in Newark, Burwell met with Mayor Ras J. Baraka and city community leaders to hear concerns about the law and ways to improve it. She said earlier meetings around the country helped federal officials understand the need to tweak the application process, such as by allowing people to apply with hyphenated names, a glitch that stopped many applications during the first open enrollment.



Burwell stressed that if individuals want coverage to begin on Jan. 1, they need to have applications completed by Dec. 15. The current open enrollment period goes through Feb. 15, 2015.



Unlike this time last year, the Spanish language version of healthcare.gov, the enrollment web site, is up and running. The site can be accessed at https://www.cuidadodesalud.gov.



In addition, telephone assistance is available at 1-800-318-2596. In-person assistance is available throughout the state. People can also visit healthcare.gov for a list or go to Newark City Hall, where two floors below where Burwell spoke, a number of consumers waited in line to enroll with the help of certified counselors.



Those who do not purchase coverage and do not receive an exemption will be hit with a penalty when it comes time to file their 2015 taxes in 2016. The penalty is $325 per family member or 2 percent of adjusted gross income, up to a maximum of $975.



The first year of Obamacare did put a big dent in New Jersey’s uninsured rate, which fell 46 percent from September 2013 to June 2014, according to a report by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Burwell said government officials want to make inroads among Spanish-speaking communities and is concentrating on Spanish-speaking media and mobile technology, which Latinos favored during the first open enrollment period, Burwell said.

Tim Darragh may be reached at tdarragh@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @timdarragh. Find NJ.com on Facebook.