WASHINGTON (CBS DC/AP) – People who are caught lying on their Obamacare applications in an effort to obtain bigger taxpayer-funded subsidies could face a maximum fine of $250,000.

The recently released Health and Human Services regulations explain on page 409 that “any person who fails to provide correct information” on the application “may be subject to a maximum civil money penalty of $25,000 for each application.” It further states that any person who “knowingly and willfully provides false information” is subject to a “maximum civil money penalty of $250,000 for each application.”

The Washington Post reported earlier this month that an investigation of internal Obama administration documents found that “potentially hundreds of thousands of people are receiving bigger subsidies than they deserve.”

One of the reasons was because applicants listed incomes on their applications for insurance that differs substantially from those on file with the Internal Revenue Service.

Over the next 10 years, it’s estimated that Obamacare will cost U.S. taxpayers $2.6 trillon, a Senate GOP report found.

President Barack Obama poked fun at Republicans on Monday for placing an election-year focus on the deadly attacks in Benghazi, Libya, and his namesake health care law rather than on issues he deemed more serious.

Standing between two flags in a white tent erected outside a supporter’s sprawling home, Obama pointed the finger at the GOP and charged his political opponents with employing an election strategy based around making Americans cynical, angry and suspicious enough that they vote for Republicans in the next election.

“The debate we’re having right now is about what, Benghazi? Obamacare? It becomes this endless loop,” said an incredulous Obama. “It’s not serious. It’s not speaking to the real concerns that people have.”

It was a rare moment where the president’s frustration with the GOP’s incessant focus on his political weaknesses bubbled to the surface.

Republicans have spent recent weeks pummeling Obama and his administration over the 2012 attack in Libya that took place on Obama’s watch. For Obama, the renewed focus on Benghazi, where four Americans died, only replaces one headache with another; until recently, Republicans had been laser-focused on pushing repeal of Obama’s unpopular health law as a way to score points with voters in November.

(TM and © Copyright 2014 CBS Radio Inc. and its relevant subsidiaries. CBS RADIO and EYE Logo TM and Copyright 2014 CBS Broadcasting Inc. Used under license. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. The Associated Press contributed to this report.)