Hope that a new player would take on Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois falls to a startup backed by $160 million in federal loans but starting from scratch.

Land of Lincoln Health Inc. Co-op sold its first policies last week on the new insurance exchange, a key feature of President Barack Obama's health care overhaul intended to spur competition to lower soaring premium increases.

With nearly $24 million in cash and 34 employees, Land of Lincoln is taking aim at Health Care Service Corp., the sixth-largest health insurer in the nation, with Blues plans in five states, including Illinois. The co-op is the only statewide challenger on the exchange to Blue Cross, which dominates the Illinois market, while most established insurers are moving cautiously.

quote|Mark Hall, Wake Forest University It's a pretty heavy lift to create an insurance company from scratch." It's a pretty heavy lift to create an insurance company from scratch."

The venture is led by Kevin Scanlan, CEO of hospital trade group Metropolitan Chicago Healthcare Council, which gives the Chicago-based co-op strong ties to health care providers. But Land of Lincoln's directors and executives have little experience running an insurance company.

Lower price is one way to crack the market, but the co-op's premiums are consistently higher than Blue Cross' offerings on the exchange, according to a Crain's analysis.

“It's a pretty heavy lift to create an insurance company from scratch,” says Mark Hall, a law and public health professor at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, N.C. “I think even established companies are really struggling to figure out how this new market is going to work.”

The co-ops are an attempt created by the Affordable Care Act to stir competition among insurers to soften premium increases. The Obama administration has awarded nearly $2 billion in virtually no-interest loans to 24 co-ops nationwide.

Executives of the council, which sponsored Land of Lincoln, touted cost savings in December when the venture was selected for funding, saying it would “redefine the insurance landscape.”

The co-op's board is drawn from hospitals as well as neighborhood and business groups, but none of its directors has worked as a senior executive in the insurance industry, according to bios provided by the co-op.

See who's behind Land of Lincoln (popup window)

Because outreach to communities is crucial, the board's diversity is a valuable asset, says Daniel Yunker, CEO of the co-op and senior vice president of the council. Mr. Scanlan, who is chairman of the co-op, was unavailable for an interview.

To provide the expertise the co-op lacks, Land of Lincoln has used consultants and lawyers, Mr. Yunker says. The co-op's credibility is bolstered by Catamaran Corp., which has agreed to provide pharmacy benefit management, he adds. The Schaumburg-based firm had $9.94 billion in revenue in 2012.

The co-op has tapped $27.4 million in federal financing. After administration and other expenses, it has $23.9 million in cash, according to a June 30 financial statement.

As it starts selling policies, the co-op could provide a badly needed alternative for small businesses, which are hit hard by rising health insurance costs. “It was through Land of Lincoln Co-op that we feel is where the solution lies,” says Melinda Kelly, executive director of the Chatham Business Association and a co-op director.

Yet Land of Lincoln's average monthly premiums are typically higher than its competitors, especially Blue Cross, according to Crain's analysis of data released by the federal government. For small-group plans in particular, the co-op's premiums are more than $500 a month higher than Blue Cross' in some cases, Crain's found.

Mr. Yunker says customers should focus on the total cost of plans, which includes deductibles and co-pays.

Experts say co-ops nationwide already have influenced some insurers to reduce prices, even if the startups don't offer the lowest costs.

A spokesman for Blue Cross, which has about 60 percent of the small-group market in Illinois, says the company's prices are the “best value.”

Land of Lincoln's higher premiums may be because the co-op is renting a network of physicians and hospitals operated by HealthLink Inc., a subsidiary of Indianapolis-based WellPoint Inc., one of the largest health insurers in the nation.

The deal allows the co-op to start while it builds up its own network, Mr. Yunker says. “It was important for us to be able to start with a broad access network,” he adds.

For complete coverage of Chicago-area health care news, visit ChicagoHealthCareDaily.com.