Charles torches cheap clothes in his garden in bid to make us wear wool: Prince's campaign driven by suicides of farmers as sheep industry declined



Prince will conduct an 'experiment' at Clarence House in London this week

He aims to show wool is much more fire resistant than synthetics like nylon

Part of a drive by Charles to revive British love affair with wool



Trail blazer: Charles, pictured in Lake District, is stepping up his campaign for wool

In one of his most controversial campaigns since he championed organic food before it was fashionable, Prince Charles will set fire to duvets, jackets and carpets in his back garden – to highlight the value of wool.



The Prince is to conduct the experiment at Clarence House this week to show that the natural fabric is much safer in a blaze than synthetic fibres like acrylic, nylon and polyester.



It is part of a drive by Charles to revive Britain’s love affair with wool, which he sees as a chic, eco-friendly and long-lasting alternative to cheap ‘throwaway’ garments.



Charles has been alarmed by the number of sheep farmers committing suicide – their livelihoods dwindled during the foot and mouth crisis.



He is concerned that synthetic materials are jeopardising wool sales and that unsafe products, some from factories abroad using cheap child labour, appear in shops.



Falling prices meant farmers were paying more to have their sheep sheared than they got for the fleece – but the Prince’s efforts are already turning their fortunes around.



The Prince’s experiment aims to stress wool’s natural fire retardant quality. While man-made fibres can go up in flames if a cigarette is dropped on them, wool will smoulder and burn out.

London Fire Brigade said it fully supported the Prince’s initiative, pointing out that at least eight people died last year after their clothes or bedding caught fire.



However, critics of the campaign say woollen clothes are much more expensive than mass-produced synthetic fabric, and out of the reach of ordinary, cash-strapped families.



The Prince’s demonstration is to take place on a fire-proof metal stage at his London home on Thursday. He will use a flaming taper to set light to a wool jacket and then a synthetic one.

There will be similar tests on carpets, one wool and the other synthetic which is expected to flare up alarmingly.



A duvet stuffed with wool and one with a man-made filling will be set alight to illustrate the dangers of smoking in bed.



Later, to prove that wool is also kinder to the environment, the Prince, wielding a ceremonial spade once used by King George VI, will bury a woollen jersey in a flower bed, alongside one made of synthetic material.



After four months the items will be dug up to reveal the wool version rotting into the soil while the synthetic one will be largely intact.



Flocks: The Prince keeps Lleyn ewes, pictured, at Highgrove

His aim is to encourage the use of wool as a first choice, especially in public buildings, with woollen blankets in hospitals and carpets in schools. He also hopes to see more wool used as insulation.



One courtier explained: ‘He is convinced that wool must become an affordable alternative and will lead the argument – however unfashionable and against economic trends – for a better use of our natural resources using a better product and hopefully saving an entire agricultural community.’



As part of the international Campaign For Wool, of which he is the patron, the Prince has enlisted fashion designer Vivienne Westwood and High Street stores such as Jigsaw and Marks & Spencer – who will be there to witness the plastic pyre.

Five years after the campaign launched, it has seen significant successes.



The long-term decline in the number of sheep in Britain has been reversed – there are well over a million more now than in 2010 – and prices have more than tripled.



The Prince, who keeps a flock of Welsh Lleyn sheep at his home at Highgrove in Gloucestershire, said: ‘In the past five years, my Campaign for Wool, which aims to increase the demand for this remarkable fibre and assist the sheep farming community, has expanded into 19 countries.



‘I am so pleased that it has enjoyed some level of success. Wool has significant fire-resistant and fire-retardant qualities, and it is so important that manufacturers and consumers alike understand its sustainable and eco-efficient benefits.



‘When the campaign launched in 2008 the average price of the wool clip in Britain had fallen to 33p per kilo; it is currently above £1 per kilo.



‘While wool itself is still affordable, the impact down the line on farmers and wool-growers, and thus on the British and global sheep-farming industry, is immense.