Christie won't back down, may watch Cowboys in Green Bay

Not one to shy away from anything, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie is doubling down on his controversial support for the NFL’s Dallas Cowboys and might go watch them play at Lambeau Field next Sunday.

“I hope to,” Christie said Monday on WFAN’s “Boomer & Carton” radio show, when asked if he will join the team once again as it faces off against the Green Bay Packers in the divisional round playoff game.

Story Continued Below

It could even turn into a political reunion of sorts, if Christie and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker — a Packers fan and fellow Republican — are both in attendance.

( Also on POLITICO: Blitz: Christie's brother mocks governor's football foes)

“If I do go to Lambeau this weekend, of course Scott and I are friends and I’ll see Scott,” Christie said.

The New Jersey governor’s long-term fandom for the Cowboys has come under recent scrutiny as his high-profile friendship with Cowboys owner Jerry Jones has been on display. The pair have taken in games in Jones’ suite this season, which has elicited backlash on Twitter. Christie’s brother Todd came to his defense late Sunday in a lengthy Facebook post.

Christie, who visited with the team in the locker room after Sunday’s 24-20 win against the Detroit Lions, said he didn’t get any heat when the Cowboys played poorly in the past few seasons.

“We all know what this is about, and that’s fine,” Christie said. “I would take all the abuse that I’m taking from some of these folks in return for Cowboys playoffs wins.”

( Also on POLITICO: Christie to hit string of inaugurations)

“Just because I’m governor of New Jersey doesn’t mean I change who I root for,” Christie added.

Although he is executive of the state, Christie isn’t above superstitions. He explained that he wore the same orange sweater to all five Cowboys games he attended this season, adding the team won each time.

“I don’t need advice on how to root for the Dallas Cowboys; I’ve been doing it for 43 years,” Christie said.

Christie also dismissed suggestions that his high-five was rejected by Jones in an awkward embrace during Sunday’s game.

“It was pandemonium in there,” Christie said. “It’s difficult to describe the level of intensity in the Jones box. … So, no, believe me, I’m sitting in Jerry Jones’ box, how do I feel dissed?”

Follow @politico