Topics: aol_on, Austerity, Class warfare, Editor's Picks, flint, Inequality, lead poisoning, libby nelson, Michigan, One Tough Nerd, Rick Snyder, Sustainability News, News, Politics News

A few days ago my partner and I were sharing some of our less-pleasant encounters in the New York City subway system. Nothing too outrageous, just the kind of awkward run-ins with mentally unwell people that have long been part of living in this city (and have become harder to avoid as of late). If you live here long enough, you eventually become pretty inured to these moments; but they’re still always a little sad.

Sometimes, though, they’re not so much sad as they are scary. Far more often than not, people suffering from severe mental health issues are harmless. But that’s not always the case. My partner, for example, recounted that once she accidentally — but very slightly — stepped on a woman’s foot. She apologized, but for the rest of the time my partner was on the train, this woman was screaming at her. My partner knew it wasn’t really about her, of course; but it was still a shitty experience.

After she told me her story, I said, only half-kidding, “That happened to you because a lot of people in Tribeca and Lenox Hill don’t want to pay more taxes to fund better mental health public services.” I was being flip to some degree, but what I meant — and what I do believe — is that these kinds of systemic failures always have a cost. The question is whether it’ll be paid by the affluent, in the form of taxes to fund public services, or by regular people, who have to experience, first-hand, the consequences of neglect.

The idea of “negative externalities,” in other words, goes well beyond a carbon tax. It also matters to the welfare state. On the one hand, you have fossil fuel companies that want others to pay for climate change’s damages. On the other, you have “small government” types who want others to pay for the results a threadbare safety net. Nations that can’t afford to build seawalls watch ocean levels rise with horror, while those who can’t afford taxis or a driver are berated by impoverished and unbalanced strangers on the train.

It’s hard not to think of that broken dynamic while reading about the possibly criminal negligence that’s caused the rate of lead poisoning among children in Flint, Michigan, to double in just a few years, and forced the state’s Republican governor, Rick Snyder, to declare a state of emergency. The poisoning was the result of decisions made by the “emergency managers” Snyder dispatched to run the near-bankrupt Flint. And as Vox’s Libby Nelson recounts, their goal was to save money:

Flint, under the control of a state-appointed emergency manager, decided to save money on water. It had been purchasing water from Detroit, but costs had been climbing even as Flint’s population fell. In 2013, the city decided to join a new, regional water system that, like Detroit, drew water from Lake Huron. The switch would save millions of dollars per year. The problem was that the regional water system wasn’t yet built, and Flint wanted to start getting its water from somewhere other than Detroit right away. So the city started taking its water directly from the Flint River in 2014 — celebrating its break from Detroit with a countdown and a toast, Michigan Radio reported.