Glenn Beck on Tuesday tore into Congressman Chris Stewart (R-Utah) over his decision to vote for John Boehner as speaker of the House, saying he believes Stewart — who has been his friend for years — is losing his soul.

Beck asked the congressman whether it was Boehner’s decision to fund Obamacare, his support of the CRomnibus bill, or his decision to continually delay any action in opposing President Barack Obama’s agenda that garnered his support.

Stewart said the allegations against Boehner aren’t true, and continued: “I think in the time we have here, we can’t go back and review the last two, or four, or six years of votes you may or may not agree with him on. But the bottom line is this: I think we should be celebrating today, and it’s discouraging to me that instead this has become such a divisive day. We had a great election in November. … For the first time we’ve got a united front where we can oppose President Obama.”

“We have a united Congress, and they’re giving the green light to the president on amnesty,” Beck said. “They’re giving a green light on the CRominbus — that’s a trillion dollars, Chris!”

Beck reversed and analogized the situation, asking Stewart what he would do if he found Beck in a brothel, insisting that he wasn’t doing anything wrong and was just friends with all the women.

Stewart laughed. “Well, it depends, Glenn. How attractive are the young ladies in the brothel, right?”

Beck shook his head. “You told, us, Chris, to come down on you like a bag of bricks if we ever felt you were losing your soul. This is bag of bricks time. We think you’re losing your soul.”

Stewart said he appreciated Beck’s words, but remained firm in his decision, saying he thinks Beck may have misunderstood some of his previous stances.

“I do think that there are times where, you and I agree, that you’ve indicated, that I haven’t agreed with you,” Stewart said. “I think you’ve indicated that I’ve said or implied things that I certainly haven’t, and I never have. And I think you and I agree on far more than we disagree.”

“It is the game, Chris,” Beck said heatedly. “You’re playing the game. Stop playing the game!”

“You don’t think we can do better, Chris?” Beck’s co-host Stu Burguiere added. “You don’t think we can do better than John Boehner?”

“Listen, gentlemen, who do you suppose that we should support here?” Stewart retorted.

All three immediately said Texas Congressman Louie Gohmert would make a far better speaker than John Boehner.

“Do you know how many votes Louie Gohmert will get?” Stewart said. “As much as I like Louie, he’s not the person to lead the house right now.”

“But John Boehner is?” Beck said.

“We can agree to disagree on that,” Stewart remarked.

Beck told Stewart that people are “done” with the kind of games he is playing, and that he will not be re-elected if he continues playing politics against the interests of the American people.

“Glenn, I disagree with you,” Stewart said. “I think that by 2016, when the American people see what the Republicans have been trying to do for the last years, when we now have allies in the Senate who will help us to do those things in the next two years, we’re going to be able to move forward on the REINS Act, on reforming Obamacare, or eliminating Obamacare –”

“I don’t believe you,” Beck said flatly. “There’s no evidence. You’ve never done it, Chris! It’s never happened!”

Beck concluded by saluting Stewart for having the courage to come on the show, but reiterated that he is “worried” about the man’s soul.

Your browser does not support iframes.

The full episode of The Glenn Beck Program, along with many other live-streaming shows and thousands of hours of on-demand content, is available on just about any digital device. Click here to watch every Glenn Beck episode from the past 30 days for just $1!