A flood of patients who have become newly insured under the Affordable Care Act are visiting doctor's offices and hospitals, causing some health workers to worry about how they can provide care to everyone in need. One group, however, isn't lining up for care: People with mental health issues or substance use disorders.

[MORE: Teens with Addiction Have Few Recovery Programs]

Though Obamacare extends coverage to this group – collectively referred to as behavioral health – various loopholes in the health care law at this time have kept people from requesting mental health care. Some states haven't expanded Medicaid, the government health insurance program for poor or disabled Americans, leaving about 5 million in a coverage gap, the majority of whom, experts believe, need mental health care. In other cases, patients aren't even aware of the benefits they can get with their new health insurance.

The Congressional Budget Office projected that 13 million uninsured Americans would have access to health coverage by 2014, whether through Medicaid, online exchanges or the private market. But so far the demand for mental health services hasn't budged, even though provisions in the health law make it more affordable.

More patients seeking mental health care will come within the next few years, experts project, and the question then will be whether there will be enough providers available. Paul Gionfriddo, CEO of Mental Health America, predicts a " bump in the road where access gets a little more constrained," though he is optimistic that the details of the law will work the way they are supposed to in time.

"We haven't been hearing about access issues from our members," says Stuart Gordon, director of policy and health care reform at the National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors.

That isn't for lack of need. Mental health is one of the most common health care issues, affecting as many as 1 in 4 adults each year.

[ALSO: Americans Using Less Health Care But Spending More Despite Obamacare Promises]

The federal Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration found in a 2013 report that 9.6 million adults reported having a serious mental illness, such as major depression, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, panic disorder, post traumatic stress disorder and borderline personality disorder. People with mental illness require an individualized treatment plan that could require medications, therapy and participation in peer support groups.



People who don't have health insurance are more likely to put off medical care or to skip it altogether. Untreated mental illness can cause someone to become unemployed or homeless, or to turn to substance abuse. Some turn to suicide, and many are taken to prison instead of receiving care. The economic cost of untreated mental illness is more than $100 billion each year in the U.S., according to the National Alliance on Mental Illness.

When the health care law was passed, it required states to provide Medicaid coverage for adults with incomes up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level, or $11,670 a year for an individual, and $23,850 for a family of four. For them, health coverage is either free or extremely low-cost. It also provided tax credits for people who do not qualify for Medicaid but still cannot afford health insurance, those with incomes between 100 and 400 percent of the federal poverty level. The Supreme Court ruled that the Medicaid expansion portion of the health law is voluntary for states. Now, 23 states have opted not to expand Medicaid, though that could change quickly with the midterm elections in less than a week.

Obamacare also updated the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008, which requires insurance companies to offer the same amount of coverage for mental health and substance use disorders as they would for medical or surgical procedures. A plan that covers mental health benefits must cover medications, emergency care and outpatient and inpatient services.

When the law was passed, about 20 percent of Americans did not have coverage for mental health services, and one-third of those covered in the individual market did not have coverage for substance abuse.

But the extend to which coverage is granted now varies. With mental health, it's hard to define what an adequate level of treatment is, and how much is medically necessary.

It's difficult to quantify how many therapy sessions a person needs, but chemotherapy treatments are more strictly defined, Gionfriddo explains. Insurance companies tend to both limit the number of sessions they will cover, as well as the amount they will reimburse. For this reason, many psychiatrists do not accept private insurance or Medicaid.

Under Obamacare, officials at the federal health agency projected that 1.2 million Americans in small group plans would receive mental health and substance use disorder benefits. States and insurance plans have a variety of flexibility, however, meaning that the droves of people that have flocked to other health plans won't be reflected in mental health care for several years.

Under the health law, plans in the marketplace are required to cover 10 Essential Health Benefits, including mental health and substance use disorders. The law does not specify which particular services should be covered within each category. States therefore vary on what they require the marketplaces to include, or what they choose to include in Medicaid programs. Some states, for example, require coverage for autism. Grandfathered plans, or insurance plans that have some flexibility for when they can reach different benchmarks of the health law, can exclude behavioral health coverage for now.

[READ: CDC Report Examines Obesity and Antidepressants]

"There's a perception that enforcement is not what it should be, and that people aren't getting the benefits they are entitled to," says Bob Carolla, a spokesman at the National Alliance on Mental Illness.

Some people may not be accessing care because they don't understand the details of the health law. A poll from the Kaiser Family Foundation released last week shows that 90 percent of the uninsured are unaware that open enrollment starts Nov. 15, and two-thirds of uninsured people say they know "only little" or "nothing at all" about the online marketplaces where people can compare and buy health insurance.

A Field Poll in September conducted for the California HealthCare Foundation showed that fewer than 40 percent of Californians understand that insurance plans are supposed to cover behavioral health.

But the expansion of the number of people insured can fall flat if there aren't enough health and social workers to care for them. A report released in September from the health agency's Office of the Inspector General raised questions about whether Medicaid beneficiaries would have access to physicians once they get insurance. Some patients have to travel far or wait for months for an appointment, the report found.

The situation is more dire for mental health care. Historically, the field is understaffed and treated differently in in both policy and industry, and patients often are hesitant to seek care because of the stigma attached to mental disorders.

[READ An Ignored Group of Smokers: People With Mental Illness]

According to the report, 66 percent of women with a serious mental illness received mental health treatment in 2012, compared to 57.8 percent of males. This rate is not significantly different from what it had been in recent years, the report states.

"I think everyone recognized it could be an issue," Gordon says, adding that his organization regularly receives queries from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services about whether patients are having difficulty accessing behavioral health services.

Mental issues are treatable, but access to care can be difficult. According to data from the Department of Health and Human Services, 55 percent of U.S. counties, all of which are rural, do not have a practicing psychiatrist, psychologists or social workers. Estimates from the agency show there is a shortage of 1,846 psychiatrists and 5,931 other professionals.