Welcome to Overnight Regulation, your daily rundown of news from Capitol Hill and beyond. It’s Monday evening here in Washington and it’s gearing up to be a busy week with only a few days for lawmakers to avoid a government shutdown. http://bit.ly/1locQaL

Here’s the latest.

THE BIG STORY

House lawmakers voted Monday to ban plastic microbeads from bath products like soaps and body washes.

The bill, introduced by Rep. Frank Pallone (D-N.J.) earlier this year in an effort to protect the nation's lakes and streams from piling up with the little pieces of plastic, passed by a voice vote.

Because the beads, which are often used to exfoliate the skin, are less than five millimeters in size, they escape water filtration systems and end up in bodies of water where they are mistaken as food by fish and wildlife.

ADVERTISEMENT

“Simply put, microbeads are causing mega-problems,” said House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton (R-Mich.). "Once they’re flushed down the drain, that’s when the problem really begins."

"We must put a stop to this unnecessary and avoidable pollution," added Pallone, the ranking Democrat on the Energy and Commerce Committee.

The bill would preempt states from issuing their own laws to regulate microbeads. Last month, Pallone said the provision was added because the federal law would phase out products faster than any state law now in place.

The legislation applies to any non-prescription rinse-off cosmetics, including toothpaste.

The American Chemistry Council (ACC) praised the House for passing the legislation Monday.

“Plastics play a vital role in our economy—from helping build and maintain homes to advancing new technologies,” the industry group said. "H.R. 1321 is an important step to ensure we have one sensible, national standard for phasing out the use of solid plastic microbeads in personal care products across America."

Cristina Marcos contributed to this report.

ON TAP FOR TUESDAY

The Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Antitrust, Competition Policy and Consumer Rights will hold a hearing to examine the AB InBev/SABMiller merger and the state of competition in the beer industry. http://1.usa.gov/1XGcbSM

The Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee will hold a hearing to examine opioid abuse in America. http://1.usa.gov/1NvkoCR

The House Oversight and Government Reform Committee will hold a hearing to examine the stream protection rule. http://1.usa.gov/1IAzy9q

The House Science, Space and Technology’s Subcommittee on Research and Technology will hold a hearing to discuss the future of biotechnology. http://1.usa.gov/1QZDOlC

TOMORROW’S REGS TODAY

The Obama administration will publish 132 new regulations, proposed rules, notices and other administrative actions in Tuesday’s edition of the Federal Register.

--The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) will issue a final rule to remove the Modoc sucker from the federal list of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife. This rare species of fish, which is usually less than 6 inches in length, is native to northern California and southern Oregon.

--The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) will propose a rule to allow recipients of Community Forest Program grants to allow local governments, tribal governments and qualified nonprofit organizations to acquire land for resource conservation and open space preservation.

NEWS RIGHT NOW

US rebuffed on meat labeling rule http://bit.ly/1TwBDE4

Supreme Court won’t hear assault weapons case http://bit.ly/1Qbb0Xf

Clinton: I will be tough on Wall Street http://bit.ly/1YUSNib

Homeland Security plans new level to terror advisory system - The Washington Post http://wapo.st/1NFOEXn

Study sees possible dip in world carbon dioxide emissions - The AP http://apne.ws/1SK0Ri5

Justice Department probes Chicago Police for Civil Rights violations - Huffington Post http://huff.to/1HQtpWN

BY THE NUMBERS

$1 billion: The amount in tariffs Canada and Mexico are threatening to impose on the U.S. to retaliate against the Agriculture Department’s meat labeling rule.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“This is an opportunity for us to protect our children and our communities from potential mass violence and grief,” said Nancy Rodkin Rotering, mayor of Highland Park, Ill. Rotering on Monday hailed the Supreme Court's decision not to take up a challenge to her city's law banning assault weapons.

We’ll work to stay on top of these and other stories throughout the week, so check The Hill’s Regulation page (http://thehill.com/regulation) early and often for the latest. And send any comments, complaints or regulatory news tips our way, tdevaney@thehill.com or lwheeler@thehill.com. And follow us at @timdevaney and @wheelerlydia.

Click here to sign up for the newsletter: http://bit.ly/1pc6tau