The snow is almost here.

Much of today will be calm with so-called "nuisance snow" starting tonight and Thursday morning, said state climatologist David Robinson.

But shortly after Thursday morning's rush hour, a volatile weather pattern that started at Thanksgiving will begin to crescendo, blanketing New Jersey and the entire Northeast in snow, wind and cold, weather forecasters say.

The National Weather Service has issued a winter storm watch beginning Thursday evening that will last through Friday morning. Along with the snow and cold, wind gusts of up to 26 miles per hour are expected to cause blowing and drifting snow.

All of that snow and wind will add up to near-blizzard conditions, according to meteorologist Gary Szatkowski.

Meteorologists at Accuweather.com predict that northern New Jersey will see between six and 12 inches of snow. Central Jersey will likely get between 3 and 6 inches and southern New Jersey will see only a few inches.

"It's going to get very cold during the course of the event and quite windy," Robinson said. "It is going to be really nasty (Thursday) night and Friday."

Robinson added that the area should expect "road flooding followed by a flash freeze." Accuweather warned that the storm will not only affect road travel, but air travel as well because of poor visibility and high winds.

Officials at PSE&G, the state's largest electric and gas utility, said today the company is closely monitoring the storm and is preparing for it by making sure personnel will be available to handle any outages, vehicles are fueled, generators have been tested and coordinated the company's efforts with county and municipal emergency management teams.

The storm, taking energy from the Gulf of Mexico and across North America, will start to develop off the coast of Cape Hatteras in North Carolina and track north throughout the day Thursday, culminating on Friday morning and afternoon for much of the Northeast.

Accuweather predicts the storm will affect as many as 70 million people in the Northeast, with areas of Massachusetts and Rhode Island being hit the hardest.

In New Jersey, temperatures are expected to drop into the teens and single digits throughout the state and wind gusts of up to 26 miles per hour are expected Thursday night and Friday, according to the National Weather Service. By Friday night temperatures are expected to drop to 8 degrees.

As soon as this week's storm passes, another weekend storm will be on its heels.

"There's going to be a pretty quick turnaround," Robinson said. "There will be another storm threat Sunday into Monday."

Temperatures are going to shoot back up into the 40's by Sunday and the region will see mostly rain starting Sunday night, the National Weather Service predicts. That means a good chance of flooding if accumulated snowfall begins to melt with the rain.

By Monday night, temps in North Jersey will dip back down into the teens.

"We're going to be through several brutally cold days," Robinson said.

RELATED COVERAGE

• NJ Transit will cross-honor all tickets Thursday because of snow storm