SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Although the mainstream media as a whole (with few exceptions) is covering up the damning video of ObamaCare architect Jonathan Gruber openly discussing all the lies and deceit surrounding passage of President Obama’s signature domestic achievement, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi forced the Washington Post’s hand on the matter Thursday when she was caught lying about not knowing Gruber.

“I don’t know who [Gruber] is,” Pelosi told reporters Thursday. “He didn’t help write our bill.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

The only problem with that claim is the Post’s discovery that in November of 2009, Pelosi gushed over Gruber by name. Here’s the video. The transcript is below:

Q: As you know, the Republicans released their health- care bill this week. And I wanted to get your comment on the bill, and specifically on the CBO analysis that it would cost significantly less than the Democratic plan and that it would lower premiums.

PELOSI: Let me just say this. Anything you need to know about the difference between the Democratic bill and the Republican bill is that the Republicans do not end the health insurance companies’ discrimination against people with preexisting conditions. They let that stand. That’s scandalous, the fact that it exists. I don’t understand why they have not heard the American people, who have said preexisting conditions should not be a source of discrimination.

And secondly, the Republican plan ensures about 3 million more people than now, and ours does 36 million people. So that’s a very big difference in that.

We’re not finished getting all of our reports back from CBO, but we’ll have a side by side to compare. But our bill brings down rates. I don’t know if you have seen Jonathan Gruber of MIT’s analysis of what the comparison is to the status quo versus what will happen in our bill for those who seek insurance within the exchange. And our bill takes down those costs, even some now, and much less preventing the upward spiral.

So again, we’re confident about what we set out to do in the bill: middle class affordability, security for our seniors, and accountability to our children.

The Post asked Pelosi’s office about this and was told that what she meant was that she didn’t personally know Gruber.

The Post’s coverage thus far of Gruber’s comments has centered only on GOP outrage towards the comments, not the newsworthiness of the comments (which are glaringly obvious). Because left-wing outlets like the Washington Post were as complicit as Gruber in covering up the darkside of ObamaCare (the cancelled policies, the lies, the phony CBO scoring), Gruber’s bursts of honesty are a media scandal as much as they are a political one.

The House Minority Leader caught in this kind of a whopper — which was meant to cover-up Gruber’s direct involvement — makes the story a little less about “GOP outrage.”

Although the MSM will continue to do everything in its power to downplay GruberGate, that just got a little more difficult.

New Media is forcing the issue, and there’s not a damn thing the corrupt former-gatekeepers in the MSM can do about it.

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC