A charge that competition dilutes quality of health care

If you go What: City Council meeting When: 7 p.m. Tuesday, October 27 Where: Council Chambers, 350 Kimbark St.

On Tuesday, the Longmont City Council will hear an appeal in the case of the UCHealth Longs Peak Hospital planned for the northwest corner of Colo. 119 and County Line Road.

The hospital is projected to cost between $160 million and $170 million.

The hospital, with exceptions for parking, materials and height rules, passed the planning commission on a 6-1 vote last month. But per the Longmont development code, it just takes one letter to appeal a major development up to the City Council and that's exactly what happened.

The city r eceived one letter from Longmont resident Ryan Berry, asking for an appeal of the commission's decision.

Berry told the Times-Call that he's not affiliated with Longmont United Hospital in any way but that he still has major concerns that allowing a second hospital into Longmont will dilute medical services and cause Longmont United Hospital to cut jobs.

"The truth is, competition does not drive improved healthcare, but instead dilutes it," Berry wrote in his appeal letter. "It removes both income for the hospital to balance against its expenditures and reduces the practice that both physicians and hospital staff (receive) by reducing the number of patients the staff may care for in any given period."

Advertisement

Proponents of the hospital believe the city should not get in the way of hospital competition. Dr. Richard Jacobi, who practices at the UCHealth-owned Longmont Clinic, wrote to the city in support of the new hospital.

"Zoning will not solve this debate over medical redundancy vs. competition," Jacobi wrote in his letter. UCHealth "has offered to support the city by planning to build their hospital within city boundaries, while strategically planning for growth in neighboring communities. If the city turns the new hospital down it is likely (UCHealth) or someone else will build a hospital a little closer to the growing Erie and Firestone markets."

Planning staff has recommended an appeal hearing procedure to the City Council for Tuesday's meeting. First, the staff will present the facts of the appeal and then Berry can present his side of the case for a maximum of 15 minutes.

Then, UCHealth representatives can present their side for a maximum time of 15 minutes. Fourth, anyone at the meeting can comment on the proposal and appeal, but the council may only consider evidence in their decision relevant to Berry's letter of appeal.

Then follows questions and discussion by staff, council, Berry and UCHealth before the council votes.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci