Both houses of congress have now had a chance to vote on the $1.1 trillion omnibus spending bill that funds the Obama Agenda, including open borders, executive amnesty, more H2-B visas for low-skilled foreign workers, an increase in spending, Planned Parenthood, wind farm tax credits, President Obama’s racial zoning quotas, and ObamaCare.

Said Rick Manning, President of Americans for Limited Government:

“We agree with Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley who has said it will help terrorist travel and economic espionage in the U.S. It leaves our borders wide open, and fails to stop Obama’s executive amnesty for millions of illegal immigrants with U.S.-born children. It increases spending $112 billion over the next two years, busting the spending caps. It does nothing to defund Planned Parenthood. It reinstates the Wind Production Tax Credit. It funds Obamacare. It quardruples H2-B visas for low-skilled workers at the expense of American workers. It fails use the power of the purse to rein in a single one of Obama’s economy crippling regulations. It funds the Department of Housing and Urban Development racial and income zoning quotas being imposed on 1,200 counties and cities that accept any portion of $3 billion of annual community development block grants.

“The omnibus does not advance Republican priorities, or even the American people’s priorities, it advances the priorities of the power elite in Washington, D.C. that continues to operate within a vacuum.”

How did your federal representatives vote? You can find the House vote here, and the Senate vote here.

Of the presidential candidates in the Senate, Senators Ted Cruz and Rand Paul predictably voted “Nay” on this bad bill; Senator Marco Rubio did not vote. Senator Lindsey Graham-nesty voted “Yea.”

So how did “South Dakota common sense and conservative values” in Washington D.C. do today? Not so good.

Senator John Thune amazed us and voted “Nay” on the Obama agenda in both the cloture vote and the final vote. Could there be hope to reverse the drift to the Left of the man who defeated Tom Daschle in 2004?

Ole “South Dakota common sense and conservative values” FHA-endorsed Senator Mike Rounds voted for it. I’m sure glad conservatives got a “Republican” in that Senate seat last year; if we hadn’t, that seat might have a score even lower than Mike Rounds’ 20% rating (since this vote hasn’t been scored by Conservative Review yet, it won’t be as high as 20% for long). After all, Democrats are about the only ones with lower ratings than ole “South Dakota common sense and conservative values” Mike Rounds.

And Rep. Kristi Noem predictably went along with the RINO House leadership and voted to fund the Obama agenda.

You know, I could have sworn–sworn–that Republicans told me last year that if we elected them, they’d stop the Obama agenda for us.

What happened to that? Did they leave their guts in their home states? Their principles, too?

I don’t see much stopped…except Republican principles, and the traditional limited government values that used to make this nation great.

With Republicans who’ll ensure a Leftist “fundamentally transforming America” agenda gets funded, who needs Democrats?



This article is printed with the permission of the author(s). Opinions expressed herein are the sole responsibility of the article’s author(s), or of the person(s) or organization(s) quoted therein, and do not necessarily represent those of American Clarion or Dakota Voice LLC.

Comment Rules: Please confine comments to salient ones that add to the topic; Profanity is not allowed and will be deleted; Spam, copied statements and other material not comprised of the reader’s own opinion will be deleted.





Similar Posts: