New Tech Colorado -- formerly Boulder Denver New Tech, or BDNT -- started as a Meetup.com group in Boulder for entrepreneurs and technophiles, expanded to Denver and Fort Collins and has since grown its member base to 10,000 people.

Robert Reich, a co-organizer of the group, spoke with the Daily Camera last week about the volunteer-run organization's latest effort -- the development of a freelancer search engine on the organization's bdnt.org website.

The following has been edited for clarity and space.

1. How has BDNT grown its reach during the past 12 to 18 months?

One of the things that we're doing is we -- as three of us that act as the moderators of the event, myself, Andrei (Taraschuk) and Christine (Hudson), -- the way we start this event is we ask if people are hiring, what events are going on and we also ask the community to get to know each other and meet someone new.

One of the things that we noticed is we get an enormous amount of companies coming here to tell people about jobs they have. In looking at it, I thought, "What can New Tech do here? ... Could we move the knowledge from the event to some kind of permanent presence?" And that's when we moved away from Meetup.com and built the website.

The idea was to start to get the community to have all the information in a long-lasting way.

At a high level, I'm trying to engineer the knowledge back into the community.

2. What was the impetus for creating the freelancer search engine, and flipping the job board in a sense?

The job board's been up for about four to five months and it seems to be progressing, it's getting anywhere from 90 to 100 jobs a month.

I was noticing that very few people were posting project-related work. It was more full-time (positions).

At the (New Tech) event, we get a ton of requests for projects. I just was wondering if there was a disconnect for a job board for freelancers or project work. The two weren't aligning really well was what I could see from the data.

Could you flip the entire model of finding freelancers and put the onus on the freelancers to say, "Here are the skills I have, and I'm available and not available."

If a person places an ad on Craigslist, they'll expect people to come to them. The hard part is if you're a small business here in Boulder, how do you know how to find the right people? New Tech is this really robust community of people who are trying to help people be aware of the startup community and the skills (the members) have to offer.

On top of that, we ask the community to endorse the skills of people they work with. ... Here's a way that you could find people that most local businesses wouldn't know about, and on top of that, they're vetted.

I feel like we've kind of flipped the whole model upside down.

3. What types of freelancers can post on this board?

The list at the high level are developers, people to advise, business developers, designers, hardware engineers, marketing and technical (operations). Our plan is to add as many as the community sees fit. We've gotten a few requests for (user interface) specialists, art direction and requests for photography.

Our goal is to be the largest list here in the state for freelancers who are looking for (jobs).

A lot of these folks are creative folks. They're not great marketers of themselves. The fact that New Tech is close to 10,000 members, we have a built-in audience.

How do we expose the community to the community, and how do we expose the New Tech community to the wider populous?

4. What companies and entities could best be served by this?

There are so many companies that have projects where (they) just need "X" done. My feeling is that tech is now becoming so critical to what people do, every business needs to have some form of tech presence.

We've got such an amazing audience here -- to have a member base here of almost 10,000 people is just crazy -- and now the fact we can give the broader community a way to tap into that feels really powerful.

Here's a practical way of if you're a local hair salon and you need better (search engine optimization), you now have a way to better dial into this community.

5. Where does BDNT go from here?

We actually took last month's event here in Boulder and asked that question of the community.

I think one of my takeaways was that New Tech has done a really interesting job of highlighting what is new to the community, whether it's a technology or a business model, and we've stayed pretty focused on just the startup sector.

... We're going to start to test bringing in folks from LOHAS (lifestyles of health and sustainability industry), from other segments such as bio(tech) and life sciences and start helping them while still promoting it from a new technology standpoint, which to me covers business models and (entrepreneurial activities).

The audience (of New Tech) itself has evolved as the community gets larger and because of that, I think we can expand our charter a bit.

The whole entrepreneurial spirit is becoming a driver for the economy. I think we can bring those lessons learned (from the tech and startup community) to the broader community.

-- Alicia Wallace