We’re pleased to share the results in our latest guide to city lawmakers, the New York City Legislative Dossiers 2016.

To answer all these pressing questions and more, City & State reached out to every single member of the New York City Council over the past few weeks and asked them directly.

Even more importantly, where do these legislators go for the best slice of pizza?

And what do the 50 City Councilmembers think will be the most contentious issue? The mayor’s ambitious new zoning plan? The fight over horse carriages? Uber? Or something else entirely?

New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio will roll out his agenda for 2016 next week, but what are the top legislative priorities of each member of the New York City Council?

Inez Barron

District 42, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Intro 261-a, prohibiting discrimination based on consumer credit history. Policy focus: Police reform bills and restructuring of NYPD. Top priority for 2016: My top priorities will include fighting to freeze tuition increases for CUNY students, increasing the number of Black and Latino faculty members at CUNY colleges and the number on course for tenure, ensuring that Gov. Cuomo funds the CFE lawsuit and fighting to ensure that housing development proposed for my district is affordable to the residents who live there as our AMI is $34,000. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The Mayor’s housing plan, ie. Mandatory Inclusionary Housing (MIH) and Zoning for Quality and Affordability (ZQA). The best piece of art about the city: "Take the A train" by Duke Ellington and the Harriet Tubman Statue in Harlem.

Joseph Borelli

District 51, Republican The best bill of 2015: Jokingly, all of my bills, of course … but in reality, the proposed home rule to restore disability benefits to police and firefighters. Policy focus: Maintaining the quality of life and suburban character of the south shore of Staten Island, and ensuring that taxpayers, homeowners and small-business owners are given a fair shake at city hall. Top priority for 2016: Opioid abuse, treatment and ensuring a path back to normalcy for addicts. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Mandatory inclusionary housing. It seems many people are in favor of it in theory, but few support it in practice. Who has the best slice of pizza in the city: Campania in Eltingville, Staten Island. The best piece of art about the city: Tie between "Gotham: a History of New York City to 1898" by Edwin G. Burrows and Mike Wallace and “The Narrows from Staten Island,” an oil-on-canvas painting by Jasper Francis Cropsey, 1868. Twitter handle: @borellijoe

Fernando Cabrera

District 14, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Cabrera was the primary sponsor of a 2015 law requiring the retention of data on the open data portal. Policy focus: Cabrera is the chairman of the Juvenile Justice Committee and co-chairman of the Gun Violence Task Force. Top priority for 2016: One bill sponsored by Cabrera would require the Corrections and Health and Mental Hygiene departments to report on cases of injuries to inmates and staff in city jails, and to refer such cases to investigative agencies. Twitter handle: @FCabreraNY

Margaret Chin

District 1, Democrat The best bill of 2015: One I’m particularly proud of is my bill, Intro 641, requiring NYCDOT to complete a comprehensive study regarding pedestrian and bicyclist safety on truck routes. Mayor de Blasio signed it into law in June 2015. Policy focus: Tenant harassment. Together with my Council colleagues and advocates, we will push forward legislation to ensure that landlords think twice before using construction as a way to harass their tenants, and to hold those landlords accountable for their actions. Top priority for 2016: Preserve and grow affordable housing. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: MIH/ZQA. I look forward to working with the community, my Council colleagues and the Mayor to ensure that we can maintain and grow our affordable housing stock. The best slice of pizza in the city: Any place in Little Italy, of course! The best piece of art about the city: Any of the offerings at the Flea Theater, SoHo Rep, and other small theater groups downtown. Twitter handle: @CM_MargaretChin

Andrew Cohen

District 11, Democrat The best bill of 2015: A package of bills that addressed the K-2 epidemic that swept New York City over the past year. I was a co-sponsor on all three of the bills, Int. 917, Int. 897, and Int. 885, which together impose tougher penalties on vendors who are caught manufacturing, distributing or selling these synthetic cannabinoids, also known as K-2, which is an unnatural toxic substance with serious health risks. Policy focus: In 2016 I plan to focus on renewing the Council’s commitment to developing new resources to expand the mental health services available to all New Yorkers. Top priority for 2016: In 2015 I introduced a bill that would prohibit the use of all-terrain vehicles in the city, Int. 834. It hit the supermajority milestone mark of 34 sponsors and is scheduled for a hearing in March. My top priority is to see this pass unanimously in 2016. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The citywide zoning proposal. The best slice of pizza in the city: Salvatore’s of Soho on Riverdale Ave. in the Bronx. The best piece of art about the city: Daniel Hauben is a Bronx artist and also happens to one of my constituents. His depiction of Bronx streets is truly amazing. Many of his pieces are on display across New York City, the country and the world.

Robert Cornegy

District 36, Democrat The best bill of 2015: The bill I co-sponsored with Councilmember Margaret Chin to create a small-business advocate within the Department of Small Business Services. Policy focus: Working creatively to preserve and create affordable housing opportunities for residents of my district and responding to the needs of mom-and-pop businesses throughout the city. Top priority for 2016: Enacting anti-harassment protections for commercial tenants via Intro 851. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The Council will soon consider the Mayor’s affordable housing proposals, which have been contentious thus far. The best slice of pizza in the city: Patsy’s, near the promenade. The best piece of art about the city: “Do The Right Thing,” of course. Twitter handle: @robertcornegyjr

Costa Constantinides

District 22, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Legislation that will require a cost-benefit analysis of installing geothermal technology when the city undertakes construction or a new building and mandate the clean energy be used if it is cheaper. Policy focus: Ensuring the city meets the mandate of reducing our emissions by 80 percent by 2050. Top priority for 2016: My top priority is to make New York City greener and more sustainable. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: I’m sure there will be tough conversations related to for-hire vehicles and others. We’ve never shied away from any tough situations or tough conversations. The best slice of pizza in the city: Grand Avenue Pizza, 35th Street and 30th Avenue, Queens The best piece of art about the city: If you look at the city’s skyline – that’s a beautiful piece of art right there. Twitter handle: @costa4NY

Elizabeth Crowley

District 30, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Local Law 102 of 2015, which would establish a physical education reporting requirement for all New York City schools, including the frequency students receive PE instruction, all full-time and part-time certified instructors, as well as physical class space. Too many schools are not following state-mandated requirements to hold classes and report on doing so. Policy focus: I will focus on establishing a prevailing wage in projects associated with the Housing Preservation Development. Prevailing wage ensures projects will be done by trained workers, creating safer sites and better quality construction. Top priority for 2016: My proposal for establishing light rail commuter service from Glendale to Long Island City. I believe establishing light rail along a 6-mile stretch of the LIRR Lower Montauk line – currently used to transport freight – is a smart investment for our city. It would ease the burden of my constituents’ dealing with public transportation, bring interborough transit to riders and could be done cost-efficiently. The best slice of pizza in the city: Rosa’s Pizza on 69th Street and Grand Avenue The best piece of art about the city: “A Heart in New York” – Simon and Garfunkel Twitter handle: @ElizCrowleyNYC

Laurie Cumbo

District 35, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Cumbo was the prime sponsor of a bill that would create an emergency mobile text system, which she is continuing to push. Policy focus: Cumbo is Chair of the Committee on Women’s Issues and sits on the committees on Finance, Higher Education, Housing, Youth Services, and Cultural Affairs, Libraries and International Intergroup Relations. On gun control: I believe that every Borough should have an office focused specifically on addressing gun violence that deals with mental health services, community outreach, organizing community partners, town hall meetings, 72-hour responders to gun violence throughout the City, school interventions, teen summits, citywide marketing campaigns and art and athletic outlets for our youth. I am committed to working with my colleagues to make this a reality. Twitter handle: @CMLaurieCumbo

Chaim Deutsch

District 48, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Deutsch voted for a program to reimburse nonpublic schools for the cost of security guard services. Policy focus: Deutsch is the chairman of the Subcommittee on Non-Public Schools. Top priority for 2016: Deutsch is a sponsor of legislation requiring countdown pedestrian signals at intersections adjacent to schools and parks. Twitter handle: @ChaimDeutsch

Inez Dickens

District 9, Democrat Policy focus: In 2016 I will be focusing on increasing the level of affordable housing stock to include senior housing and housing for the disabled. I will also be pushing hard for the inclusion of more MWBEs in the City’s contracting process. Top priority for 2016: The same. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: I can see the Mayor’s MIH/ZQA becoming an issue for the Council as you will have some members for it and others against it because it doesn’t fit the needs of their community. I for one know my community and the three Community Boards I represent rejected the plan for various reasons. I can also see education becoming an issue as many minority members of the council try to push for more Gifted and Talented programs for their district. Then there is the issue of how to humanely handle people with mental health issues. The best slice of pizza in the city: I normally don’t eat pizza, but when I do I choose any place in Harlem, lol. The best piece of art about the city: Why, anything associated with the Harlem Renaissance of course.

Daniel Dromm

District 25, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Amending the administrative code of the City of New York to require the Department of Education to provide data regarding students receiving special education services. Policy focus: I will focus my efforts on building new schools to create additional seats in NYC’s most overcrowded school districts, including districts 24 and 30. Top priority for 2016: To gain additional funding for the School Construction Authority budget. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The misuse of public dollars to pay for private and religious schools. The best slice of pizza in the city: Pizza Boy on 37th Avenue and 74th Street in Jackson Heights The best piece of art about the city: The documentary “In Jackson Heights,” which won the 2015 best nonfiction film award from the New York Film Critics Circle. Twitter handle: @Dromm25

Rafael Espinal

District 37, Democrat The best bill of 2015: I’d say the FY16 budget was the best because the City Council was able to increase services on so many levels. In particular, I’m proud to have led the effort to secure $1.5 million in Council funding to support Holocaust survivors. Policy focus: I’m really focused on all aspects of the East New York rezoning proposal. The policies that stem from it will set the stage for the rest of the city. In addition to ensuring the housing built is affordable to my community, I am working hard to make sure the plan contains policies that support the creation of strong jobs, particularly in the ENY Industrial Business Zone, and secures high-road retailers in the commercial corridors. Top priority for 2016: My top priority for 2016 is to ensure the administration’s rezoning proposal for East New York, Cypress Hills and Ocean Hill meets the needs of my community and contains provisions to make sure that the promises made today will be kept in the years to come. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Citywide rezoning proposals, horse carriages and plastic bags. The best slice of pizza in the city: I’m biased because I love all pizza, but if I had to sit down somewhere, I’d say Roberta’s. The best piece of art about the city: Mad Men Twitter handle: @RLEspinal

Mathieu Eugene

District 40, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Eugene was the primary sponsor of a bill that would have created a workplace development program for disconnected youth. Policy focus: Eugene is Chair of the Committee on Youth Services and sits on the committees on Civil Rights, Fire and Criminal Justice, Health, Immigration, and Small Business. On housing: Having a home is a human right and no one who lives in New York City, which is one of the wealthiest cities in the world, should be without this basic right. Homelessness is an epidemic that is impacting families and individuals in all socioeconomic classes but particularly in working families. It is our moral obligation as government to provide for the people. Twitter handle: @CMMathieuEugene

Julissa Ferreras

District 21, Democrat The best bill of 2015: The Credit Check Ban. It is breaking the cycle of poverty, eliminating an obstacle to employment for vulnerable communities like victims of domestic violence, low-income households and people of color who are most discriminated against because of financial history. Policy focus: I’ll be focusing on improving the lives of New York City’s youth – improving education, improving job opportunities and bringing school restrooms into the 21st century with accessible feminine hygiene products. Top priority for 2016: Leading a budget process that is fair, inclusive and punctual. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The horse carriage bill, because both the opposition and support are strong. The best slice of pizza in the city: Corona Pizza, of course! The best piece of art about the city: Hands down, “Hamilton.” It’s intelligent and refreshing. I’ve seen it three times. Twitter handle: @JulissaFerreras

Daniel Garodnick

District 4, Democrat The best bill of 2015: The Commuter Benefits Law, which I introduced, requires businesses with 20 or more employees to offer their staff the opportunity to use pre-tax earnings on transit, saving the average New Yorker $443 per year. In a city seeking to take aim at inequalities, making transit more affordable is the right focus. Policy focus: As Chair of the Committee on Economic Development, I am most interested in finding ways to encourage growth, including: providing relief to small businesses by eliminating the Commercial Rent Tax, advocating for prudent budgeting practices and developing creative solutions to untap the economic potential in our commercial districts, just as we did in East Midtown. Top priority for 2016: Fighting against practices that threaten tenant stability and housing affordability, and finding ways to protect and expand our affordable housing stock. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: It depends – how much longer will Donald Trump be running for president? The best slice of pizza in the city: Di Fara The best piece of art about the city: “New York, New York” from “On the Town” Twitter handle: @DanGarodnick

Vincent Gentile

District 43, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Legislation passed on the eve of Veterans Day that will launch a new Department of Veterans’ Services. Policy focus: Combatting illegal home conversions and including hookah smoke under the Smoke Free Air Act. Top priority for 2016: I remain committed to improving the quality of life through initiatives and capital projects in District 43. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The 2016 Presidential election – several unique personalities are obviously involved. The best slice of pizza in the city: Very difficult – there are more qualified candidates than your usual Heisman Trophy nominees. I have to go with Gino’s on 74th Street and 5th Avenue in Bay Ridge. The best piece of art about the city: The two dignified lions – Patience and Fortitude – that sit in front of the New York Public Library. Twitter handle: @vgentile43

Vanessa Gibson

District 16, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Int. 730, The Student Safety Act, is integral to changing school climate and ending the school-to-prison pipeline. Policy focus: Police reform. Ensuring the good work we have done to improve police-community relations is codified into law and outlasts the current administration is critical. While we recognize the good work the NYPD does, it is our job as legislators to put things in to law. I will also continue to focus on reducing gun violence and work with the new Bronx district attorney in projects on Rikers Island. Top priority for 2016: District 16’s Jerome Ave. is the second neighborhood to undergo a rezoning and the only area in the Bronx slated to be rezoned at this time. I am committed to making sure Jerome Ave. serves as a model for future rezoning, one that serves the people currently living in the neighborhood and supports commercial and businesses currently operating as well as brings in industry that provides jobs. In service to my District, I will work closely with my colleagues on revisions to MIH and ZQA. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The zoning text amendments. The best slice of pizza in the city: Giovanni’s in the Bronx The best piece of art about the city: “Empire State of Mind” Twitter handle: @vanessalgibson

David Greenfield

District 44, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Intro 65-a, which provides, for the first time in the history of the city, security for students at non-public schools on a level comparable to that enjoyed by public school students. Policy focus: As Chair of the Land Use Committee I will be spending the next few months overseeing the resolution of the Mayor’s proposal on Mandatory Inclusionary Housing and Zoning for Quality and Affordability. I am also focused on continuing to improve quality of life for the residents of my district through park renovations, neighborhood beautification and quality-of-life legislation that will directly benefit the day-to-day lives of my constituents. Finally, transportation is an important issue to me. Top priority for 2016: Working with the Mayor and the rest of the Council to find a way forward on MIH & ZAQ that achieves the Mayor’s goals while protecting the communities that have raised concerns over the proposals. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The Mayor’s affordable housing plan as it relates to MIH & ZQA and my bill to cap Uber’s surge pricing. The best slice of pizza in the city: I think that everyone agrees that Di Fara in my district is the best pizza in NYC. The best piece of art about the city: Billy Joel’s “New York State of Mind” is on my iTunes playlist. Twitter handle: @NYCgreenfield

Barry Grodenchik

District 23, Democrat The best bill of 2015: I did not take office until the end of 2015. Policy focus: Schools, transportation, parks, libraries and quality-of-life issues. Top priority for 2016: Ensuring the schools in our district remain excellent. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The Mayor’s rezoning proposal. The best slice of pizza in the city: Gabby’s Pizza in Queens Village, Queens The best piece of art about the city: “The Panorama of New York City” at the Queens Museum Twitter handle: @BarryGrodenchik

Corey Johnson

District 3, Democrat The best bill of 2015: A set of improvements that I passed to the School Safety Act with Councilmember Vanessa Gibson. Far too many of our students face severe or degrading punishment for their behavior. This bill makes progress on that front by requiring transparency and rigorous data collection when it comes to disciplinary action in our schools. Policy focus: As Chair of the City Council’s Health Committee, I’ll be fighting hard for legislation I introduced that would create an Office of Comprehensive Community Health Planning, which would identify the health needs of all our city’s communities and marshal the resources we need to meet those demands. Top priority for 2016: Making sure the public schools in my district have the resources they need to provide a world-class education, and ensuring that the new public middle school at 75 Morton St. is in good shape and on track to open in the fall of 2017. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The Mayor’s housing plan, Mandatory Inclusionary Housing and Zoning for Quality and Affordability, has already stirred up a lot of debate and will continue to do so. The best slice of pizza in the city: L&B Spumoni Gardens in Bensonhurst. Best Sicilian around. The best piece of art about the city: “New York State of Mind” by Billy Joel Twitter handle: @CoreyInNYC

Ben Kallos

District 5, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Despite receiving hundreds of millions of dollars in tax subsidies, owners of affordable housing have failed to register 50,000-200,000 affordable units. I introduced a bill (Intro 1015) to require all affordable housing to be registered with HPD and to create a universal application system. Policy focus: There should be no wrong door when you go to the government for help. I will work to make government interact with New Yorkers more seamlessly, including by passing my bill (Intro 855) to make government assistance enrollment automatic, closing the 500,000-person gap between those who qualify for SNAP and those who actually get it. Top priority for 2016: Bringing affordable housing to the Upper East Side and protecting residential neighborhoods from out-of-context superscrapers. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Zoning for Quality and Affordability and Mandatory Inclusionary Housing. The best slice of pizza in the city: Delizia The best piece of art about the city: “Humans of New York” Twitter handle: @BenKallos

Andy King

District 12, Democrat The best bill of 2015: IDNYC. This municipal ID program has allowed people to engage in my No. 1 message: “People Pay Attention to People Who Participate.” It is an important resource available to all New York City residents, particularly youth, undocumented immigrants, the homeless, and anyone else who typically would have difficulty obtaining official government identification. Policy focus: I believe the key to a successful person lies behind the door of education, which means creating policies that help youngsters in pre-K, elementary school and college as well as the students who made bad decisions and are rehabilitating themselves. Top priority for 2016: To make sure our schools have the resources needed to educate, reeducate and develop our children. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Housing and zoning laws. I think the MIH & ZQA conversations have not been well laid out, which has created an air of confusion in credibility. The best slice of pizza in the city: Sal’s Pizzeria at 205th St. and Bainbridge Ave. in the Bronx. The best piece of art about the city: “Empire State of Mind” by Alicia Keys and Jay-Z. Twitter handle: @andykingnyc

Peter Koo

District 20, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Justice for Hit and Run Victims Act. Policy focus: I will be working with City agencies to troubleshoot transportation, small business, sanitation and development concerns in my district. Also, as chair of the Landmarks Committee, I look forward to passing Intro 775 to reform the landmarks process. Top priority for 2016: I look forward to continuing to work with my colleagues to pass Intro 775. I’m also focusing on making sure the Flushing West development will benefit our community. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: I think the mayor’s MIH/ZQA plans will need to be revamped. I think we can do it, but it will take compromise by the administration. The outer boroughs were not happy with the original plan. The best slice of pizza in the city: Amore Pizzeria, 3027 Stratton St., Flushing The best piece of art about the city: Frank Sinatra, “New York, New York” Twitter handle: @CMPeterKoo

Karen Koslowitz

District 29, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Paid sick leave. Top priority for 2016: Focusing on quality-of-life Issues affecting our most vulnerable populations – children and senior citizens. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: New York City zoning initiatives. The best slice of pizza in the city: Nick’s Pizza in Forest Hills The best piece of art about the city: “Panorama of the City of New York” at the Queens Museum Twitter handle: @CMKoslowitz

Rory Lancman

District 24, Democrat The best bill of 2015: From my perspective as chairman of Courts and Legal Services, Intro. 736, which created the Office of Civil Justice, was a very important step toward improving access to civil legal services. Policy focus: My main focus will be on ensuring a legal system that works for all New Yorkers through criminal and civil justice reform. Top priority for 2016: My top priority is to examine speedy trial rules, because justice delayed is justice denied for victims, the public and defendants. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The mayor’s Mandatory Inclusionary Housing proposal The best slice of pizza in the city: Every pizza place in my district is the best pizza place in New York City. The best piece of art about the city: Sinatra’s “New York, New York” Twitter handle: @rorylancman

Brad Lander

District 39, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Passing NYC’s new law to ban credit checks as a condition for employment. Policy focus: Supporting and protecting workers in the on-demand economy. I’m also working with Councilmember Corey Johnson on establishing a “drivers’ benefits fund” for taxi and Uber drivers, so they have access to benefits like health care, retirement and sick days that traditional employees have through their jobs. We need to update our Human Rights Law, so it covers independent workers. And finally, we should follow Seattle to establish a way that on-demand workers can have the right to organize and bargain collectively. Top priority for 2016: My first priority will be passing my bill with Councilmember Chin to put a small charge on plastic bags in order to dramatically reduce their use. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Issues of growth, development, preservation and change are always contentious issues in NYC, and they will be again in 2016. The best slice of pizza in the city: My son’s favorite is Di Fara. My daughter’s is Grimaldi’s. As Councilmember for the 39th District, I’m partial to Lucali in Carroll Gardens and Table 87 in Gowanus. The best piece of art about the city: “Hamilton” for sure. Twitter handle: @bradlander

Stephen Levin

District 33, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Intro 419, which I introduced in partnership with Councilmember Van Bramer, that established New York City’s first ever comprehensive cultural plan. Arts and culture are very important to me and to New York City’s identity, and I was proud to be a part of passing legislation that will make our city more artist-friendly and help showcase the cultural contributions of every borough. Policy focus: Continuing to improve our handling of homelessness policy and digging into how we can improve the foster care system and achieve better outcomes for foster youth. Top priority for 2016: To continue our oversight of social services in New York City on the General Welfare Committee and look for ways in which we can improve the quality and delivery of services for New Yorkers in need. In addition, I will prioritize continuing to provide effective constituent services for the residents of the 33rd District. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Hard to say – contentious issues have a way of coming out of left field. The best slice of pizza in the city: Di Fara and Paulie Gee’s The best piece of art about the city: “Hard Times in New York Town” by Bob Dylan and “New York’s My Home” by Ray Charles. Twitter handle: @stephenlevin33

Mark Levine

District 7, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Intro 736, which created the Office of Civil Justice, to oversee growth in free legal services to low-income tenants facing eviction, immigrants facing deportation, parents facing loss of custody of their children and more. Policy focus: Preserving mom-and-pop businesses, boosting investment in parks in low- and middle-income neighborhoods and expanding foreign language education in public schools. Top priority for 2016: Strengthening laws to help low- and middle-income New Yorkers remain in their homes. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Neck-and-neck between a horse carriage ban compromise and mandatory inclusionary zoning. The best slice of pizza in the city: Koronet Pizza on Broadway and 110th St. Their slices are HUGE! The best piece of art about the city: The Broadway show “In the Heights,” by Lin-Manuel Miranda Twitter handle: @marklevinenyc

Alan Maisel

District 46, Democrat The best bill of 2015: I introduced legislation in relation to transferring the parking violations bureau from the department of finance to the office of administrative trials and hearings. Int. 264-2014 would ensure fair hearings, which every person deserves. This bill is co-sponsored by 18 of my colleague Councilmembers and should be coming up at committee soon. Policy focus: In my district, there are a large number of unmapped streets. These are streets that are used by the public, but that the city is not responsible for, i.e., maintenance. My legislation would require the department of transportation to create a task force to determine how the city can take ownership of these streets. A second part of this legislation deals with the problems that homeowners have in disputes over their community driveways. Top priority for 2016: Continuing in my efforts to solve the many quality-of-life issues that my constituents have. In addition, I am committed to the renovation of parks in my district that have yet to receive upgrades. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Always unpredictable. The best slice of pizza in the city: Pizza D’Amore in Mill Basin, Brooklyn. The best piece of art about the city: “New York, New York” sung by Frank Sinatra

Melissa Mark-Viverito

District 8, Democrat Top priority for 2016: My colleagues and I are proud of the work this City Council has done to uplift New Yorkers. Whether it’s bringing much needed regulation to the car wash industry, creating a new Office of Labor Standards, creating the nation’s largest Department of Veterans’ Services or increasing the size of our police force, the Council’s work has touched and improved the lives of New York City residents across the five boroughs. In the year ahead, we look forward to continuing that commitment to making New York City a fairer and better place for all who live here. The best slice of pizza in the city: Patsy’s for a classic New York slice or Neapolitan Express for a modern twist. The best piece of art about the city: The incredible murals from the MonumentArt Festival in El Barrio and the South Bronx and “Hamilton.” Twitter handle: @MMViverito

Steven Matteo

District 50, Republican The best bill of 2015: Intro 0727, which helps thousands of owners of Sandy-ravaged homes rebuild without being penalized by the “Sandy tax.” Policy focus: Making life-saving AEDs more widely available, sensible improvements to roads/transportation, helping more local businesses through private-public partnerships and strengthening and potentially expanding business improvement districts. Top priority for 2016: Passing my bills requiring AEDs at Little League games, increasing littering fines and pushing for better public transportation options on Staten Island, including a West Shore Light Rail and improved bus service. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Mandatory inclusionary zoning, police reform bills, regulating Uber, horse carriages… Pick one! The best slice of pizza in the city: Any pizzeria in Staten Island The best piece of art about the city: “New York, New York” – the Sinatra version Twitter handle: @StevenMatteo

Darlene Mealy

District 31, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Intro 818, which would amend the attorney’s fees provisions of the city human rights law to include expert fees in attorney’s fees awards and directs courts and the Human Rights Commission to base attorney’s fee awards on the highest prevailing hourly market rate charged by attorneys of similar skill and experience practicing anywhere within New York City. Also the Fair Chance Act, Intro 689 – which requires the HRC to perform a housing discrimination investigation for a period of one year – and Intro 690, which requires the HRC to perform an employment discrimination investigation for a period of one year and report the results to the Council. Policy focus: Housing and employment discrimination. Top priority for 2016: To bring additional resources and programs for our youth and seniors, advocate against gentrification and continue to fight for affordable housing in the district. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The Mayor’s proposal to implement a court system in Brownsville located at 444 Thomas Boyland St. I am in favor of bringing a court system to the district, however I am opposed to this location because it will bring all criminal services within a one-block radius. The best slice of pizza in the city: Not Ray’s Pizza on Fulton St. The best piece of art about the city: The mural of Rosetta “Mother” Gaston and Greg “Jocko” Jackson in Brownsville

Carlos Menchaca

District 38, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Carwash workers and Worker Cooperatives – both very personal to me and our mission to address dignity in our immigrant workforce. Policy focus: “Literacy for All” is a term you will hear very often this year. The premise is simple: every New Yorker deserves access to adult education classes, to learn English and to get their GED in their neighborhood. To make the most of our work on UPK, we must ensure that our parents have the skillsets to help our students who are now on track to get the education they deserve. This is policy that considers the entire family. Top priority for 2016: Fully fund the Literacy for All Project. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The Council’s interactions with the Mayor’s Affordable Housing Initiatives will be some of the more contentious moments of 2016. The best slice of pizza in the city: Rocky Sullivan’s in Red Hook The best piece of art about the city: “Hamilton” on Broadway offers a mix of our geopolitical past and our modern musical tone. It is also written by a very famous Latino New Yorker. I listen to the soundtrack on the subway to work! Twitter handle: @NYCCouncil38

Rosie Mendez

District 2, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Intro 222, requiring that landlords provide tenants with advance notice for non-emergency repair work that will result in disruptions to building services. After complaints from constituents that they would come home to find basic services interrupted with no warning, the law establishes a general baseline of 24 hours’ advance notice for most work. Policy focus: The focus will be on the biggest problems facing my district, including the lack of affordable and permanent housing at every income level and the proliferation of homelessness. Top priority for 2016: Passing bills I have been carrying for 10 years, including Asthma Free Housing (Intro 385) and Right to Counsel for Seniors (Intro 96). The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: ZQA and MIH will be contentious depending on changes made to the proposal after feedback from advocates and community boards. Infill or development on public housing would be a big problem for my district as well. The best slice of pizza in the city: 11B The best piece of art about the city: The movie “You’ve Got Mail” is a great movie about New York, gentrification and the social scene in NYC with its farmers’ markets and coffee shops. Twitter handle: @RosieMendez

I. Daneek Miller

District 27, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Fair Chance Act/Ban the Box (Int. 318). Policy focus: We’re going to have to double down and focus on equity: How do we deliver public services and who is providing these services? Are communities receiving their fair share or being called on to provide more than their fair share? Top priority for 2016: The Five E’s of Transportation: 1. Equalize commuter rail fares and eliminate two-fare zones. 2. Enact the Commuter Van Reform Act. 3. Extend express bus service. 4. Expand Vision Zero. 5. Ensure proper transportation funding. This campaign seeks to quickly, efficiently and safely improve transit in transportation deserts throughout the five boroughs. Equally important, we have to discuss methods to promote affordable housing. That includes stabilizing neighborhoods hardest hit by the foreclosure crisis. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: By far, issues of housing and specifically with respect to providing affordable housing. We must thoroughly think through this process and the impact on indigenous residents, potential displacement issues and the larger framework of our land use process. The best slice of pizza in the city: Margherita Pizza on 163-04 Jamaica Ave. (By Jamaica Avenue and Guy R Brewer Blvd.) The best piece of art about the city: “Do The Right Thing” – a visionary film. Twitter handle: @IDaneekMiller

Annabel Palma

District 18, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Palma was the prime sponsor of a bill that would require retailers that sell smartphones in New York City to install theft-deterrance technology. Policy focus: Palma sits on the committees on Youth Services, General Welfare, Technology, Land Use, Community Development and the Subcommittee on Landmarks, Public Siting and Maritime Uses. On health care: Access to quality primary health care is the first line of defense in preventing, diagnosing and treating health problems before they become life threatening, causing admission to a hospital emergency room. The most critical step in connecting people to quality health care is through a primary care provider, and for many Bronxites this is an option not readily available. Twitter handle: @PalmaAnnabel

Antonio Reynoso

District 34, Democrat The best bill of 2015: The Fair Chance Act/Ban the Box. Policy focus: As Chair of the Committee on Sanitation and Solid Waste Management, I will continue to focus on creating waste equity in New York City. Three communities of color, North Brooklyn, the South Bronx, and Southeast Queens, process about 80 percent of the waste processed in the city, which has major impacts on public health in those neighborhoods. Additionally, the commercial waste system is outdated and inefficient. We need reform in both, and I am excited to work on this with the Committee in 2016. Top priority for 2016: Affordable housing. My office has started Housing Task Forces in North Brooklyn and Ridgewood that bring tenant organizers together with City agencies to address buildings where residents are threatened with displacement. They work proactively to ensure that these buildings are repaired and the tenants can stay in their homes. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Police reform. We need to improve the relationship between the NYPD and communities, and how to accomplish that will continue to be a contentious issue in 2016. The best slice of pizza in the city: Williamsburg Pizza at 265 Union Ave., across the street from my district office. The best piece of art about the city: Bushwick Collective’s street artwork. It’s about NYC because it’s in NYC and anyone can see it just by visiting Bushwick! Twitter handle: @cmreynoso34

Donovan Richards

District 31, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Updating the Air Code for the first time in about 40 years, which introduced new requirements to limit emissions from certain unregulated sectors, while promoting the adoption of cost-effective air pollution controls. These sectors cause emissions that contain tiny particulates generated by commercial char broilers, fireplaces, food trucks, refrigeration vehicles and buses. Policy focus: Improving the affordable housing crisis in the city and making sure Mandatory Inclusionary Housing and Zoning for Quality and Affordability becomes a plan that works for all communities. Top priority for 2016: Reforming the Board of Standards and Appeals The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Mandatory Inclusionary Housing and Zoning for Quality and Affordability The best slice of pizza in the city: J & S Pizza on Merrick Boulevard in Rosedale The best piece of art about the city: “Empire State of Mind” – Jay-Z feat. Alicia Keys Twitter handle: @DRichards13

Ydanis Rodriguez

District 10, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Transit Desert Study. Policy focus: Expanding our public transportation network into areas in need. From bikes, trains, buses and ferries, all systems must relied upon so that New Yorkers can move more safely and efficiently going forward. Top priority for 2016: Moving NYC and New Yorkers to more fully realize the importance of public transit and how choosing these options over cars can increase safety, energy efficiency, quality of life, environmental sustainability and public health. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Housing and ZQA and MIH. The best slice of pizza in the city: Johnny’s Pizza on Dyckman St. and Post Ave. The best piece of art about the city: “Little Red Lighthouse and the Great Grey Bridge” by Hildegarde Swift Twitter handle: @Ydanis

Deborah Rose

District 49, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Among many good pieces of legislation was the Caregiver Discrimination Act, which prohibits employment discrimination based on “caregiver” (family responsibility) status. I believe that no worker should be treated differently – or unfairly – because they are, or are perceived to be, a caretaker of a parent, spouse, child or domestic partner. Policy focus: I prioritize ensuring that New Yorkers of all ages and income levels can find housing they can afford, while preserving the character of our neighborhoods. Top priority for 2016: My priority is to ensure that we have the public transportation, traffic mitigation, school seats, hospital beds, recreation facilities, street lighting and other infrastructure components necessary to support my constituents. Most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Proposed zoning texts proved contentious at the community board and borough board levels. I expect that to continue, though I am optimistic we can come to agreements that benefit all. The best slice of pizza in the city: You can’t ask a Staten Islander to name just one! Nucci’s, Brother’s, and Joe and Pat’s are a few of my favorites. The best piece of art about the city: "Empire State of Mind" – Jay-Z and Alicia Keys Twitter handle: @CmDebiRose

Helen Rosenthal

District 6, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Jumaane's ban the box bill (Local Law 63 of 2015). It'll give thousands of New Yorkers a fair chance at getting hired. Policy focus: Protecting and expanding tenants' rights, especially by preserving affordable housing and empowering tenants who experience harassment from their landlords. Top priority for 2016: Getting my accessibility package through. Over 800,000 NYC residents have a disability, and right now there are too many barriers limiting their participation in civic and cultural life. Twenty-five years after the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act, that is unacceptable. Most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The vendor cap legislation and land use rezoning The best slice of pizza in the city: Patsy's with prosciutto The best piece of art about the city: Robert Caro's book on Robert Moses, "The Power Broker." Twitter handle: @HelenRosenthal

Ritchie Torres

District 15, Democrat The best bill of 2015: The Carwash Accountability Act, which serves as a precursor to a newly invigorated role for DCA in ensuring responsible business practices in low-wage industries. Inspired by the logic of the CAA, I am advancing legislation, known as the CLEAN Act, that would empower DCA to clean up the dirty practices of the worst industrial laundry operators. Policy focus: School diversity is, by far, the most morally urgent cause that almost no one in elected office seems to be talking about. The city can and should do more to foster greater diversity in the classroom. Top priority for 2016: Ensuring NYCHA gets its fair share from the city and state remains a continuing crusade of mine. The next stage in the struggle for NYCHA's survival is a focus on the Battery Park Authority's revenues as a funding stream for preserving public housing. Kudos to Scott Stringer and Jeff Klein for pressing the cause. Most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The Right to Know Act. The best slice of pizza in the city: The restaurants of Arthur Ave., like Zero Otto Nove, have some of the best pizzas. The best piece of art about the city: My favorite book about the city is "The Power Broker," ?which chronicles the infamous life and legacy of Robert Moses. For good and for ill, we all live in a City that he radically reshaped in his own image. Twitter handle: @RitchieTorres

Mark Treyger

District 47, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Treyger was the prime sponsor of a bill that would make building owners provide disabled residents a reasonable alternative when a passenger elevator is out of service for more than 24 hours. Policy focus: Treyger is Chair of the committee on recovery and resiliency and sits on the committees on Aging, Education, Land Use, and Parks and Recreation, and the Subcommittee on Planning, Dispositions and Concessions. On Sandy recovery: All New York City residents, regardless of their ability to qualify for federal disaster aid programs, deserve safe and humane housing. It is our responsibility as elected officials to ensure that all victims of Superstorm Sandy have the ability to return to their homes. Twitter handle: @MarkTreyger718

Eric Ulrich

District 32, Republican The best bill of 2015: Ulrich was the prime sponsor of a law that created a New York City Department of Veterans’ Services. Policy focus: Ulrich is Chair of the Committee on Veterans and sits on the committees on Environmental Protection, Housing and Buildings, Recovery and Resiliency, and Small Business. On homeless veterans: NYC has made great strides in reducing the number of chronically homeless veterans in 2015. Let us resolve to help every homeless veteran in NYC find stable long-term housing in 2016. Twitter handle: @Eric_Ulrich

James Vacca

District 13, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Intro 462, my emergency elevator repair bill, which gives the City the authority to repair broken elevators and charge the landlord for the cost in cases where the landlord refuses to make timely repairs. Policy focus: As Chair of the Committee on Technology, I will focus on various tech issues such as the Open Data law, the rollout of the Wi-Fi RFP, and the status of PSCA II. Top priority for 2016: Reducing the property tax burden borne by the middle class. Last year I proposed a property tax rebate that didn’t make the final budget. I will be fighting even harder to save money for hardworking New Yorkers. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Land use rezoning. It will affect every community in the city. The best slice of pizza in the city: Emilio’s of Morris Park. Their chicken vodka slice is the best around. The best piece of art about the city: “The Only Living Boy in New York” by Simon & Garfunkel Twitter handle: @jamesvacca13

Paul Vallone

District 19, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Firstly, it was an honor to co-sign the city’s first Department of Veterans Services into law. Secondly, passing a new law restricting commercial traffic on our residential streets is a clear win for the preservation of the quality of life in our community. Policy focus: As chair of the Subcommittee on Senior Centers, I believe we must continually increase our focus on policy and budget for our rapidly expanding and critically important senior population in New York City. Top priority for 2016: As a result of the historic funding we brought to our district over the last two years, our community can proudly and finally say we are once again a priority as we stand tall in Northeast Queens. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The upcoming presidential election will be the clear focus of attention for our city, state and country in 2016. The best slice of pizza in the city: There’s nothing better than stopping by for a slice from Graziella Pizzeria & Restaurant in Flushing. The best piece of art about the city: After celebrating his 100th birthday at City Hall, there is no greater icon than Frank Sinatra and his timeless classic, “New York, New York.” Twitter handle: @PaulVallone

Jimmy Van Bramer

District 26, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Strengthening the Justice for Hit-and-Run Victims Act. Top priority for 2016: Implementing the Cultural Plan. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: Uber bill. The best slice of pizza in the city: Sunnyside Pizza Twitter handle: @JimmyVanBramer

Jumaane Williams

District 45, Democrat The best bill of 2015: Passing the Fair Chance Act was an important moment for our city. Policy focus: Creating real affordability throughout our city and reducing gun violence in our communities. That means advocating for working families in the MIH/ZQA negotiations; increasing income-targeted, truly affordable housing; expanding the Crisis Management System and pushing for a more holistic approach to decrease gun violence; and creating new employment opportunities for our young people. Top priority for 2016: To ensure all families have safe, stable and affordable neighborhoods where they can put down roots and raise families without fear of eviction or gun violence. The most contentious issues for lawmakers this year: The Mayor’s housing plan. In particular, zoning changes and MIH. The best slice of pizza in the city: There are too many great pizza places to choose from, but if you come to District 45, I’ll take you for the best Caribbean food you’ve ever had. The best piece of art about the city: There’s a painting hanging at Medgar Evers College that holds a special place for me. Growing up, my mom would take me to events at the College and I noticed the painting every time we walked by. It depicts a mother and child and states “nothing is real to us except freedom.” Twitter handle: @JumaaneWilliams