Reliable transport for Sydneysiders: Light rail down George Street in the CBD.

Hundreds of trees will be cut down, car parking spaces will disappear and in some places pedestrians will have to walk on narrower footpaths.

Plans for light rail down George Street and into the eastern suburbs may lead to a more reliable journey to work for tens of thousands of residents. And to a more pleasant central business district for many, many thousands entering and walking around central Sydney.

But as the government has been at pains to stress this week, its impact will be substantial for those who live along its route or whose travelling cuts across it.

Sydney's Light Rail Future. Photo: Supplied

For the great majority of the 13 kilometres of proposed tram track from Kingsford and Randwick to Circular Quay, the trams will run on discrete tracks away from cars or buses.

Advertisement

This will help the service achieve its planned 97 per cent reliability and keep trams to every two to three minutes, a steep increase on the eastern suburbs buses that struggle for 30 per cent reliability, according to Transport for NSW.

But it will also mean changes to footpaths and road traffic.

For instance, at a stop planned outside World Square on George Street, the pedestrian path will be narrowed for a short stretch to accommodate an island platform in the middle of the road.

For motorists, the tram lines will reduce traffic paths on George Street to one lane in each direction, with this lane to be separated from the tram path by a slight rise in the road.

North of World Square, the plan is to set up a one-kilometre ''pedestrian zone'' between Bathurst and Hunter Streets, with no car access apart from taxis, emergency vehicles, and perhaps delivery trucks and property owners' vehicles.

Along this strip, Transport for NSW says, the idea is to power the trams with surface tracks rather than overhead wires. Along the route to Randwick and Kingsford, indicative maps released this week by the department show large-scale removal of trees and parking spots. On Anzac Parade, for instance, trees in the middle of the road corridor, and at least on one side, will be removed, replaced in many instances by new ones.

Documents distributed by the government say ''temporary and permanent changes to parking availability and type are likely … especially within areas such as Devonshire Street, Surry Hills, and Wansey Road, Anzac Parade and High Street in Randwick.'' There would be ''limited opportunity'' to recoup lost parking.

In Randwick, the final stop on the light rail line is likely to occupy much of what is a small park at the intersection of Avoca Street, Coogee Bay Road and High Street.

The High Street Park stop is planned as an interchange stop for people getting out of eastern suburbs buses and changing to the light rail.

Transport for NSW said an environmental impact statement will be prepared by November, showing the impact on trees, parking and local traffic.

A former senior transport adviser to a NSW minister, Greg Sutherland, said he was excited about the prospect of the re-introduction of trams to the eastern suburbs, but cautioned that for it to work well the government would need to be careful how it integrated the trams into the on-street environment.

''If they don't adopt the best European practices the ultimate success may not be as good as expected,'' Mr Sutherland said.

A block of 69 home units in Surry Hills will be knocked down. Syd Hickman, chairman of the block's owners corporation, said Transport for NSW had indicated it would start making offers to owners from November.

Construction of the tram line is to start next year, to be finished by the end of the decade.