MGN Online

A massive search and rescue operation was suspended Sunday for an AirAsia Indonesia jet that lost contact with air traffic control over the Java Sea during a flight to Singapore shortly after the pilots requested a change of flight plan because of weather.

Darkness and bad weather forced the suspension of the search, which will continue Monday morning, said Indonesian transport officials.

Flight QZ8501 lost contact with air traffic control in Jakarta at 7:24 a.m. Sunday local time near Belitung Island, Indonesia, after leaving Surabaya, Indonesian Air Transport Director Djoko Murjatmodjo said during a news conference Sunday. The flight, which had at least 161 people on board, was scheduled to land in Singapore at 8:57 a.m. local time.

Murjatmodjo said teams were searching the sea and mountainous areas in the region.

The plane was several hours past the time when its fuel would have been exhausted, Indonesian officials said during a news conference Sunday.

The aircraft was on the submitted flight plan but was requesting deviation due to enroute weather before communication with the aircraft was lost while it was still under the control of the Indonesian Air Traffic Control, AirAsia said.

According to flight tracking website Flightradar24, the jet was flying at the regular cruising altitude for most jetliners -- 32,000 feet -- when the signal was lost.

"At the present time we unfortunately have no further information regarding the status of the passengers and crew members on board, but we will keep all parties informed as more information becomes available," AirAsia said.

The captain in command had a total of 6,100 flying hours and the first officer a total of 2,275 flying hours, according to the airline. The aircraft had undergone its last scheduled maintenance on 16 November 2014.

The flight manifest for the the Airbus A320-200, with the registration number PK-AXC, released by the Indonesian authorities said there were 155 passengers on board, including one infant and 16 children.

Of the passengers, 149 were Indonesians, three were South Korean, and there was one traveler each from Malaysia, Singapore and United Kingdom. Of the crew one was French and six were Indonesian, according to AirAsia.

Search and rescue operations were in progress, AirAsia said.

I am touched by the massive show of support especially from my fellow airlines. This is my worse nightmare. But there is no stopping. — Tony Fernandes (@tonyfernandes) December 28, 2014

The plane lost communication with Indonesia's Surabaya airport 42 minutes after takeoff, when it was believed to be over the Java Sea between Kalimantan and Java islands, Hadi Mustofa, an official of the transportation ministry told Indonesia's MetroTV.

Mustofa said the plane had seven crew and 155 passengers.

The Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore said it was informed about the missing plane by Jakarta ground control about half an hour after contact was lost.

"Search and rescue operations have been activated by the Indonesian authorities," it said.

The Singapore air force and the navy also were activated with two C-130 ready to assist Indonesia authorities in the search, according to the aviation authority.

"We remain ready to provide any assistance to support the search and rescue effort", the CAAS said.

A waiting area was set up at Changi Airport in Singapore, where the plane had been scheduled to land, with facilities and support for relatives and friends of the passengers on the plane.

"My only thought are with the passengers and my crew. We put our hope in the SAR operation and thank the Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysian governments", the GCEO of AirAsia tweeted.

The White House said President Obama was briefed on the flight.

This caps a terrible year for Malaysia and air travel.

Very sad to hear that AirAsia Indonesia QZ8501 is missing. My thoughts are with the families. Malaysia stands ready to help. — Mohd Najib Tun Razak (@NajibRazak) December 28, 2014

Air Asia is Malaysian based, and in March, Malaysia Airlines flight 370, a wide-bodied Boeing 777 with 239 people on board, went missing soon after taking off from Kuala Lumpur for Beijing. It has never been found.

Then in July, another Malaysian Airlines Boeing 777 was shot down over Ukraine, killing all 298 on board.