The youngest survivor of a triple-fatal wreck last November sat down with WYFF News 4’s Liz Lohuis for an exclusive interview.

Cheyenne Queen, 12, was pinned behind the driver’s seat for a nearly an hour before firefighters could free her.

She was barely breathing when the Anderson County deputy coroner performed a surgical tracheotomy to save her life.

“I know the trach was to help me breathe when I first got in the hospital,” said Cheyenne.

Cheyenne was in a coma for weeks, and hospitalized for three months.

Now she’s back home, walking and talking.

There's a lot that Cheyenne doesn't remember about being in the hospital.

“I don't really remember when I couldn't walk. But now that I can walk it feels good to walk,” said Cheyenne.

She does recall when she first tried to speak.

“I’m a big talker, so it really got on my nerves, and I was trying my best to talk,” said Cheyenne.

On New Year’s Day, Cheyenne surprised her family and friends with a special message on her Facebook page.

“Happy New Year,” said Cheyenne.

“To hear her speak on New Year’s Day, and then to see her walk, take those first steps on Feb, 1, it's just been overwhelming,” said Cheyenne’s father, Tim Queen.

Cheyenne's father said she will work with a neuropsychologist to deal with a traumatic brain injury. Once Cheyenne goes back to school she will work with special-needs teachers.

She's also seeing a speech therapist and physical therapist.

Cheyenne is not alone in her journey.

“It was really good to see all my friends and stuff. They have helped me through this by just by being there,” said Cheyenne.

It's a spirit that can't be broken.

“When I get better, I want to dance and do all the things I used to do,” said Cheyenne.

The Queen family also wants to thank the community for their outpouring of support. The Fighting with Cheyenne Facebook page has more than 4,000 likes.

An account has been created in Tim Queen's name at Palmetto Bank in Simpsonville to help pay for Cheyenne's medical expenses.

Riley McDermott has been charged with six counts of felony DUI in the crash that injured Cheyenne.

Three people died in the crash: Jessica Roberts, 20, Cory Simmonds, 22, and Amber Hope Perkins, 17, who was Cheyenne's sister.

Jessica Roberts' 17-year-old sister, Samantha, was hurt.