U.S. Rep. Scott Garrett knows how to defend unpopular positions, especially his "no" votes when the rest of Congress is leaning "yes." He opposed relief money for Hurricane Katrina victims and covering medical expenses of 9/11 responders. He says the big financial firms should have been allowed to fall off the cliff in 2007. He rejected a bipartisan compromise to end the 2013 government shutdown. Recently he went against emergency funding to deal with the Ebola threat and speed up research for a vaccine.

He's fond of saying the federal government has a spending problem, not a revenue problem. For Garrett, that's not a cliche, it's a conviction, and voters in the Fifth Congressional District have elected him to six terms.

Yet on the road to a seventh, Garrett has had to answer more than the usual critics. His claim that he led the way on funding for victims of Superstorm Sandy in 2012 is dubious. When Gov. Chris Christie finally confronted Speaker John Boehner for lack of action, Garrett was quiet. Garrett says he signed all but one letter of support and voted for the final bill. Yet he tried to make relief aid dependent on budget cuts, which could have held up or nixed billions in aid.

The question isn't why Garrett got caught dragging his feet at the back of the Sandy wagon, but why he didn't stick to his guns and say "no" to another disaster bailout? He's done it before, on principle. It's who he is.

Democratic challenger Roy Cho is making hay on this point. Cho, a business attorney from Hackensack, has gotten some traction, with a poll showing he trails by five points. It's also worth noting that redistricting has placed 70 percent of the district's population in Bergen County.

Cho exhibits the shortcomings of inexperience. He had to answer, for example, why he was still voting elsewhere in 2012, after moving to Bergen County.

Where Garrett wants to starve deficits, Cho wants to jump-start transportation spending through public-private partnerships -- a concept that needs some fleshing out.

While that's just one aspect of this race, it is representative of the sense of compromise Cho says he would bring to Congress. He's looking for ways to generate economic activity and put people to work, whereas Garrett would slash funding and let the states figure it out.

With some reservations, we think Cho is the better choice, and we endorse his candidacy. Giving up a six-term incumbent's seniority is no small consideration, but voters should ask what they've gotten back.

Cho and Garrett agree President Obama should have made a clearer case to intervene against ISIS, and gotten Congressional approval.

Garrett wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act; Cho would amend it to address the flaws. On immigration, Garrett wants more border security and no "amnesty." Cho, a son of Korean immigrants, supports a path to citizenship and the DREAM Act.

Garrett, who voted against every bailout, wants to repeal the Dodd-Frank legislation designed to promote transparency in financial investments. Cho wants to change it but keep consumer protections and open a dialogue on "smart" regulation.

"Even hedge fund people understand that you have to help the middle class," Cho says.

Voters who are happy with Garrett's limited government stance will see no reason to change horses here. We think Cho comes across as a moderate Democrat with good ideas about moving the country and New Jersey forward.

The 5th District includes all of Warren County except Phillipsburg and its suburbs, and parts of Sussex, Passaic and Bergen counties.