Jonelle Roberts

Whenever Stephanie visits her mom at the nursing home, she leaves upset.

Sure, there is an emotional toll to every visit, but that isn't it.

Mom never left the house without lipstick. Now, her hair isn't combed.

Mom says she is taking baths, but that can't be right. Mom has always hated baths.

It seems that Mom stays in bed all day.

Stephanie encourages her to participate in the activities. Mom says bingo doesn't interest her, and she complains that she doesn't know anyone. So, Mom stays in her room and Stephanie continually worries.

Stephanie wonders if the staff even knows who her mom is.

Please remember that you are a valuable resource to staff!

The 1987 Nursing Home Reform Law (OBRA) requires nursing homes to individualize care. The only way to individualize care is to get to know who you are caring for. You have the power to help your family member teach staff who she is.

Every facility has regular care plan meetings for each resident. A care plan meeting includes staff from many disciplines, including nursing and social services. The sole purpose of the meetings is to develop the best care plan possible for each and every resident.

Encourage your family member to attend this meeting, and with your family member's permission, you should attend, as well.

At the care plan meeting, help staff get to know your loved one and her preferences. What is she proud of? How did she spend her youth? Is she Catholic or agnostic?

Advertisement

This is also the time to bring up your concerns and ask questions. Is Mom's pain being controlled? Can she be dressed and have her makeup on when breakfast is served in her room at 10 a.m? How is she getting along with her roommate?

During the care plan meeting, take notes and understand what specific action the staff will take and when. If this makes you uncomfortable, as your ombudsman, I will coach you through the process. If you still aren't comfortable, I can attend the care plan meeting with you. I am here to help residents and their families communicate effectively with staff.

After you attend the care plan meeting, reflect back on the experience and consider whether or not the care plan will be effective. Good care plans are specific, individualized and reflect the resident's concerns, well-being, functioning and rights. It lays out what each staff person will do and when it will happen. It is a living document that is evaluated and updated on a routine basis.

On the other hand, a bad care plan labels a resident's needs and concerns as problem behaviors. It is vague and doesn't require specific action by staff. Even a good care plan can go bad if it isn't shared with staff and reassessed at regular intervals.

Throughout this process, the resident's right to be seen also applies to the resident's loved ones.

Don't push your values and desires onto your loved one. Ask what it is that she prefers. She is already dealing with a difficult transition punctuated by a loss of physical and mental ability. Support her by empowering her to live her life as she wishes.

For more information, contact:

Jonelle Roberts serving Morgan County at 970-867-9409 ext. 233

Erin LeBlanc serving Logan, Phillips and Sedgwick counties at 970-854-2949

Marlene Miller, Lead Ombudsman, serving Yuma and Washington counties at 970-848-2277

Jonelle Roberts is the long-term-care ombudsman serving Morgan County. She writes a monthly column about issues related to older adults and long-term care for the Times of Your Life section.