Macy's will build a massive order fulfillment center on the west side of Owasso.

The company says it will bring one thousand jobs to Owasso.

Macy's will build a massive order fulfillment center on the west side of Owasso, bringing 1,500 full and part-time jobs to the area.

News On 6 was first to tell you about a month ago that the Owasso area was on a short list to attract a major new employer.

11/19/2013: Related Story: Owasso Aiming To Attract Major New Employer

The facility will be located at the Cherokee Industrial Park. It's outside the Owasso city limits, but inside the school district.

"Macy's is very pleased to announce today it will build its newest fulfillment center in Tulsa County, Oklahoma," said Frank Julian, Macy's vice president, at a news conference held Monday.



As we told you last month, Owasso diverted a half-million dollars from its hotel tax fund to the economic development authority to try to attract Macy's.

Macy's will also hire 1,000 seasonal employees each year during the busy holiday season. The overall economic impact over the next ten years is estimated at $800 million.

The company looked at ten different potential sites and narrowed the list down to Owasso and one other location. The site already has the utility infrastructure needed, and 76th Street North is four lanes, which helped the location win out over 150 potential sites in four states.

"This is fantastic news for our state, it's a great opportunity to once again put Oklahoma on the map with a big name company," said Governor Mary Fallin.

The company will begin construction of 1.3-million-square-foot facility in April 2014 with completion set for a year later. That should create between 350 and 500 construction jobs.



The size is equivalent of 46 football fields.

"Anyone in the audience that enjoys shoes, when fully stocked there will be one million pairs of shoes stored in that facility," Julian said.

Owasso Mayor Doug Bonebrake said his city's victory is a victory for the whole region.

"An operation of this scale, along with the 1,500 plus jobs it brings, is truly a significant boost to all of the surrounding cities and counties. We all will enjoy an economic benefit from this development and we all will share the positive effects it will have on the greater Tulsa area," he said.

"The word is getting out that Northeastern Oklahoma is a great place to invest," Fallin said.