Topics: AlterNet, Ben Carson, Chris Christie, Donald Trump, Rand Paul, university of missouri, Yale, Elections News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

The anti-racism protests at the University of Missouri and Yale have become a topic of national conversation, which means politicians are also weighing in. As the party of old white cranks who think the only racism that exists in this country is against white men, it’s pretty much the job of the GOP presidential hopefuls to try to outdo each other yelling about how much they are not on board. (Considering that there are anti-racist protests happening at Ithaca, Smith and the University of Kansas, among several others, they’ll probably have more to say in coming days.) Here are some prize reactions from the Republican presidential contenders.

1. Donald Trump

Speaking via phone on Fox Business Network, Donald Trump—who by his own estimation, has “a great relationship with the blacks”— said he thinks the Missouri protests are “disgusting.” The billionaire, apparently taking a breakfrom not reading the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, took a few minutes to scaremonger about the school’s future and boast about how he would have essentially done nothing to deal with charges of racism confronting the campus.

“I think it’s disgusting. I think it’s disgusting,” Trump said about the protests. “I think the two people that resigned are weak, ineffective people. I think that when they resigned, they set something in motion that’s going to be a disaster for the next long period of time.”

And then, per usual, the billionaire made it about himself. “Trump should have been the chancellor of that university,” he said. “Believe me, there would have been no resignations.”

Trump also suggested that student demands are not to be taken seriously.

“Their demands are like crazy. The things that they are asking for, many of those things are like crazy. So it’s just disgraceful.”

2. Ben Carson

Oddly, Carson—a Yale alum—began his thoughts on the University of Missouri situation on a sort of reasonable-sounding note, though it does suggest a false equivalence between students and the administration. Then things went really sideways, as you might expect.

“It’s part of the problem we have going on in our country right now,” Carson said on The Kelly File. “We have people who get in their respective corners and demonize each other, but there’s no conversation. And of course, if you ask people to put on the record what their gripes are and what their solutions are, then perhaps they can see that they’re not so far apart and they can come up with some reasonable solutions.”

“But this is just raw emotion. And people being manipulated, I think, in many cases by outside forces who wish to cause disturbances.”

That last part sounds a lot like when, in footage from the Civil Rights Movement, you hear white Southerners talking about how everything was fine until “outside agitators” starting coming in and getting the Negroes all riled up. Carson went on to talk about how we should be all be frightened, because anarchy, and also the Constitution and also America.

“Well, we need to recognize that this is a very dangerous trend,” Carson said. “When we get to a point where a majority can say, ‘I don’t like what you’re doing, that’s offensive, and therefore I have a right to be violent toward you or deprive you of rights, because I don’t like what you’re doing,’ that really goes against the grain of our constitutional rights.”

Not sure if Ben Carson knows that the only violence, or threats of violence, during the Yale and Missouri protests have come from two white men who, via social media, said they planned to shoot black protesters. In any case, Carson continued on in the same vein.

“We’re being a little too tolerant, you might say. Accepting infantile behavior….To say that I have a right to violate your civil rights because you’re offending me is un-American. It is unconstitutional. And the officials at these places must recognize that and have the moral courage to stand up to it. Because if they don’t, it will grow, it will exacerbate the situation, and we will move much further toward anarchy than anybody can imagine and much more quickly.”