Farah Sosa, a cultural photographer from Guatemala encouraging consumers to sign up for Covered Californa before deadline during a rally on Olvera Street in downtown Los Angeles. The band Mariachi Divas joined Covered California officials at a lunchtime rally Thursday, February 12, 2015 to encourage Los Angeles County residents to enroll for health coverage since the deadline to enroll is Feb. 15. The event was emceed by international music star and humanitarian activist, Rocky Dawuni. (Photo by Walt Mancini/Pasadena Star-News)

Calls to meet Sunday’s deadline to enroll for health care insurance under the Affordable Care Act got louder Thursday as Covered California officials held a rally near downtown L.A.’s Olvera Street.

It was a final push into the psyche of the uninsured that health coverage brings peace of mind.

After a performance by the Grammy Award-winning Mariachi Divas, Peter Lee, executive director for Covered California, called Sunday’s deadline the finish line of the second year of enrollment into health plans designed to help Americans meet the provisions of the Affordable Care Act.

Those who begin the sign-up process on Sunday will have until Feb. 20 to finish, he added.

“Individuals who try to enroll online on the 16th will not be able to sign up online unless they have started and get help from one of the thousands of enrollers statewide,” Lee said.

This year’s enrollment goal was to sign up 500,000 qualified Californians for health care. So far, 354,000 have selected a plan, but Lee said he wasn’t discouraged. While all the additional outreach into the Latino, African-American and Asian communities appeared to be working, Lee agreed the tax penalties for those who choose to remain uninsured will be a big incentive. “Tax season is now about health care,” he said. “It matters to your pocket. This time, instead of paying for health care, you’ll be writing a check to the IRS.”

But Lee also said that Covered California board members will be looking into providing a special enrollment period for those who didn’t know there was a penalty.

The penalty for remaining uninsured in 2014 is $95 per adult and $47.50 per child, with a family maximum of $285, or 1 percent of the annual household income, whichever is greater.

Meanwhile, of the 1.2 million Californians who enrolled in a health plan through Covered California, the state’s health insurance market exchange, 800,000 received federal subsidies to help them pay for their coverage. Covered California officials estimated that federal money paid out an average of $5,200 per household per year, or about $436 per month.

But some people may have to pay some of those subsidies back. Those who received the 1095-A forms to file federal tax returns this year will learn if what they received was appropriate.

Farah Sosa, a Los Angeles resident who spoke at the rally on behalf of Covered California, said having health coverage for the first time last year helped her avoid paying what would have likely been a hefty hospital bill after she was admitted to the emergency department with chest pains.

The 35-year-old woman who works as a freelance photographer in the Los Angeles music scene said if she owes the feds money for subsidies she received, it would likely be cheaper than a hospital bill.

Advertisement

“Even if I owe taxes, it’s worth it,” she said. “I used my health plan.”

Covered California representatives and certified enrollment agents will be available to help today from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. at the Panorama Mall, 8401 Van Nuys Blvd., Panorama City.

Those who would like to enroll must bring the following:

• Proof of current income and employer information on all family members who wish to apply (tax return, W-2, recent pay stubs, etc.).

• Social Security numbers for U.S. citizens, or document information for immigrants with satisfactory status. Families that include undocumented immigrants can apply. Parents can apply for their child even if a parent isn’t eligible for coverage.

• Federal tax information.

• Date of birth for each family member in the household.

Other enrollment events can be found at CoveredCA.com. Go to “Find Local Help.”