Heidi Kloser of Vail tweeted her news late Monday about “the best phone call ever.”

“I am going to Sochi!” wrote the 21-year-old bump skier, who will join defending Olympic champion Hannah Kearney on the U.S. Olympic freestyle team.

With teams nominated, Tuesday morning saw U.S Freeskiing and U.S. Snowboarding’s Olympic coaches making the hard calls to enlist athletes who maybe didn’t make the cut mathematically, but have strong shots at bringing home Olympic medals. Both U.S. Freeskiing and U.S. Snowboarding stacked rosters late Monday with four men and women on each of the halfpipe and slopestyle teams.

Torin Yater-Wallace of Aspen got that call. The 18-year-old skier who suffered a collapsed lung during early December training and was unable to compete in the five Olympic qualifying finals since, was nominated to U.S. Freeskiing’s first-ever Olympic halfpipe team. Yater-Wallace, who won the Olympic test event in Sochi last season, joins Nevada’s David Wise, Crested Butte’s Aaron Blunck and Boulder’s Lyman Currier on the Colorado-deep pipe team.

Annalisa Drew, 20, of New Hampshire, also got the nod to compete in the ski halfpipe, joining Maddie Bowman, Brita Signourney and Angeli VanLaanen, who will ski in the Olympics after a lengthy battle with Lyme disease.

Park City, Utah’s Joss Christensen was tapped for the ski slopestyle team, joining Colorado skiers Bobby Brown and Gus Kenworthy as well as Indiana champion Nick Goepper.

Darkhorse 16-year-old Julia Krass of New Hampshire earned a spot on the women’s ski slopestyle team after a win at the final qualifying events in Park City last week. She joins Breckenridge’s Keri Herman, Vermont’s Devin Logan and Montana 15-year-old slopestyle phenom Maggie Voisin, who will likely be the youngest competitor in Sochi.

“Each of the freeskiing athletes added to our nominations brings the potential for success in Sochi,” said Jeremy Forster, the director of freeskiing and snowboarding in a statement released Tuesday. “They each distinguished themselves during the Grand Prix qualifying series with some amazing performances, all the way through the last qualifying events this past weekend.”

U.S. Snowboarding had fewer discretionary positions open for the Olympic team. The men’s and women’s halfpipe team was filled following a three-event qualifying push at Mammoth Mountain last week.

Defending Olympic halfpipe champion Shaun White joins Greg Bretz, Danny Davis and Steamboat Springs’ rookie Taylor Gold on the Sochi squad. Kelly Clark, the winningest snowboarder ever hopes to extend her untouchable gold-medal streak at Sochi, leading Olympic veteran Hannah Teter and newcomers Kaitlyn Farrington and 17-year-old Steamboat Springs native Arielle Gold.

White joins Sage Kotsenburg and Chas Guldemond on the first-ever U.S. Olympic snowboard slopestyle team. Although U.S. Snowboarding has yet to make a formal announcement, Alaska’s Ryan Stassel, who won one of three contests at Mammoth, announced on his Facebook page late Monday that he had received that coveted call to join the U.S. Olympic slopestyle team.

California’s Jamie Anderson, who dominates slopestyle, easily locked her Sochi position at Mammoth. She leads 16-year-old Vermont rookie Ty Walker, who mathematically secured her Sochi spot at Mammoth. While not formally announced, both Idaho’s Jessika Jenson and California’s Karly Shorr announced on their Facebook and Twitter pages late Monday that they would be joining U.S. Snowboarding’s Olympic slopestyle team.

California ski cross racer John Teller – who notched his third World Cup victory at France’s Val Thorens ski area last week, the only World Cup ski cross wins ever by an American – will compete in the second-ever ski cross Olympic contest in Sochi. (Teller will likely be the only American competing in Sochi’s ski cross.)