Several months ago I wrote a column about feathers that got readers squawking. I wrote about how they were causing a buzz in in fashion and décor circles. Bird lovers cried “Fowl!”

And rightly so.

Feathers are beautiful. When they are rendered as a motif in, say, wallpaper, fabric or tableware, they can be exquisite. But when actual feathers from endangered flocks are used in home décor, that is a bird of different color, I found out. That use, my fine-feathered friends, can be at the peril of already threatened birds.

Don’t do it.

When I wrote that column last fall, I had not thought that through. But readers raised their concerns and, as a result, my consciousness.

My consciousness was raised even more last week when I had an eye-opening discussion with Craig Hoover, chief of wildlife trade and conservation for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, a federal agency that protects nature. Hoover told me about the impact certain home décor choices have on our planet and its wildlife.

Ladies and gentlemen: After you read the rest of this column, you will not be the same. I’m not.

After talking to Hoover, I felt like a dirt clod in the spring meadow of life. I haven’t been turned, overnight, into an off-the-grid, tree-hugging, PETA-activist vegan with a Greenpeace sticker on her solar-powered Smart car. But I do care about the future of this spinning sphere, upon which we all depend entirely.

Hoover shared his mission, which is simply to prevent consumers from unwittingly buying home furnishings that harm the planet’s wild spaces and inhabitants. For this cause, he needs noisemakers like me to get the word out.

“Most people aren’t thinking about where an item comes from and what impact their purchasing decision has on animal and plant life around the world,” said Hoover.

“I want to get them to make the connection between the beautiful product in the store and the impact that removing it from the wild has on plants or animals,” he says.

Ivory

“As in, if consumers would stop buying ivory, hunters wouldn’t stop killing elephants just for their tusks,” I say.

“Anything that creates a demand for products made from endangered species is bad news for that species,” he says.

Hoover shared some other products used in home décor that he wants you to think about before you buy.

Often beautifully carved into ornate balls or figures, ivory comes at a steep price to wildlife, usually to elephants that are killed solely for their tusks. Some ivory also comes from walrus tusks and hippo teeth, said Hoover. Unfortunately, demand for ivory has risen sharply. Last year, 35,000 African elephants were killed for their tusks. Over the last decade, we’ve lost more than 60 percent of our forest elephants. Asian elephants are now endangered and African elephants are threatened, he said.

Coral

In home décor, showy pieces of coral are often on display, but again, at a cost to the planet. Hundreds of thousands of species of fish rely on coral reefs for food and shelter, said Hoover. But, because of the market for coral, the planet’s reefs are shrinking. “Coral grows very slowly,” said Hoover. “A 12-inch piece of branch coral, one of the fastest-growing types, grows only an inch a year, so it would take 12 years to replace itself.”

Rhino horn

Poachers are killing the equivalent of a rhino every 12 hours in South Africa alone just for the animal’s horn. With the texture of toenails, rhino horn is mostly sold for unproven medicinal purposes, but some fashion the horns into drinking cups, which sell for extraordinarily high prices.

Mahogany

Supplies of mahogany and Brazilian rosewood are not in good shape and are highly regulated, said Hoover, who wants consumers to know the status of the wood in the furnishings before they purchase. Stick with woods like oak and pine that are sustainably produced.

Tortoise shell

Sea turtles are endangered because their shells are so highly regarded. Fake tortoise-accessories looks just as fabulous. But buying items fashioned from real tortoise contributes to reptiles’ demise.

Orchids

Buying these graceful flowering plants could threaten our already at-risk rain forests.That’s where many orchids come from, said Hoover, who encourages buyers to ask where the plants came from before buying. If they were grown in a nursery, fine. But avoid imported ones.

Feathers

As I learned the hard way, decades ago women’s hats were adorned with exotic feathers, creating a run on rare birds and driving many toward extinction. So ask where feathers comes from: If they’re from wild birds, that’s not OK.

Marni Jameson is the author of “House of Havoc” and “The House Always Wins.” marnijameson.com.