Metro Detroit cancer centers bulk up Karmanos, others add facilities, technology, specialists

The decision by the Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute in the fall of 2013 to join McLaren Health Care Corp. was a launching point to build a statewide presence.



Expansion-minded McLaren, with its 10 hospitals, provided Detroit-based Karmanos what it needed: Greater access to capital, lower supply and equipment costs through economies of scale, and access to more patients for advanced cancer treatment and clinical trials.



The move comes as other health care organizations are concentrating on strengthening their own oncology provider networks, adding facilities and technologies such as genetic testing and hiring specialists when needed, executives said.



Those moves come in part because of incentives under the Affordable Care Act to keep as many patients as possible in a given network.



Leading oncology competitors to McLaren in Southeast Michigan include the University of Michigan Health System, St. John Providence Health System, Henry Ford Health System and Beaumont Health.



Still to be resolved in the McLaren-Karmanos merger is ongoing litigation between the two entities and the Detroit Medical Center over whether McLaren can market Karmanos in Oakland and Wayne counties. (See story.)

Karmanos growth plans

In the 15 months since the merger took place — using $78 million pledged by McLaren as part of the acquisition — Karmanos has been hiring cancer researchers, renovating operations and completing plans on inpatient and outpatient expansions, said Gerold Bepler, M.D., CEO of the National Cancer Institute-accredited institute.



At least $20 million will be used for research to hire scientists and their teams, Bepler said. So far, Karmanos has hired four scientists and plans to hire 16 more, along with several dozen senior or midlevel investigators and technicians.



During the past year, Karmanos also more than doubled the number of patients enrolled in clinical trials, to 211 during 2014 from 90 in 2013.



Karmanos plans to add three clinical trials this year to 19 underway to capitalize on the greater patient access. In addition, the institute supports more than 700 cancer research programs with Wayne State University.



Bepler said Karmanos also has upgraded equipment and renovated its infusion center and inpatient clinics.



"At the end of the year, we plan to look at our ambulatory network" in Southeast Michigan, he said. Karmanos has two outpatient centers in Farmington Hills and a joint venture in Monroe.



To provide uniformity, Bepler said, Karmanos has been certifying each McLaren hospital cancer center in Karmanos' treatment protocols, quality-of-care index and more than 350 common care plans. McLaren also is developing a common electronic health record for oncology, working with Elekta Ltd. and its software called Mosaiq.





Influx of outpatient care

As technology and screening improve, cancer care is moving more into the outpatient arena, said Theodore Lawrence, M.D., director of the University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center.



UM, which operates more than 40 outpatient centers, recently opened satellites with cancer services in Brighton and Northville to expand its reach closer to Detroit as well as west of Ann Arbor, Lawrence said.



"The strategy of seeing more inpatients in Ann Arbor is not going to happen," he said.



For example, UM outpatient visits have increased at an average 3 percent clip annually in the past decade and totaled 102,300 in 2014. In 2000, that number was 56,800.



As part of its expansion, UM has created a statewide radiation oncology network with affiliations with MidMichigan Health in Midland and Traverse City-based Munson Medical Center to collaborate on all cancer programs.



"We have been trying harder to form more partnerships statewide for at least the last five years," said Lawrence, a radiation oncologist who took over the cancer center this year. "I do want to accelerate this, anything we can do with cancer consistent with the health system's overall strategy."



At MidMichigan, for example, "We attend tumor boards with them, conduct genetic counseling, do video conferences and collaborate on quality initiatives," Lawrence said. "A small fraction of their patients come here for consultation, and we do their bone marrow or liver transplants."



The UM network also includes community affiliations with seven hospitals to co-manage radiation oncology programs. UM specialists coordinate care and, in some cases, refer to the cancer center, he said.



The hospitals are Allegiance Health, Jackson; Alpena Cancer Center; McLaren Greater Lansing; Metro Health Village, Wyoming; Providence Assarian Cancer Center, Novi; Providence Cancer Center, Southfield; and VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System.

Beaumont's cancer plan

David Wood, M.D., Beaumont's chief medical officer, said Karmanos will help improve McLaren's cancer services and increase care coordination within the system.





St. John's cancer plans

Bob Hoban, St. John Providence's senior vice president of strategy and centers of excellence, said that historically, St. John hasn't competed with Karmanos.



"We compete a little bit with McLaren" in Mt. Clemens, Hoban said. "So far, we haven't seen any strong moves by Macomb in the cancer area."



Last year, St. John's six cancer centers and nine infusion centers had 4,000 new cancer cases generating $160 million in net revenue, an amount that has been increasing over the past several years, Hoban said.



St. John's outpatient cases grew 10 percent last year, with inpatient behind at a 3 percent growth rate, he said.



To enhance cancer screening, another new emphasis for St. John is genetic therapy. The health system has hired two geneticists and a genetic counselor. It also recently began a molecular pathology program to provide laboratory support to identify specific mutations in cancer tumors.



"This is a major growth area," Hoban said.



Hoban also said the St. John system is standardizing protocols through the St. John Providence Oncology Network to treat patients in consistent ways using best clinical practices and multidisciplinary teams.



One of St. John Providence's new areas of emphasis in cancer care has been developing the program under contract at Crittenton Hospital Medical Center. Last year, St. John took over Crittenton's program.



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325. Twitter: @jaybgreene

Related Links