The Eye

'Shahs Of Sunset' Season 3: Asifa And Bobby May Marry On The Show, PLUS Did Reza Call Off His Wedding To Adam?

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images/Angela Weiss) Is "Shahs of Sunset" star Asifa Mirza planning to get married on the show?

"Shahs of Sunset" has seen its fair share of weddings lately. With that in mind, it's time to add another couple to the list as two more cast members of the reality show have plans to tie the knot. Asifa Mirza and Bobby Panahi are set to exchange vows for a second time.



While this might not be the first time Mirza and Panahi will be husband and wife, Mirza is still confident about giving their relationship a second chance. "Don't act like a wife until you're a wife," she told RyanSeacrest.com.



Speaking of Mirza, the reality star also revealed that she is planning on venturing into the world of publishing. Mirza is planning on taking her past experiences and writing a book about relationship advice.



The new wedding announcement come son the heels of Mike and Jessica's recent marriage. The two married despite rumors swirling around Mike that he had made some advancements on a fellow cast member, Golnesa "G.G." Gharachedaghi, during a trip to Turkey last season.



Additionally, Reza and Adam are busy planning their own marriage ceremony. With all the nuptials going around on the show, tensions are starting to mount between several cast members.



In fact, Reza and Mike are having a little beef after Reza decided to take back the wedding invitation he was planning on sending Mike. His actions caused some major issues with both Mike and Jessica.



On the show it seems that Reza and Adam are heading to the alter soon, but as we previously reported, it was Mike and Jessica who made it down the aisle just last month. So is the editing off, or does something happen to postpone Reza's nuptials?



Tell us! Would you take relationship advice from Asifa? Why did Mike and Jessica get married before Reza and Adam? Let us know what you think in the comments below.



Watch all the drama unfold as "Shahs of Sunset" airs Monday nights on Bravo.







SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.