Margaret Stock’s bid for a seat in the United States Senate is less than a month old, but she understands the unique situation she is in, as well as the strange moment in American politics that serves as the backdrop for her candidacy.

She’s challenging Alaska’s senior senator, Lisa Murkowski (R-Alaska), who won a historic write-in campaign in 2010. It was the first time in over 50 years (and just the second time in the republic) that such a write-in candidate won a seat in the U.S. Senate — the only other was Strom Thurmond’s South Carolina victory in 1954.

Murkowski prevailed thanks to a broad coalition of support. Anti-establishment and Tea Party favorite Joe Miller was the Republican Party nominee. On the left, Scott McAdams ran atop the Democratic Party ticket. Murkowski campaigned as a moderate Republican, picking up support from independents, moderate Democrats, and establishment Republicans.

It worked. About 10,000 votes ultimately separated Murkowski and Miller, with McAdams a distant third.

Six years later, Murkowski is the 13th most senior member in the Senate Republican majority and serves as chair of the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. But she is also running in a presidential election year that thus far has overwhelmingly favored anti-establishment, far-right candidates, like business mogul Donald Trump and Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas).

Governor John Kasich (R-Ohio), the most ideologically similar candidate to Murkowski — currently running a campaign reminiscent of President George W. Bush’s “compassionate conservatism” in 2000 — has managed to obtain just six percent of primary delegates. He’s said if he can’t secure his home state of Ohio, he’ll call it a day.

Alaska’s GOP caucus voters almost neatly divided themselves between Cruz and Trump, with Kasich earning only 892 (about 4 percent) of over 21,000 ballots cast. That could once again leave Murkowski susceptible. If a GOP primary candidate felt particularly inspired to launch a Miller-esque bid, this is a good year to do it.

But Stock is taking a much different tack. A lifelong Republican up until a few weeks ago, the 28-year U.S. Army reservist, Ivy League grad, and MacArthur “Genius” Award recipient (and, full disclosure, my former Constitutional Law professor at the University of Alaska Anchorage) Stock has decided to run as an independent. She says she felt compelled to jump into the race because Murkowski hasn’t been the strong senator that Alaskans deserve.

The beef with Murkowski

“The big thing I think Alaskans don’t like about Sen. Murkowski is she doesn’t hold her ground on anything, you know?” she told me Sunday afternoon at Steam Dot in Anchorage. “She takes a position in order to get elected. She did that when she was running last time. And then as soon as the pressure comes from the national party she flips.”

“The majority of Alaskans have rejected the parties, and so it doesn’t make any sense for our senator to kowtow to the National Republican Party,” she continued, noting that 54 percent of voters in the state are independent. “What’s the point? It’s not helping our state. And on a whole range of issues she’s been doing things that help the national party and help the Lower 48 — but they don’t help Alaskans.”

Climate change was one example, she said. Alaska is experiencing climate change at a more accelerated pace than much of the Lower 48. Villages like Kivalina, Newtok, Koyukuk, and Shishmaref will have to be relocated due to rising water levels and coastal erosion. Murkowski’s ascension to Chair of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee gave her ample power to act on Alaska’s behalf. Stock says she has failed to do so.

“She talks a lot, but doesn’t do anything,” Stock said. “She’s the chair of the Energy Committee. She’s got a great deal of power which she should be using to mitigate climate change effects in Alaska and she’s not doing that. In fact, she’s doing things that are going to make it worse up here.”

Murkowski, for instance, acknowledged climate change shortly after the 2014 election that put the GOP in the driver’s seat.

“I come from a state where we see a warming. We’re seeing it with increased water temperatures; we’re seeing it with ice that is thinner; we’re seeing it with migratory patterns that are changing,” Murkowski was quoted by The Hill on election night. But she then said that the causes were unclear, referencing a volcano in Iceland. “The emissions that are being put in the air by that volcano are a thousand years’ worth of emissions that would come from all of the vehicles, all of the manufacturing in Europe.”

It was a comment Princeton professor and climate scientist Michael Oppenheimer called “simply untrue.”

“We’re going to need federal money to mitigate the effects of climate change. We’re not going to be turning it away. That makes no sense. Resiliency is absolutely critical,” Stock, who has served on the board of Prince William Sound Science Center, countered. “The key thing there is you have to have the money to make these communities resilient or they disappear.”

She criticized the president’s summer visit to Alaska as well, saying that his remarks on climate change were good speeches, but bore little in terms of specific policy.

And there is no shortage of other issues that concern her. In June, Murkowski voted against a defense bill amendment that would have sped up the process of bringing a new Coast Guard icebreaker to Alaska. She also expressed concern over Murkowski’s voting record on opioid addiction funding and women’s health.

Focus on veterans’ issues

One area Margaret Stock is very interested in is veterans’ affairs. The retired lieutenant colonel and former professor at West Point says that she has a lot of support from veterans, and she would work to serve on the Veterans Affairs Committee. Prior to being unseated in 2014, Sen. Mark Begich (D-Alaska) held a seat on the committee.

Particularly, Stock wants to work to improve access to health care through the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.

“I have a lot of clients and people I’ve recruited for the military who are working in the Veterans Administration. People are frustrated with the bureaucracy and how the delivery of health care is happening,” she said. “There’s obviously improvements that can be made, and it takes focus. And one of the things you can do as a senator, you can ask for hearings and you can push the bureaucracy to do things the right way, and of course try to get them funding so they can do things the right way.”

GOP candidates in the presidential election have increasingly suggested elements of the V.A. should be privatized. But Stock disagrees, pointing to what she calls flaws in the Obama Administration’s signature legislation, the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

“If we try to mirror the civilian health care system in the V.A. — do we really want the breakdown that we’ve had with the Affordable Care Act?” she replied.

The last thing we want to do is take health care away from veterans and then create massive new bureaucracies and paperwork. Talking to veterans, they think there’s problems at the V.A. but it’s working better than the civilian health care sector is working right now. So, the trick is to take the good things that work and preserve them and then improve the bad, not just throw the baby out with the bathwater.

In regards to the ACA, Stock says she’s seen issues as a small business owner with employees purchasing health insurance through the exchange. When the cost of premiums surpassed the penalty for not having insurance, it no longer made economic sense for many people to buy in, she said. But Stock also isn’t okay with scrapping the ACA entirely.

“The interesting thing about the act is that it was originally a Republican idea. It was supposed to be a market-based solution to the health care crisis. And because people are trying to undercut it, it’s made things worse,” she said, emphasizing the problems with its initial implementation. “But we’re not going to solve a problem just by repealing the Affordable Care Act with nothing to replace it. That’s not a solution.”

Hyperpartisanship in the U.S. Senate and the Trump phenomenon

The office Margaret Stock is running for has, in recent years, been plagued by hyperpartisanship counterintuitive to compromise. As a result, the vast majority of issues facing the American people have been left unaddressed. I asked her how she viewed the political brinksmanship while wearing her cap as a former professor with the West Point Department of Law, Department of Social Sciences, and as a constitutional law professor at UAA.

“It’s destructive,” she replied flatly. “The whole point of the U.S. Constitution was to force people to compromise with each other. That’s the way it’s set up structurally. And what’s happened is Congress has gotten so dysfunctional that they’ve essentially ceded all their power to the executive branch, and then they attack the executive branch but they don’t do anything to counteract that power.”

When I broached the topic of Donald Trump, she said that an electorate admiring a “strongman” candidate was problematic in the American political tradition.

That’s not American democracy. People should admire it when Congress can hold its own, and the executive branch holds its own, and the judiciary holds its own. There’s a balancing act there. If one branch gets too strong and we admire that, we’re going to end up with an imperial, authoritarian presidency. That’s not American democracy. So, we need to get back to that center, and the polarization prevents the center from functioning.

Still, Stock is optimistic. She says that so far she’s been having a great time running and can’t wait to hit the campaign trail; plans are in the works to head to places like Cordova, Barrow, Dillingham, Juneau, Sitka, and Ketchikan.

“I wouldn’t be running if I didn’t have hope,” Stock said with a smile. “If we all just sit back and let other people that haven’t been effective continue to mosey along, we’re not going to fix the system. And that’s why I’m running.”

Like this: Like Loading...