The gavel that Florida House Speaker Steve Crisafulli slammed down Tuesday to bring an abrupt halt to the 2015 legislative session is made from the wood of orange trees planted by his great-grandfather and grandfather in the 1930s and 1940s.

Those orange trees allowed the Crisafullis of Merritt Island — Italian immigrants who first stopped in Ohio — to become an American success story.

Now Steve Crisafulli, Republican leader, can't abide the prospect of taking federal money to expand Medicaid and help 850,000 poor Floridians get health care.

He hates Obamacare so much, he blew up his first session as House Speaker over it.

But his family doesn't seem to have qualms about taking federal money to help their agricultural business. An online database culled from federal records by a nonprofit group shows Bud Crisafulli, the Speaker's father and business partner, has taken $132,466 in federal farm subsidies over the past two decades.

Why is it OK for a thriving family to take federal money for agriculture, but not OK for struggling families to get federal money for health care?

I e-mailed this question to Crisafulli through his communications director Wednesday, and also asked about the accuracy of the database figures, but didn't hear back.

Crisafulli, 43, lists his occupations as real-estate broker and "agribusinessman." Since 1999, state records list him as a vice-president of Crisafulli Enterprises, Inc., a family entity headed by his father that develops land and has agricultural holdings. In 2002, father and son launched Crisafulli Builders, Inc., a construction firm, state records show.

Bud Crisafulli has received $132,466 in farm subsidies since 1995 — $111,318 of that came after his son began working with him, according to a database culled from U.S. Department of Agriculture records by the Environmental Working Group, a Washington, D.C. outfit that's critical of some subsidy programs. I sent Bud Crisafulli an email and left a message at his office, but could not reach him.

According to the database breakdown of the total, Bud Crisafulli has received $56,966 in disaster relief money for livestock, citrus trees and "non-insured assistance." He also received $75,500 from an environmental incentive program to improve conservation practices for soil, water and land.

Did I mention the Crisafulli family sold a huge chunk of land to the U.S. government in the 1950s, according to Space Coast Living magazine, land which became the Kennedy Space Center?

In a Tampa Bay Times op-ed piece this week, Crisafulli wrote that he opposes Medicaid expansion because it's a flawed, inefficient program and "offers no incentive for personal responsibility for those who are able to provide for themselves."

Because of his strident opposition, Crisafulli pulled the plug on the regular session three days early. On Wednesday, Senate president Andy Gardiner called Crisafulli's actions "unconstitutional and unprecedented" and said the matter could go to court.

If this impasse isn't resolved and a budget isn't approved by July 1, a state government shutdown looms.

We're used to seeing partisan gridlock and meltdowns from Congress. But this is stupefying in Tallahassee, where Republicans control everything. There is often late-session brinkmanship between Florida's two chambers, but usually the grown-ups take control and arrive at the necessary compromise.

This year, it's hard to say if there are any grown-ups.

mmayo@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4508.