Monterey >> This isn’t Natalie’s first time in recovery. It isn’t even her first time at Genesis House, a residential drug treatment facility in Seaside run by Community Human Services.

She graduated from the Genesis House in early 2012 and continued to live drug-free for seven months at a county-backed sober living environment. But once she left the program, she didn’t attend the weekly Genesis House grad meetings or stay connected with the staff.

“That wasn’t good,” said Natalie, which is not her real name. “Because I relapsed.”

Natalie began using heroine and methamphetamine again. Unable to find employment, she lost custody of her 11-year-old child and ended up in jail for three months. She left jail clean and determined to stay that way.

She’s back at Genesis, this time with a three-month-old baby. And when she leaves, she plans to sign up for something she didn’t have before: Community Human Services’ new outpatient treatment facilities, set to open in Salinas and Monterey in January 2015.

Medi-Cal changes brought on by the Affordable Care Act expanded health care access to thousands of Californians, bringing with it coverage for substance abuse treatment. In Monterey County, that led to 40,000 new enrollees in the program, many of them low-income.

The outpatient centers, one on Garden Road in Monterey and the other in Salinas, will serve up to 100 patients each. They will offer individual and group therapy during daytime and evening hours and utilize many of the therapy techniques used in CHS’s other drug-therapy programs.

Most importantly, CHS is applying to be a Medi-Cal provider so that the services will be available those to who are in the most need of treatment.

“Now more than ever before, there needs to be more programs for those patients who want services,” said Senior Programming Director Marta Sullivan, who will be overseeing the centers.

In Salinas, the new center will double the number of spots for people seeking treatment, while the Garden Road location will be the first outpatient treatment facility for Medi-Cal patients in Monterey. A treatment facility at Community Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula does not take Medi-Cal patients.

The need for drug treatment in Monterey is huge, according to Genesis House Program Director Clive Stewart. That facility has 36 inpatient beds, with a wait time of three to eight weeks.

“You could do five outpatient centers and it wouldn’t clear the number of people who need it,” Stewart said.

Advertisement

Stewart estimates there are only about 180 inpatient beds in all of Monterey County. Outpatient centers don’t need beds, so counselors can schedule appointments with patients right away while they wait for a spot to open up.

In some cases, outpatient treatment itself might be enough, allowing patients to hold onto jobs and keep their families together, Stewart said.

Stewart also sees a role for outpatient therapy after patients leave the treatment facility. Upon entering Genesis, patients are assessed and get a treatment plan with goals, the main one is getting and staying clean. When they graduate and begin outpatient treatment, this process will be repeated.

“Now that they’re sober, the goals have changed.” said Stewart.

Natalie, two months into her stay at Genesis House and drug-free for nine months, is looking to that stage of her life. She’s taking parenting classes and the staff is helping her reconnect with her older child. She plans to work closely with CHS’s counselors in the outpatient clinic.

“My goal is just to have my family whole, to be fully present in their lives.” she said.

Kim Smuga-Otto can be reached at 831-726-4378.