STAMFORD — This Jones County town of 3,040 isn’t exactly the seat of power in U.S. House District 19.

But on Tuesday, the community two hours east of Lubbock played host to the first open forum featuring eight of the nine candidates running for the open congressional seat in 2016. They gathered in the Roundup Hall of the Texas Cowboy Reunion to field questions in an event hosted by the Jones County Republican Party ahead of the March 1 primary.

Although the forum-style event provided ample time for each candidate to comment, none of the eight seized the opportunity to separate themselves from the pack on the issues presented to them by Jones County Republican Chairman John Harrison in front of about 60 people Tuesday morning.

Each candidate said they would support repealing the Affordable Care Act and said health care should be returned to the private sector. When prompted for a stance on refugees and immigration, again all the candidates agreed they would vote to prohibit refugees from Syria while terrorism is still a threat. All eight of them also said they understood the focus on agriculture that’s all but required for the seat. Although the candidates agreed on the issues, details of how they would accomplish their goals, if elected, were sparse.

The candidates running to replace U.S. Rep. Randy Neugebauer, R-Lubbock, who has held the seat since 2003, are former Texas Tech Vice Chancellor Jodey Arrington, farmer Jason Corley, Platinum Bank head Greg Garrett, veterinarian John Key, retired surgeon Donald May, farmer Don Parrish, Lubbock Mayor Glen Robertson, retired U.S. Air Force Col. Michael Bob Starr, and a director of nursing in Smyer, DeRenda Warren. They are all running as Republicans.

“You’ve got options up here,” said state Sen. Charles Perry, the Lubbock Republican who was a guest speaker. “People that decided to put themselves out, put their families out to become the next congressional representative of this district. It takes a lot, more than I think people appreciate and understand.”

May was the only candidate not in attendance, but Ysidro Gutierrez of his campaign was on the panel to speak on his behalf. Neugebauer announced this fall he will not seek re-election in 2016.

Agriculture

Question: How will you make a difference for agriculture, be it with the farm bill, regulation from the environmental protection agency or policy on foreign trade?

Key said it’s not as easy as simply passing a bill, but more so working with the staff at the United States Department of Agriculture and the U.S. Department of Commerce to make sure the farmers’ interests are being met and to prevent interference from the EPA and the Bureau of Land Management.

Many of the other candidates also made mention of limiting the presence of the EPA and the Bureau of Land Management, but also making sure there’s a fair share of subsidies available for cotton farmers.

“I totally support Congressman Mike Conaway out in the Odessa area at trying to get our cotton seed classified as a Title 1 oil seed,” Warren said of the Midland Republican who serves as chairman of the House Agriculture Committee. “This will make it eligible for our farmers to have agricultural risk coverage and price-loss coverage.”

“Dr. May believes that the food stamps program should be separated; he will work on that as your representative, from the farm bill,” said Gutierrez speaking on May’s behalf. “And Dr. May believes that agriculture is a national defense issue, he believes that food and fiber is one of the facets of national defense that will keep our nation strong.”

Refugees

Question: What is your stance on allowing Syrian refugees into the country?

Robertson suggested that with political, economic and trade pressure, the United States should force countries like Saudi Arabia to step up and take care of the refugees.

“They’ve got the resources, they’ve got the ability, they’re in the region,” he said. “It’s ludicrous for us to allow refugees that we cannot properly vet, to come to the United States.”

Starr agreed that refugees should not be allowed in the country until the threat of terrorism is over, but said in office he’d be more focused on creating a safe place to live in Syria, so refugees won’t be an issue.

“I don’t understand why we’re not spending more time talking about what we ought to be talking about, and that’s creating a safe place for Syrian refugees inside of Syria,” Starr said. “We can do that with American policy that focuses on it.”

Immigration

Question: And what about the immigration issue?

All candidates stressed the need for more border security.

Arrington said border security is not an issue of ‘we don’t know what to do,’ but rather an issue of ‘not having the political courage.’

“We have the tools, we have the technology and we need to deploy all of it — including our military — to stop the inflow of people,” Arrington said.

Corley was the only candidate to recommend the construction of a wall.

“Build a fence already. For the love of God, build a fence,” he said, adding the potential to stop drug traffic would be beneficial for both the U.S. and Mexico and it would stop the exploitation of labor.

Affordable Care Act

“If it exists in the Yellow Pages, the government should not be involved in it,” said Parrish, “and last time I checked, there’s plenty of doctors and hospitals. We’ve got to figure out where government stops, and this is definitely it.”

This opinion was echoed by all of the candidates.

As the owner of a bank, Garrett talked about the struggle he’s having making sure he’s able to provide health insurance for his employees.

“We’ve got to make sure that we don’t have an additional tax, which is what this is,” he said. “I’ll work to replace it, repeal it and call it unconstitutional.”

matt.dotray@lubbockonline.com

• 766-8744

Follow Matt on Twitter

@mdotrayAJ