Doctor who invented the pill says society will change by 2050.

The professor and chemist who invented the birth control pill has now claimed that advances in IVF will render the pill obsolete allowing people to plan pregnancies and engage in sex for recreational purposes only.

In the future, according to one dire prediction, babies will come from test tubes and sex will be purely for recreation. Highlights By Catholic Online (NEWS CONSORTIUM) Catholic Online (www.catholic.org) 11/11/2014 (1 year ago) Published in Health Keywords: Djerassi, IVF, pregnancy, brave new world, pill, moral

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - Prof. Carl Djerassi, the Austrian-American chemist who invented the birth control pill has made a prediction. According to him, IVF will render the pill obsolete and sex will just be for fun as women plan their pregnancies through IVF.



The notion conjures images of a world not unlike that created by Aldous Huxley in the novel, Brave New World. In Brave New World, children are all created via IVF, and rather than being born, they are grown in test tubes and containers on an assembly line. The people of this dystopian society worship Henry Ford and follow no moral guidelines. They spend their days engaged in meaningless pursuits which include casual sex and drug use. When they become old or suffer, they are simply euthanized.



A moral society is founded on God. Let us share the Word of God with all and pray for change.



Brave New World is a cautionary tale, warning what happens to a society that embraces hedonism in place of genuine moral values. Hedonism is the promise of the pill and IVF, allowing people to engage in sexual promiscuity and to plan pregnancies with clockwork precision. It is the ultimate Tower of Babel, the alleged triumph of man over God.



Dr. Djerassi also claims the use of IVF will end abortions because all pregnancies could now be planned. He also claimed that children could be healthier since eggs and sperm could be frozen at a younger age then used later when the mother is ready.



Like Brave New World, it sounds appealing at first, but behind the promising facade are many horrors.



IVF relies on the fertilization of multiple eggs at once. Since it is a clinical fact that life begins at conception, we will no longer be dealing with eggs per se, but children. Although these children will be newly conceived and far from viable outside the womb, all life remains a gift from God and must be respected as such. IVF however does not do this. One child perhaps out of dozens could be selected for birth and the others literally discarded as medical waste. This does not reduce abortion, but rather in amplifies it many times.



And sexual activity, which is to be reserved for marriage and should be open to the creative power of God to bestow new life within the context of a loving relationship, is instead treated as a casual, recreational pursuit with no more consideration than one would have over where to eat for lunch.



This is not a world we want to live in, although many have tried to create it for several decades now. Already, a crude form of this Brave New World has been created through the pill, a chemical weapon which women are conditioned to use on themselves. Pregnancy is equated to a parasitic condition and an inconvenience, and by persuading women of these subtle lies, they are objectified and turned into sexual objects. Instead of being potential mothers and wives, women are now reduced to willing recreational victims of male sexual desire.



We must pray that Dr. Djerassi's vision of a brave new world is wrong, and that the world will not turn to IVF and normalize recreational sex as the new normal. We must keep in mind that Brave New World was science fiction, and it was a cautionary tale, told for a reason.

---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.