Bill Martinson, his wife, Cindy, and daughter Mandy during her short release from prison last year. (Photo: Photos Special to the Register)

This Mother's Day is full of bittersweet memories for my family. At this time last year, my wife, Cindy, was dying of cancer, and our daughter, Mandy, came to visit her. This visit was especially unusual and precious, though, because Mandy is serving a 15-year sentence at the federal prison in Waseca, Minn. Because Mandy has been a model prisoner, she was able to convince the Bureau of Prisons to escort her home for a four-hour visit with her mother.

It would be the last time Mandy would see her mother alive at home. Three months later, Mandy called and spoke to Cindy by phone. Five minutes after Mandy hung up, Cindy passed away.

This Mother's Day, Mandy and I will think of Cindy and feel her absence. But we will also think of Mandy's last visit with her mom and all the times she couldn't be there. Mandy is wracked by guilt that she could not help me care for Cindy in those terrible months. Anyone who has watched a loved one with terminal cancer die knows that those final days and weeks are priceless and irreplaceable.

The Bureau of Prisons allowed Mandy Martinson a four-hour visit with her mother. (Photo: Special to the Register)

Mandy's 15-year prison term is one of the infamous mandatory minimum sentences Congress created in the 1980s, in a fever pitch of fear about drugs. The idea behind the laws was to put away major drug traffickers and kingpins. Mandy is only one example of how these one-size-fits-all punishments often result in too much prison time for the wrong people.

Mandy's troubles began in 2003, when she left an abusive boyfriend and turned to drugs instead of her family for comfort. She started using methamphetamine and, to our horror, went on a downward spiral that ended in addiction. She started dating a drug dealer who had a criminal record, and he moved in with her. Thirty days later, he was arrested, and Mandy was also arrested and charged for the drugs and the two handguns he kept in the home. This was her first and only arrest in her life.

While Mandy had full knowledge of this man's activities and enjoyed the fruits of his crime, she never sold drugs or used the guns. After her arrest, she put her life back together. She reconnected with us, completed drug treatment, and resumed her job as a dental hygienist. Nonetheless, because of mandatory minimum sentencing laws, Judge James Gritzner had to give her a 10-year prison sentence for drug trafficking, plus an additional five years for possessing a handgun. Despite her rehabilitation and sobriety, Mandy went to federal prison for 15 years. As is frequently the case, the boyfriend got a shorter sentence. He has already been released.

It is perhaps a blessing that Mandy did not have children of her own that she had to leave behind, but plenty of women do. Many women like her serve five, 10-, 15-, and 20-year mandatory minimum prison sentences because they got involved with using or selling drugs, or dated or married men who did. Drugs are a scourge on our society, but locking up women like my daughter for 15 years is doing nothing to make us safer, help addicts recover, or end the illegal drug trade. It's only hurting families.

Fortunately, legislation pending in Congress would cut these harsh mandatory minimum drug sentences for nonviolent offenses in half. The Smarter Sentencing Act (S. 502, H.R. 920) has bipartisan support, would save billions of dollars, and will make sentences more reasonable for nonviolent drug offenders like Mandy. If the Smarter Sentencing Act had been in effect, Mandy would have received a 10-year prison term — still a far more than adequate punishment, but one that would have brought her home just in time to help care for me and her mother during the worst days of our lives.

Sen. Chuck Grassley is the chairman of the powerful Senate Judiciary Committee and can bring the Smarter Sentencing Act up for review and passage at any time. He has always put Iowa families first, and this Mother's Day, I hope he will remember both mothers and daughters who are serving unjust and unnecessary mandatory minimum sentences for nonviolent drug crimes, and do something to improve those laws.

BILL MARTINSON lives in Mason City. Contact: iowabillmartinson@gmail.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1H9ZhE1