Medicare and Medicaid Administrator Marilyn Tavenner testifies before a House Oversight and Government Reform Committee hearing Sept. 18. She told Congress that 7.3 million people have signed up for subsidized private health insurance under the health care law -- a number that turned out to be erroneous. (Photo: Manuel Balce Ceneta, AP)

WASHINGTON — It took a junior congressional staffer about 20 minutes to discover what the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services says it didn't know about its own health exchange enrollment data.

Marilyn Tavenner, the administrator for the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services, told Congress in September that 7.3 million people had enrolled in coverage through Obamacare.

What she did not say — and Obama administration officials say they did not realize — was that nearly 400,000 of them were standalone dental plans.

That was revealed only after the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee asked for the data to back up those numbers. Even then, it took HHS a month to provide hundreds of pages of barely legible printouts. When the committee asked for spreadsheets, HHS provided 289 of them — all password protected.

Republicans say the episode is part of a troubling pattern of transparency failures in implementing the Affordable Care Act, which allows Americans without insurance to buy it from government-run online exchanges. Rep. Darrell Issa, R-Calif., the oversight committee chairman, called Tavenner to testify Tuesday about the incident.

HHS denied any deliberate attempt to obscure the health plan numbers.

"As we have said, we made an unacceptable mistake, and individuals with both marketplace medical and dental coverage were erroneously included in our recent announcements," said HHS press secretary Katie Hill. She said it has devoted 23,000 staff hours to providing more than 135,000 pages of documents to the oversight committee.

Without those dental plans, the exchanges fell to below the 7 million mark in paid enrollments — long considered a key benchmark because that's what the Congressional Budget Office originally estimated.

"It's incredible that they didn't know what was in their own data," said committee spokeswoman Caitlin Carroll, "and it raises very concerning questions about what's happening at HHS."

Meinan Goto, a member of the committee's professional staff, said it didn't take long for him to discover the dental plans as "outliers." The tip-off: HHS said thousands of people had enrolled in plans costing just $22 a month.

Also scheduled to testify Tuesday: Jonathan Gruber, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist who developed the economic models used to justify the health insurance law's cost estimates. In a recently publicized online video, Gruber suggested that a lack of transparency helped get the law passed, saying the "stupidity of the American voter" was instrumental in getting the bill passed.

Gruber has become a lightning rod for Republican criticism of the Affordable Care Act in recent weeks, but it wasn't until the administration admitted giving erroneous enrollment numbers that the committee scheduled a hearing.

Follow @gregorykorte on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1A99AAM