The tensions between populism and policymaking that are so evident in this year’s presidential primaries have trickled down to the state level.

In Colorado’s case, major policy reforms — including those that emerged from last fall’s Building a Better Colorado process of town hall meetings — have at times taken a back seat to partisan posturing.

But the Building a Better Colorado reforms remain a key part of the civic agenda, especially in these three areas:

• Reform or replace the Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights (TABOR), or put in place a “TABOR relief valve” so that the state may keep a bigger share of tax revenue to fund roads, schools and other infrastructure necessary to serve Colorado’s growing population.

• Reform our primary election process so that the results better reflect the will of voters and also put Colorado where it belongs on the national political map, as the most influential swing state in the Rocky Mountain region.

• Establish somewhat higher though reachable hurdles for qualifying and approving constitutional amendments, taking into account Colorado’s diverse geographic and demographic interests.

The difficulty in getting TABOR relief approved in the just-finished legislative session underscores how tricky it is to enact reforms in an election year where the Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders insurgencies are having a big impact. In the state Senate, for example, majority Republicans were pushed by the Colorado chapter of the Koch brothers-funded Americans for Prosperity not to tweak the language of the state’s hospital provider fee and exempt it from TABOR limits. The penalty: facing a more conservative primary opponent at the next election.

That exemption would have raised several hundred million dollars for state infrastructure, education and health care spending. And using the hospital provider fee as a TABOR relief valve had bipartisan support in the legislature, editorial support from newspapers statewide, extremely broad support from business groups as well as from prominent Republicans such as John Suthers, the former state attorney general who now serves as mayor of Colorado Springs.

However, the full Senate never got to vote on the fee reform because the majority leader sent it to a so-called “kill committee.” Now, Gov. John Hickenlooper has to decide whether to call a special session or fight for a more robust and permanent TABOR reform initiative at the general election.

Colorado’s party caucuses were embarrassing. Long lines and political machinations led to frustrated participants in both parties. Colorado Republican voters were deprived by their state party of a presidential preference poll. Eventually, they handed their delegates overwhelmingly to Ted Cruz, whose campaign has been suspended under blistering assault from Donald Trump, the presumptive nominee.

Democrats gave their delegates largely to Bernie Sanders in a chaotic process in which it was hard to know if all the votes were counted. The caucus was a public relations disaster for some of the super-delegates pledged to Hillary Clinton, notably Sen. Michael Bennet, who likely will face a tough race in November against an as-yet-undetermined opponent.

The obvious solution for Colorado voters is to hold a primary election at a time that matters on the presidential selection calendar. Such a primary must provide a way for independents — now the largest share of the electorate — to participate without changing their registration, and should replace the existing caucus process.

Yet the legislature took a look at this issue and did not act. Republicans and Democrats could not agree on a means to give independents a voice in their respective presidential primaries. Almost certainly, an up or down vote on the creation of an open presidential primary, perhaps combined with reforms to candidate selection for races down the ticket, will be on the ballot this November.

Finally, there is the question of constitutional reform itself. A majority of participants in the Building a Better Colorado town hall meetings concluded that raising the bar for constitutional reform would be a good idea. A likely proposal to go before voters would require a minimum threshold of signatures from each state Senate district to be submitted before an amendment could be certified, and could require a super-majority vote of, say, 55 percent to be approved.

Given the current flaps over signature-gathering for the GOP nomination for U.S. Senate and for an initiative removing some restrictions on alcohol sales, this is going to be a hot topic. If enacted, this constitutional amendment will end the easy pickings that allow some special interests to take political advantage of Colorado’s citizen-initiated constitutional reform process. Future constitutional changes would require more thought and broader support — the kinds of checks and balances that the nation’s framers had in mind when they set a high bar for constitutional amendments.

On three other contentious issues — reform of the state’s residential construction defects law to encourage the development of more affordable housing; reform of the state’s antiquated liquor licensing system to allow grocery stores to sell beer, wine and possibly liquor; and transportation funding — the legislature went one for three at best. They walked completely on construction defects, one of Colorado’s most pressing economic issues. Late in the session, negotiations among the various interest groups reportedly came close to agreement, only to fall apart at the last minute.

On transportation funding, the Republican Senate and the Democratic House struck out, killing a transportation borrowing and funding bill over disagreements on long-term funding for transportation and on the question of whether to include transit funding in the package.

The legislature hit a single with grocery store liquor sales, crafting a convoluted, last-minute compromise in the face of a pending citizen initiative funded by the major grocery chains. This complicated compromise may be vetoed by Hickenlooper, leaving the way open for the grocers’ initiative to make and quite possibly pass the ballot.

So the legislature’s scorecard on six critical issues facing Colorado:

• Three strikeouts, on TABOR/hospital provider fee, primary election reform, and transportation funding;

• Two walks (they did not take up bills on constitutional or construction defects reform); and

• One single, on liquor sales.

Why the dismal performance? Legislative leadership of both houses is primarily concerned with maintaining party position and power. This leads them to kowtow to the paymasters who fund their campaigns, whether that be trial lawyers on the left or the Koch brothers on the right. Our legislators are so busy protecting their political positions that they have outsourced the give and take of legislating to lawyers and lobbyists.

As a consequence, important bills are drafted and negotiated in the dark and often in the waning days of the legislative session, when there is little time for thoughtful consideration and no time for careful compromise.

The reform ideas from Building a Better Colorado are now advancing through the citizen initiative process. A direct appeal to the voters may be the only way to get major policy decisions made for Colorado in these highly partisan times.

Entrepreneur Henry Dubroff splits his time between California and Colorado. John J. Huggins is an entrepreneur and investor in Denver.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.