In a small corner of Bell Helicopter’s new Amarillo factory, technicians from the company’s Xworx facility are busy installing electronic systems that will monitor the first test flights of the Relentless 525 — a new civilian helicopter.

At one assembly station, an employee is busy with a computer tablet that provides detailed, step-by-step instructions showing each part and how it fits into the aircraft.

“It goes through each operations step so you know exactly what you’re doing,” said Cody Dunn, a local Bell employee who was using the tablet to review parts needed for an assembly.

Larry Thimmesch, vice president of the 525 program, said tablet technology has been integral at the new plant — a 249,000-square-foot facility near Rick Husband Amarillo International Airport where workers are now building the first of five test Relentless helicopters.

“Every person over here assembling the aircraft is really doing it off computer with virtual work instructions,” Thimmesch said. “It will tell them to torque on bolts. It will tell them when to inspect it. ... It helps manage the workflow.”

An Xworx crew from Arlington, he said, is now assembling wire harnesses, sensor units and other equipment that will monitor various data as the test aircraft make their maiden flights.

“In flight tests we measure thousands of parameters,” Thimmesch said. “When they fly the aircraft, it is going to send all that data remotely to a telemetry station, where there is about 30 people with computers that are reading all the data on how the aircraft is flying, what kinds of loads it is seeing on all the members, how are the systems working, so we really understand and learn about the product.”

Inside Bell’s Amarillo plant, workers are beginning to assemble the roofs, floors, and nose and tail sections before the engines and blades can be installed. Each section is built in modules, Thimmesch said, and each unit can be rotated inside a special holding fixture so workers can easily install parts. Each aircraft, made of 50 percent composite materials and 50 percent metal, requires roughly 10,000 parts, and the plant now has about 40,000 parts in stock.

“It all fits together kind of like a Lego assembly,” Thimmesch said.

The rest of this year will be a busy one at Bell, where workers are now building five of the aircraft — the potential uses for which include offshore oil and gas exploration, firefighting, emergency medical flights, paramilitary operations and hauling corporate VIPs.

“The plan is to have Aircraft 1 completely done this year and to fly it, but we’re already building Aircraft 2,” he said as he walked through the nearly spotless plant. “By the end of the year, we will have five flight test aircraft in build and we will actually be starting to build our first production aircraft that we deliver to a customer. So we’re going to ramp up very fast in manufacturing.”

The factory, he said, now has about 10 employees assembling aircraft, and another 22 workers are trained and ready. Some Bell employees will transition from the V-22 Osprey program to help with the assembly work.

“As soon as the parts come in, we have the people to install them,” Thimmesch said. “By the middle of summer, we will have almost 90 people over here working on the aircraft.”