Buy Photo U.S. Rep. Scott DesJarlais (Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)Buy Photo

DesJarlais talks Trump DNJ video by Scott Broden

MURFREESBORO – U.S. Rep. Scott DesJarlais recently returned to his 4th Congressional District during a recess from Congress to spend time with his Tennessee constituents and examine their issues here.

A Republican from South Pittsburg, DesJarlais stopped by The Daily News Journal Wednesday to sit down for an interview:

Q: What is your response to the 2016 presidential race? Are you endorsing anyone?

DesJarlais: I am not endorsing anybody. It’s too broad a field right now. I think there’s a lot left to see. I think it’s interesting that it was all about the Republican presidential race. Of course, (Donald) Trump has been really interesting because he speaks with no political filter, and I think some people find that appealing because they are really tired of politicians promising things and not getting things done. That’s not an endorsement of Trump. I just think it should tell people that they want to hear true speak and not political speak.

And I think that the other thing that’s interesting is that it seemed to be a foregone conclusion that Hillary Clinton was going to be the (Democratic) nominee. Now at the end covering up these top-secret and classified documents in her emails, which she assured us didn’t exist, and she shouldn’t have been using a personal server anyway. And my good friend (Republican U.S. Rep.) Trey Gowdy, who is heading the Benghazi Committee unearthed the fact that she was using a personal email server. And now the FBI has it, and we’ll see what comes out. I know that Gen. (David) Petraeus didn’t fare too well when he did that. Sandy Berger, (former President Bill) Clinton’s former NSA director in ’03 took some documents from the National Archive. He got hit pretty hard, and we’ll see what they’ll do to Hillary Clinton. But I don’t think her candidacy by any means is a foregone conclusion. I think the fact that (Vice President) Joe Biden was in Chattanooga last weekend and had some pretty tough speak would indicate that he’s serious about getting into the race, as well.

It’s frightening to me that a candidate like (Democratic presidential candidate) Bernie Sanders, a confessed socialist, can get the interest of 20 to 30 percent of the interest of our nation. I certainly hope that’s not the direction we’re heading.

Q: Although you are not endorsing any of the 17 Republican presidential candidates at this time, who are the ones impressing you?

DesJarlais: I have been watching (Gov.) Scott Walker for some time now. I think he’s done some good things in Wisconsin. I think (Gov.) John Kasich from Ohio might be interesting. Ohio is an important state. Certainly Sen. (Marco) Rubio and Sen. (Jeb) Bush in Florida would be good to be on the ticket somewhere.

Q: You mean Gov. Bush?

DesJarlais: Gov. Bush. Thank you. There’s so many of them it’s hard to keep them straight. Maybe they’ve all been governors. No. Let’s see, there’s Ben Carson I think is an intelligent man. It’s interesting to have non-politicians in the race.

Q: Carson’s like you, a medical doctor, right?

DesJarlais: He’s got something right, right out of the gate. There’s just a really interesting field right now. We need to see more debates and see how that evolves. I’m watching a number of candidates.

Q: What are you working on right now as the representative for the 4th Congressional District?

DesJarlais: I’m working on several things. One thing that we have been working on because of the tragic shooting in Chattanooga is HR 3115, and that’s a bill to ask the Department of Defense to review the directive that was issued in ’92 that prevented our military personnel from being able to arm themselves and defend themselves in case of attacks on domestic soil. So that’s a bill that we’re working through in the House right now with 70 co-sponsors. It seems to be getting a lot of traction. It’s bipartisan. We have all the members of the congressional delegation here in Tennessee. In fact, (Democratic U.S. Rep.) Steve Cohen from Memphis actually reached out early and wanted to co-introduce it, (Nashville Democratic U.S. Rep.) Jim Cooper, as well, is on the bill, and (Williamson County Republican U.S. Rep.) Marsha Blackburn, (Gallatin Republican U.S. Rep.) Diane Black, all nine of our congressman here. We are working on that, and, of course, we are paying a lot of attention to the Iran nuclear deal.

Q: What is your position on the Iran nuclear deal that President Barack Obama’s administration reached with the Middle East nation?

DesJarlais: I strongly oppose it because Iran is not our friend. They need to have these assets unfrozen to further their terroristic activities throughout the Middle East. They are known funders of the Houthis rebels in Yemen. They are supporting the opposition in Syria. They are funding fighters in Beirut, Hezbollah. They are funding Hamas and their attacks on Israel. And they have openly stated that they need funding to continue those battles. So we are basically making a deal with our enemy allowing them to get funding back (from) sanctions that have been working and have been smothering them.

Plus they want a nuclear bomb. I don’t think there’s any secret about that. They claim to want peaceful nuclear energy, but there’s means to do that without having to have centrifuges, without having to enrich your own uranium. There’s several countries that use a one, two, three plan, where the fuel comes in from an outside source like the United States or Russia, and they use the fuel, and then we pick it up. So they have no need for centrifuges. But Iran wants to keep their capabilities because ultimately they want the bomb. They get to continue to develop ICBMs (intercontinental ballistic missiles).

We know that they are a threat to Israel. We know that they are a threat to the United States. And why we are even talking to basically a sworn enemy in this fashion is beyond logic, other than maybe the president wants some kind of legacy issue for his presidency. I have listened to all the top-secret briefings on foreign affairs. We’ve had (U.S. Secretary of State John) Kerry in several times, and I’m convinced this is a bad deal. And I know they are trying to sell it as, ‘We have no alternative,’ but sanctions are working. Tighter sanctions would work better.

Q: If Congress votes against the deal, will the Senate and House be able to come up with the two-thirds vote necessary to override a presidential veto?

DesJarlais: It’s going to be really close. If we don’t get it, it’s going to be close, and the president will definitively own this deal. He’s been trying to sell it to people, and from what I’m hearing, they are not buying it. I think it’s propaganda at this point. So first of all, he’s going to have to explain why when two-thirds of the country is opposed to his idea that he still thinks it’s a good thing. I’m not sure that we won’t be able to override the veto. But if we don’t, then we’ll see how Iran behaves. One, they don’t have a good track record. The track record over the last four or five decades has been terrible. I don’t think they will honor the agreement. I think it will fall apart at some point anyway. We will continue to express our view clearly. We’ll see what Israel does. They are going to put a lot of pressure on the people in Congress in the House and the Senate to vote against the president. So I think there’s a lot to unfold here in the next month.

Q: Two of your past Democratic opponents, Lenda Sherrell and former U.S. Rep. Lincoln Davis, are advocating new Clean Power Plan rules on carbon emission by President Obama and the Environmental Protection Agency. What is your position on this?

DesJarlais: The EPA has kind of got a big black eye right now because what happened in Colorado. When they make a mistake and pollute a river and tell people, ‘Nothing to see here. Look away. No big deal.’ But if it’s a private entity, they go after it until the end of time. So they have lost a lot of credibility, much like the IRS did through their targeting scandal and their wasteful spending on retreats and whatnot. So I think the EPA is in trouble. We all want clean air. We want clean water. But it’s an organization or a department that has kind of gone beyond its scope like so much of our federal government. It needs to be reined in. A lot of people think it needs to be defunded and eliminated, but certainly it’s got a broader reach. We are seeing this with the waters of the U.S. The president is circumventing Congress. He’s using a lot of climate-change issues again in a manner that circumvents Congress. So I think it’s always good to look at the facts, but I think most people agree that it makes it very hard for people to do business. You look around the world, the president has basically curtailed clean coal in this country. They jumped through all the hoops to make it acceptable to use coal. And now instead of letting them use it, he’s pushing toward these green-energy initiatives, highly subsidized initiatives and sending our coal to other countries to pollute the world and where they don’t have clean-coal technology.

Q: About 65 percent of eligible veterans have chosen private medical providers since Congress passed the Veterans Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014, Veterans Affairs officials reported recently at York VA Medical Campus in Murfreesboro. What can you tell me about what you and Congress are doing to improve Veterans Affairs services?

DesJarlais: The VA has had a lot of issues. Basically, the whole nation’s health-care system has had a lot of issues, whether you want to look at Medicare, Medicaid. Certainly, the VA has had a horrendous track record here, a lot of controversy and turmoil. We passed a lot of legislation through the House to help correct these problems. Right here at home in Murfreesboro, we are hearing a lot of issues come up at the facility. We were going to visit there (Wednesday). Unfortunately, they were not able to accommodate us. We reached out trying to meet with them next week, to meet with Mr. (Juan) Morales (director of the Tennessee Valley Healthcare System that oversees York) about issues we’re hearing. The veterans care all across the nation has not been what it should be. So I think that taking steps to allow veterans to use private health-care facilities is a step in the right direction. And I’m not sure that maybe it isn’t time to move to that system completely where a veteran can use a VA card or maybe be issued a Medicare-slash-VA card where they can use it anywhere around the country, and not necessarily abolish VAs, but why not let them get health care like the rest of America does and not be limited to the restraints of their system and their scheduling.

Q: What is your response to the U.S. Supreme Court’s recent 6-3 ruling that the Affordable Care Act permits tax subsidies for people who signed up for insurance through federal exchanges instead of state exchanges as the law stated?

DesJarlais: Obviously, it’s a huge disappointment to our office because the King v. Burrell case was a case we were out in front of, and you and I have talked about this several times about the difference between state and federal exchanges. And I think rather than doing their job, they looked at it more from a human standpoint rather than the technical standpoint of the law and how the bill was written. And whether that’s right or wrong, the bottom line is that the law isn’t working. It’s not covering what it was supposed to. The roll out was expensive. People’s insurance premiums are skyrocketing. Their deductibles are skyrocketing. It’s going to get much worse here in Tennessee. BlueCross (says) in 2016, you can look at 30, 35 percent increases. So there’s a lot of bad things yet to come. So for them to make that decision in my opinion wasn’t really doing their job. This is Congress’ job to write these laws. It’s their job to interpret them. And I think it’s pretty clear that the law was not written equally for those two. I think the reason for the ruling was not correct, and it’s going to hurt people in the long run. We need to get back to private-based health care. Get the federal government out of the way. We need doctors and patients making decisions, not unelected bureaucrats.

Q: If you could craft a new law to replace the Affordable Care Act, what would the legislation do?

DesJarlais: Let people have a say in what kind of health care they need. Right now, the government is telling you what you have to have and that you have to have it. And I’m not sure that’s even constitutional. But if you have tax incentives for people to buy health insurance, that’s makes it more affordable. Insurance across state lines makes it more affordable. Health savings accounts were working, and that’s something that people should have access to. And all those things kind of went away with this. And to me, the American people did not want socialized medicine from the get-go. When I first campaigned in 2010, I said, ‘This was a funnel into socialized medicine.’ It’s absolutely a funnel into socialized medicine. Those programs don’t work in other countries. You can ask people, and they say, ‘It’s a great program as long as you’re not sick.’ And so that doesn’t work out very well. So private-sector, free enterprise works better because it creates competition, lowers prices, improves access, and everything that the Affordable Health Care Act is doing we need to do basically the opposite within the private sector and let people be back in charge of their health care and get the government out of the way. They are failing on the VA. They are failing on Medicare. They are failing on Medicaid. We don’t need to fail with one-sixth of our economy.

Q: Immigration remains a key issue in the presidential election. What is your position on immigration?

DesJarlais: I think the biggest thing with immigration right now is a lack of enforcement of our own laws. We are simply looking the other way. People (who) come into this country don’t respect our laws. They don’t fear our laws because there seems to be no repercussions. There’s a lot of talk about securing the borders, which I think is important, but I also think that none of it’s going to work unless we actually enforce the laws that are in the books. If we enforce the laws that we have now, the problem would essentially go away, but for some reason people don’t have the stomach to do that.

Q: Should Congress make it a felony to sneak into the country?

DesJarlais: I don’t know that it needs to be a felony, but any time you are breaking a law, whether it’s a speeding ticket or a theft, there’s consequences. And right now, we know if we travel to another country and we break their laws, we are going to be punished. We wouldn’t be surprised if we were thrown in jail. But when that happens in this country, there seems to be all kinds of excuses why we can look the other way. I think that’s the bad way to start a relationship with somebody wanting to be an American is the first step you do is to break a law. I say shame on them for breaking our laws, and I say shame on us for not enforcing them.

Contact Scott Broden at 615-278-5158. Follow him on Twitter @ScottBroden.

About U.S. Rep. Scott DesJarlais

District: Tennessee 4th Congressional District

Party: Republican

Political experience: Won his seat in 2010 and re-elections in 2012 and 2014; serves on U.S. House committees for Oversight and Government Reform, Foreign Affairs, Agriculture

Home: South Pittsburg

Career: Worked as a physician before winning his seat in Congress

Education: Earned degrees in chemistry and psychology from the University of South Dakota and went on to receive a medical degree there.

Family: Wife, Amy; three children, Tyler, Ryan and Maggie

Community involvement: Attends Epiphany Episcopal Church in Sherwood, where his wife grew up

Full interview

See full interview on dnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.dnj.com/1JcOdob