In case you're just tuning into the NSA/surveillance battle on Capitol Hill, a handful of the PATRIOT Act's provisions expired last night, with Sen. Rand Paul declaring temporary victory over what he calls an excessive and illegal federal surveillance state. The Senate is currently debating amendments to a House-passed compromise bill, which among other things alters how so-called 'metadata' can be accessed and reviewed by the government. The 'USA Freedom Act' overwhelmingly sailed through the GOP-controlled House of Representatives and is supported by the Obama White House. Some national security hawks say some of the law's provisions represent needless reforms to remedy imaginary problems, and will only hamper the intelligence community's already-difficult task of ferreting out asymmetrical national security threats. Paul and his allies say the compromise doesn't go far enough, though they're now conceding it will likely pass. This clash of practical concerns and principles has been acrimonious at times, so much so that Paul chose not to attend a Republican caucus meeting over the weekend, telling reporters that he doubted the atmosphere would be "collegial." Motives have been impugned on both sides, with Paul's critics heavily implying, if not stating outright, that he's engaged in reckless grandstanding in furtherance of his presidential campaign (is he necessarily helping himself with Republican voters, though?); Paul fired back with this jaw-dropper, accusing opponents of "secretly" hoping for a terrorist attack:





"Some of them, I think, secretly want there to be an attack on the United States, so they can blame it on me."

Yikes. Might we all be better off by just stipulatating that (a) Rand Paul isn't deliberately trying to make terrorists' lives easier for his personal political benefit, and (b) those who disagree with his analysis and methods aren't, uh, rooting for the terrorists out of spite? C'mon. This wasn't Paul's finest moment, policy implications aside. When it comes to substance, the more hawkish contingent in this battle has been frustrated by what they see as a steady stream of demagoguery and misleading rhetoric from the other side, quarterbacked by Kentucky's junior senator. National Review's Rich Lowry wrote a useful column last week that cuts through the fog and clarifies some important truths:





You can listen to orations on the NSA program for hours and be outraged by its violation of our liberties, inspired by the glories of the Fourth Amendment and prepared to mount the barricades to stop the NSA in its tracks -- and still have no idea what the program actually does. That's what the opponents leave out or distort, since their case against the program becomes so much less compelling upon fleeting contact with reality. The program involves so-called metadata, information about phone calls, but not the content of the calls -- things like the numbers called, the time of the call, the duration of the call. The phone companies have all this information, which the NSA acquires from them. What happens next probably won't shock you, and it shouldn't. As Rachel Brand of the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board writes, "It is stored in a database that may be searched only by a handful of trained employees, and even they may search it only after a judge has determined that there is evidence connecting a specific phone number to terrorism."