Gun control battle continues in Delaware

Shooters Choice employee Bill O’Leary of Smyrna sells Eric Morgan of Magnolia his first handgun Thursday morning. On the one-year anniversary of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in Connecticut, the Delaware Legislature has only signed four of the 16 bills introduced into law with 10 still pending.

(Delaware State News/Dave Chambers)

DOVER — The Sandy Hook Promise is melancholy, but resilient.



“Our hearts will always be broken; our spirit will not,” the pledge begins resolutely, before delving into a seven-stanza commitment to prevent gun violence in communities.



“This is a promise, to truly honor the lives lost by turning our tragedy into a moment of transformation.”



Nearly a year ago to the day, 20 children and six teachers were tragically gunned down at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn.



The photographs, the tears, the grief, caused leaders across the country to mobilize — states debated more than 1,500 gun bills and passed 109 of them over the course of the year. The First State passed two major pieces of legislation, one strengthening background checks for nearly all private sales and another requiring reports for lost or stolen guns.



But on the national level, no major gun legislation made it to President Barack Obama’s desk.



A week after the shootings in Newton, a Pew Research Center survey found that 49 percent of Americans felt it was important to control gun ownership, while 42 percent felt it was important to protect the rights of Americans to own guns — marking the first noticeable split on the issue since President Obama’s presidency. By May 2013, one month after the U.S. Senate failed to pass a bipartisan universal background check bill, the percentages climbed closer; 50 percent of people surveyed favored controlling gun ownership, but 48 percent supported protecting gun rights.



The standstill has reached the federal level, but begs some stateside reflection. What does Delaware have to show in the wake of Sandy Hook?



Common sense reform

Exactly one month after the Sandy Hook tragedy, Gov. Jack A. Markell, along with top state officials, unveiled a five-prong package of gun control legislation that included propositions to expand background checks and reinstate the assault weapons ban. With that, the discussion ignited.



Democratic lawmakers in both chambers pushed House Bill 35, which implements a universal background check and requires checks for private firearm sales, except for sales between immediate family members and Senate Bill 16, which requires individuals to report stolen guns to the police within 48 hours of discovery. Both bills facilitated hours of public testimony ranging from the average citizen and NRA lobbyist to the parents of Sandy Hook students and gun control advocate Mark Kelly, husband of former congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords, who survived an attempted assassination.



“We made some very strong progress last year; I am proud of the progress we made there,” Gov. Markell said Wednesday following a school safety event in Laurel.



However, of the 16 bills introduced throughout the legislative session, 10 remain in play, with only four signed into law.



“We are going to have a very bold and ambitious agenda when we come back in January,” the governor continued. “Certainly keeping people safe is going to be an important part of that agenda, but I am not going to make any predictions on one bill or another.”



Nevertheless, in a ranking of state gun laws by gun control advocacy group, the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, Delaware ranked 10th among the top 10 states with the strongest gun laws, below Maryland, Pennsylvania and New Jersey. States were measured in terms of legislation that assessed gun owner accountability, firearms in public places and background checks.



The study also found that states with the highest grades have the lowest death rates nationwide — among them, New York and New Jersey. For instance, the gun death rate in 2010 for New Jersey amounted to under 6 percent per 100,000 people. Delaware was at nearly 10 percent.



“While more research is needed to determine the precise relationship, it is clear that the data supports the conclusion that state gun laws and the rate of gun deaths are closely tied,” the study stated.



In Dover, city police report taking in record numbers of firearms during criminal investigations, from .22-caliber rifles and smaller pistols to assault-style rifles. Authorities said 58 weapons were seized in 2012, and 93 had been taken in 2013 as of Wednesday night.



If applied strongly, Dover Police Department Chief Jim Hosfelt said, current Delaware Code has ample penalty phase power to lock up those incapable of abiding by gun laws and prohibitions due to prior felonies. Through plea bargaining, however, sentences are regularly reduced as the vicious cycle quickly starts again, the chief said.



“The answer is not creating new laws but enforcing the ones on the books,” Chief Hosfelt said. “You have to be accountable for your actions when arrested and turned over to the prosecution phase of a case. …”



Currently, Dover police say they are dealing with a horde of habitual gun law violators who quickly return to the streets after their cases are adjudicated through plea bargains and minimum sentences that offer quick jail time.



“We are tired of seeing the same people over and over again arrested for gun crimes and felonies,” Chief Hosfelt said.



During the session, there was movement among legislators with more conservative districts to push for increases in sentences for those committing crimes with firearms. Two were signed by the governor.



House Bill 36, sponsored by downstate Republican, Rep. Ruth Briggs King, R-Georgetown, increased minimum sentences required for individuals who were considered prohibited from owning a firearm, while Senate Bill 40, sponsored by Sen. Bruce C. Ennis, D-Smyrna, focused on repeat offenders. The Senate bill added the crime of “possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony” to the list of serious violent felonies that can serve as predicate offenses that trigger Delaware’s Habitual Criminal statute.



Recently, Dover PD staff met with Charles M. Oberly III, the US Attorney District of Delaware, to see what federal resources could be added to cutting crime — and the weapons that come with it — at the local level.



Tougher sentencing of previous felons found with weapons and ammunition they are prohibited from possessing is a possible option, city police said, since proving that is a relatively simple matter compared to other criminal cases.



Dover PD patrol officers routinely respond to shots fired reports and actual shootings within city boundaries during regular shifts.



“There was a time when a shots fired report was an unusual occurrence,” Chief Hosfelt said. “Now our officers respond to those almost daily.”



The culture is such in Dover that prior fistfights to settle disputes now simply are handled by one or more combatants pulling their guns and blasting off rounds, Chief Hosfelt said.



Just to the north in Smyrna, the town has not seen the same proliferation of gun play and weapons-related crimes, law enforcement said.



“We really haven’t been getting many guns lately from the street, only in search warrants,” Smyrna Police Department Lt. Norman E. Wood said.



A Delaware State Police spokesman said that reporting guns lost or stolen is a key to investigating later crimes they may be tied to.



“Any gun legislation that provides an effective tool in our investigative tool box, or has the ability to take dangerous weapons out of the hands of criminals or those that cannot legally possess them, is effective and a welcomed addition to any law enforcement agency,” Sgt. Paul G. Shavack said.



“The lost or stolen gun reporting legislation is a critical component that eliminates the defense or excuse of a criminal involved in a ‘straw purchase’ to claim that the gun was lost or stolen without reporting it as such.”



“It’s too new,” Lewis D. Schiliro, secretary of the Delaware Department of Safety and Homeland Security, said, but noted that the passage of both pieces of legislation was a great step forward to keeping firearms out of the hands of people who should not have access to them.



“There is a balance between the Second Amendment right to own and possess to the idea that the overall right of society be free from gun violence, I think that’s the balance we are striving for,” he said.



Natural and legal rights

The Second Amendment, the right to own and bear arms, resonates with Beth Parsons, owner of Shooter’s Choice Gun Range in Dover.



“I think when people have negative opinions about firearms it’s because they aren’t educated, they don’t know about them. They hear media, they see movies and they think all guns are like they are in the movies,” Ms. Parsons said. “They need to know the truth from myth. And I have never once seen a gun get up and shoot somebody and lay back down.”



On a sunny Thursday prospective gun buyers meandered around the store, while some waited to have their specific pieces inspected before firing a couple rounds at the store’s indoor shooting ranges. For Ms. Parsons, the store happenings have finally calmed down.



Shortly after the Sandy Hook incident, she said, there was an extreme influx of customers, wary that the federal government would impart intense gun control regulations.



“It was quite intense, we were busy from open to close every day, seven days a week,” Ms. Parsons said. It was not uncommon to see lines of up to 30 people waiting their turn on the 10-lane shooting range.



“As far as sales went, we were actually down to just a few hand guns in the store,” she said. “Literally the cases were empty and they were not available. ... So many people were buying, the manufacturers couldn’t keep up.”



But in terms of the increased background bill legislation on private sales, it really hasn’t been a hindrance on business. If anything, it is just a bit frustrating, she said.



“At the same time its good to know that the person if they are not family they can own that gun,” she said.



“So there’s two ways of looking at it, yeah it costs a little bit of money, but it’s the piece of mind.”



Rookie lawmaker Sen. Brian J. Pettyjohn, R-Georgetown, looks to build on the two Democratic pieces of legislation passed six months earlier. He introduced Senate Bill 18, which works in conjunction with the lost and stolen gun reporting legislation. His bill, which was passed in the Senate, would make it a class A misdemeanor to falsely report a lost or stolen gun to a law enforcement agency.



“It’s a common sense bill, this bill is a good fit and it makes even more sense that people are required to make that report,” the senator said, pointing out that it will hopefully get ahead of straw purchases for someone who is person prohibited.



After a tragedy there is often a knee-jerk reaction to enact major gun reform, he said, but it is important not to hinder access to guns to those who are in need. For the person who lives in back-country of Gumboro or the single mom who has to work two jobs and support a family.



“I want to make sure they have what they need to protect themselves, their home, and their family,” Sen. Pettyjohn said.



Schoolhouse rock

There was a time when school was understood as the safe place, a place, Rep. Darryl Scott, D-Dover, said, that was conducive to play and work.



But with incidents like the Columbine school shooting in Colorado more than 10 years ago, and the most recent Sandy Hook shooting, there are extra precautions a school must take.



“It’s a reality we have to face,” Rep. Scott said.



The state started taking steps toward major school safety reform in 2011. The Markell administration and the Delaware Department of Safety and Homeland Security supported the Omnibus School Safety Act, which creates a formal statewide framework for comprehensive school safety plans, by advocating for co-department, school district and law enforcement collaboration. The legislation, which was signed in 2012, called for the creation of a web-based portal, known as the Emergency Response Information Portal or ERIP. By using this portal, school districts can outline safety protocols, identify safety teams and storm building plans, site maps and interior photographs. At this time, the Polytech and Laurel school districts are utilizing the website.



“We’ve been fortunate in so many ways that we haven’t had an incident, but the state recognized there was a potential gap,” Rep. Scott said.



The governor visited the Laurel Intermediate School Wednesday as the middle school unveiled their school safety plans on the new emergency response portal.



“As important as our police and first responders are the most important people are the folks already within the school and this will give them so much good information about how to keep kids safe,” he said following the event.



Secretary Schiliro, with the Department of Safety and Homeland Security, feels that this is just the start to revamping school safety for the state, combining both planning, training and physical security.



“There are many tools in that tool box, and this is one of them,” the secretary said.



Over the past legislative session their were many pieces of legislation that sought to address school safety, from creating panic buttons in schools to creating a competitive school safety fund for local districts.



“There’s a lot of ideas out there some that we agree with and some that we don’t,” Secretary Schiliro said.



“But I think above all what we’ve raised is a level of consciousness, that we are now talking about how best we can provide for the safety of our students.”



Rep. Scot, sponsored a school safety bill that was a component of Gov. Markell’s five-prong gun control package.



House Bill 67, which awaits a vote in the House of Representatives, bans the possession of firearms in schools and on school property and creates specific zones for regulation.



“I would personally like to advance my school zone bill,” Rep. Scott said. “And if I can get the votes to advance it, I will look to move it forward. It’s going to be difficult.”



Though the bills in play may address different aspects of school safety, one thing remains constant: it’s all for the kids.



“No matter Democrat or Republican, Senate or House, no one will argue with that,” Rep. Scott said.



Another leg on that stool

“When we talk about keeping people safe there are a number of legs on that stool, one of them in our view was the gun safety piece, but another really important part is the mental health,” Gov. Markell said.



The discussion surrounding mental health care in the state resurfaced in the wake of last December’s tragedy at Sandy Hook Elementary, and has been entwined with the discussion of school safety and gun control.



The shooter, 20-year-old Adam Lanza, allegedly suffered from behavioral health issues before taking his own life at the scene of the crime.



While 54 elementary schools have family crisis counselors and high schools utilize behavioral health counselors, only three middle schools in Delaware — Stanton, George Read and Central Middle — offer behavioral health services. In order to fill that void, Gov. Markell allocated $3.3 million for school mental health services in his Fiscal Year 2014 budget, which was passed unanimously by the state’s Joint Finance Committee in May. The funding will support increasing the number of mental health professionals from three to 30.



In September, the Division of Prevention and Behavioral Health Services for the state issued a request for proposal (RFP) to fill the positions.



“We have about 22 [consultants] that will be starting on Jan. 2,” said Daphne Warner, director of prevention for the division. “We start our orientation. We are excited about that.”



“Our ultimate goal is for kids to be successful in schools and create an environment that’s supportive for them.”



As the process progresses, Ms. Warner said educating the public will be key. Especially in erasing the stigma about seeking mental health care for both adults and children.



Dr. Sanjay Nath, director of the Institute of Graduate Clinical Psychology at Widener University, has passionately studied that stigma related to mental health care. Before the Affordable Care Act was implemented, Dr. Nath said it was very difficult for people with severe mental illness to obtain care. It was very uncommon for people to freely discuss any internal mental issues at the workplace. Now, most recently, Vice President Joseph Biden announced that the administration will dedicate $100 million for state-level mental health reform.



“Public perception of people with mental illness tends to be more negative,” Dr. Nath said. “In the minds of the public, people will mental illness are more likely to do something violent.”



However, in reality, individuals with mental illness are more likely to be victims of a crime.



“A violent act occurs and we look for an explanation,” he said.



The American Psychological Association released a report Thursday that studied gun prevention, prediction and policy. Overarchingly, the study found that there is not a single profile that can predict whether an individual will commit a violent act with a gun — there are a variety of factors related to social development, family and environment. However, individual treatment should still be sought.



“Although it is important to recognize that most people suffering from a mental illness are not dangerous, for those persons at risk for violence due to mental illness, suicidal thoughts, or feelings of desperation, mental health treatment can often prevent gun violence,” the report stated. As such mental health reform should be a national priority.



Still, Dr. Nath feels the link is a double-edged sword that reinforces a stigmatized idea.



“To me its better if there was focus on it separately,” he said.



In Delaware, lawmakers introduced bi-partisan mental health legislation that sought to expand the reporting requirements for medical professionals in order to keep guns out of the hands of those found to be “dangerous” individuals.



Though the bill passed unanimously in the House of Representatives it was defeated in the Senate, after being thought of as an easy bi-partisan win with backing from both the state’s attorney general’s office and the National Rifle Association.



“The senseless shootings at Sandy Hook Elementary, in Aurora, Colorado, and most recently, at the Navy Yard in Washington, D.C., highlight a glaring deficiency in our public safety system — the lack of law enforcement’s ability to keep guns out of the hands of dangerously mentally ill individuals. Working with the mental health and law enforcement communities and a bipartisan group of legislators, my office proposed House Bill 88 last spring as a direct response to these tragedies,” the attorney general’s office stated in response. “The House of Representatives passed House Bill 88 by an overwhelming 40 to 1 vote. Unfortunately, the bill was defeated in the Senate after a lot of misinformation was spread”



“I still don’t understand,” Democratic Rep. Darryl Scott, D-Dover, said trailing off. “I thought was a very good piece of legislation,”



The legislation would have required medical health professionals to report to police when a mentally ill person, whether involuntarily or voluntarily committed for treatment, communicated a threat of violence against themselves or another identified person and has the capacity to carry it out.



“I really don’t know if they are going to pick it up or not,” said Rep. Danny Short, R-Seaford, the House Minority Leader.



Under the bill , once law enforcement finds evidence to substantiate the threat, the attorney general’s office will file a petition with the state’s Superior Court, but police cannot search a house or seize firearms without a judge’s order.



Sen. Pettyjohn voted against the bill in the Senate, along with some of his Democratic colleagues. He said the chamber had received many constituent calls from concerned with the innerworkings of the bill, many coming from veterans groups. The concern was that retired military seeking treatment for Post Traumatic Stress Syndrome could be committed on one statement.



“I think the process worked the way it was supposed to, so that the right questions can be asked,” the senator said.



The bill can be brought up in the Senate when the lawmakers reconvene in January, but only by the majority caucus — the Democrats.



The idea that we as a society need to do a lot more to keep guns away from those with dangerous mental illnesses has broad public support, and my office and I are working hard to secure the needed support in the Senate to have the bill pass in 2014,” a statement from the Delaware Attorney General’s office read.



“This bill will save lives.”



Moving forward

Throughout the Newtown Foundation’s National Vigil for All Victims of Gun Violence Thursday, George Higgins, acting director of the Delaware Coalition Against Gun Violence, held the photos of two family members who tragically lost their lives in a home invasion.



Mr. Higgins traveled to Washington D.C., to join hundreds at the Washington National Cathedral for the ceremony.



“The occasion was both solemn and uplifting because we heard these people who were touched who are becoming very active,” he said Friday. “We are not going to be silent any longer. It’s not about guns its about the irresponsible behavior of people who have access to guns.”



Despite the lapse on the federal government’s side to pass gun legislation, Mr. Higgins feels the work is not done stateside.



“And I think the idea that this [gun control awareness] has all died away is completely false,” he said.



His organization is also pushing for the Senate to take up House Bill 88, but that might be the only lobbying effort.



“I doubt we will see anything on gun issues outside the possibility of HB 88, going into an election year,” Mr. Higgins said.



“Our goal between now and January when the session opens again is that we do more to educate the public and educate our legislators in what is actually contained in that specific bill [HB 88].”



Rep. Short knows any discussion of gun control outside of the mental health bill will be passionate. Especially if the discussion concerns limiting magazines and banning assault-style weapons.



“It’s not rocket science; it polarizes the discussion and causes people to take sides,” he said. With the election year approaching, in September 2014, perhaps there won’t be as much controversial discussion.



“I would say we need to focus on what we need to get done, rather than focus on something and argue and argue,” he said.



At the end of the day, it will just have to be a wait-and-see situation come January.



“The gun legislation will invoke strong emotion from both sides,” Rep. Scott added.



“And we’ll see whether there’s an appetite in the chamber and leadership to bring up those issues.”



Staff writer Craig Anderson contributed to this report. He can be reached at 741-8296 or canderson@newszap.com. Follow @DSNAnderson on Twitter.



Staff writer Jen Rini can be reached at 741-8250 or jrini@newszap.com. Follow @DSNJen_Rini on Twitter.