Former adjunct professor Joseph Fruscione quit his part-time job teaching in the English department at George Washington University this spring. Instead, he took up freelance editing and proofreading.

“I received my doctorate nine years ago. Folks with a lot of experience part-timing are seen as washed up or stale. I realized I was never going to move up.”

Fruscione, along with nine other educators from across the nation, wrote an open letter to the Department of Labor’s Wage and Hours division urging the new director to “open an investigation into the labor practices of our colleges and universities in the employment of contingent faculty, including adjunct instructors and full-time contact faculty outside the tenure-track.”

About two thirds of college professors today are hired on a part-time basis, work on semester-long contracts and are prevented from earning tenure, the letter points out.

As of Thursday morning, the adjunct professors’ online petition has garnered more than 1,400 signatories, vastly exceeding the group’s initial goal of 500 signatures by Sept. 30.

Part-time professors have faced a lack of job security or wage fairness for years, Fruscione says, but now is the time to act because the Wage and Hours division’s newly minted director, David Weil, was himself an economics professor at Boston University.

“Our basic mission at Wage and Hour is pretty simple: making sure people get a fair day’s wage for a hard day’s work,” Weil told The Boston Globe in June shortly after his highly contentious confirmation hearings. “The difficulty is the workplace has changed dramatically in the last 20 years, and figuring out how we really make sure that happens has become a more and more complicated thing to accomplish.”

RELATED: Part-time faculty copes with economic hardships, lack of university support

The Wage and Labor office did not immediately return a request for comment about whether or not the office was aware of the petition and if it planned to respond.

Advocates hope more people will pay attention to what they see as unfair practices once they realize how low wages and part-time contracts can adversely affect students. So far, Fruscione says he’s been “very pleased with the diverse field of signees,” which includes full-time professors as well as part-time ones, but not yet any signatories who identify themselves as university administrators.

Less time to focus on students

Fruscione says his meager part-time salary forced him to work at more than one school at once. His timely daily commute prevented him from spending as much time as he would like on his students.

“It’s less time to have person-to-person office hours,” he says. “It’s more students and it’s less time to give meaningful feedback on student writing. It also prevents any kind of mentoring down the road.”

Samey Lee, a global cultural studies major and labor activist at Point Park University in Pittsburgh, says the unfair treatment of adjunct professors — who often have no say in the trajectory of academic curricula — has hurt her education.

She says adjunct professors sometimes only have time to meet with students immediately before or after class because they are often not on campus. “We would meet in Starbucks or the park across the street [from the classroom] because he didn’t have an office,” she says about one of her adjunct professors. “It mad it hard for me to build a relationship with my professor.”

Lee and other students at Point Park have passed out buttons reading “I support adjuncts” across campus.

“A petition alone is not going to make these changes, but I think that’s a really good first step,” she says.

Alex Harris, a senior double majoring in journalism and sustainability studies at the University of Florida, says she’s a “big fan” of adjunct professors and is concerned that they are being exploited for financial purposes.

“Universities seem to be skimping a little bit by choosing to rely heavily on adjuncts not because they are professionally better for the students but because it’s cheaper,” she says. “It’s dishonest for schools to do.”

But Harris points out that the responsibility also falls on adjuncts to properly plan their careers.

“The people who have figured out how to work the system use adjunct teaching as a supplement to what they do,” she says. “So you can be a full-time professional and as a supplement, teach a class. That seems to be the better way to do it.”

Melissa Miller, a senior international affairs major at George Washington University, says part-time professors asking for higher salaries are often justified.

If they’re starting out as adjunct but eventually want to be full-time, then it makes more sense for them to want higher pay so they don’t need the second or third job outside of teaching,” she says.

‘You can’t fire all of us’

Ann Kottner, another part-time professor, says her frustrations with unfair work practices have led her to speak out, even if it puts her job in jeopardy.

“I kind of have a ‘bring it on attitude’ at this point,” Kottner, 54, says. “I’m at an age now where I don’t care. I feel like this is an issue that somebody has to stand up for and many of us have suffered the consequences of speaking out. The more of us who speak out, the harder it is to fire us. You can’t fire all of us.”

Kottner has held part-time employment at York College/City University of New York and New Jersey City University. She says she’s always had to teach courses at least two schools simultaneously. She recently obtained health insurance through President Obama’s Affordable Care Act because her status as a part-time teacher means she doesn’t qualify for health insurance like full-time professors do.

RELATED: Professors read mean reviews of themselves, results are predictably hilarious

“The bad thing about teaching right now is that if you are a non-tenured professor you almost have to have some other kind of other support to be able to do it,” she says.

What’s the solution? Kottner says she hopes that the Department of Labor will make recommendations to colleges and universities on how to treat adjuncts “more fairly” in pay and benefits.

But she also hopes we’ll see an influx of professors hired on the tenure track where they’ll eventually have job security and won’t have to worry about being not hired back at the end of each semester.

Decades ago, adjuncts were a minority of professors who taught because they had experience in a specific industry that could be valuable to students, according to Kottner. But she says that today, adjuncts serve as a fallback for universities financially unable to pay full-time professors’ heftier salaries and cover their benefits.

“This was not what any of us signed up for,” Kottner says. “We planned academic careers. We thought that we would have a good middle class life. We love what we do and that should not be taken advantage of.”

Justin Peligri is a rising senior at George Washington University