President Barack Obama has enrolled in a health care plan under the Affordable Care Act, the White House confirmed Monday.

According to a White House official, Obama selected a bronze plan through the District of Columbia's exchange.

"He was pleased to participate in a plan as a show of support for these marketplaces which are providing quality, affordable health care options to more than a million people," the official said.

While Obama did not physically sign up for the plan himself -- members of his staff did in person, NBC's Peter Alexander reports -- he was involved in selecting the plan. The president will pay for the plan's premiums himself.

Obama's decision to sign up for his signature health care program is entirely symbolic, as the president receives his health care through the military.

Obama promised to sign up for coverage under the law in March 2010, after Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa) proposed an amendment to the law requiring the president to do so.

"We think the amendment is unnecessary," then-White House spokesman Reid Cherlin said at the time. "The president will participate in the exchange. But let's be clear: The amendments being offered by Senate Republicans, including this one, are just a ploy to delay the bill."

Also on HuffPost: Most Iconic Photos Of Obama's First Term Most Iconic Photos Of Obama's First Term

1 of 44 Situation Room May 1, 2011: President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden, along with members of the national security team, receive an update on the mission against Osama bin Laden in the Situation Room of the White House, May 1, 2011. Seated, from left, are: Brigadier General Marshall B. "Brad" Webb, Assistant Commanding General, Joint Special Operations Command; Deputy National Security Advisor Denis McDonough; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton; and Secretary of Defense Robert Gates. Standing, from left, are: Admiral Mike Mullen, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; National Security Advisor Tom Donilon; Chief of Staff Bill Daley; Tony Blinken, National Security Advisor to the Vice President; Audrey Tomason Director for Counterterrorism; John Brennan, Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism; and Director of National Intelligence James Clapper. Please note: a classified document seen in this photograph has been obscured. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza) Share this slide:

Pete Souza/The White House