An external view of the W.N. Clark Power Plant in 2014 before it went dark in preparation for decommissioning. ( Timothy Brown / daily Record )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

»

Within a week, the remaining structure at the W.N. Clark Power Plant will be flattened and sorted into piles of scrap and debris to be discarded or salvaged.

Black Hills Energy representative Bret Jones, senior program manager, external affairs, on Thursday said although the structure will be down, quite a bit of work will remain.

"Probably what will be the most difficult and the most time consuming is the removal of concrete foundations," Jones said. "We will be excavating concrete foundations to a depth of five feet; the plan is ultimately to follow up with that to fill whatever concrete foundation that is still left to a depth of at least five feet with clean-fill material."

A view of the remnants of the W.N. Clark Power Plant on Thursday. Demolition of the last standing structure is expected to be complete by the middle of next week. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Black Hills will be reviewing a plan submittal for the removal of the river intake, which would happen once the company receives all necessary approvals. Its contractor, Independence Demolition, also will begin removing the railroad spur, and rail and ties, before excavating the rail bed.

"Following demolition, I believe we will do some additional environmental testing, especially around the areas where we identified there being environmental issues," Jones said. "Ultimately they will do a final grading and seeding."

All work is expected to be complete by June 1.

Advertisement

Talks still are ongoing between the City of Cañon City and Black Hills Energy on the possible transfer of ownership of a large portion of the 13- to 14-acre property to the City. Black Hills is in the process of gathering information such as water rights, maps and environmental reports to bring to the City.

City Administrator Doug Dotson said he has some ideas for potential uses for the property that he will present to the city council during the annual planning retreat Feb. 23.

"Right now, we are still planning on a conversation in the very near future about the City receiving the property," he said Friday. "There is obviously the issue about receiving it as a park — that's not what our thinking is because there is a Charter issue there — but there may be some good possibilities for the future."

Black Hills will retain a western portion of the property for its control building and two substations.

Black Hills Energy acquired the electric system from Aquila in 2008, and it later was shut down after the Colorado Clean Air - Clean jobs Act was signed into law in April 2010. The plant was retired in December 2013, and demolition efforts began in May 2014.

Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com