WASHINGTON -- A coalition of nearly 200 civic, business and political groups and individuals is endorsing a House bill designed to block larger increases in flood insurance premiums resulting from a 2012 law.

House Democrats and Republicans were nearing an agreement on the bill. Sources said an agreement on the bill could be announced later day - setting the stage for a House vote as early as Wednesday.

Last week, negotiators resolved some technical concerns by the Federal Emergency Management Association, which administers the flood insurance program.

The coalition, organized by Greater New Orleans Inc., said in a letter that the House legislation "ensures that flood insurance will remain affordable for those who have build to code at the time of construction."

"We urge you to vote yes on the Homeowner Flood Insurance Affordability Act," the coalition said in a letter to House members. "The undersigned organizations support a fiscally sound, actuarially responsible National Flood Insurance Program that communicates to citizens their true flood risk."

The House bill makes a number of changes in the 2012 Biggert-Waters flood insurance law, which was designed to make the program more solvent, but is leading to substantial increases for many homeowners. Louisiana lawmakers said some of the increases - double, triple, even 10 times or higher current premiums - would make the program unaffordable for middle-class homeowners.,

The revised bill instructs FEMA leaders, who oversee the federal flood insurance program, to "strive to minimize the number of policies with annual premiums that exceed 1 percent of the total coverage provided by the policy."

It's short of the absolute cap some Democratic lawmakers had sought, but at least puts Congress on record that FEMA, as it moves to price premiums to reflect actual risk, should find ways to avoid charging more than $2,000 on a $200,000 flood insurance policy.

The bill still contains language limiting increases in the nine premium classifications for FEMA to an average of 15 percent. Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., and Rep. Cedric Richmond, D-New Orleans, among others, were concerned that a 15 percent limit on average increases still left open the possibility that some homeowners in each classification could get much larger annual increases, prompting the revision that limits increase for most individual policies to 18 percent each year.

To help pay for the changes in the 2012 Biggert-Waters flood insurance law, the bill would authorize a $25 surcharge on residential policies, and a $250 surcharge on premiums for non-residential properties and non-primary residences. House GOP leaders are insisting the bill should not add to the federal deficit.

The program has 5.5 million policyholders, including 484,000 in Louisiana.

Also included in the House bill:

Restoration of a grandfather clause that allows continued subsidies for homeowners whose home elevations met the requirement of previous FEMA maps, but are out of compliance under revised maps showing greater risk of flooding.

Eliminates the property sales trigger, which under Biggert-Waters led to an immediate increase to actuarial levels once a home changes owners. That sales trigger has made it difficult, if not impossible, for some homeowners to sell their homes.

Reimburses homeowners for successful challenges of new FEMA maps.

Creates a flood insurance advocate for homeowners having trouble getting affordable premiums.



Refunds policyholders who were charged higher rates because of a Biggert-Waters provision that increased premiums for homes that were built before FEMA established flood-risk maps.

Among those signing the letter to House members urging passage of the House bill were the American Bankers Association, the National Association of Home Builders, National Association of Counties; the Eden Isles Homeowners Association of Slidell; St. Tammany Parish President Pat Brister; Stop FEMA Now; and the New Dorp Beach Civic Association of Staten Island, N.Y. Still, Stop FEMA Now founder George Kasimos said Congress needs to do more to keep the flood insurance program affordable.

"It's (the House legislation) better than it was, but we still feel they are kicking this down the road," Kasimos said. "We'd like to see FEMA held accountable for its mismanagement with only 44 percent of premiums going to pay actual claims.''

The House bill still faces strong opposition from some large insurers, and conservative groups such as Americans for Prosperity and Heritage Action. These critics say the House bill moves Congress away from the 2012 law that brought needed reforms to the debt-ridden program.



The Senate passed a bill January 20 that delayed most of the increases for four years to allow FEMA time to complete an affordability bill and Congress and FEMA more time to adjust Biggert-Waters to avert huge increases. Sen. David Vitter, R-La., Monday endorsed the House approach.

"The most important strength of the House bill is that it reinstates grandfathering permanently, which means if you played by the rules and built or rebuilt your homes to code, you'll be protected from unaffordable rate increases," Vitter said. "This is a permanent fix, not just a delay, plus it's completely paid for so the program can sustain itself. The Senate bill, which I supported, was important to get the process going, but the House has strengthened and improved the legislation."

Sen. Landrieu is expected to discuss the House bill later today., She's been working with Rep. Maxine Waters, D-Calif., and Rep. Richmond as they negotiated the House flood insurance bill with aides to House Majority Leader Eric Cantor.

Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, Landrieu's leading GOP challenger in the fall Senate race, has also been instrumental in helping draft the House bill, along with Rep. Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson.