Dentists starting to take bigger bite out of Downstate Delaware

Dr. Mario Disabatino of Glenwood Dental Associates points to some tooth roots in his Smyrna office. When he began his practice in 1968, he was one of two dentists in the area. Now there are seven Smyrna-based dentists — and he projects that number to rise. (Delaware State News photo by Jen Rini)

DOVER — In 1968, Dr. Mario Disabatino, fresh out of his dental residency with the U.S. Navy, was one of two practicing dentists in Smyrna.

He remembers the backlog of patients, with no ability to finagle the schedule to accommodate additional ones at Glenwood Dental Associates.

The shortage of doctors existed until about 2000, when dentists slowly started to come to the area.

“Ever heard of Dagsboro?” he quipped.

Currently, the Sussex County town of about 829 people has three local dentists.

“It’s starting to fill in,” he said, adding that there are seven now in Smyrna and expects that number to go up.

According to a study prepared by the University of Delaware for the Delaware Division of Public Health, there are 381 active dentists in the state. Although the number has decreased by 16 since 2008, the number of specialists has increased by five.

Jill Rogers, executive director of the Delaware Health Care Commission, said the issue is one of geography.

By the numbers, there are 238 general or pediatric dentists in New Castle County, 48 in Kent County and 40 in Sussex. In terms of specialists, such as oral surgeons, there are 39 in New Castle, seven in Kent and nine in Sussex.

“If you look at the map and look at the number of providers, there are more providers in New Castle County per capita,” Ms. Rogers said. “The distribution is the problem, not the number.”

Recruitment efforts

Dr. Greg McClure, director of the Bureau of Oral Health and Dental Services in the Division of Public Health, said when he began his tenure in Delaware in 1999, Kent and Sussex counties were definitely considered shortage areas, especially in terms of pediatric dentistry.

“I think they are in short supply nationally,” Ms. Rogers added.

From 2010 until August 2013, the bureau ran a pediatric dentist recruitment program with a concerted effort to bring two pediatric dentists to Sussex County.

Since its inception in 2001, the State Loan Repayment Program has been crucial for such recruitment efforts.

Dental applicants can apply for a combination of state and federal funds in exchange for relocating to a practice area designated as a health professional shortage area.

The program states the average awards for advanced-degree practitioners range from $25,000 to $35,000 for a two-year contract, while average awards for mid-level practitioners range from $10,000 to $15,000 for a two-year contract. All awards are evaluated on a graduated scale.

Although the bureau was unable to recruit two dentists, Dr. McClure said the addition of just one pediatric dentist made a significant difference.

“We see it as important as people should be coming for dental care at age 1,” he said.

Pennsylvania-educated Dr. Jessica DiCerbo was the pediatric dentist who benefitted from the program.

Since opening her practice in Rehoboth Beach this August, she said she’s seen an influx in patients.

“The word of mouth has gotten out,” she said.

Previously, some of her patients would have to drive to Salisbury, Md., for children’s dental care.

“I think it’s a real convenience for parents,” Dr. DiCerbo said, adding that her practice takes Medicaid insurance, which is an advantage for families of different economic backgrounds.

Dental decay in children is the top chronic childhood disease, she said, so advance care is crucial.

“Children do not complain about their teeth until it is really bad,” Dr. DiCerbo said.

Lapse in care?

Even though dental care is connected to overall health, it may be the one component that is most neglected.

And with the economy at a standstill, Dr. Disabatino said individuals who have lost insurance are reluctant to come in for yearly check-ups.

Now kicking in with the Affordable Care Act in 2014, dental care for children is considered an essential benefit.

However, unlike health insurance, if adults do not sign up for dental insurance, they will not be required to pay the yearly penalty.

“We will have to wait and see,” Dr. Disabatino said of the new health care law.

Dr. Amit Patel, of American Dental Care in Dover, would be ecstatic to have more patients.

They are seeing a lot of open blocks of time during office hours five days a week.

“We do try to make ourselves accessible,” Dr. Patel said.

But the issue of the number of people actively seeking dental care still remains.

“We need to get the awareness out there so people are taking a personal [stake] in their hygiene,” he said.

“We do have space for new patients and we do welcome them.”

Staff writer Jen Rini can be reached at 741-8250 or jrini@newszap.com. Follow DSNJen_Rini on Twitter.