By Christine Stapleton, The Palm Beach Post, Fla. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

Aug. 16 --The Social Security Administration has finally called it quits at its West Palm Beach -area office after several years of what the administration describes as "air quality issues" -- issues that the building's owner claims are false accusations made by disgruntled workers.

The administration sent out a press release at 6:34 p.m. on Thursday saying the office would close permanently at 3 p.m. Friday . The closure leaves central Palm Beach County without a Social Security office and forces the elderly, disabled, low-income and others applying for assistance programs to travel to other offices in Belle Glade , Boca Raton , Margate or Port St. Lucie .

Patti Patterson , the administration's regional communication director in Atlanta , said nothing happened to trigger the permanent closure: "It was just more of the same ongoing issues. We just made a decision that we have to move to another space."

The closing follows a lawsuit filed in Palm Beach County Circuit Court in May 2013 by 23 Social Security workers against SSAB Florida Co. LLC , which owns the building at 1645 N. Congress Ave , just west of West Palm Beach . That lawsuit, which is pending, blames air-quality issues in the building for the office workers' alleged respiratory problems.

But the building owner denies the building has any problems.

"We have done every possible test -- on carpet fibers, walls, air ducts and I can tell you the physical evidence demonstrates there is nothing wrong with the building," said Dr. Rustom Khouri , the president and CEO of Carnegie Management and Development Corp. , the Ohio -based parent company of SSAB Florida. "These people are just trying to rip the system off."

The Social Security Administration also has complained about air-conditioning problems and general maintenance issues to the the U.S. General Services Administration .

GSA, the agency responsible for federal office space, worked with SSAB Florida to address the complaints since they arose in 2012, and independent air quality tests conducted since suggest there have been no threats to safety and health at the 22,000-square-foot building.

Khouri said the government's $56,000 -a-month lease on the building doesn't expire until July 2017 and "they're going to have to keep the lease in place."

Saudia Muwwakkil , a GSA spokesperson, wrote in an email that "It is too early to say what steps we will take to fulfill the remaining term of the Congress Avenue lease."

Robert Johnson , attorney for the 23 employees, declined to comment about their lawsuit.

Eric Neuman , attorney for SSAB and Carnegie, wrote in an email that "the building has never made anyone sick."

"As we've stated in the lawsuit, the plaintiffs' case is frivolous and wrongful," Neuman wrote. "We are confident that this will come out at trial and that we will prevail on all claims and counterclaims."

Meanwhile, in federal court, Sagamore Insurance Company has asked a judge to decide whether it must cover SSAB Florida's legal expenses in the Social Security workers' lawsuit. SSAB held a $1 million insurance policy with Sagamore, but the policy excludes damages and legal costs associated with fungi, including mold.

Air-quality complaints and other repairs and construction caused the government to close the office in February 2013 . Workers were reassigned to other offices until the office was reopened in December.

Then on July 17 , Social Security shifted 50 workers to other offices and cut back services offered in West Palm Beach to benefit verification, changes of address, direct deposit changes and obtaining a printout of a Social Security number. Federal officials said then that the Congress Avenue location would be closed permanently as soon as a new site could be found.

Upon learning Thursday that the office would be closed for good without having a new office lined up, Palm Beach County's four U.S. representatives -- Alcee L. Hastings , Ted Deutch , Lois Frankel and Patrick Murphy -- sent a letter to Region 4 Social Security Administration Commissioner Michael W. Grochowski , expressing their concern about the closure and urging the administration to find new office space in the West Palm Beach area.

"Given the large population of elderly and disabled persons in our districts, appointments carried out over the phone or via the internet are not readily viable options," the representatives wrote. "It is paramount that we continue to ensure full access to the invaluable resources of the SSA through a physical office location in West Palm Beach ."

While the office search continues, the administration is working with libraries, mental health centers and homeless shelters to provide limited services, Patterson said. West Palm Beach's Mandel Public Library at 411 Clematis St. has installed icons on the desktop of the library's public computers that link directly to the administration's website.

Patterson said many of Social Security's services do not require an office visit, and she urged people to go to the agency's website at www.socialsecurity.gov or call its toll-free number, 800-772-1213, to avoid lengthy lines and travel time.

Online services include applying for retirement, disability, Medicare , spouse and child benefits; checking application status; getting a Social Security statement; and appealing a decision.

For other services: Call 800-772-1213 or TTY-1-800-325-0778; go to www.socialsecurity.gov.

"We're still trying to have some limited presence in communities," Patterson said.

___

(c)2014 The Palm Beach Post (West Palm Beach, Fla.)

Visit The Palm Beach Post (West Palm Beach, Fla.) at www.palmbeachpost.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 883

[jetpack-related-posts]