Getty Images Amid all the news that hackers gave gotten their hands on millions of credit card numbers and contact information from at least five retailers – including Neiman Marcus – many of you might be wondering what those thieves could really net from just an email address, home address, phone number or a credit card number. The answer depends on you, and what kind of "ish" you could get sucked in by. On the one hand, you're technically right – once a credit card is canceled and without your Social Security number, there's not much left for an identity thief to directly profit off of. But with a little extra work and some programming ingenuity, identity thieves can use this information to engage in what I like to call the pantheon of "ishing" – phishing, spear-phishing, vishing and smishing – and still turn a tidy profit off of their crimes with your inadvertent help. So what are these four big Ishes? Let's go through them, shall we?

1. Phishing If you have an email account, you're probably already familiar with phishing, which is when you (and thousands of other people) get an email claiming to be "your" financial company, email provider or best friend (among other identities) in an effort to get you to give them sensitive financial information or personal information (like your Social Security number), or even to click on a link that will collect that information or install a virus or malware onto your computer. What you might not know is that phishermen's trawling tactics are increasingly sophisticated and their emails look more and more like they've come from reputable sources, which is why you have to retrain yourself not to click, no matter how initially important or worrisome the email might be. If you think you do need to be in touch with your financial institution, email provider or best buddy, type that email address directly in a new window, or web address in a new browser. If you think you do need to be in touch with your financial institution or email provider, go directly to the institution's actual website ("Google" it if you need to) and find their contact information there. Alternatively you could call the number on the back of your card or on a recent bill.

2. Spear-Phishing Spear-phishing is, as it sounds, just a more targeted form of phishing: hackers will go through lists of contact data looking for people that seem either more vulnerable to phishing tactics or more important – like people who work at financial services companies – and send them tailored emails that appear to come from specific, important people they know. They're often asked to click on links or download seemingly innocuous files and – bam – the hackers are in.

3. Vishing Vishing is how hackers take advantage of phone number databases – like the ones accessed in the SnapChat hack. They'll call you and claim to be from your bank (they just need your account number and routing information), the IRS (just confirm your Social Security number) or even Microsoft (just let them log into your PC remotely) to try to gain access to your personal or financial information or even install malware on your devices.