Andy Tobin (Photo: Handout) Story Highlights Arizona House Speaker Andy Tobin will challenge U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-Ariz., for the sprawling rural 1st District, one of the GOP's top targets this fall.

Tobin starts the race with little money compared to Kirkpatrick's $1.4 million war chest and he's competing in a district that has a Democratic edge in voter registration.

But Kirkpatrick lost the seat once before, in the midterms of 2010, when Republican turnout surged.

House Speaker Andy Tobin finally secured the Republican nomination for Congress in Arizona's sprawling rural 1st District on Tuesday and will challenge U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-Ariz., one of the GOP's top targets this fall.

Tobin won the primary by only a few hundred votes after his opponent Gary Kiehne conceded the race. Because the margin was so narrow, it took a week to decide the contest as officials wrapped up counting ballots in eight counties.

Establishment Republicans believe Tobin provides the strongest chance of victory in the Nov. 4 general election.

After conceding, Kiehne, a political newcomer and wealthy businessman from the White Mountains, threw his support behind Tobin, who lives in Paulden, outside the district.

"This was a hard-fought and very close election," said Kiehne, who ran as a folksy cowboy and spent more than $400,000 of his own money, but stumbled as he made controversial statements. "My top priority this fall is to see Republicans win here in Arizona, so I want to offer all of my support."

State Rep. Adam Kwasman, R-Oro Valley, who came in third, also called on Republicans to unite behind Tobin.

The district stretches from the Grand Canyon to suburbs of Tucson.

Tobin starts the race with little money compared with Kirkpatrick's $1.4million war chest. Kirkpatrick also didn't face a primary challenger, while Tobin's image has been battered over a brutal few months of campaigning against Kiehne and Kwasman. Also, Tobin is competing in a district that has a Democratic edge in voter registration.

But Kirkpatrick has lost the seat once before, in the midterms of 2010, when Republican turnout surged. Kirkpatrick could find that a number of key votes she made with her party, when Arizona's two other swing Democrats, Reps. Ron Barber and Kyrsten Sinema, chose instead to side with the GOP, end up being radioactive.

In a race in the 1st District that political handicappers rate as a toss-up, both candidates will need to sway independents and members of the other party to win.

Though Tobin is outmatched in fundraising for now, he is likely to see Republican donations pour in quickly and outside groups with deep pockets pick up the slack. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce gave Tobin a big boost in the primary, airing ads on his behalf at a crucial moment late in the race to help his struggling campaign.

Kirkpatrick is likely to benefit from well-funded groups such as Emily's List, which works to elect female Democrats who support abortion rights.

The National Republican Congressional Committee got a jump on the competition Tuesday by releasing a TV spot criticizing Kirkpatrick for her "baggage," such as voting for the Affordable Care Act and supporting President Barack Obama.

The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, delayed by the uncertainty of the GOP primary, will launch an ad today criticizing Tobin for slashing more than $1billion in education funding at the state Legislature during the recession, according to a transcript provided to The Arizona Republic.

Gary Kiehne (Photo: Handout)

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1rLtkuN