Is USA the new Japan?

The U.S. might be nothing like Japan in most areas of comparison, but the medical insurance market is an exception. In 1961, Japan implemented its initial wave of national healthcare coverage. Although there are major differences between their system and the Affordable Care Act (ACA), there are some similarities:

In essence, both nations are aiming to accomplish the same goal.

Individuals' out-of-pocket expenses experienced significant growth after national coverage was implemented.

Demand for supplemental medical insurance plans grew following the rise in expenses.

There are many more similarities, as well as plenty of differences, but one thing that stands out to me in both instances is the emergence of Aflac, Inc. (NYSE:AFL), which expanded to Japan in 1974.

Aflac is currently trading at $61.53/share. With a 9.59 P/E, versus a 10-year average P/E of 12.58, and a DCF valuation of $101.07/share, I believe that the supplemental insurance company is undervalued. Why is it trading at a 64% discount? Here are some of the reasons:

The USD/JPY exchange rate has harmed Aflac's revenues, causing concern for future revenue streams.

A large portion of the company's investments are in Japanese Government Bonds (JGBs). Also, many of their investments' credit ratings were recently taken down a notch

Aflac's U.S. operations were harmed by increasing commission percentages to distributors.

Uncertainty revolving around the ACA has caused some concern for the future of U.S. insurance companies.

Do these reasons constitute the current valuation of Aflac? Not at all. Here's why:

USD/JPY

The exchange rate effect, although significant for Aflac, will diminish if the dollar weakens (which I predict will happen and positively affect Aflac's revenues within 12 months). Both Japan and the U.S. are aiming to have 2% inflation per year. If both countries can stay on track to accomplish that goal, then the exchange rate effect will fade.

Another key factor in the exchange rate effect on Aflac is the percentage of premium and investment revenues from the U.S. versus Japan. In 2014, 72% of their revenues were denominated in yen (which is down from 2013 and 2012). Revenues from Aflac's U.S. operations have been increasing year over year. Aflac predicts, and I agree, that U.S. revenues will continue to grow, further reducing any effects the USD/JPY exchange rate might have on their revenues.

Investments

Regarding their investment portfolio, we, again, see the negative effects on Aflac's revenues that the USD/JPY rate has had. Although this has hurt the market value of their portfolio, the company still has a strong cash flow from their investments. Going forward, the company is looking to invest in more USD denominated investments. Unless you see the Japanese government defaulting in the near future, the risks associated with this concern are minimal.

Commission percentages

Aflac is looking to revamp its operations in the U.S. market. These changes took place before the end of 2015's Q1, and the expenses associated with them were noticeable; however, so was the growth in U.S. premium revenues. Aflac is aiming to increase its sales in the U.S. by offering higher incentives to their distributors and more products to their customers. Why are they doing this? Because of the Affordable Care Act.

The ACA

The ACA causes concern for many companies operating in the U.S., and rightfully so. If an insurance company cannot adequately adapt to the new market, they are destined for hardship. Aflac, however, is not one of those companies. First of all, Aflac sells supplemental insurance: meaning that there is no material effect of the ACA on Aflac's products. Second, it thrives in a market with national healthcare coverage (Aflac controls roughly 80% of Japan's cancer insurance market). Third, they are prepared for the changes. There are multiple companies that sell supplemental insurance products in the U.S., but Aflac is among few that solely provide supplemental insurance plans (at no cost to employers who offer these "benefits" to employees). The main difference, in my opinion, is the impact of name recognition; 94% of U.S. workers recognize the Aflac brand name, which will come into play the more that supplemental insurance products are sought out.

Conclusion

I believe that Aflac is undervalued by roughly 64%. The U.S. political and insurance landscapes are shaping up in ways that Aflac is all too used to, and I think that they are the front-runner among all supplemental insurance providers. The exchange rate effects might cause their valuation to shift slightly (higher or lower), but not to the point that they are only worth $61.53/share.

About the author: