Wednesday's announcement essentially formalizes a handshake agreement between the two hospitals

Rochester General Hospital, left, and Unity Hospital in Greece. (Photo: File photos ) Story Highlights The agreement essentially creates one hospital out of two

Rochester General Hospital is the area's third largest employer

Hospitals around the country are feeling the impact of lower payments due to health care reform

Though some questions are yet to be answered, two of Rochester's largest health care systems took another step toward a merger billed as a union of equals.

Rochester General Hospital System and Unity Health System announced Wednesday they have signed a formal agreement to form a fully integrated single health system.

The merger, if it clears a federal antitrust review by the Federal Trade Commission and a separate state assessment, will create one hospital system led by one board of directors with equal representation from both of the current hospital system boards.

The new system thus far has not been named, though that will be decided, hospital officials said, before the deal closes, likely in mid-2014.

Wednesday's announcement essentially formalizes a handshake agreement both systems made in April. The boards of directors of the two systems approved the deal on Wednesday .

In a conference call Wednesday afternoon, Unity president and CEO Warren Hern and RGH general president and CEO Mark Clement said joining the two systems is a prudent step in today's health reform environment, with Medicare reimbursements expected to drop as a result of the Affordable Care Act, and care increasingly being shifted away from inpatient hospitals to outpatient models.

"There's great downward pressure on traditional hospital revenue," Clement said. "This is the reality of the health care environment today," Hern said.

The two hospitals, as part of the merger plan, have assessed the regulatory environment. "We feel confident that we will pass regulatory review, that the community benefit this provides will be clear to the FTC," Clement said. Approval is also required by the state, though the antitrust review is expected to be the more problematic.

"This is just another step in the process," Hern said of the boards' approval. "Since last April we've been working to create a document that today was approved enthusiastically by our boards."

Both leaders said closing or downsizing existing hospitals in either of the systems is not part of the plan. If the merger is approved, the public is not expected to experience change in the quality or access of care, the leaders said.

"This is more about the non-clinical aspect of the systems," Clement said. "This will allow us to have one supply network, and other back-office coordinations."

Hern said, "In IT alone, we could save millions over time by having one system."

Neither was able to say how many jobs might be lost due to the merger.

Both Hern and Clement said that competing with the larger University of Rochester Medical Center was not a factor in the merger decision.

"We work closely with the medical center," Hern said. "There will always be competition, but we expect it to be around providing the best care possible."

"We understand the reasons for this affiliation because URMC shares the same pressure to reduce costs and improve quality of care," Steve Goldstein, CEO of the medical center's Strong and Highland hospitals, said Wednesday. "We appreciate Unity and Rochester General's previous public commitment to continue supporting the role URMC plays in training our region's physicians. This shared commitment to medical education helps to raise the quality of care for all patients and must be preserved."

The Rochester General Health System operates Rochester General Hospital and Newark-Wayne Community Hospital as well as two long-term-care facilities, Hill Haven and DeMay Living Center. Last week, it announced an affiliation agreement with Clifton Springs Hospital and Clinic in Ontario County.

The Unity Health System operates Unity Hospital on the Unity Park Ridge Health Care Campus in Greece and Unity St. Mary's Campus in Rochester.

Rochester General is the area's third largest employer, with 8,100 employees. Unity is the sixth, with 5,358. Combined, their workforce approaches that of URMC, their largest rival.

The University of Rochester is the region's largest employer at 21,881 workers. Of those, 13,732 work in UR's health system, which includes Strong Memorial, Highland, Golisano Children's and F.F. Thompson hospitals, physician practices and other holdings. It also purchased the former Lakeside Memorial Hospital in Brockport, which closed in April, and established the Strong West urgent care center there.

The economics of health care reform make agreements such as the one reached Wednesday desirable, if not necessary, the two CEOs said. Hospitals around the country are feeling the impact of lower payments.

For instance, the Cleveland Clinic is searching for ways to cut $250 million from its budget over the next year or so, and has closed maternity wards in half the hospitals it operates. In upstate New York, Adirondack Health may close its emergency room in Lake Placid and a dialysis center in Tupper Lake.

TTOBIN@DemocratandChronicle.com

Twitter.com/tobin3

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1ap81T5