Chris Chester/WAMU

Story updated at 11:40 a.m. Monday.

The National Weather Service has issued a winter weather advisory for the District effective from 2 a.m. Monday through 10 a.m. on Tuesday.

Rain saturated much of the region in the early morning hours Monday, but snow has gradually entered the mix as the morning wears on. Precipitation will change to all snow by mid-afternoon, with the heaviest snow expected Monday night into Tuesday.

Road crews mobilized late Sunday evening were standing at the ready in the early morning hours. Jennifer McCord, a spokesperson for the Virginia Department of Transportation, encouraged commuters to telework if possible. VDOT is expecting winter storms to affect this morning’s ride to work, tonight’s commute home, and even tomorrow is in play.

"Our focus for our crews is on the next 36 hours… possibly three rush hours impacted by snow and this wintry mix," McCord says. "So that’s an extended period of time that we want folks to prepare for.”

VDOT says it hoped to pre-treat roughly 850 miles of roads in Northern Virginia.

Meanwhile, in Prince George’s County, Maryland, an estimated 135 trucks were deployed overnight to prepare for today’s storm. The county is asking that residents park their cars on even-numbered sides of residential streets or in their driveways to help the crews clear the roadways.

This is just the first serving of what the National Weather Service is calling a "complex winter storm scenario."

A large coastal storm is expected to develop off the coast of North Carolina late Monday afternoon. With winds up to 40 miles per hour, the NWS says an additional 5 inches or more of snow is possible along the coast — in particular the Maryland counties along the Chesapeake Bay.

Lonely REAGAN NATIONAL NE flights STARTING TO get cancelled Amtrak still operating NE service but warns it may stop pic.twitter.com/iBFOb73guH — Armando Trull (@trulldc) January 26, 2015

The D.C. Metro region will be spared the worst of that second storm. Current forecasts call for snow showers and just a 50/50 chance of precipitation on Tuesday. Those with travel plans further north may want to make contingency plans, though, at least according to the Capital Weather Gang:

Model forecasts are suggesting that a winter storm that will track up the Northeast coast on Monday night into early Wednesday morning could drop as much as 25 inches of snow along the country’s busiest and most populous Northeast corridor. ... Wind gusts up to 50 mph could lead to widespread power outages. Visibilities will drop to less than ¼ of a mile at times of peak snowfall intensity, which is expected to climb to more than 1 inch per hour.

There are currently no delays out of any of the region's three airports, but cancellations are to be expected for flights to the northeast later today as the storm develops.

A handful of schools in the D.C. suburbs closed Monday morning, including Frederick County, Maryland, and Frederick County, Virginia. You can check the complete list of school closings with our partners at NBC Washington. The federal government is open today with the option for unscheduled leave.