Topics: Books, Race, Ta-Nehsis Coates, The Economist, News, Politics News

The reviews of Ta-Nehisi Coates’ controversial new book, “Between the World and Me,” were bound to be contentious — the epigraph is an excerpt of the poem by Richard Wright from which the book draws its title, after all. But wrestling with the ideas contained in a book that’s difficult for many people to read shouldn’t result in patently unfair reviews from anonymous, intellectually dishonest critics like the individual who penned The Economist’s.

Putting aside the issue of anonymity — it’s not as if The Economist covers race more judiciously on a typical day — the core problem with its review is that it’s nothing more than yet another performance of the publication’s long-tired contrarian shtick. “The epistolary form is not the only archaic thing about Mr Coates’s book,” the reviewer writes, apparently unaware that Coates is very deliberately referencing James Baldwin’s “Letter to My Nephew” with this format.

“He writes with the torrential outrage of a campaigning Victorian,” the reviewer continues, because associating a black man with the gendered image of teetotalers like Carrie Nation is a perfectly sensible, and not the least bit sexist, thing to do.

The reviewer — I was about to write “he,” for what I hope are sadly obvious reasons — proceeds to denigrate the quality of Coates’ prose, characterizing it “loquacious, repetitive, at times self-indulgent and just good enough to get away with it,” and follows that judgment with a passage that demonstrates said judgment’s worthlessness. Quoting a moving passage after claiming that the writer is barely capable of producing one is probably not the best idea.

But the reviewer had to pen a contrarian review, so quoting other passages was absolutely out of the question. It’d be difficult to argue against the power of Coates’ prose if one quoted this, after all:

Americans believe in the reality of “race” as a defined, indubitable feature of the natural world. Racism — the need to ascribe bone-deep features to people and then humiliate, reduce, and destroy them — inevitably follows from this inalterable condition.

That wouldn’t do at all. But the central offense the brave anonymous reviewer seems to have suffered from Coates’ book stems from the fact that “Between the World and Me” contains many statements to the effect that well-intentioned white people are complicit in systemic racism — that they still accrue the benefits bequeathed to white people by virtue of their whiteness.