Politics would not exist without hope and fear.

After a long time thinking about and writing about the 2016 race to be president, I am convinced one or the other is entrenched in the campaigns and voting. I’ll give you three examples:

Donald Trump

– Many people love him because they fear more of President Obama’s policies.

He wants to defund Planned Parenthood; strengthen the military; return jobs here from over the border or overseas; says same-sex marriage is a state issue; looks to eliminate corporate taxes; favors capital punishment; wants to cut the U.S. Department of Education, leave to local control; opposes hikes in the minimum wage; believes climate change is a hoax; is in favor of drilling for oil domestically; likes Russia (Putin), not China; says no to Syrian refugees; OK with no limits on guns; opposes Political Action Committees; wants to stop immigration, particularly Muslims; says no to a flat tax; and, among other concepts, wants to repeal and replace Obamacare.

Of course, he did not announce those stances “that way” or use what many would call politically correct words. Trump often delivers his message with words, that prior to now, no one would say in public or on TV; to listen to some of his speeches, you’d think it was a late night talk show (or reality TV).

Bernie Sanders – He embodies hope for his supporters. That should come as no surprise, considering he is a self-described “democratic socialist,” and wants to expand what we call handouts and entitlement programs.

He also wants to charge companies for carbon emissions (is considered a “climate change hawk”); favors free preschool and free tuition at public colleges and universities; is pro-choice; wants to break up big banks and open up the Fed; looks to ban assault weapons, and repeal laws protecting gun manufacturers from lawsuits; likes universal, government-provided health care; wants to waive deportations and offer a path to citizenship; promises to raise income taxes on those making $250,000 or more, and tax capital gains same as dividends; calls for withdrawal of all troops as soon as possible; and, among other ideas, supports the deal with Iran and opposes tougher sanctions.

Sanders is viewed as the “I like him, but he can’t win” guy, and 60 percent of his support is from the younger generations (ages 18-34). He also has an unpredictable track record on gun control.

My third example is local (think: Prescott and Yavapai County). Fear of increases in sales and property taxes; hope for more services; hope for and fear of a new county jail, depending on your opinion; worries over assured water supply and group homes; and myriad other topics, including zoning, spending, transparency, and access.

If you’re not the whimsical voter who makes a decision based on a candidate’s appearance, it behooves you to examine the issues. Open your eyes and mind. Approach candidates and officials mentally knowing what you want, and see how they fit into your mold … and if they change your mind.

Otherwise, if we operate out of only hope or fear, we’re looking at the candidates with glasses colored by emotion.