Big moments for the economy ahead

BIG MOMENTS FOR THE ECONOMY AHEAD – POLITICO’s Ben White: “The general election is still a year away. But much about the economic picture that will frame the 2016 presidential race will come into the focus in the next two weeks as the Federal Reserve prepares to raise interest rates for the first time in nearly a decade and the job market improves to levels not seen since 2007. … The overall backdrop – an economy that is strong enough for the Fed to start hiking rates – should favor Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton.

“But the first Fed move, which is widely expected to come on December 16th, presents a potential wild card that could roil global markets, slow U.S. job growth and provide an opportunity for Republicans in an economy that retains significant structural problems that have left many voters deeply frustrated and casting about for tough-talking outsiders like Donald Trump.

Story Continued Below

OUT OF THE EMERGENCY ROOM; STILL IMPAIRED – “Back in 2008, the U.S. economy was in the emergency room and we have slowly emerged. We can walk pretty fast now but we are still structurally impaired and cannot run,’ said Mohamed A. El-Erian, chief economic adviser at Allianz. ‘And the Federal Reserve action likely to come in December presents risks of both a policy mistake and a market accident.’

“The policy mistake would see the Fed tightening the U.S. money supply while Europe, Japan and China are all easing credit, creating a global “divergence” which further drives up the U.S. dollar, hurting U.S. exporters and possibly creating big corporate defaults abroad for companies whose debt is held in dollars. The ‘market accident’ would see big stock price declines as investors decide profits can’t hold up without the Fed pumping easy money into the system.

NO STOPPING THE FED – “But none of these potential problems are likely to hold up the Fed, which is bordering on desperate to exit from its current emergency footing and to start the process before the 2016 election year begins. The dawn of the new economic age will begin this week as Fed Chair Janet Yellen speaks to the Economic Club of Washington on Wednesday and testifies before the Senate Joint Economic Committee on Thursday.

“Yellen is widely expected to lay further ground work for a rate hike next week in both appearances. Analysts say she is likely to argue that with the unemployment rate at 5 percent, job growth strong and wages starting to rise, it no longer makes sense to have rates below zero, an emergency policy born of the financial crisis. … ‘She has two opportunities now to set expectations for a rate hike in December,” said Megan Greene, chief economist at Manulife.

‘And Fed members have been tripping all over themselves to say they would like to normalize policy. They have been laying down sign posts everywhere.’ Greene added that the Fed very much wants to get out of the way before the election. ‘They don’t like to talk about it, but I think they will be moving more for political reasons than economic ones.’”

FED TIME TABLE – Via Morgan Stanley: “[W]e've removed one hike from our expected path of tightening after December, and following a lengthy pause, we expect the Fed to next move in June 2016. … While a relatively low bar set by Fed officials for liftoff in December was met by the strong October employment report, the case for hiking rates now is not especially compelling from a dual mandate perspective

“In particular, it’s hard to see how any policymaker could claim to be ‘reasonably confident’ at this point that inflation is now on the way to 2 percent after core PCE has missed on the downside for eight straight years and has been nearly immobile at 1.3 percent all this year”

HAS THE CREDIT CYCLE ALREADY TURNED? – FT’s Stephen Foley: “Dear future historians: Janet Yellen did not cause the late-2010s recession. If a Federal Reserve interest rate rise in December is followed in short order by an economic slowdown, the temptation will be to blame the central bank and its chair for a premature tightening of monetary policy. But there are a growing number of red flags that suggest the US credit cycle has already turned, with consequences for the real economy next year, even before the Fed makes its move. …

“Smart money investors have positioned themselves for a rise in corporate defaults, a pullback in lending, and contagion across asset classes. The question is whether this is the start of a self-reinforcing downward spiral. The answer depends in part on the complex chain that links the deepest recesses of the credit markets to the real economy”

http://on.ft.com/1NjQzk9

NEW ROLL BACK TUCKED INTO HIGHWAY BILL – Via a close watcher: “There is an amendment that was added to the Federal Highway Bill that will be voted on this week and the amendment attempts to repeal the Trust Indenture Act, a law that has been in place since 1939 and protects minority investors from majority investor groups ganging up on them and forcing them to take bad deal terms in the case of a bankruptcy or distressed situation”

REACT – Andrew Milgram, Managing Partner of Marblegate Asset Management: “We were very concerned to learn that Senators working on the federal transportation bill have added a completely unrelated financial amendment that would retroactively overturn 76 years of legal precedent established under the Trust Indenture Act (TIA), directly impact several high-profile court cases pending adjudication and remove vital protections for minority investors for which the law was created. This amendment directly undermines legal due process and Constitutional procedure.”

The Amendment: http://politi.co/1NjLt7v

NEWS FROM ACROSS THE POND: POLITICO PRO EUROPE BRIEF — POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premium subscription service, has teamed up with POLITICO Europe to bring you POLITICO Pro Europe Brief. If you’re engaged in international affairs or responsible for monitoring European policy and politics to determine their influence on the U.S., Pro’s Europe Brief is for you.

Written through an American lens, the Europe Brief draws on POLITICO resources in both Brussels and D.C. to track and translate key policy and regulatory developments and their impact on the U.S Bonus: Try it for free! Download a complimentary issue of Europe Brief today.

GOOD TUESDAY MORNING – Email me on bwhite@politico.com and follow me on Twitter @morningmoneyben

DRIVING THE DAY – President Obama continues to hold meetings at the Paris climate talks and will hold a press conference … Senate Judiciary has a Puerto Rico debt crisis hearing at 10:00 a.m. … Treasury and USAID at 7:30 a.m. host a Financial Inclusion Forum featuring opening remarks from Jack Lew and a keynote by Bill Gates … Business Roundtable at 10:00 a.m. will hosts a call to talk about CEO plans for capital spending and employment … ISM Manufacturing at 10:00 a.m. expected to rise to 50.5 from 50.1 … Construction at 10:00 a.m. expected to 0.6 percent … Auto sales expected to rise to 18.4M from 18.2M …

ALSO TODAY: The Financial Services Roundtable and its Save 10 Coalition will be giving away 100 free slices of pizza at the DC Slices Pizza Truck at Farragut Square and sharing information about the Save 10 initiative. http://bit.ly/1NEVL8L

THIS MORNING ON POLITICO PRO FINANCIAL SERVICES — Zachary Warmbrodt on whether bank regulatory relief will make it into a must-pass appropriations bill -- and to get Morning Money every day before 6 a.m.-- please contact Pro Services at (703) 341-4600or info@politicopro.com

** A message from the American Bankers Association: Regulatory burden has real-life consequences. For example, a young couple couldn’t get a home loan for their growing family—not because they didn’t qualify, but because arbitrary D.C. regulations tied their banker’s hands. That’s why America’s hometown bankers call on Congress: Pass Reg Relief Now. Learn more at aba.com/RegRelief **

LOW ODDS FOR FINANCIAL RIDERS IN SPENDING BILL – Via KBW: “Congressional Republicans have been pushing to include policy riders in the spending bill and two of the policy riders on the table are connected to financial services. One of these riders would block or delay the Department of Labor's (DOL) fiduciary rule. The other is Sen. Richard Shelby's (R-AL) banking bill, which includes a change to the automatic designation of banks with over $50 billion in assets as systemically important financial institutions.

“KBW analysts do not expect that the financial services-related policy riders will be included in the omnibus spending bill because they think Republicans have other policy riders that are higher priorities for them than the Shelby bill and the DOL policy rider, and analysts expect Republicans will push harder for these riders that are not related to the financial services sector. In KBW’s view, Republicans would prefer to add policy riders on Syrian refugees and environment and energy-related riders like blocking the EPA's coal and Waters of the United States rules”

BUSINESS INVESTMENT STALLS OUT – WSJ’s Eric Morath: “Business investment across the U.S. is fizzling out. Companies appear reluctant to step up spending on the basic building blocks of the economy, such as machines, computers and new buildings. The broadest measure of U.S. business investment advanced 2.2 percent from a year earlier in the third quarter … marking one of the worse performances of the six-year-old economic expansion.

“Other measures show an even gloomier picture. A gauge of capital expenditures — orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft — declined 3.8 percent through the first 10 months of the year compared with the same period in 2014, according to government estimates. Weak investment restrains economic output, one key reason the economy has struggled to grow faster than 2 percent in recent years. The weakness also saps the economy’s future potential” http://on.wsj.com/1NmMJeD

RENMINBI GOES GLOBAL – FT’s Shawn Donnan in Washington and James Kynge in New York: “The IMF on Monday gave a major vote of confidence to China and its reform efforts, giving the renminbi greater weighting than the yen or pound as it included the currency in its elite basket of reserve currencies. … The vote by the board to make the renminbi the fifth currency in the basket used to value the IMF’s own de facto currency followed months of deliberation at the fund and years of lobbying by a Beijing eager for the recognition. …

“The Rmb’s elevation to the club of elite global reserve currencies is a big step for China and a significant one for the international monetary system,’ said Eswar Prasad, professor of economics at Cornell University and a former IMF China mission chief. The renminbi will become the third biggest currency in the ‘special drawing rights’ basket when it takes effect on October 1. The move is largely symbolic but Christine Lagarde, IMF managing director, called it a ‘milestone’ in China’s economic reform ‘journey’ and its integration into the global financial system” http://on.ft.com/1Qab2gD

CUOMO EYES NEW LIMITS ON BANKS – IMF’s Ben Protess: “As authorities around the globe grapple with the threat of terrorism, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo is preparing to impose new regulations on New York State banks to prevent illicit money from flowing through Wall Street and into the hands of militants and criminals. Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, plans to propose rules this week that would clarify and expand the responsibility of New York State banks to thwart money laundering and the financing of terrorist groups …

“The rules — a jolt to New York banks as well as to the federal regulators who typically police such transactions — would force a chief compliance officer to certify that a bank maintains systems to ‘detect, weed out and prevent illicit’ money transfers. If compliance officers file an ‘incorrect or false’ certification, they could face criminal charges under the rules, a rare effort to hold financial executives criminally liable. At its core, Mr. Cuomo’s proposal aims to block terrorists from using the New York financial system, the center of dollar-based finance and global capitalism. The effort, though, could prove challenging, as New York banks process billions of dollars in payments on behalf of clients who often hide behind layers of legitimate front groups.” http://nyti.ms/1Qaaw24

WARREN A NO-SHOW FOR CLINTON – WP’s Anne Gearan and Mike DeBonis: “The tableau surrounding Hillary Clinton on Monday was impressive: 13 female Democratic senators endorsing the Democratic 2016 presidential front-runner en masse. The evening fundraising event on Capitol Hill brought in a chunk of campaign cash ahead of an often difficult fundraising month in December. But it was also meant to underscore Clinton’s near-monopoly among Democratic lawmakers who have declared a preference, and her appeal as the first woman with a strong shot at becoming president.

“But one particularly influential female Democratic senator didn’t join her colleagues: Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) — the anti-Wall Street crusader who was courted to run as the darling of very liberal Democrats — has not endorsed Clinton, nor has she promised she will. Her absence served as an awkward reminder of Clinton’s enduring struggle to generate support and enthusiasm among an influential segment of her party’s most liberal members” http://wapo.st/1YEOAip

MORGAN STANLEY CUTS JOBS – WSJ’s Justin Baer: “Morgan Stanley plans to slash hundreds of jobs from its debt and currencies division, people familiar with the matter said, revealing that the Wall Street firm believes that a months-long slump in trading revenue may persist. Morgan Stanley company could eliminate as much as a quarter of the business’s workforce … The cuts will occur across all of the division’s offices, and on each of the firm’s trading desks, though London is expected to bear a slightly bigger brunt than New York, the people said.

“The potential cuts reflect Morgan Stanley’s acceptance that a slowdown in client activity that took root during the summer months may not reverse any time soon. The New York firm also faces pressure from investors to lift its returns on equity that have often languished below a 10% target set by James Gorman, Morgan Stanley’s chairman and chief executive. New capital rules have penalized big banks for holding vast inventories of bonds and other debt securities, forcing them into difficult decisions on how big their trading businesses can remain in the postcrisis era” http://on.wsj.com/1Pq5y2G

FED TO RESTRICT LOANS – NYT’s Peter Eavis: “In the lead-up to the financial crisis of 2008, the Federal Reserve had the ability to make huge emergency loans to almost any entity it chose, a power it used to help save Wall Street firms from possible collapse. Now, seven years later, the Fed, under the direction of Congress, has adopted a new rule that would place restrictions on its extraordinary financial powers. The restrictions, which stem from the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010, aim to ensure that the Fed’s emergency loans are not used to shore up insolvent firms.

“The five members of the Fed’s board on Monday voted to approve the rule, which takes effect on Jan. 1. The Fed’s emergency loans point to a quandary at the heart of the financial system. Many specialists say central banks, so-called lenders of last resort, need to have a free hand to lend liberally in a crisis to keep panics from taking down healthy firms. But others say the availability of emergency loans encourages banks to pursue habits — like making excessive use of short-term borrowing to finance their activities — that make the system unstable in the first place.”

** A message from the American Bankers Association: What would regulatory relief mean for your hometown? Meaningful relief helps your banker provide reasonably priced loans that allow your fellow Americans to buy a home, expand a small business, send a child to college or save for retirement. Reg relief means creating jobs and opportunity. It means economic growth. It means building a strong future for your hometown. By passing S. 1484, Congress can trim the outdated and ill-fitting regulations standing in the way of Americans’ financial dreams. We call on Congress to Pass Reg Relief Now and let bankers help their communities thrive. Learn more about what reg relief means for your hometown at aba.com/RegRelief . **

**A message from the Property Casualty Insurers Association of America (PCI): Hurricane Season is right around the corner. Home, auto, and business insurers are committed to assisting policyholders in need, quickly and efficiently. Insurers have a strong track record following even the most devastating of natural disasters. In the wake of Superstorm Sandy, insurers settled more than 130,000 flood claims, with only one percent of claims going to litigation. The private insurance sector paid more than 1,500,000 million Sandy claims from all other insured losses, with less than one percent going to litigation. But there is still work to be done. Insurers are looking at new tools and methods to improve our response after natural disasters. The industry also is working with Congress to make improvements to the flood insurance system. Building safer, stronger, more resilient communities is a goal for us all. We are all in this together. Learn more about the Property Casualty Insurers Association and the industry’s efforts at http://bit.ly/FloodHQ and at @PCIAA.**