I am also confident that, four years from now, Zogby will not be the least bit surprised by the state's much improved financial position.

By John Blake

Last March, when debate began over the fiscal 2014-15 state budget, Corbett administration Budget Secretary Charles Zogby said he could hardly have predicted that Pennsylvania would be confronting such a significant budget deficit in the fourth year of its tenure.

Zogby may have been surprised, but I wasn't.

Three-plus years of anemic job growth and stagnant middle class wages; a retreat from state investment in community and economic development; hundreds of millions of federal health care dollars foregone; and the loss of twenty thousand jobs in public education.

Now outgoing Gov. Tom Corbett went back to the old playbook for trickle-down economics granting $1 billion in tax breaks for big business in Pennsylvania.

Trickle-down economics didn't work 30 years ago and it's not working now. Nationally, Pennsylvania has gone from eighth to last in job growth in four years.

In his final mid-year budget briefing in November, Zogby's message was subtle, but clear: We've had failed fiscal and economic policies for four years.

Central to the most recent budget recipe is the nearly $2 billion in one-time transfers used to balance this year's budget. Those dollars are gone. They won't be available to plug this year's budget deficit.

The budget secretary identified public welfare as a cost driver. What he failed to explain was that if Corbett had decided to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), billions of federal dollars would have come into the state and there would have been $500 million in direct budget savings this year.

For three years the administration ignored the prospect for 30,000 needed health care jobs to serve our seniors and offered 500,000 uninsured working families no peace of mind for access to affordable health care.

A modest natural gas severance tax, one that would not stifle the industry's capital investment in this state, would have generated much needed additional funding over the past four years to help support our school districts and replenish state coffers.

Unlike every other state with natural gas deposits, we have undercompensated our citizens for the volume of natural gas extracted from beneath our soil and it is inexplicable.

Zogby also pointed at the state's pension systems as the key budget cost-driver. No argument there – pension costs are significant and growing.

The Corbett administration's solution would have nearly doubled our unfunded liability while undermining retirement security for thousands of Pennsylvania workers.

Instead of a practical solution, the Corbett administration was prepared to exacerbate the crisis with bad public policy – and all for a sound-bite called 401(k).

Moreover, Zogby lauded the governor's compliance with a no-tax pledge made long ago to a Washington lobbyist while ignoring the fact that the administration's failure to properly fund public education caused 75 percent of the state's 500 local school districts to significantly raise local property taxes.

Local taxpayers cannot afford it and we cannot afford to compromise the quality of public education offered to our children.

Zogby also said there is now a significant mismatch between the growth in state spending and state revenues.

This should have been expected. Lack of new jobs means lack of new revenue.

Further, for the past four years, the state has not been a good partner in community and economic development.

The state agency entrusted with this mission – the Department of Community and Economic Development (DCED) – had its budget slashed from more than $325 million in 2010 to about $200 million in the current fiscal year.

Even the budget office's own Redevelopment Assistance Capital Program (RACP) -- a vital initiative that matches at a minimum one private dollar for every state dollar invested was significantly reduced at a time of the lowest interest rates in a generation.

Again, reflecting on the one-time transfers that balanced this year's budget – they decimated the trust funds built up for decades in the Small Business First and Machinery and Equipment Loan fund programs at DCED.

The $180 million transferred from these programs to plug the budget hole significantly undermines the state's ability to leverage private lending for job growth.

On Jan. 20, 2015, Gov.-elect Tom Wolf will take over as chief executive. I am confident that the new governor and lawmakers, working together, will make fiscal policy changes that will better serve the short- and long -term interests of the state.

I am also confident that, four years from now, Zogby will not be the least bit surprised by the state's much improved financial position.

State Sen. John Blake, a Democrat, represents the 22nd Senate District in Lackawanna County.