President Obama will take Louisiana detectives, a scheming dwarf and sleazy congressmen on his upcoming three-day President’s Day getaway, but he’s vetoing Kim, Khloe, Kourtney and the rest of the Kardashians.

And TV experts aren’t surprised by the choices made by America’s Netflixer in Chief.

“The TV apple doesn’t fall too far from the tree,” says Marc Berman, editor in chief of TV Media Insights as he reviewed a presidential agenda that includes “True Detective,” “Game of Thrones” and “House of Cards.”

“Politics are just in his DNA and these are intense political dramas, you have action, adventure, and plot twists,” Berman adds.

The leader of the free world — who keeps America’s terror watch list — has been open about his favorite shows, including “Breaking Bad,” “The Wire” and “Homeland,” whose plotlines often seemed ripped from the Snowden files.

Kevin Spacey in Netflix’ "House of Cards" returns Friday. (netflix)

He’s also a fan of “Modern Family” and “Parks and Recreation,” which he watches with his wife and daughters.

His current obsessions include the Matthew McConaughey-Woody Harrelson cop show and Kevin Spacey’s caustic Washington drama, which returns to Netflix on Friday.

“Man this guy’s getting a lot of stuff done,” Obama once said about Spacey’s fictional Rep. Francis Underwood — though the character not only kills legislation, but also killed a man last season.

“I wish things (in Washington) were that ruthlessly efficient,” the president once joked.

Obama also loves Matthew McConaughey (who doesn’t?) and Woody Harrelson in HBO’s “True Detective.”

The president’s Tivo is filled with a lot politics and policy — and definitely no Kardashians — and Berman worries that the commander in chief isn’t properly kicking back when he’s on vacation.

“If I were president I’d escape by watching ‘I Love Lucy,’” he adds.

SIDEBAR

Our own TV critic David Hinckley reveals what President Obama’s watch list says about the POTUS.

Currently, President Obama is enjoying “Homeland,” with Claire Danes. Wonder why... (Didier Baverel/SHOWTIME)

“Game of Thrones” - 4 stars - Dear Mr. Boehner, Please honor us with your presence at our upcoming "Red Wedding."

“Breaking Bad” - 5 stars - Walter White restores his faith that in America, you can be anything you want if you're willing to work hard enough at it.

“True Detective” - 4 stars - Every time he starts to think Joe Biden is nuts, he can look at this partnership and know things could be worse.

“Homeland” - 5 stars - For someone who spends his life being second-guessed, this is a chance to turn it around.

One of the president’s all time favorite shows is “Breaking Bad” (with Bryan Cranston, left, and Aaron Paul). (Frank Ockenfels/AP)

“The Wire” - 4 stars - Note to self: At next press conference, remember to enunciate clearly.

“Boardwalk Empire” - 4 stars - This is why he takes the family to Martha's Vineyard instead of Atlantic City every summer.

“House of Cards” - 4 stars - To most Americans, a TV show. To someone trying to get legislation past the Republican House, a tutorial.

“Modern Family” - 4 stars - If we can't get the DREAM act passed, the next Sofia Vergara may never leave Colombia.

The president will be watching plenty of “Game of Thrones,” starring Kit Harington as Jon Snow. (Helen Sloan/HBO)

“Parks and Recreation” - 3 stars - At least this dysfunctional political body has a sense of humor.

“Downton Abbey” - 5 stars - Of course he watches a chick show. Women got him elected.

“Mad Men” - 5 stars - If he could just get Don Draper to sell the Affordable Care Act.

“SportsCenter” - Let's face it. The White House was Plan B once he realized he didn't have a quick enough first step to start for the Bulls.

jsettembre@nydailynews.com