Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Jonas Singer and Cullen Gilchrist started Union Kitchen in Washington, D.C. to be an incubator for food businesses. They are among the finalists for USA TODAY's Entrepreneur of the Year. H. Darr Beiser

Jonas Singer and Cullen Gilchrist are co-founders of Union Kitchen. (Photo: H. Darr Beiser, USA TODAY)

WASHINGTON — Shared kitchens and business incubators aren't new ideas. But Jonas Singer and Cullen Gilchrist saw opportunity in merging the two concepts to launch Union Kitchen, Washington's first small-business incubator for entrepreneurs in the city's blossoming food scene.

"I think it's safe to say we're really the only people who run a business like this one," says Singer, who launched the kitchen with co-founder Gilchrist in early 2013. The two are co-owners of Washington's Blind Dog Cafe and Bakery and had initially sought out kitchen space they could use to make their cafe's baked goods.

When they found a 7,300-square-foot unused kitchen space blocks from the U.S. Capitol, they launched Union Kitchen with only a handful of members. The business model was simple: Small food businesses apply for memberships on an initial six-month basis that give them access to a low-cost, full-service, regulated community kitchen space. Beyond the benefits of freezer space and trash pickup, Union Kitchen quickly expanded to help members navigate how to brand, design, market and distribute their products, which can be particularly helpful for first-time business owners.

The combination has helped businesses such as Capital Kombucha, a beverage company. "We're finding out how important it has been to have someone else worry about all of the facilities for us, and we've really just been able to focus on our products, our branding, our production process and our sales," company co-founder Dre Schneider says.

Union Kitchen helped the company facilitate getting its beverages into Whole Foods stores after Singer and Gilchrist arranged a tasting with Whole Foods reps for their members. "We have a high expectation that our members are growing their brands," Singer says.

Union Kitchen is one of 10 finalists for USA TODAY's Entrepreneur of the Year award. More nominee profiles will run in the coming weeks, and a winner will be announced in December.

Unlike many kitchen incubators, Union Kitchen is unapologetically for-profit, which Singer and Gilchrist say is essential to their success. "Our business interests are 100% in line with our members' interests," Singer says. To that end, they constantly look for ways to expand their own business. Union Kitchen also provides catering and distribution services for their members' products.

A 2013 study on kitchen incubators estimated there are at least 135 shared commercial kitchens in the USA. The majority have operating budgets under $100,000, just break even, have three or fewer full-time employees and less than 25 users.

Union Kitchen has 50 members and 17 full-time employees and will see $1.5 million in revenue this year. Collectively, its members will see $15 million to $20 million in revenue in 2014.

Singer and Gilchrist inked a deal to expand Union Kitchen into a second facility in Ivy City, an economically depressed neighborhood in the nation's capital where they are investing $2 million to build out a 15,000-square-foot warehouse that will allow them to bring on about 30 new members.

"Union Kitchen's innovative approach to supporting culinary entrepreneurs in the District of Columbia has been instrumental in catalyzing the city's small business scene," Washington Deputy Mayor Jeff Miller says. The city provided grant funding to help Union Kitchen expand, in part because it's helping to boost jobs. Union Kitchen boasts that more than 300 jobs have been created through the kitchen and its affiliated members.

One of those job creators is Meredith Tomason, owner of RareSweets, a bakery that launched out of Union Kitchen but will graduate to its own storefront space in downtown Washington in December. "I have done what I needed to do, and I am now able to go off and do what the original intent was, but I wouldn't have been able to do that if I wasn't at Union Kitchen for the past year and a half," she says.

Neither Singer nor Gilchrist has a business degree, but life experience has taught them a few lessons on what it takes to make it as an entrepreneur:

Find someone you want to be, then go work for them and learn the ins and outs of the business.

Know your numbers.

Work. A lot.

Find a good partner. Know your strengths and weaknesses and find a complement.

Singer, 32, and Gilchrist, 29, bring a Millennial-era view to their business ethos. They want to make money, but they want to feel good doing it.

"I think we're trying to build this message that there's a good way to be profitable," Singer says. "There's a good way to be a capitalist."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1qTW7xx