The damage was discovered at about 4:30 a.m. Tuesday. Police say the suspect or suspects spray painted a mix of offensive messages and random symbols on the walls of the barn, as well as on some of the pigs that were inside.

Animals were let out of their pens, pigs were spray painted with graffiti, cattle were sprayed with fire extinguishers and investigators believe the vandalism happened either late Monday night or early Tuesday.

The damage was discovered at about 4:30 a.m. Tuesday. Police say the suspect or suspects spray painted a mix of offensive messages and random symbols on the walls of the barn, as well as on some of the pigs that were inside.

"It's bright red on a white pig and we'll have to keep just washing it every day and hopefully it will fade away," said FFA instructor Chancer McPherson. "We've got most of it off. That hard part, it's come off the hair but the hard part is it's soaked into the skin."

The animals were all let out of their pens, creating a dangerous situation where some of them could have been seriously hurt. Two sheep were essentially poisoned after eating the pig feed because it has high copper contents.

10/16/2013 Related Story: Chickasha High Ag Farm Vandalized, Animals Injured

A local veterinarian had to come in and give the sheep medicine to counteract the feed. The animals should all be okay in the end, but months of hard work by FFA members and the thousands of dollars they invested into the animals could go to waste.

"As many hours as these students put into these projects, it's disheartening. We don't know who it is or who is doing this," explained McPherson.

The team, however, is already looking forward to getting past the senseless crime. They have been gearing up for a showing in Kansas City next week.

"We're still going to attempt to go to Kansas City and go and give it our best shot and see what happens."

Chickasha Police say the suspect could face civil proceedings for damages if the person gets caught. A nearby church was also sprayed with a similar symbol as the ones on several of the walls of the barn.

Anyone with information on the crime should call the Chickasha Police Department or the anonymous Crime Stoppers hotline (405)222-TIPS.