Topics: Careers, Editor's Picks, Jobs, listicles, Rush Limbaugh, rush revere, Entertainment News

Rush Limbaugh just added extra work to the plates of elementary school teachers across America, who are going to have to spend a lot of time undoing the damage caused by his historically inaccurate and bizarre new project, a children’s history book called “Rush Revere and the Brave Pilgrims: Time-Travel Adventures With Exceptional Americans.”

According to his site Two if by Tea, “Rush Revere is a modern-day Paul Revere who rides around America espousing fundamental American values. He is a close friend of Rush Limbaugh who sounds the alarm that The Liberals Are Coming!™” By essentially injecting himself into the 1600s, Limbaugh hopes to teach children “the true story of Thanksgiving,” an idea given to him by his wife, Kathryn, who observed that Limbaugh is “always talking about how history is being mistaught.”

It seems that the ever-enterprising Limbaugh, who published two other books in the 1990s, is expanding his reach. But why stop with children’s books? Here are 10 other projects that Limbaugh could successfully undertake:

1. Gettysburg reenactor

Given Limbaugh’s proclivity for history, playing a reenactor of one of America’s most pivotal battles would be the next logical application of his passion. Except that Limbaugh fiddles with history just a little bit, playing a resurrected George Washington, who arrives to battle in a stylish Tesla. Also, the reenactment takes place in a more American state, like Texas.

2. An Etsy business tycoon

Taking a page from the book of his kindred spirit Glenn Beck, who lovingly tried to auction off an Obama-in-a-Pee-Pee Doll, Limbaugh could easily set up shop on Etsy. Perhaps he could make jewelry for women, a demographic he seems to understand quite well.

3. Professional cuddler

Please note: This is a real job. Cuddly-wuddly Limbaugh could probably make a decent chunk of change charging men and women upwards of $60 to enjoy his cuddly-wuddliness. (Just a thought!)

4. Professional LARPer

To the uninitiated, “LARP” stands for “live action role-playing,” an interactive game in which players physically act out the stories of their characters in costume, with props. After all, Limbaugh is already a renowned LARPer in this tragicomedy we call real life.