AUBURN, Ind. -- Indiana’s Studebaker Corp. closed its doors in South Bend 50 years ago this month, but not before Lee Pontius bought himself a Studebaker-built Avanti.

The automobile company announced its closing plans Dec. 9, 1963. Four days later, Pontius, then 26, showed up at Studebaker Automotive Sales, 3625 E. Washington Blvd., Fort Wayne.

Pontius aimed to buy a stylish 1963 Avanti before it was too late.

“I was afraid I’d never get the chance when I got out of school. They’d all be gone,” said Pontius, who was finishing his engineering studies at Indiana Tech.

Pontius paid $4,041 for his Avanti, setting up payments of $75 per month for three years.

“I was scared to death” by the size of his commitment, Pontius told The Star this week.

But Pontius’ investment paid off, because he still owns that Avanti. He has driven the sporty car 120,000 miles, mostly to call on Borg-Warner customers in the mid-1970s.

“It’s still fun to drive,” Pontius said. “People that aren’t even interested in cars turn their heads to look at it.”

In 1964, he was visiting Cincinnati when people poured out of a barbershop — “even the guy in the chair” — to admire his car, he said. “They were just swooning over it and thought it was the new Mustang,” Pontius said, remembering his irritation at the mistaken identity.

On Labor Day weekend of 1965, Avanti owners gathered in Auburn at the same time as the Auburn Cord Duesenberg Club reunion, feeling a kinship with the ACD Club’s owners of trend-setting, orphaned, Indiana-built cars. Pontius took a photo of six Avantis, including his, lined up on West 9th Street, where the ACD owners traditionally assemble.

Pontius moved to Auburn during his days as an engineer for the former Borg-Warner plant on the city’s south side. He once considered taking a job for two South Bend men who were building replica Avantis. One of them convinced Pontius to go into business for himself instead, so Pontius opened the NAPA Auto Parts store in Auburn, which marked its 40th anniversary this year.

Pontius grew up with a family tradition of driving cars from small, independent makers. His grand-

father ran a small Kaiser-Frazier dealership.

“My dad and I owned Studebakers,” he said. Before buying his Avanti, Lee Pontius had driven a 1953 Studebaker hardtop. His

father drove four or five stylish Studebaker Hawks in the 1950s.

The Pontius family also has a long history of driving Hudsons. Today, Lee and his son, John, own 10 Hudsons, predominantly from the 1940s. “The independents were innovators,” Lee Pontius said.

Studebaker introduced the Avanti in 1962 in a last-ditch attempt to save the struggling company, in the much same way Auburn Automobile Co.’s death throes produced the timeless 1936 Cord.

The Avanti featured radical styling and enough power to set 29 land-speed records. The company built fewer than 6,000 before the end came.

The Avanti “was different-looking than anything else,” Pontius said. Its fiberglass body was supplied by the same Ohio company that made the first Corvette bodies in 1953.

Pontius’ 1963 Avanti came with a turquoise paint job.

“I didn’t even like the color,” he said. He chose his car from four on the sales lot because “it had the least options and cost the least of any of them.”

Finally, in the late 1980s, Pontius painted his Avanti black to suit his taste. After 50 years, it still does.