2016ers mostly mum as Clinton faces the cameras The cautious approach underscored how delicate email is for some presidential prospects.

Hillary Clinton’s potential 2016 Republican and Democratic rivals largely steered clear of attacking her Tuesday as she publicly addressed questions over her email use while serving as secretary of state. Some flat-out refused to touch the subject.

The cautious approach underscored how delicate the subject is for some presidential prospects, especially those with email-related controversies of their own. And politically, there’s an upside to keeping a low profile while Clinton struggles in the spotlight.

Story Continued Below

Clinton held a news conference, her first in about two years, in New York on Tuesday to defend her email practices. She said she chose to exclusively use a personal email account for reasons of convenience, but she also insisted her actions were entirely legal and that her nonpersonal emails would be made available to the public.

Her answers at the news conference didn’t do much to mollify critics, and she drew plenty of scorn from the Republican National Committee and other quarters.

A few long-shot GOP presidential contenders also slammed her: Former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina tweeted “In effect, @HillaryClinton told us to trust her. Nothing in her track record suggests we should do so.” Former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum issued a statement that blasted her “lapse in judgment.” And former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee suggested during a radio interview with conservative host Hugh Hewitt that she is “truth challenged,” though he demurred when asked whether she is a “liar.”

But for the most part, whether it was on social media or in response to interview requests, 2016 hopefuls stayed silent.

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, one of the first Republicans to criticize Clinton when news of the emails surfaced last week, wasn’t expected to weigh in Tuesday. Neither was firebrand conservative Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas. Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker has weighed in before, but he didn’t respond when asked for comment after the news conference Tuesday.

Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, often a vociferous critic of Clinton, ultimately ripped her remarks during a Fox News appearance Tuesday night, calling for an independent investigation, but for several hours after her appearance his usually aggressive team had no comment. Florida Sen. Marco Rubio also did not take on Clinton’s comments in the wake of the news conference, although he had already addressed the issue more broadly in radio interviews.

Republican operatives say that, for now, many candidates may feel it’s wiser to wait instead of weighing in and becoming the story. If the potential 2016 rivals go on offense, that could allow Clinton to try to play the sympathy card.

“Never interrupt your enemy when they’re setting a dumpster fire on their campaign,” said Rick Wilson, a veteran Florida GOP operative. “Piling on her gives her the excuse to say, ‘Republicans are attacking me,’ when she’s doing the job for us.”

At the same time, a number of the GOP candidates risk reminding the public of their own tech-related woes. Governors in particular have exposure when it comes to public access to their emails — whereas members of Congress are for the most part exempt from federal open records laws.

Clinton remains by far the dominant 2016 hopeful on the Democratic side, and three potential rivals in her party all declined to engage Tuesday.

The three, former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley, independent Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, and former Virginia Sen. Jim Webb, all appeared Tuesday at a gathering of the International Association of Fire Fighters ahead of Clinton’s mid-afternoon news conference.

O’Malley brushed off questions about Clinton as he walked from the hotel to his car. Sanders twice declined to comment on the Clinton email saga, telling a group of reporters, “I really don’t want to talk about Hillary Clinton.” And Webb said that while her news conference provided “a good opportunity for Secretary Clinton to come forward and explain the situation she’s been in,” the email controversy was between her and the news media.

Asked for reaction after Clinton talked to reporters, Sanders’ spokesman had no comment and Webb’s said the former senator hadn’t watched the news conference. A spokeswoman for O’Malley didn’t respond when asked for further comment.

Like many other rank-and-file Democrats, these three possible candidates have been very reluctant to publicly criticize Clinton over emails or much of anything else. O’Malley has suggested he will more aggressively draw “distinctions” with Clinton if he decides to run.

The people most willing to take shots at Clinton right now come from the more official arms of the GOP. The Republican National Committee, state parties and GOP research arms were out with scathing pushback minutes after the former secretary of state’s news conference.

Although Clinton said she didn’t email classified information, GOP officials jabbed her on that issue in particular. “If she had an ounce of respect for the American people, she would have apologized for putting our national security at risk for ‘convenience,’” RNC Chairman Reince Priebus said in a statement.

Clinton was asked how she determined which emails she turned over to the State Department for eventual public release, and whether she deleted any. The former secretary of state said that all federal officials have discretion in which emails they save versus those they delete.

That wasn’t enough for Iowa GOP Chairman Jeff Kaufmann.

“Mrs. Clinton said nothing to assuage concerns that she is hiding important State Department emails on her private server, and worse, she admitted to deleting emails,” he said in a statement.

Jonathan Topaz contributed to this report.