Consumers would be protected from surprise medical bills when they go to the hospital under a measure to be unveiled Thursday in Trenton by a group of powerful Democratic lawmakers.

Out-of-network charges to insurers would be capped. And in an unprecedented push for transparency, the state would publish a list of the average prices for almost every service, based on data the insurers would be required to submit. When hospitals or doctors and insurers disagree on the appropriate amount for an out-of-network bill, the measure calls for “baseball arbitration” — a state-appointed arbitrator to choose one side’s final offer.

The financial stakes are enormous, and a high-powered offensive from those whose revenues or income would be diminished by the measure is expected, including specialist physicians and hospitals.

“I think it’s going to be a fight,” for passage, said Assemblyman Gary S. Schaer, a Passaic Democrat who chairs the Assembly Budget committee and helped draft the “The Out-of Network Consumer Protection, Transparency, Cost Containment and Accountability Act,” to be introduced today at a noon news conference.

But he pointed to the high-ranking Democrats who drafted the legislation, including state Sen. Joseph Vitale, chairman of the Senate Health Committee, and Assemblyman Craig Coughlin, chairman of the Assembly committee in charge of health insurance, both Wood-bridge Democrats — as well as Assemblyman Troy Singleton of Mount Laurel. Schaer is chairman of the Assembly Budget Committee.

Most lawmakers are expected to agree, he said, that “significant remedial action needs to be undertaken to tackle this issue, which contributes a lot to the rise in health-care costs,” as well as bankruptcies among state residents.

An important way insurance companies control costs is by negotiating contracts with hospitals, doctors, and other health-care providers who agree to accept their reimbursement and become part of their network. Some health plans include coverage for care received from providers who are not part of the insurer’s network.

The out-of-network charges billed by some New Jersey hospitals are among the highest in the country, and insurers say that they drive up premiums for everyone. In addition, patients who receive care from hospital-based physicians – over whom they have no choice – often are surprised to learn that they were out-of-network providers and charge much more than expected.

So confident are the drafters that this measure will reduce health-care costs that they include a provision requiring the savings to be used to lower premiums or give dividends to plan members. “We’re not looking for them to pocket the difference,” said Schaer, of the insurance companies. “They’re required to … pass along those savings, in part, to the consumer.”

Even before the measure was made public, CarePoint Health, a chain of three for-profit Hudson County hospitals, said that “our hospitals may be forced to close,” because of the one-sided effort to limit out-of-network charges without requiring higher in-network reimbursement rates. A high proportion of its patients are covered by Medicaid or Medicare, government programs that pay less than the cost of care, and it is necessary to seek higher reimbursement from commercial insurers to cover those losses, executives said.

The Record published an article on Monday detailing surprise out-of-network bills patients had received from hospital-based physicians.

The measure being introduced today seeks to protect consumers from surprise bills in two ways:

— In emergencies, a hospital and all the medical professionals who care for patient at the hospital must bill the patient no more than the patient’s insurance plan would allow for in-network services. It would be the facility’s responsibility to make sure all of the physicians practicing within its walls followed that rule.

— For elective or non-emergency admissions, the hospital and the admitting doctor would have to disclose in writing whether they were in- or out-of-network, and the amount of the expected charges. Unless the patient “knowingly, voluntarily, and specifically selected an out-of-network provider,” the patient would not incur any out-of-pocket costs beyond what he would have paid in-network.

While an emergency patient can’t be billed more than the in-network rate, insurance companies can be billed more by an out-of-network doctor or healthcare facility. Charges to the insurer, however, could not exceed 2½ times the median price established by a health-price index to be created under the measure.

The index will determine the range of prices for in-network services. Insurers would be required to turn over all their claims data for analysis, and pay a surcharge to set up the database, which would be run by the state Department of Banking and Insurance.

The measure tries to encompass everyone with commercial insurance in New Jersey, as well as those in the State Employee Benefits Program and the School Employees’ Health Benefits Program.

Email: washburn@northjersey.com