Lafayette mayor: I couldn't afford a house at these prices

Greg Zadel, of Zadel Realty, looks out the window in a home under construction on Ponderosa in Frederick on Wednesday. The new owners are moving from east of Denver. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

Rising Boulder County home prices are pushing thousands of people out of the running for home ownership, with more than 60 percent of Boulder County residents age 25 and older earning too little to purchase median-priced homes, according to an analysis by the Times-Call.

County wide, median home prices have risen 32 percent since 2010, to $469,000 in the first half of 2015, mirroring major gains in the larger Denver metro market. But median income is just $67,959, well below the $90,000-$100,000 needed to purchase a home here.

The Times-Call analysis examined income and population data from the U.S. Census as well as regional real estate data on pricing and sales.

Ten years ago the picture was brighter, with 48 percent of residents blocked from owning homes. At that time, median income was $57,502 and a median-priced home cost $338,000,

As housing costs have outstripped income gains, more people have started migrating north and east in their hunt for an affordable home.

"If they want to be homeowners, they have no choice but to go somewhere else," said D.B. Wilson of Re/Max of Boulder, who provided the statistics on home prices. "We're seeing a lot of folks going out of the county."

Affordable communities no longer

The city of Boulder is by far the most expensive. Median priced single-family homes sold for a staggering $790,000 in the first six months of 2015, pricing out an overwhelming 77 percent of householders.

Advertisement

But the historically more affordable "three L's" — Lafayette, Louisville and Longmont — have experienced tremendous growth as well.

Lafayette prices have increased 65 percent since 2010, when median prices were $269,000. Now, a similar home would cost around $444,900 — too costly for about 51 percent of residents.

"I could not afford to buy at the current median housing price," said Lafayette mayor Christine Berg, who purchased her home in 2009. "That's the reality of the situation."

Berg said she has seen an "influx" of buyers from Boulder competing for homes for their families.

"How we do make sure that folks buying here and renting here are staying here?" Berg asked. "It's kept me up at night (wondering) how to maintain the small-town feel and the diversity here."

In neighboring Louisville — for years named one of the best places to live by CNN and Money magazine, among others — median prices passed $500,000 for the first time.

Louisville has seen a 31 percent increase, from $397,000 in 2010 to $520,000 today. Though the city has a slightly more affluent population than neighboring Lafayette, 55 percent of residents do not earn enough to buy a house at those prices.

"Louisville is gotten to the point of being too pricey for first-time home buyers," Wilson said. "Lafayette — that's priced out, too. Realistically, you're talking Longmont."

Longmont is the lone city in Boulder County with a median home price in the sub-$400,000 price range. A single-family house cost $305,000 in the first half of 2015, up 35 percent from 2010, when it was $226,500.

Affordability vs. availability

Though Longmont stands as the sole pocket of affordability in Boulder County, it remains out of reach for many first-time home buyers.

Clay White, 28, a teacher at Nederland Middle/High School, said he and his wife, 26, stopped looking when they realized what they could — and couldn't — afford.

"We wanted to look this spring because everyone said the interest rates were going up," White said. But their search came to an abrupt halt when they faced the reality of their finances.

"When we got our final 'what we can afford,' we just said, 'Let's stop.'"

White's household income is in line with median earnings for Louisville, where he has lived for 20-plus years. But student loan debt has lowered the family's purchasing power significantly.

"Unless you find a hidden gem, $215,000 isn't going to buy you a whole lot," White said.

"It's slim pickings," said Ted Lupberger, owner of Coal Creek Brokers. "That entry level (price point) is really where you see the most aggressive (action)."

In 2014, homes under $250,000 were few and far between, according to a report from Amy Aschenbrenner, CEO of the Longmont Association of Realtors, and Kyle Snyder, sales manager with Land Title Guarantee Company.

Longmont saw 443 single-family detached dwellings sold in that price range, the most by far in Boulder County in 2014.

Lafayette was second, with 23 sub-$250,000 home sales. Erie was close behind, with 18.

In the city of Boulder, five such units were sold. In Louisville, two. And in Superior, zero.

Snyder said labeling Longmont as "the most affordable" is a bit of a misnomer, because low inventory still makes it hard for buyers to find what they need.

"Just because they have a lower average price doesn't mean they are affordable, because you can't find one."

'Challenge not unique to Boulder'

A July report from the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City found that Colorado was the least affordable housing market in the Rocky Mountain states.

Nationally, home prices showed modest appreciation between 2010 and 2015. The median price of new homes in the U.S. is $237,000 — a seven percent increase over a five-year span.

In comparison, Boulder County experienced 32 percent gains — Lafayette leading the way with a 65 percent increase in median prices. The city of Boulder was second, with a 46 percent jump.

"Affordability is a huge challenge that is not unique to Boulder," said mayor pro tem Suzanne Jones. "This is a phenomenon that is facing every desirable place to live."

That's both a blessing and a curse, said Longmont mayor pro tem Brian Bagley.

"If houses were $120,000, that wouldn't be good, (because it) would mean the economy was bad and no one would want to live here," Bagley said. "So it's a double-edged sword."

The wave of new residents drawn by the thriving economy combined with the lack of developable land creates a market comparable to traditionally high-cost areas.

"Locally, we are demographically supercharged," said Lou Barnes, mortgage banker and member of the Daily Camera editorial advisory board. "The population is leveling out, but Boulder County employment continues to grow."

Barnes said the escalating prices and increased demand are a natural result of an area with natural boundaries that prohibit expansion.

"Compare Boulder County to the Bay Area or New York City, in which one side of their growth is shut off," Barnes said. "It's effectively shut off by the mountains. Everything lies to the east, north and south."

Moving on out

Growth in those directions has been considerable.

In Broomfield County, prices have risen 25 percent over that same period, from a 2010 median of $335,000 to the current $420,000.

Comparably affordable Weld County is seeing major gains as well.

"The Frederick-Firestone area has grown really steadily over the last few years," said Greg Zadel of Zadel Realty in Firestone. "We get a lot of first-time homebuyers, because the value of what they can get for their money (is so high)."

Average prices in the area are in the mid- to high-$200,000s.

"You get people from out of state, and they start (living) in Boulder — they don't know Frederick and Firestone exist," he said. But when it comes time to buy a home, "they just drive east until they find what they can afford."

Though some might balk at the long drive to work in Boulder County, Zadel doesn't see things that way.

"We have people that locate here because of the ease of commuting to different areas," he said, Loveland, Greeley, Longmont and Denver among them. "It's a central location."

Zadel welcomes the families, the teachers, the firemen and policeman who come for the prices but stay to enjoy the small-town feel and open space. He finds nothing but positives in the area's expansion, and sees no slowdown on the horizon.

"It's affordable and there's a good stock of housing, and we're going to see more growth."

Declines in buying power

Compounding the problem of housing affordability is the decrease in buying power for typical first-time buyers.

Millennials make up the largest share of the home buying market — 32 percent, according to a March report from the National Association of Realtors. But they also come to the table saddled with more debt than any generation before them.

The Institute for College Success & Access reported that 2013 college grads borrowed an average of $28,400 to complete a four-year degree. In Colorado, 55 percent of the class of 2013 had some form of student loan debt, averaging $24,520 per borrower.

"Student loan debt is one of the major inhibitors of first-time home buyers, because the payments are a huge portion of salary," said local lender Jessica Uphoff. "It limits what they qualify for."

Uphoff also sees high car payments take hopeful home owners out of contention. But the biggest factor, she said, is stagnant wages.

"If you look at other high-cost areas, the salaries are a lot higher than here. Our economy hasn't caught up with that yet."

Further limiting affordability is the impending in interest rates by the Federal Reserve, which have stayed at historic lows since being slashed in late 2008.

The average rate for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage has hovered around 4 percent for most of 2015. Any increase would likely be modest, and still well below historic norms.

Uphoff said that is a mixed blessing. Every full percentage point the rate is raised will result in a "significant decrease" in affordability, but increases typically result in reduced demand, leveling out prices.

"I think the market will slow down a little bit, but we're going to have high demand even with higher interest rates," she said. "I don't think people are going to stop moving here."

On the other hand, a change in jumbo mortgage rates could open up the market by decreasing the need for large down payments that millennials have struggled to save.

But, Uphoff admitted, those types of loans — above $456,550 in Boulder County — are unrealistic for buyers who already are having difficulty affording a home in the area.

"People just need more money," she said. "It's an expensive place to live."

Natives no more

BVSD teacher White recognizes that reality.

Born and raised in Louisville, he's lived through the positive changes in his town, and wants to be part of that continued evolution.

"It's hard for some people to understand, but if you've grown up in a place that's now voted as one of the best places to live, you don't want to leave," he said.

But an exodus is looking ever more likely, with a median home price some $300,000 above his purchasing potential — a sad irony for the grandson of a one-time Louisville home developer.

Still, he doesn't bear any ill feelings toward the folks who created a high-cost atmosphere.

"I can't fault these people. If I had $1 million, I'd want to go wherever was best for my kids."

White is still looking for that hidden gem in Louisville, but he's begun venturing farther out into Lafayette and Erie. He takes a rosy view of a situation that, to many, is life-changing.

"If it happens, it happens," he said. "If not, we'll just make out east an awesome place to live."

Shay Castle: 303-473-1626, castles@dailycamera.com, @shayshinecastle