Troy University economics professors Scott Beaulier and Phillip Mixon have agreed to answer your questions about the Affordable Care Act beginning at 12:30 this afternoon. Get your questions ready for the comments section in this post.

Beaulier and Mixon have offered a contrarian view of the costs and benefits of expanding Alabama’s Medicaid program under the Affordable Care Act. Studies from the University of Alabama and the University of Alabama at Birmingham suggest that – since the federal government will pay 90 percent or more of the expansion costs – the state stands to create more than 30,000 jobs and generate some $1.7 billion in additional tax revenue through 2020.

The Troy professors, however, contend that those projections underestimate the administrative costs that the state would incur from an expansion and overstate the benefits. They point out that medical spending is not taxed; that the state already has a doctor shortage that would become more acute under an expansion; and that much of the money would be spent on vendors out of state.

Beaulier and Mixon contend that, far from enjoying a bonanza from the Medicaid expansion, the program actually would end up costing the state more.

Beaulier and Mixon will talk about their research and perhaps share some ideas about better approaches for covering the uninsured.

Beaulier is the chairman of the Division of Economics and Finance at Troy and the executive director of the Manuel H. Johnson Center for Political Economy. The center has come under fire from liberal critics because it accepted a sizeable donation from the Koch Foundation, run by a billionaire conservative activist.

Beaulier has a bachelor of science degree in economics and history from Northern Michigan University and master’s and doctorate degrees in economics from George Mason University.

Mixon is an associate professor at Troy University’s Sorrell College of Business. He earned a bachelor degree from Mississippi State University in 2003 and a PhD. in from the university in 2012.

Log on and submit your questions below. We will open the discussion at 12:30.