“ACAenroll.com (ACA Marketplace Enrollment Solutions) is proud to participate in Get Covered Illinois’ (GCI) Producer Program. We feel it is vital to ensure Illinoisans are provided with every opportunity to enroll in the Health Care Marketplace during the Open Enrollment Period," began Bill Hallberg, Chief Enrollment Officer, ACAenroll.com. “To avoid penalties, Illinoisans only have until February 15th, when the Open Enrollment Period ends, to obtain health insurance. ACAenroll.com is eager to lend our expertise to assist individuals, families and small businesses in making the right choices when selecting a qualified health plan.”

Multilingual certified and licensed ACAenroll.com agents and A-Safe-Haven Get Covered Illinois (GCI) in-person counselors will be working together at ACAenroll.com’s Bedford Park headquarters, 6640 S. Cicero, Bedford Park, IL, to assist individuals enroll in the Health Care Marketplace weekdays 8 am – 8 pm; Saturday 9 am – 3 pm and Sunday 9 am – 3 pm during the remainder of the Open Enrollment Period. Walk-ins are welcome or interested applicants can call 1-844-765-1379.

Residents who enrolled last year are encouraged to take advantage of the free, in-person help during this year’s Open Enrollment Period to review any new health coverage options and the financial help available.

Hallberg explained, “Under the second year of the Affordable Care Act, the number of qualified health plans has more than doubled from the 165 plans offered in 2014 to over 400 plans being offered in 2015. That is great news for the insured because they now have more opportunities to find health coverage that best meets their needs and budget.”

According to the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, other favorable statistics that are encouraging for consumers include (1):

1. As of December 2014, 67% of Illinois Marketplace enrollees could obtain coverage for $100 or less after any applicable tax credits in 2015.

2. In the first month of Open Enrollment, 80% of Illinois consumers who selected health insurance plans were determined eligible for financial assistance to help cover their cost and lower their monthly premiums.

The choice of qualified health plans, cost of coverage after applied tax credits, and financial assistance available are all motivating reasons for those who still need to obtain coverage. With only three weeks remaining until the 2015 Open Enrollment Period ends, the time is now for Illinoisans to obtain coverage. ACAenroll.com is eager to lend our expertise and are proud to collaborate with GCI by providing additional opportunities for local residents to seek coverage and avoid possible tax penalties,” concluded Hallberg.

Source:

(1) http://www.hhs.gov/news/press/2014pres/12/20141230a.html (December 30, 2014 )

About ACAMES:

ACA Marketplace Enrollment Solutions (ACAenroll.com) is a national enrollment firm specializing in the Health Insurance Marketplace and the Senior Product Market. ACA Marketplace Enrollment Solutions is not affiliated with any governmental agency. We work with consumers to determine their subsidy eligibility, review benefits and plans that will meet their healthcare needs and get them enrolled for coverage. We offer opportunities for producers to have access to our carriers on a national level. Our Call Center is staffed with multi-lingual and licensed health insurance agents who also are certified on the exchange. The company’s website http://www.ACAenroll.com and our Call Center staff are available to assist enrollees through the entire enrollment process. Go to http://www.ACAenroll.com or contact 1-800-342-0631 for more information.