Promises to gut Hyde Amendment

By Dave Andrusko

Last week we posted about the inevitable–Planned Parenthood Action Fund, the political action arm of PPFA, announced that it was going to endorse pro-abortion Hillary Clinton for president, a change from the long-standing policy of not endorsing candidates in presidential primaries.

Planned Parenthood Action Fund’s endorsement followed a similar enthusiastic expression of support from NARAL Pro-Choice America. Together they represent the beginning of the consolidation of the feminist pro-abortion establishment behind Clinton who is in a dog fight with Democratic Socialist Bernie Sanders in both New Hampshire and Iowa (where the first presidential caucuses take place February 1).

On Sunday Planned Parenthood Action Fund staged a rally in Manchester, New Hampshire, site of the nation’s first presidential primary, to make it formal. If you are so inclined, you can watch the event here. (She begins talking about 44 minutes in.)

In gratitude for the endorsement, Clinton, the former Secretary of State, pledged her bona fides maximus to the largest abortion provider in the world.

One particularly illustrative example is the following.

“First of all, I will always defend Planned Parenthood, and I will say, consistently and proudly, Planned Parenthood should be funded, supported, and appreciated—not undermined, misrepresented, and demonized. I believe we need to protect access to safe and legal abortion, not just in principle, but in practice. Any right that requires you to take extraordinary measures to access it, is no right at all. … and not as long as we have laws on the books like the Hyde Amendment making it harder for low-income women to exercise their full rights.”

What does that mean?

In reverse order, first, that if Hillary Rodham Clinton becomes president she will do her best to make sure that low-income women “exercise their full rights” [abort] by gutting the Hyde Amendment. For newcomers who may not understand the full importance of that promise, the Hyde Amendment is an annual appropriations rider which eliminates public funding for abortion except in the cases of rape, incest or to save the life of the mother.

Prior to its passage in 1976, the federal Medicaid program paid for 300,000 abortions a year. Conservative estimates are that there are well over one million people are alive today because of the Hyde Amendment.

To this day pro-abortionists grind their teeth when they speak of the Hyde Amendment. For them the “right” to abortion never meant only the legal right to abort. It required that you and I and every other tax payer fund their abortions.

Second, keep the federal spigot turned on. The House and the Senate have passed legislation that would block most federal funds from going to Planned Parenthood, and repeal many parts of Obamacare, including the program that provides tax-based subsidies for about 1,000 health plans that cover elective abortions.

What does PPFA do with the annual $500 million + tax payer dollars? “Planned Parenthood dismembers or chemically poisons a baby to death every two minute–killing over seven million innocent children since 1973,” Congressman Chris Smith, Co-Chair of the Bipartisan Pro-Life Caucus, said last week. “Planned Parenthood is Child Abuse, Incorporated.”

And as Clinton told her audience, “[T[he only thing, as Cecile [Richards, PPFA president] said, stopping them from making that the law of the land was President Obama’s veto pen.” Clinton assured her audience she would “have your back” on this and other abortion-related issues.

And to make sure she touched all the bases, Clinton warned her audience that “I shudder to think about what the Republicans would do, if given the chance.” Clinton added, “We know any Republican president would accelerate the assault on access to safe and legal abortion. And think about this: The next president could easily appoint more than one justice to the Supreme Court.”

Couldn’t have made that latter point better myself.