Sid Salter (Photo: Special to The Clarion-Ledger)

STARKVILLE — So what do we know after listening to the paid media and the candidate forums in Mississippi's First District free-for-all to choose a successor to the late U.S. Rep. Alan Nunnelee?

With 13 qualifiers, just listing the candidates to succeed Nunnelee consumes time and space. That fact has made meaningful candidate forums and debate difficult despite the best of intentions by most of the candidates and by various good government groups around the districts seeking and scheduling such events.

Outside of those engaged in the inside baseball of politics, just naming all the contenders in this special election is a feat that eludes most average working voter in the district. Most journalists struggle to keep the list accurate.

For the record, the Republican contenders include: businessman Boyce Adams of Columbus; former Airbus Helicopters executive Sam Adcock of Starkville; state Sen. Nancy Collins of Tupelo; Tupelo dentist Dr. Edward "Doc" Holliday; emergency room physician and budding novelist Dr. Starner Jones of Pontotoc; Lee County District Attorney Trent Kelly of Saltillo; Itawamba County Prosecutor Michael "Chip" Mills, Jr. of Fulton; Tupelo attorney Greg Pirkle; former Eupora Mayor Henry Ross; Oxford attorney Daniel Sparks; Northern District Transportation Commissioner Mike Tagert of Starkville; former Jackson City Councilman Quentin Whitwell of Oxford. The lone Democratic contender is Walter Zinn Jr. of Pontotoc.

In many ways, this race is reminiscent of the 1996 campaign when the late 3rd District U.S. Rep. Sonny Montgomery stepped down in 1996. In all, 12 candidates sought the seat Montgomery was vacating in that 1996 race that eventually came down to a general election showdown between eventual winner Republican Chip Pickering and a Democratic nominee John Arthur Eaves Jr.

But past the sheer numbers, the comparisons to the 1996 Third District race and the current First District special election falter.

In the race to succeed Montgomery, candidates had to contend with Congressman Montgomery's presence as they campaigned. Despite a lifelong political affiliation with the Democratic Party, Montgomery was popular with GOP voters and actually was more conservative than many registered Republicans nationally.

Yet from jump street, no Democratic candidate was given any real chance in 1996 of succeeding Montgomery for a seat that had been held for three decades by a Democrat. But there was one clear issue in the 1996 race that is visible in the special election to choose a successor to Nunnelee — the fact that conservative Republicans are having a difficult time gaining any separation from their like-minded colleagues in the race.

For a host of the candidates competing for the runoff, trying to tick their similar views – against Washington, against Obama, against "Obamacare" and against "insiders" – chews up 30 seconds of air time in a hurry.

That leaves precious little time for those same candidates to tell voters what they actually support and what makes them unique among a remarkably well-qualified field of candidates.

While Tagert and Kelly seem to be the leading contenders to make the runoff, there are several candidates with "county cluster" strategies who would break out. Others, like Pirkle, have gained ground with innovative marketing strategies.

Republicans should watch the special election in the state's First District as a dry run for the looming 2016 presidential and congressional races in Mississippi. Expect to hear the same basic themes from GOP candidates fighting to emerge from primaries.

Increasingly, campaign seasons in Mississippi are becoming pretty brutal internal contests between members of the same party to emerge from their primaries – then to adjust their appeals to general election audiences in November.

Modern technology, social media and new media outlets are making that journey more difficult and less politically plausible in each succeeding election.

In the final days of the campaign, it will be interesting to see who gains the necessary separation to survive this crowded, rather confusing race.

Sid Salter is a syndicated columnist. Contact him at sidsalter@sidsalter.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1H9NzcB