Abeille Bridal opened Aug. 1 to offer "designer gowns at affordable prices"

Lindsey Everhart smiles at one of her bridesmaids while trying on a wedding dress Thursday at Abeille Bridal in Loveland. Lauren Tanner, owner of the new bridal shop, is also reflected in the mirror behind Everhart. (Photo by Jenny Sparks/Loveland Reporter-Herald) ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: Abeille Bridal's grand opening: a champagne and cupcake open house. When: Noon-5 p.m. Sunday, Aug. 16. Where: 2529 N. Lincoln Ave., Ste. F. Hours: 10 a.m.-6 p.m. Monday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday; noon-4 p.m. Sunday. More info: Visit AbeilleBridal.com or facebook.com/abeillebridal, call 669-0909 or email Abeillebridal@gmail.com.

After trying on her first wedding gown Thursday, Lindsey Everhart of Kingsburg thought she'd found the one, and then she tried on nine more.

Everhart, who came to Loveland to visit the new Abeille Bridal shop before going to larger bridal stores, chose a beaded sleeveless ball gown for her tightening-of-the-knot ceremony June 4, 2016, one year after her marriage.

"We'll talk about what you like and don't like," said Lauren Tanner, owner of Abeille Bridal, recommending Everhart pick out a few dresses to figure out what she prefers to narrow down her options.

Her options were in pure white, ivory, alabaster, gold or colors such as pink or green, and cuts from short to long that included A-line, ball gown, sheath, fit and flair, mermaid and trumpet.

Advertisement

"You got me," Everhart said as she looked through the racks of gowns. "I love that. I really love that. You have some good variety, missy."

Tanner opened Abeille Bridal, 2529 N. Lincoln Ave., Ste. F, on Aug. 1 and is holding a grand opening on Sunday, Aug. 16, with a champagne and cupcake open house. She started her business out of her home a year ago, operating out of a converted office space and keeping some of her stock in storage.

"It was getting too big, and I wanted to offer more selection for the bride," Tanner said. "I wanted to have a storefront, which means a whole lot more room going from an office to 1,200 square feet."

To open her store, Tanner converted a former office space into a shop space, doing some minor remodeling work and painting. She added 200 gowns to her stock, bringing the number to 420 gowns.

The gowns are on mannequins and racks along the wall, interspersed with displays of an assortment of veils and accessories that includes head pieces, belts, necklaces, earrings and appliques. She also offers tuxedo rentals.

Tanner added the tagline to the store's name, "designer gowns at affordable prices," because she gets the gowns at discount prices with a few selections that can be ordered. She purchases show room models from designers, floor samples from bridal shops, dresses from shops going out of business, discontinued or over-inventory dresses, pre-production dresses that never get made and dresses that end up in stock due to a miscommunication about color or size.

Once Tanner buys a dress, she can't return it, as is the case for the brides, according to the industry standard.

In the back of the store, Tanner offers a sale room for brides on a budget. She has dozens of dresses on clearance, typically priced up to $400. None of her dresses cost more than $2,000, she said.

Tanner's offerings range from couture to designer dresses, reflected in the name she chose for the store. The word "abeille," French for "bumblebee," sounded couture to her ear, she said.

"I thought it would be a little bit different and give it that high-end feel," Tanner said.

Tanner, a Loveland native who graduated from Fossil Ridge High School in 2008, started out in the bridal business in 2009, working for a bridal shop in Windsor for two years. She then worked in bridal consulting in a high-volume shop in Las Vegas for another two years before returning to Loveland to open her own shop.

"It's a special day, and you get to be part of it," Tanner said. "I love that moment when you can make someone ... feel beautiful on their wedding day."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm