As election day draws near, Mississippi voters are still confused about the wording for Initiative 42 and Initiative 42-A. How will either effect the funding of education and what will happen if either initiative is passed?

The battle for adequate education in Mississippi continues to heat up as election day draws near. When voters head to the polls Tuesday, they'll do so with the ability to amend the constitution in an effort to work towards making the education in Mississippi better, through funding.

"90 percent of our Mississippi children attend public schools and our legislature created a formula back in 1997, called the Mississippi Adequate Education Program, otherwise known as MAEP," 42 For Better Schools Volunteer Sally Gray said.

That formula, according to Gray has only been fully funded two times in the past thirteen years. Gray says MAEP was designated at the time to provide a C level education to children and many citizens have been speaking out on how the legislature needs to fully fund education. That's where Initiative 42 comes into play. It's a citizen sponsored initiative that would amend the state constitution and would require the state to fund an adequate education through judicial enforcement. For Representative Greg Snowden who authored the 42-A bill, he says 42 isn't the answer.

"What initiative 42 really does, is strike the word legislature from Section 201 of the constitution and insert the word state," House Speaker Pro Temp Greg Snowden said. "It gives the chancery courts of the state specific enforcement authority. I believe that's a fatal blurring really of Doctrine of Separation of Powers. If you are talking about accountability, what it really does is remove the accountability of the people you elect."

The competing amendment 42-A, according to Snowden states that that you have to an effective way of funding education without judicial enforcement. Because with Judicial enforcement, Snowden says a judge will have the control ultimately about funding, school policies, create lawsuits.

"The last time I checked, the legislature was part of the state and the legislature is not going to lose power to appropriate funds, with the passage of Initiative 42," said Gray.

When voters head to the polls both Gray and Snowden stress that you should read the wording on the ballots very carefully, as to ensure you understand it.

"It is past time for the people of this state to say, we're sending a message to our legislature and to the rest of the country that we value education, we value our kids, and we support our kids," Gray said. "We want to see our schools fully funded."

"You're not sending a message, you're amending the constitution to remove the word legislature from the constitution, insert the word state, and say the court shall have the authority to do this," Snowden fired back.

Initiative 42 and 42-A will appear on the ballot during the general election on November 3. Those for and against the initiative encourage voters to carefully read the ballot before casting their votes Tuesday. If you are for amending the constitution you must choose yes before voting for 42 or 42-A. If they majority of Mississippians are against amending the constitution, then both initiatives will fail.