Business Reporter J.K. Wall '01 Offers Thoughts on SCOTUS & Obamacare

June 13, 2015

"While speaking Thursday to a group of Indianapolis alumni of my alma mater, DePauw University, I was asked what I think will happen in the King v. Burwell case," writes the Indianapolis Business Journal's J.K. Wall. "You know, the one where the Supreme Court will decide if the nearly $1 billion in Obamacare subsidies that helped nearly 200,000 Hoosiers buy health insurance this year are actually legal."

Wall, a 2001 graduate of DePauw, adds, "I’ve been asked this question several times just in the past two weeks, as those in the health care world brace for what could be the chaotic aftermath of the court’s decision. One study suggests Hoosiers that received Obamacare’s tax credits would see a 271 percent spike, on average, in their insurance premiums if those credits disappeared."

The winner of a national journalism award in 2011, Wall states, "here’s what I told the DePauw folks who gathered at Harry & Izzy’s downtown to hear me blather: I give a slight edge to the chances that the Supreme Court does strike down the tax credits. I am not a legal expert, and I am well aware that plenty of folks, including President Obama, think the whole case is ridiculous, a slam dunk of legal interpretation. Of course, many folks said the same thing about the case challenging the individual mandate in Obamacare -- and then watched all their arguments lose before the court. The individual mandate survived in 2012 only because Chief Justice John Roberts interpreted the law in a way neither the Obama administration nor the rest of the justices had. My bet is that lightning doesn’t strike twice for the pro-Obamacare arguments. (My philosophy professors at DePauw would tell me that’s an example of the Monte Carlo fallacy; but that’s all anybody is doing these days in making predictions -- just rolling the dice.) If the tax credits are invalidated, there are easy ways for the Obama administration to issue new regulations that could fix the problem."

Read more at IBJ's website.

J.K. Wall, who was a history major and Media Fellow at DePauw, has been a health care/education reporter at the Business Journal since August 2007. He previously spent more than five years at the Indianapolis Star, where he covered business.

Back