Charleston Mayoral candidate William Dudley Gregorie enjoys going to Hampton Park and sitting near the Denmark Vesey statue to work through things he would like to see the city of Charleston improve on.

Charleston City Councilman William Dudley Gregorie has run for mayor twice before, but he feels he is more qualified than ever because of the tragic events from June 17.

William Dudley Gregorie Age: 66 Family: Single Occupation: Retired, S.C. director of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Education: B.S. and M.A. from Benedict College (B.A.) and Howard University (M.A.) Past elected office: Charleston City Council, 2009-present Contact: 819-6619; gregorie996173@bellsouth.net; gregorieformayor.com

That was the day a gunman entered a Bible study at Emanuel AME Church — where Gregorie serves as a trustee — and opened fire, killing nine in what authorities describe as a hate crime intended to ignite a race war.

Upcoming profiles William Dudley Gregorie Aug. 24 Ginny Deering Aug. 31 John Tecklenburg, Sept. 7 Maurice Washington, Sept. 14 Paul Tinkler, Sept. 21 Toby Smith, Sept. 28 Read our first profile of candidate Leon Stavrinakis at postandcourier.com.

“I think anyone that runs for mayor has to prove that they’ve been tested. I think that June 17 was not just the city’s test, but my test,” he said, adding that he felt a personal responsibility to ensure the city didn’t descend into violence and rioting.

“Any person who wants to be the mayor of any city, if they cannot stand up in crisis and protect the people and reputation of the city, they’re not worth a grain of salt. So I think that it forced me into statesmanship, which is an important characteristic for anybody who wants to be mayor of a city.”

Gregorie spoke while seated on a shaded Hampton Park bench next to the city’s new Denmark Vesey statue.

Vesey, a former slave who won a lottery and bought his freedom, also was a member of Emanuel AME, and his foiled plans for a slave revolt in 1820 led to the church’s first major crisis, when it was burned to the ground.

As Gregorie talked, a young black couple walked around the statue and read its inscription on the base, possibly unaware that the man talking quietly on the bench nearby was angling to become the first black mayor in the city’s 232-year history.

Some may consider erecting a statue to a person behind a plot to kill every white man, woman and child in the city a divisive idea, but Gregorie said that many people in the black community consider Vesey a freedom fighter.

He glanced back at the bronze statue as he spoke about it as a sign of the city’s racial progress — proof the city is open to remembering historic figures both white and black.

“Anytime the city of the Confederacy builds a statue to Denmark Vesey, that kind of lets you know we’ve come a long way,” he said. “I kind of use this as the barometer as how far we’ve come as a city and as a state. That kind of calmed them (in the national media) down because they were trying to raise some dissension, and under no circumstances was I going to allow that to happen, especially as a city councilman.”

Multi-racial supporters

While Gregorie’s base would appear to be the city’s black voters, there are two other black candidates in the race, as well — former City Councilman Maurice Washington and nonprofit consultant Toby Smith.

Gregorie’s donors include dozens of Charleston’s black professionals, but he said they aren’t necessarily his base but rather many of the people he knows best.

His public service began in 1974 when he worked pushing carts for the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. He worked his way all the way up to an executive level, then retired and was first elected to City Council in 2009.

District 6 had a black majority at the time, but it was redrawn after the 2010 Census and now has more white than black voters. Some expected he would have trouble in his 2013 re-election bid, where he faced four opponents.

“Everybody predicted a runoff, but I won every single white precinct and walked away with 62 percent of the vote,” he said.

He credited the big win to his attention to constituent service work. He may be the only City Council member ever to hire a part-time employee — Mona Lisa Simms — to help with this service. “Everyone in our district knows her as a no-nonsense, get-the-job-done person,” he said.

And he noted he got white support during his 2011 mayoral bid, particularly from residents upset over cruise ships.

But that support also proved controversial, as an anonymous political group — one exempted from public disclosure under state ethics laws — funded ads on Gregorie’s behalf. Gregorie distanced himself from that effort at the time, saying, “We’re running our race.”

Gregorie, whose other interests include listening to jazz and gospel as well as renovating houses, has planned to become mayor of Charleston for almost two decades — he mentioned his goal to some Housing and Urban Development colleagues years before he even moved back to his home state in 1999 to direct HUD’s statewide office in Columbia.

Gregorie was unable to unseat Mayor Joe Riley in 2007 and 2011, but with Riley retiring when his term is done in January, Gregorie hopes to triumph on his third try.

Asked about his accomplishments as a councilman, he pointed to his successful push to have City Council meetings televised and to have “The Crosstown” street signs along U.S. Highway 17 removed and replaced with “Septima P. Clark Parkway” signs. He currently is pushing for a way to honor his Mother Emanuel church along eastern Calhoun Street.

But he said his accomplishments also include support of the city’s current multi-million dollar drainage work along Septima Clark Parkway as well as the WestEdge development emerging off Lockwood Boulevard.

An affordability agenda

Gregorie’s main mayoral message is that he would work to ensure Charlestonians can continue to call it home.

“I think we have an affordability crisis in our city. I think that is something that I think hasn’t been out there,” he said. “We need more affordable opportunities in this city.”

Gregorie said his “affordability agenda” calls for more than creating affordable places to live — and ensuring those places remain affordable for decades, not just for 10 or 15 years.

It also extends to raising wages. Gregorie said, adding that he is proud to have helped the city recently raise its lowest wage for full- and part-time employees to about $10.30 an hour earlier this year, well above the minimum wage.

But Gregorie would not necessarily kowtow to developers who want to build new apartments. He said he would like to reconsider the city’s “Gathering Place” zoning — a category meant to allow more density in certain areas. “I will be looking at those to make determinations as to whether we should continue some of those,” he said.

Gregorie said he has another advantage, as the only current City Council member in the race.

“I have an ongoing working relationship with City Council,” he said. “I do think someone who is elected that does not have that relationship, there’s a potential for chaos in terms of transition. A lot of people don’t realize that all powers lie in council. It’s not the mayor. The mayor just runs the city.”

His colleague, Councilman Robert Mitchell, has pledged his support to Gregorie, whom Mitchell has known since Gregorie’s work with HUD.

“He dealt with a budget that was more than the city of Charleston has,” Mitchell said, adding that the HUD job showed that Gregorie has experience handling finance, budgeting, community issues and management.

“Working with council for the last couple of years would give him some insight as far as how council is thinking,” Mitchell said. “He has been working with them already.”

Reach Robert Behre at 937-5771.