A behavioral health services provider based in New Britain is closing two of its facilities in Litchfield County.

Ray J. Gorman, president and CEO of Community Mental Health Affiliates (CMHA) said Tuesday that the private, nonprofit health services organization is shutting down its Northwest Center Outpatient Behavioral Clinic in Lakeville Oct. 31 and a residential home for boys in Torrington at the end of next month.

The clinic in Lakeville treats about 175 adults and 95 children at any given time, Gorman said.

Four males, ages 14 through 19, live at the residence in Torrington, Gorman said, which is authorized to house up to five individuals. He said it is the responsibility of their social worker at the Department of Children and Families (DFC) to find them a new home, since they will most likely end up in foster care. They were placed there by DFC, Gorman said, so his organization has no authority over their future placement.

Advertisement

“Some of these kids have been there a lot of time, so there will be some separation problems,” Gorman said.

One of the biggest reasons behind the clinic’s closing is the reduction of state money to help fund the clinic.

CMHA is funded through private and public donations, though 20 percent of their budget is funded by the state’s Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services (DMHAS), Gorman said. CMHA is an accredited health provider licensed by the Department of Public Health to conduct adult treatment and the DFC for their treatment for children.

The facility in Lakeville was an outpatient clinic accredited to treat both children and adults, and participates in both Medicaid and Medicare.

Services provided by the clinic include individual psychotherapy, group therapy and evaluations and its facilitators can prescribe medication. The clinic regularly treats patients with substance abuse disorders.

The decision to close the facilities was not easy, Gorman said, and it was the result of a combination of events that occurred over a long period.

“It’s come down to this,” Gorman said. “We have seen over the last 10 years in Connecticut (that) the grant support for mental health providers has been relatively flat.”

Gorman said after seven years of grant support, CMHA merged with the Northwest Center in 2007 because it was in danger of going out business. The state legislature had been reducing the amount of money allocated to community services.

He said the advent of the Affordable Care Act has made some state legislators believe that with people required to be insured, there will be less need to support the services with state grants.

“I know what they say they’re doing, but it doesn’t make any sense to me,” Gorman said.

Mary Kate Mason, a spokesperson for the DHMSA, said that 30 of the roughly 175 clients in Lakeville are state agency clients. She said that while there have been changes in funding streams, providers have been kept whole. The agency gave $103,000 to that clinic in 2013, though where that money will go once the clinic closes is yet to be determined.

Gorman said the clinic costs between $360,000 to $400,000 per year to operate, depending on the volume of clients.

Mason said it’s not uncommon for providers to transition out of services, adding that her department has helped organizations like CHMA stay whole.

“They received grant dollars,” Mason said. “There was a reduction in the amount of grant dollars.”

However, the difference is being made up by an increase in the Medicaid outpatient service rate, Mason said.

CMHA will try to transfer all of its patients from Lakeville to their clinic in Torrington, located on Commercial Boulevard. In addition to the clinics in Lakeville and in Torrington, CMHA operates 13 offices and facilities total, most of which are in New Britain. One office is in Waterbury.

“Clients are being notified,” Gorman said. “We began telling people last week. Clients are receiving a letter.”

Local organizations that helped raise money for the organization in the past have also been notified, Gorman said. Gorman said he’s reached out to local state representatives for support, including state Sen. Clark Chapin, R-New Milford, and state Rep. Roberta Willis, D-Lakeville.

Gorman said he suspects they will lose a few patients in the interim.

“For some people, it’s going to be impossible to come to Torrington,” Gorman said.

The organization will stop accepting referrals to its offices in Lakeville and instead shift them to the Torrington offices, Gorman said, though the company will continue to provide services in Lakeville until the closing date.

The office has a staff of six full-time and part-time employees. Gorman said some of the clinical staff will be retained, but there will be layoffs for administrative and support staff.

Reach Esteban L. Hernandez at (860) 489-3121, ext. 328.