By Mark Salter - October 14, 2013

Sen. Ted Cruz excites the passions of both his admirers and his detractors. The latter greatly outnumber the former for the moment and probably indefinitely, and they don’t merely dislike Cruz. They despise him.

Animosity that intense and widespread usually has more than one explanation, but I doubt fear is one of them. Certainly the Texas Republican’s constant self-aggrandizing contributes to it. That’s a common enough vice among politicians, but Cruz’s self-promotion is so fulsome and relentless it appears to be pathological rather than a bad habit.

Take, for example, his recent appearance at the Values Voter Summit, where Cruz was heckled by a contingent of immigration reform supporters, whom he superciliously disdained as “paid political operatives” of President Obama. He dismissed the interruption with the assertion “the left will always, always, always let you know who they fear, and they fear you.” By “you,” I think he likely meant “me.” And, of course, not all immigration reformers are of the left. But that’s another matter.

At another point in his remarks, Cruz attempted a little humor, and that too was conveyed with his trademark self-importance. Referencing a meeting between Obama and Senate Republicans scheduled for later that day, Cruz asked his audience, “If I’m never seen again, please send a search and rescue team. I very much hope tomorrow morning I don’t wake up amidst the Syrian rebels.” Funny, unless you’re a Syrian rebel.

The real joke is the senator’s presumption that Democrats would like him to disappear. Why would they want that? They’re not afraid of him. They’re counting on him. If the president thought for a moment that Cruz was actually in some danger, I imagine he would immediately provide him a Secret Service detail.

Let’s examine briefly the good service our scourge of the squishes has recently rendered the president and the Democratic Party. Cruz appointed himself the leader of the effort to shut down the government and risk defaulting on the nation’s debts to force the president to surrender on Obamacare -- and he tried to shame other Republicans into joining him by accusing them of not being strong like Ted.

That effort proved suicidal, as predicted by nearly everyone not floating high above the grubby intrigues of mere mortal politicians in an impenetrable bubble of self-regard. And it did produce political benefits. Unfortunately, they all accrued to the other side.

The widely respected NBC-Wall Street Journal poll offers a tour d’ horizon of the damage. One of the polls authors’, Bill McInturff, called it “among the handful of surveys that stand out in my career as being significant and consequential.”

Just 14 percent of Americans now believe the country is on the “right track,” and confidence in the economy has dropped 16 percent in one month. Not all of that dissatisfaction was caused by the government shutdown, but it’s certainly a major contributor; 63 percent of those interviewed said this recent example of Washington’s dysfunction has made them less confident.

And whom do they blame for their dissatisfaction? They blame everyone in Washington. But Republicans receive by far the greatest share of the disgust. Voters hold Republicans more accountable for the shutdown by a margin of 22 percentage points over Obama. Republican and Tea Party favorability ratings have fallen to historic lows -- 24 percent and 21 percent, respectively. Obama’s own favorability ratings are nothing to brag about -- but he is more popular than any other politician in Washington.

Just over half of those polled say they want the government to do more rather than less. Cruz and his confederates are managing to make the country more sympathetic to the central tenet of Democrats’ governing philosophy.

But the most perverse consequence has to be that support for Obamacare has increased. It’s still unpopular, but less so than it was before the shutdown. A majority of Americans now say they do not want funding for it totally eliminated. And all this happened during the program’s launch, which was, by bipartisan consensus, a disaster, with millions of people unable to choose a health care plan because of faulty software that could have been better designed by the average teenager. Had Cruz and his allies not gotten in the way, Obamacare might have become as unpopular as they now are.

Good work, fellas. As McInturff noted, their gambit turned into an “ideological boomerang.” Is there any chance they’ll sit down now and let adults try to repair the damage? Probably not, which is more good news for Democrats.

Liberals may despise Cruz, but in one of those ironies common in politics, they know that right now he’s big government’s best friend. Democrats won’t utter the words out loud, but in their hearts they’re chanting, “Go, Ted, Go!” And in quiet moments, as they count their unearned blessings, they dare to dream their secret ally might be the next Republican nominee for president.