Democratic U.S. presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton speaks to supporters during a campaign rally October 14, 2015 in Las Vegas, Nevada. Clinton continued to campaign in the area one day after the first Democratic presidential debate. (Alex Wong/Getty Images)

How does Hillary Clinton follow up her bravura performance in Tuesday night's Democratic debate? She goes to Capitol Hill where her next debate will be with the GOP members of the House Select Committee on Benghazi. This could get ugly.

[READ: Hillary Takes Center Stage]

Neither the moderators nor her campaign trail colleagues could lay a glove on Clinton on Tuesday night. As I wrote that night, Clinton reminded everyone why she is the front-runner: She was commanding, polished without being robotic and likable. She also reminded anyone watching that she's very good at debating. As Bloomberg's John Heilemann noted, her strengths are particularly well-suited for a debate: "Her zeal for policy and encyclopedic grasp of its nuances and details," he wrote. "Her intense focus, her relentless diligence, her penchant for methodical preparation. The sharp analytical bent of her mind. Her capacity to deploy her combativeness to strategic ends." Hillary Clinton is not an ideal politician – she can seem insulated, hostile (especially to the media) and calculating – but underestimating her in a debate setting is a huge strategic blunder.

Of course the GOP has continued to demonstrate its talent for blunders of late. The whole Democratic debate was a two hour contrast to the name-calling absurdity that has consumed the GOP race. And no great surprise: Tuesday's event featured Hillary Clinton at center stage while the Republican shows have had decidedly unserious reality TV star Donald Trump as their focus.

This is not to suggest that it was a perfect evening for the Democrats as it demonstrated their lack of depth: Of five people on the stage, two were fringe candidates (the overwhelmed former Rhode Island Gov. Lincoln Chafee and former Virginia Sen. Jim Webb, he of the disconcerting grin over killing someone); a third, Sanders, is generally viewed as unelectable; and a fourth, O'Malley, while theoretically conventionally electable is currently pulling less than half a percent in the polls, according to RealClearPolitics. The Democrats' three front-runners are Clinton, age 67, Sanders, 74, and, while he's not officially a candidate, Vice President Joe Biden, who will turn 73 next month – not exactly a party well-positioned for the next decade.

Of course the real action in the GOP since the last debate has been on the party's undercard, the House of Representatives. If you live outside the Washington Beltway you might screen out news of congressional ineptitude as that branch's baseline modus vivendi, but that group has turned mere dysfunction into performance art. House Speaker John Boehner, fed up with a particularly quarrelsome faction of his conference that prizes confrontation and disdains the kind of compromise that our system requires, last month announced his resignation.

The same group helped spur Boehner's presumed successor, House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy of California, to withdraw his bid for the post. House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, the party's 2012 vice presidential nominee, quickly emerged as the only person capable of unifying the party's disparate elements, except that the far right quickly started finding imperfections with him as well. And Ryan has repeatedly said he doesn't want the job (why would he?). If he passes, the field could grow exponentially. For example Montana Rep. Ryan Zinke, a Republican who has been in Congress for less than 10 months, told the Wall Street Journal's Kristina Peterson that he's considering a bid because "our phones are ringing off the hook because I think America wants something different." Truly it is majestic when the country cries out as one in such a manner.

This all makes great fodder for politicos but the extent to which nonpolitical America has noticed – the Zinke boom aside – is debatable. They'll start paying closer attention if the dysfunction causes a national default because Congress fails to raise the debt ceiling or if there's a Christmas season government shutdown. But for now they're lucky their gang's inability to shoot straight doesn't have, say, the harsh spotlight of a presidential campaign trained on it.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Hillary Clinton]

Which is why next week's Benghazi hearing, with Clinton as the star, presents such a problem for the Republicans. We can expect Clinton to be as well-prepared and on her game as she was Tuesday night. Republicans will need to be focused, restrained and, importantly, articulate – granted that the deaths of Ambassador Christopher Stevens and three other Americans on September 11, 2012 were a tragedy, three years on Republicans haven't been able to spell out in a simple way precisely what they think Hillary Clinton's misdeeds were in relation to the attack. Whatever amount of time they spend asking her about her email server will only underscore the extent to which this committee has been on a fishing expedition.

And an admittedly partisan one. Recall McCarthy's first sin was, asked what the committee had accomplished, pointing to Clinton's declining poll numbers (proving again the old saw that a gaffe in Washington occurs when someone inadvertently tells the truth). A second GOP lawmaker, Richard Hanna of New York, echoed McCarthy this week, saying that "a big part of this investigation" was aimed at going after Clinton. "That's the way Washington works. But you'd like to expect more from a committee that's spent millions of dollars and tons of time." And a former staffer is suing the committee, alleging that he was fired in part for not being sufficiently focused on bringing down Clinton.

So the Benghazi Republicans will finally have their shot at Clinton – in front of the cameras. Maybe they'll be able to break her down "A Few Good Men"-style and get her to admit that she did do, well, whatever it is that they're accusing her of.

More likely however, the group whose confrontation fetish consistently leads to political overreach will do what it does worst and confirm for anyone watching that the committee is the partisan sideshow Clinton says it is.