Leave it to the establishment media’s favorite Republican Senator – John McCain – to join the Chicken Little chorus and the Democrats to declare that the sky is falling now that the House has actually played its constitutional role and refused to fund a program with which it disagrees – Obamacare.

McCain’s comments came when he also told reporters that the cancelation of the Air Force-Navy game would be the “defining moment” of the shutdown.

“The apocalypse is upon us,” McCain lamented according to The Hill.

The cancellation of a football game as the “defining moment” in this great constitutional battle?

Give us a break.

The real apocalypse will come if and when Obamacare is fully implemented.

At that point over 20 new taxes will have kicked-in and the Medicare actuary has reported that in the course of its first 10 years, Obamacare will boost health spending by “roughly $621 billion” above the amounts Americans would have spent without this misguided law.

This staggering cost works out to be $7,450 for a typical family of four.

That’s a far cry from the $2,500 per year presidential candidate Barack Obama pledged on June 5, 2008, that a “typical” American family would save.

(See this post on Forbes for a great discussion of these numbers and the misstatements and outright lies President Obama and his Democratic allies have been telling about Obamacare and its cost.)

Opposition to these job-killing taxes is not just a political ploy by Republicans – many Democratic Senators (particularly those up for re-election in 2014) have opposed them as well.

As the Daily Caller reported, in December, 18 Democratic senators wrote a letter to their Majority Leader Harry Reid requesting a delay in the implementation of Obamacare’s 2.3 percent excise tax on medical device manufacturers, many of which do business in Democratic senators’ home states.

“The medical technology industry directly employs over 400,000 people in the United States and is responsible for a total of two million high-skilled manufacturing jobs. Additionally, this industry is also one of the few that enjoys a net trade surplus, significantly boosting U.S. exports around the globe,” the letter stated.

This 2.3 percent excise tax on medical device manufacturers in Obamacare has, as the DC put it, “sparked panic within the medical devices industry.” Indiana-based Zimmer Holdings, which manufactures hip replacement implants, laid off 450 workers in 2012 in anticipation of $60 million in taxes. Michigan-based Stryker Corp., which also produces hip implants, laid off 5 percent of its workers in a bid to compensate for the $100 million it will pay in taxes in 2013.

The letter was signed by Democratic Sens. Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, Kay Hagan of North Carolina, Al Franken of Minnesota, Herb Kohl of Wisconsin, Barbara Mikulski of Maryland, Chuck Schumer of New York, Kirsten Gillibrand of New York, Bob Casey of Pennsylvania, Debbie Stabenow of Michigan, Dick Durbin of Illinois, Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire, Patty Murray of Washington, Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut and then-Senator elect Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, and others, all of whom have now voted down Republican efforts to actually do something about the problem.

Obamacare’s negative impact on jobs and employment isn’t limited to medical device manufacturers, for other industries see our articles “CEOs Start Layoffs Saying We Told You This Would Happen” of November 2012 and our pre-election article “How Dumb Does Obama Think Americans Are?”

If there’s an apocalypse afoot it isn’t due to the cancellation of the Air Force-Navy football game – it will happen if Republicans cave-in and allow the economic disaster portended by all these tax increases to become reality.