As Sarnia's Coronation Park Day Nursery joined the ranks of other municipally-run day cares being shuttered across Ontario, NDP leader Andrea Horwath insisted to reporters Friday that public sector child-care centres still have a role to play in the province.

“If we don't value our children and if we don't value the services that we provide for them, if we don't want them to be the best services, then sure, let's have more and more private child care come into Ontario,” she told media outside the Oak Avenue day care.

Horwath and Sarnia city councillor-elect Brian White toured the 42-year-old day care only hours before it shuttered its doors permanently Friday.

Early this fall, Lambton County councillors voted to close the centre wedged in between two elementary schools after senior county staff reported a projected $1.1-million deficit, caused in part by the reduction of provincial child-care funding.

The Ontario Liberal government, however, did provide $5.1 million to the county in transitional funding to help with the move to a new funding formula for children's services.

“(Coronation Park) has provided fantastic quality care for so many young people, so many families and to see it close its doors today, I think it is something that is a tragedy for this community,” Horwath told reporters Friday.

While Horwath went on to point to studies that suggest not-for-profit and public sector day-care centres provide “higher quality” care, she did contend that parents should have the choice to place their children where they see fit.

“I'm not saying there aren't other choices parents can make when it comes to child care, but what I am saying is if we're talking about this type of child-care model – a child-care centre – then the centre-based child care should definitely be not-for-profit or public,” she said.

“One of the problems we have in this province, though, is there is not enough licensed not-for-profit public child care in this province, so often times parents have no choices and that's where we end up with really serious situations.”

Last week, Horwath was successful in getting the Ontario legislature to support the concept of a $15-per-day federal child-care program brought forward by national NDP leader Thomas Mulcair.

But, she insisted the Ontario Liberal government only moved backwards this week with Friday's closure of Coronation Park Day Nursery.

When asked whether the Canadian and Ontario governments who are both saddled with multi-billion-dollar deficits have money for expanding child-care services, Horwath pointed to Liberal misspending.

“We've seen this [Ontario] government waste enormous amounts of public funds,” she said. “The amount that it would take to maintain a child-care centre here in Sarnia could have been done probably a thousand times over with just the money that was just wasted with the gas plant scandal, for example.”

She also suggested that public and not-for-profit day-care centres could still be operational with wages above the private sector.

Coronation Park early childhood educators were earning between $28 and $34 per hour, according to a county staff report.

“Why is it a problem to pay people a decent salary for taking care of our most precious commodity which is our children? We don't begrudge paying high salaries in other industries and other kind of professions.”

With Friday's closure of Coronation Park, the county is now expected to find a real estate agent to start marketing the portion of the Oak Avenue facility once used by the day-care centre.

The on-site Ontario Early Years Centre (OEYC) will remain as a tenant of the facility until at least Dec. 31, 2015.

barbara.simpson@sunmedia.ca