Ted Cruz’s recent claim in New Hampshire that he does not have health insurance has been revealed to be a complete and total lie. It turns out that Cruz and his family have always had coverage.

While campaigning in New Hampshire on Thursday, Sen. Cruz claimed that he was currently without health insurance, “You know who one of those millions of Americans who’s lost their health care because of Obamacare? That would be me. I don’t have health care right now. I had purchased an individual policy, and Blue Cross Blue Shield canceled all their individual policies in the state of Texas effective December 31st. So our health care got canceled. We got a notice in the mail. Blue Cross Blue Shield was leaving the market.”

His didn’t make sense because people don’t get only a single letter in the mail and dropped. What Cruz was describing did not sound real because it wasn’t.

The Wall Street Journal reported that the Cruz campaign was forced to admit that he had been moved to another plan:

Cruz spokeswoman Catherine Frazier said Friday that Mr. Cruz’s insurance broker had told him that he lost his health coverage when his Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas preferred provider organization or PPO, policy terminated on Dec. 31.

But Mr. Cruz had in fact been automatically enrolled by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas in another, narrower-network “health maintenance organization” plan that kept him covered in January.

Customers don’t get one letter and dropped. If the customer does not pick a new plan in the marketplace, their insurance provider moves them to a new plan automatically.

Like most Republicans, Cruz has to lie to attack the Affordable Care Act. Since the law is working, the GOP has to lie and invent dire circumstances to paint a picture of failure.

The truth about Ted Cruz’s health insurance situation makes the case for Obamacare. Cruz was not tossed off of his insurance. He was not left uninsured. Unlike the old system, his insurance company didn’t get to drop him and say sorry about your luck.

Ted Cruz has no conscience. He will lie about anything if he thinks it will help get elected president. The problem with Cruz’s lie about Obamacare is that it proves that the law is working.