Two Catholic health systems with hospitals across Southern California are closer to creating a single organization that would stretch from Alaska to Texas.

Providence Health & Services and St. Joseph Health have signed a definitive agreement and are working with California Attorney General Kamala Harris’ office to complete the review and approval process in 2016, officials with both systems announced last week.

The two health systems announced interest in merging in July.

Locally, Providence oversees hospitals in Mission Hills, Tarzana, Burbank, Santa Monica as well as several locations in the South Bay, while St. Joseph Health has hospitals in Apple Valley and multiple locations in Orange County. Both health systems operate medical centers outside of California, in mostly Western states.

“Together, we can invest more in the needs of everyone we serve, especially the most vulnerable,” said Dr. Rod Hochman, president and CEO, Providence Health & Services in a statement.

“Our commitment is to improve affordability, enhance clinical care and improve access to much-needed services,” Hochman added.

“We are two mission-focused organizations that have the potential of being better together, delivering outstanding clinical care and providing a compassionate presence in all the communities we serve,” said Deborah Proctor, president and CEO, St. Joseph Health, also in a statement.

Both organizations say they share a common heritage. The Sisters of St. Joseph of Orange began in Northern California 103 years ago and branched out across the state toward Texas and New Mexico. Almost 160 years ago, the Sisters of Providence built a health care system in the Northwest, eventually growing to serve Alaska, California, Montana, Oregon and Washington.

Health system mergers have increased both state and nationwide in the past few years because of changes to the payment and delivery models introduced by the Affordable Care Act, those who watch the health care industry have said. If approved, this merger would create one of the largest Catholic health systems in the nation.

But at least one organization is calling on the attorney general to hold public hearings to review the proposed merger.

The California Nurses Association/National Nurses United said in a statement last week they want Harris to assure “patient protections and nurses’ rights are not infringed,” with the merger.

“We are opposed to any and all mergers that don’t guarantee our patients and the community we serve a higher standard of care,” CNA Co-President Zenei Cortez said in the statement. “This merger must ensure that all the hospitals remain open, that all jobs and services are maintained and that the new organization is held accountable for providing charity care and community benefits to the communities it serves.”

Advertisement

If approved, the new parent organization would be called Providence St. Joseph Health.