TPG Capital believes there are still many opportunities to be had with the cost-saving goal of the nation’s current health-care reform.

“If this is a baseball game, we are in the third innings of cost containment,” said Jeff Rhodes, a principal at the megafirm. “We need to build the relevant tools and awareness of them, and drive these more disruptive models in the market place.”

Reducing costs, while improving the quality of care, is an overarching theme of the Affordable Care Act, which was signed into law in 2010. With rising health-care spending, private equity firms have been busy scooping assets in the past year that can improve the system’s efficiency and at the same time, contain costs.

In a sign of the steep price valuation buyers are willing to pay for such assets, H.I.G. Capital sold its stake in medical cost containment service provider PMSI Group LLC to Progressive Medical Inc.—backed by Kelso & Co. and StoneRiver Group—for a more than 50 times return.

TPG entered the fray with the purchase of Envision Pharmaceutical Holdings Inc., a Twinsburg, Ohio-based pharmacy benefit management company.

The deal, announced in July and completed this month, is no small feat for TPG, given the firm has been on the hunt for a slice of the pie for years.

“Historically, they have been hard to find as many have been strategically consolidated,” Mr. Rhodes said, referring to acquisitions by large pharmacy benefit managers.

Fort Worth, Texas-based TPG didn’t put forward the highest bid, but still beat a private equity peer to the asset. Mr. Rhodes declined to comment on the price of the Envision purchase nor which firm presented the highest bid.

Kevin Nagle, Envision’s chief executive, said TPG puts other values on the table.

“TPG’s experience is helpful to us,” he said. “Its M&A team helps us target businesses whether they are clear-cut PBMs, or have similar businesses that cross over to ours and would create synergies by being part of Envision.”

Envision said it provides integrated pharmacy benefit management, but at a flat monthly management fee. Discounts and rebates are credited back to the more than 10 million individuals it serves.

TPG’s plan for Envision is to strengthen budding operations, like specialty drug management, and expand its reach, particularly to corporate clients.

“While employers are shifting healthcare costs to employees, companies are still bearing a significant part of the cost and rising costs are still an issue,” he said. “A recent win for Envision is a large brand name American company that spends over $10 million a year in drug spending and by switching to Envision, it’s able to save 20%.”

Mr. Rhodes said the hope is to double or triple the $3.5 billion Envision brings in as annual revenue.

Write to Amy Or at amy.or@wsj.com