CNN celebrated a pair of premieres at an event Wednesday night, as conservative commentator S.E. Cupp marked the debut of her new digital series “Outside with Insiders,” while Maeve Reston also debuted her “#MaeveWest” series.

Members of the CNN’s political team mingled with Cupp and Reston as the first episodes of their online series played on surrounding televisions. Reston’s newborn daughter, a favorite in the crowd, observed the scene from her mothers’ arms.

Cupp told The Hill filming her show has been “so much fun.”

ADVERTISEMENT “I had this idea to take some of my political friends hunting, fishing or shooting, because that’s what I like to do, and I know a lot of other people like to do it too. So I thought, let’s go out and I bet we can have different kinds of political conversations when we’re outside, not in suits and not in the studio,” she said.

In the premiere of “Outside with Insiders,” Cupp shoots skeet with 2016 GOP presidential hopeful Scott Walker in his home state of Wisconsin.

Cupp said she enjoyed the chance to speak to Walker “with his guard down, doing something we love to do over hours, not 15 minutes in a studio.”

The two talked politics, but also music, with Walker discussing his love of Van Halen. He said that he “listens to ‘Panama’ to get pumped up.”

Asked his opinion of the other Republican candidates, Walker said that he “likes Marco [Rubio] a lot.”

The party also marked the debut of Reston’s digital series “#MaeveWest.” The national political reporter covers West Coast news when she isn’t on the campaign trail.

Reston profiled a Los Angeles piñata shop owner whose business recently boomed after she created a Donald Trump piñata. She also spoke with Mexican immigrants and recorded footage of their attacks on Trump’s piñata.

No stranger to the lighter side of politics, Reston started the #campaignfashionreport during her time on the campaign trail, tweeting pictures of politicians’ best outfits.

The launch of Eric Bradner’s nightly newsletter “Nightcap” was also celebrated at the event.