Unlike last year’s legislation, which was vetoed by Gov. Nathan Deal, House Bill 310 contains some measures that could stop practices that critics – including a scathing state audit – have denounced.

Much of the debate in Geor­gia over the companies resulted from 13 civil rights lawsuits filed in Richmond and Columbia counties. The Georgia Supreme Court upheld a 2013 ruling by Superior Court Judge Daniel J. Craig that said probation sentences can’t be indefinitely extended, a practice known as tolling.

The high court decision stunned the probation companies and judges who preside over misdemeanor cases and city ordinance violations.

HB 310 would return tolling powers to the courts. Under the bill, judges could suspend the expiration of a probation sentence if the person is accused of violating the terms – such as failure to pay fines, restitution or fees owed to private probation firms.

The bill would establish rules for ensuring a probationer knows he is in danger of having his sentence revoked and being incarcerated. However, the bill does not address what the probation company or courts should do to ensure a court promptly addresses the matter.

In some of the lawsuits in Richmond and Columbia counties, people were arrested on probation violation warrants years after their original terms should have expired, a practice Craig deemed unconstitutional.

The bill provides a procedure that could protect poor and disabled probationers. Most of the lawsuits were filed on behalf of people

who contend they were jailed simply because they did not have money to pay fines and fees.

Though the U.S. Su­preme Court ruled in 1983 that a person cannot be jailed because he is indigent, HB 310 allows factors that a court “may” consider in waiving payments, such as the probationer’s financial resources and obligations, income and any developmental or physical disability. The bill sets the indigence level at the federal poverty guideline; 25 percent of Augustans live below that.

The bill would require a judge to hold a hearing to determine the reason for any failure to make payments before revoking a probation sentence and jailing anyone.

If a judge determines he must revoke probation, the bill requires him to consider alternatives to jail. If jail is the best punishment for not paying, confinement is limited to four months. For violations other than nonpayment, jail time is limited to two years.

The bill also has a provision for people sentenced to probation only because they have the money to immediately pay fines and court costs. A pay-only probationer could only be charged probation supervision fees for three months, regardless of the length of the sentence or how long it takes to pay off fines and court costs.

The bill would limit how much private probation firms can charge people for electronic monitoring, setting it at the level that felony probationers pay: $4.50 a day. In Richmond County, Sentinel Offender Services charges $6 a day for monitoring house arrest and up to $11 a day for alcohol-use monitoring.

If HB 310 becomes law, it will address one of Deal’s chief concerns over last year’s failed legislation – the secrecy surrounding private probation firms. Once a year, information about the money collected from probationers for fines, fees, restitution and probation fees would be subject to the Open Records Act.

A hearing on HB 310 is scheduled Wednes­day, and it could come up for a vote March 2.