DeSOTO — Second lady Jill Biden offered a hand Tuesday — even if it was an injured one — to North Texas women hoping to get others to register for health care through the Affordable Care Act.

“I push my students to sign up. They need to realize, accidents happen,” Biden said, holding up her left arm in a camouflage cast as an example.

Biden, who broke her left wrist last month when she slipped and fell, is expected to be in a cast for about six weeks.

The vice president’s wife, a community college teacher, helped the national grass-roots group MomsRising kick off its health care house party campaign at member Marie Murray’s DeSoto home.

The group aims to educate families, neighbors and colleagues about why Medicaid expansion is important and how to sign up.

“We’re finding health care decisions in family units are made by women,” said Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins, who joined about 15 women at the kickoff. “People listen more to women. So empowering other women to talk to people they love should really help.”

MomsRising provides toolkits that include information on coverage options and enrollment to people willing to host gatherings in their communities.

Veronica Moore, a U.S. Department of Health and Human Services regional outreach specialist, said that people are more willing to listen if the information is coming from a trusted source, like a faith community or neighborhood association.

Alice Kinsey of Duncanville showed off her son’s health care card to the group. Kinsey is a member of Texas Organizing Project, which champions Medicaid expansion.

Her son got health coverage through the Affordable Care Act, but she said she’s still trying to persuade her best friend, a stylist with pre-existing conditions, to do the same.

“I got her so far as to set up an account,” Kinsey said. “She’s not computer-savvy. It’s a work in progress.”

Some said they had been met with resistance in previous attempts to educate their communities about health care.

Tara Mitchell of Burleson, a 39-year-old grad student who was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2012, said other people she has spoken with “are not receptive to the idea. They’re scared of change.”

She said she has a friend who will not leave a bad marriage because she has a pre-existing condition and her husband has good insurance.

“I told her you don’t have to do that anymore,” Mitchell said.

About 1 in 4 people in Texas — or 6.4 million residents — is uninsured.