Theatre

Straight to the heart: Yalin Ozucelik and Richard Roxburgh in the Sydney Theatre Company's Cyrano de Bergerac. Photo: Brett Boardman

Reviewer rating:

Rating: 3.5 out of 5 stars

Cyrano de Bergerac

Sydney Theatre, November 15

This Sydney Theatre production cuts through the rollicking reputation of Edmond Rostand's play and into its broken heart.

In adaptor and director Andrew Upton's rendering of this tragicomic portrait of a physically flawed human dynamo, the fatal blow suffered by our hero isn't in the king hit he suffers off-stage prior to Act V. That, in a sense, is just a coup de grace.

Advertisement

Here, Cyrano (Richard Roxburgh) looks like a dead man from the moment in Act II, set some 15 years earlier, when his childhood friend and ideal woman, Roxane (Eryn Jean Norvill), confesses her love for Christian, a handsome new cadet. Unwittingly, she has opened an artery that cannot be stanched and Cyrano's actions from that point feel like those of a man who knows he's a goner.

A minimalist aesthetic has been applied to the telling of the story with designer Alice Babidge (with Renee Mulder as her creative associate) stripping the stage to a black box. Acts I and II take place on and around a small proscenium mini-stage. From interval onwards, the space belongs to the actors exclusively.

Directing this trimmed new version of the STC's 1999 production, Upton (with Kip Williams as associate director) dishes up a lively, economical staging and he has a fine cast at his disposal, with David Whitney as Ragueneau, a great pastry maker and so-so poet; Bruce Spence as the drunkard Ligniere, and Josh McConville as the foppishly vain and dangerous De Guiche. Yalin Ozucelik – who played the lead role himself in an acclaimed independent production last year – excels as Cyrano's devoted friend, Le Bret, and Julia Zemiro makes the few moments she has in the spotlight as Roxane's nurse count.

Chris Ryan delivers a well-shaped study of callow youth as Christian. Norville is a radiant Roxane. But like Hamlet, Cyrano de Bergerac is something of a one-man show.

Roxburgh, a leading man blessed with the gifts of a natural clown, is an intelligent, box office-savvy choice for this ultra-dynamic role, and he's good here, make no mistake. Sometimes he's very good. But there are times when he's outshone, too. He taps into the pathos of his character's plight beautifully but the crack in the bell is so pronounced at times, it deadens Cyrano's magnificent sound and fury.

Until December 20