By Dennis Seid

Daily Journal

TUPELO – The Mabus Agency has been growing quickly during the past 36 months, bringing in creative talent from across the country for its marketing and advertising agency.

Last winter, it moved into its current 3,800-square-foot office on Green Street. In two years, it had grown from four to 14 employees, and the firm’s old location was simply too small to accommodate the ever-growing staff.

Not quite a year later, Mabus Agency shows no sign of slowing down, and it now has 21 employees.

And its latest addition is someone agency owner and founder Josh Mabus finds much in common.

Daniel Hicks joined the company last week as vice president of special projects.

“The beginning of October, Daniel and I started meeting,” Mabus. “We both owned creative services agencies and decided it was time for Mabus Agency to acquire Hicks Design Co. We’ve been working together for a long time.”

It’s been a friendly, competitive relationship through the years, Mabus and Hicks said.

“We’ve passed clients back and forth that fit better with one business model than the other,” Hicks said.

“You can only complete each other sentences so often before you realize that there’s a synchronicity between one another and that we would work well together,” Mabus said. “We looked at what the market was doing here, what it’s doing outside of Tupelo, and one thing we’ve always committed to is serving our clients well with great strategy.”

To that end, Hicks will special projects at Mabus Agency.

Mabus said Hicks has the heart, service and strategic mindset to help the firm’s clients.

“You don’t find Daniel’s skills just anywhere,” Mabus said.

The two had talked about joining forces for four years, toying with the idea to work even closer together.

“Our philosophy and strategy in the way we approach clients was very similar, and I saw my business growing,” Hicks said. “But before I got into it to deep to create a business that was moving toward what Josh what moving toward . … there was a shared vision, and he had created what I was looking to do.”

So, they decided it was better to combine forces.

“It no longer made any sense for us not to be working together,” Hicks said.

Mabus said with two healthy businesses, combining them made for better efficiency in serving clients.

“For some it doesn’t make sense, but we thought, why not combine two businesses on the healthy upswing and not duplicate services?” Mabus said.

Added Hicks, “It comes down to offering clients the absolute highest level of service and strategy for their profitability.

“As vice president of special projects, it means I can serve our clients in various ways, not just special projects, but having a working knowledge of the printing industry, of design, of development, I can bring that to the table.”

dennis.seid@journalinc.com

Twitter: @dennisseid