Audio Aired 4/8/15 UC San Diego’s Rady School of Management announced Wednesday a $100 million donation from Evelyn and Ernest Rady, and the Rady Family Foundation.

UC San Diego’s Rady School of Management announced Wednesday a $100 million donation from Evelyn and Ernest Rady, and the Rady Family Foundation.

In 2004, the Radys and their foundation donated $30 million to help create the business school.

“What a magnificent first 10 years — and the school is just getting started,” Ernest Rady said in a statement.

The school offers advanced degrees in business with a focus on ethical leadership. Over the past 10 years the school’s alumni and students have started 82 companies. Bloomberg Businessweek ranked the Rady School as the top graduate program in the nation for intellectual capital.



“Dean Sullivan and other leaders within the community held a vision of a business school in a symbiotic relationship with the innovative culture of our region," Rady said. "The school is already exceeding expectations and there is so much more to come.”

Robert Sullivan, dean of Rady School of Management, said the donation will make it possible for the school to grow into a globally influential institution.

“The transformational support from Evelyn and Ernest Rady is the largest single commitment in history to a business school of Rady’s size and youth and will continue to propel the Rady School on its meteoric rise — enabling the recruitment of world-class faculty, attracting the best and brightest students, and pioneering with creative new academic initiatives,” Sullivan said.

Rady said the management school influence is exponentially growing.

“My close relationship with the Rady School of Management has enriched my life,” Rady said. “I didn’t truly appreciate the speed or depth of impact that this program could have on a single individual and the multiplier effect that individual could have on others.”

Rady, a businessman, has founded several companies going back nearly 50 years.

As philanthropists, Rady and his wife, Evelyn, have made significant donations to Rady Children’s Hospital, Scripps Health and the Salk Institute for Biological Studies.