When Linda turned 55, the first thing on her mind was to go and have a full physical and the necessary preventive screening tests.

Some of her friends in her age group had already developed high blood pressure and diabetes, so she was concerned. Working as a part-time front-office assistant in a doctor's office, her salary barely covered her bills, and her job didn't come with any medical insurance. Unfortunately, she wasn't eligible for Medicaid, either.

While pondering how to get a checkup and the tests, one of the patients at the doctor's office who knew Linda well suggested, "Why don't you call the Crescent Community Clinic in Spring Hill? It's a free clinic."

"Oh, I didn't realize there is a free clinic right here in Hernando County," Linda said, totally surprised and relieved.

"The clinic is for those who don't have any medical insurance and cannot afford to see a private doctor," the patient said.

Linda felt her prayers had been answered.

Like most other counties in Florida, Hernando has its share of indigents and uninsured people. They have nowhere to go when they develop medical problems. As per recent statistics, the medically uninsured in the United States now stand at about 33 million. This is in spite of almost 9 million getting insurance by signing up for Obama­care last year.

Private physicians don't accept uninsured patients, even if some of them are prepared to pay from their pockets. Going to the emergency room is out of the question because of the prohibitive expenses even for a single visit. And, of course, the ER doesn't accept non-emergencies. Therefore, most of the patients do not seek medical help unless their problem escalates to a crisis situation. And then they crash into the ER or an urgent care center.

In the late 1980s, the physicians practicing in Hernando County observed that many of those coming to the ER seemed to suffer from advanced diseases like heart failure, diabetes, cancer, asthma, hypertension and other chronic conditions that, if caught early, could have been treated promptly and effectively with a better outcome. Needless to say, this is not good for the general health of the population, nor for controlling the tremendous cost of health care delivery in an advanced nation like ours. This is why a Doctors' Free Clinic was originally started in the early 1990s. But after functioning well for a few years, it folded.

Recognizing the need for a charity clinic, a group of physicians under the leadership of Dr. Abu Zarad decided to open the Crescent Community Clinic in Hernando County in 2008.

"Our mission was to improve the health and wellbeing of the underserved, indigent and uninsured in the county," Zarad said. "We wanted to provide the best health care for our patients irrespective of their ability to pay. Charity, volunteerism and giving back to our community are rooted in our religious beliefs."

The clinic, at 5244 Commercial Way in Spring Hill, is run exclusively by volunteer physicians and ancillary staff. Lab facilities are also available on the premises, and those who need advanced testing like a CT scan or MRI are referred to certain centers that work with the clinic and charge only minimum fees.

This is a win-win situation for the patients. Currently, the clinic has more than 5,000 face-to-face patient visits a year, and the total dollar value of the services rendered exceeds $1.5 million annually. In addition, the clinic has qualified speakers who are ready to discuss health care issues with community organizations, free of charge. People may call (352) 606-3645 for further information.

I hope this article will make people in Hernando County aware that the Crescent Community Clinic is always available to serve the medical needs of the uninsured and low-income people in the county.

"There are still a lot of eligible patients in the county who haven't heard about us," said Barbara Sweinberg, administrative director of the clinic. "We are the best-kept secret here, and we don't want to be that way. We want to help people."

No matter who the patients are, the clinic won't turn any of them away, as long as they are residents of the county and meet federal poverty guidelines. All you need is to make one telephone call to (352) 610-9916.

Dr. Ravindra Nathan is a volunteer cardiologist at the Crescent Community Clinic.