In a field that now numbers 16 Republican presidential candidates, Ted Cruz said he'll distinguish himself as the "consistent conservative" in the race, the Texas senator said Tuesday night on a conference call organized by the Alabama Republican Party.

Cruz also announced that he'll be visiting Alabama on Aug. 9, with stops in Hoover, Montgomery and Huntsville. He'll be back in the Yellowhammer State on Aug. 25, when he'll be the keynote speaker at the Tuscaloosa County Republican Party's Lincoln-Reagan Dinner.

"I'm so looking forward to my visits in Alabama this August," he said.

Cruz said unlike his GOP rivals, he's been a leader in fighting against Obamacare, the debt ceiling, President Barack Obama's executive actions on immigration and supporting freedom of speech and religious liberty. He is highly likely to be among the 10 Republican candidates to qualify for the first primary debate in two weeks, which is being hosted by Fox News. The network is going by an average of the latest national polls to determine the debate participants.

"I think the clearest distinction is that if you look to that debate stage on Aug. 6 [is] that I have been the only candidate on that stage who has been a consistent conservative," the senator said on the call with several hundred Alabama Republicans. "The men and women of Alabama, you understand strong conservative principles."

Cruz said a majority of Americans no longer believe their children will have a better life than them, an idea he called the country's greatest concern. "That must be the most un-American idea you can come up with," he said. "I think the central issue in the next election will be reigniting the promise of America."

The Texas senator said he would accomplish that by bringing back jobs and economic opportunity through tax and regulatory reform, specifically by instituting a flat tax and abolishing the IRS.

"The most important regulatory reform is we need to repeal every word of Obamacare," he said, adding the country needs to adopt "common-sense health care reform that will "keep government from getting in between us and our doctors."

Cruz slammed the some Republicans in the 2016 field for "running for the hills" and "reading word for word Barack Obama's talking points" when the Supreme Court ruled in favor of same-sex marriage last month.

Turning to foreign policy, Cruz said he would "restore America's leadership abroad," by being tougher on the Islamic State group -- also known as ISIS or ISIL -- and Iran while strengthening the country's relationship with Israel.

"Instead of a president who boycotts [Israeli] Prime Minister Netanyahu, imagine America unapologetically standing with the nation of Israel," he said.

Cruz also criticized Obama for ignoring "Islamic radical terrorism" and having a "photo-op foreign policy." The candidate's plan includes arming the Kurds in Iraq to combat ISIS

"When it comes to ISIS I agree with absolutely nothing that Barack Obama is doing," he said. "We need a commanded in chief who lays out a clear objective: We will destroy ISIS. If I'm elected president, it will be abundantly clear..that if you go and join ISIS...that you are signing your own death warrant. That's how you defeat Islamic terrorism."

On immigration, Cruz said he stands with U.S. Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., in "leading the fight to stop unconstitutional amnesty," adding that the Alabama senator "is a ferocious defender of rule of law in this nation." Cruz said he supports tripling the number of border patrol officers instituting a "strong biometric entry/exit system" to stop visa overstays and implementing a "strong E-Verify system" so people can't get a job without proving they aren't in the country illegally.

Cruz also pointed out that he led the fight to stop the so-called Gang of Eight immigration reform bill in the Senate. "I will be the only major presidential candidate on that [debate] stage who has never supported amnesty," he said. "I think amnesty is wrong, it is fundamentally wrong."

As far as a winning strategy in 2016, Cruz said Republicans need to elect a staunch conservative instead of a candidate who can appeal to moderates in the general election. "Every time we do that, we lose," he said.

"We want for once, how about we nominate a candidate who is as committed to conservative principles as Barack Obama is committed to liberal principles," he said.