DEAR DR. ROACH: I'm currently taking 10 mg of lisinopril once a day to control my blood pressure. I no longer have health insurance due to being laid off. Is there an over-the-counter medication I can use, similar to lisinopril? -- C.L.

ANSWER: I am sorry to hear about your situation. I am sure it must be both frustrating and frightening to have no health-care coverage. Unfortunately, there are not any over-the-counter treatments for high blood pressure similar to lisinopril. Further, since lisinopril can in rare cases cause serious side effects, it is important to be under the care of a physician or other provider when on this treatment. Your blood pressure should be checked and other blood tests done periodically. There often are many resources in a community to get this done at low or no cost. Your local department of health may be a good place to start.

DEAR DR. ROACH: I usually walk 45 minutes daily for a cardio workout. However, the Florida summer heat can be brutal, so instead of walking, I swim and walk one hour in the pool. Is that as good a cardio workout as walking? -- R.G.

ANSWER: I think that having several different ways to exercise is a good idea, since the muscles used will always be at least somewhat different and it can keep you from being bored when doing the same thing day after day. In your situation, I think that it makes a great deal of sense to avoid the heat by getting in the pool.

The intensity of a cardiovascular workout can be measured simply by your pulse rate. A rough but commonly used guide is that moderate cardiovascular exercise is 50 percent to 70 percent of your age-predicted maximum of 220 minus your age. So for age 50, your maximum is 170, and moderate exercise is a pulse of 85 to 119. You can check your pulse at the wrist with a clock, or wear a heart monitor.

Swimming almost always is a more-intense workout than walking (race walkers certainly can get a very fast pulse rate), and walking in the pool is a good exercise for your heart and many muscles.

If the pool is outdoors, as is usual in warm, sunny places, you need to wear and reapply plenty of sunscreen to protect your skin.

DEAR DR. ROACH: I am 84. I have been diagnosed with a bursa behind my left knee. It has grown to the size of a lemon and causes me quite a bit of discomfort. It affects the way I walk and stand. I have been to two orthopedic doctors, and they are reluctant to drain it but won't explain why. I am otherwise in excellent physical condition. -- J.W.

ANSWER: It sounds like you are talking about a popliteal or Baker's cyst. X-ray and ultrasound can confirm this. At your age, it is likely related to osteoarthritis of the knee. Most surgeons do treat these with a combination of drainage and (at the same time) injection of the knee with a corticosteroid such as cortisone.

Since they seem reluctant to do this, it may be that I am guessing wrong at your diagnosis, so when you see the doctor, ask the diagnosis and write me back.

READERS: The booklet on restless leg syndrome and nighttime cramps offers more tips. Readers can obtain a copy by writing: Dr. Roach -- No. 306, Box 536475, Orlando, FL 32853-6475. Enclose a check or money order (no cash) for $4.75 U.S./$6 Can. with the recipient's printed name and address. Please allow four weeks for delivery.

* * *

Dr. Roach regrets that he is unable to answer individual letters, but will incorporate them in the column whenever possible. Readers may email questions to ToYourGoodHealth@med.cornell.edu or request an order form of available health newsletters at P.O. Box 536475, Orlando, FL 32853-6475. Health newsletters may be ordered from www.rbmamall.com.