Dr. Ben Carson, a retired brain surgeon who is running to become the Republican candidate for the U.S. presidency, said Sunday he is glad that real estate mogul Donald Trump is in the race, and that it is noteworthy that no person of color is among the Democratic candidates.

He also said he would consider serving as vice president if an offer from the right candidate came along and he was afforded the opportunity to champion a significant cause, such as health care reform.

Carson spoke for about 45 minutes by phone as he traveled between Houston’s Second Baptist Church and an appearance in Dallas on Sunday afternoon.

He is scheduled to attend a book signing at 7:30 p.m. Monday at Barnes & Noble Booksellers, 4909 W. Waco Drive, where he will greet the public and autograph copies of his book, “A More Perfect Union.”

The best-seller addresses the framing of the U.S. Constitution; the rights and liberties it enumerates; and the separation of powers it demands of the legislative, judicial and executive branches of government.

“Basically, everybody knows we have a Constitution, but very few know what’s in it, including the guarantee of liberties to citizens that protects us from the expansion, invasion and control of government,” Carson said.

He said the book has been well- received and his signings around the country typically have attracted sizable crowds.

Addressing the separation of powers the Constitution espouses, Carson criticized President Barack Obama for what he called the abuse of executive orders, saying Obama too often circumvents the authority of Congress by enacting policy on his own.

“Executive orders are supposed to be temporary measures reserved for situations when Congress is not available to legislate,” Carson said.

Instead, he said, Obama has used them to pursue his version of immigration reform and to craft changes to the Affordable Care Act, the controversial health care program that some refer to as “Obamacare.”

Carson said Obama has gotten by with this strategy because “he’s dealing with a weak legislative body he knows he can push around.”

The candidate took issue with some news outlets covering his campaign and what he called “the dishonesty of the media.”

Carson came under attack for saying he does not think a Muslim should be considered for the office of president, and for saying he would not have “stood by” and been shot by a gunman who killed nine students at a community college in Roseburg, Oregon.

“Anyone from any religion or religious background must be willing to subjugate his or her religious views to the Constitution, and anyone not willing to do that would not be acceptable to me as the leader of this nation,” Carson said.

He said the media made it appear he was purposely criticizing the victims of the massacre in Oregon, “though I certainly was not.” He said he was simply trying to make the point that he would encourage the students to rush the shooter in hopes of disarming him.

Trump’s impact

Of Trump, another outsider who never has held political office, Carson said: “I’m absolutely glad he’s in the race. He’s getting the attention of people who normally would be sitting on their hands, making them interested in the process.”

Asked about last week’s Democratic presidential candidate debate, including front-runners Hillary Rodham Clinton and Bernie Sanders, Carson said: “I was surprised to see everyone embrace the policies of the current administration so strongly. I hope that continues; it will make it easy for the electorate to decipher which way it wants to go.”

If one measures a president’s impact by his ability to carry out a political agenda, then Obama unquestionably has been a success during his nearly seven years in office, Carson said.

“What he has done has fundamentally changed America,” he said.

“But the question is: ‘Is it good for America and what the people want?’ It certainly is not consistent with what I believe or with the opinions of most people I encounter. But that’s why we have elections.”

Carson, known for his thoughtful answers and low-key persona, said he thinks his strength as a candidate is his common sense, “which seems to be not so common anymore.”

He added that political correctness “is antithetical to freedom of speech and freedom of expression. The worst thing about it is that it stifles conversation, which is a killer in a pluralistic society.”

Carson, who is black, said he finds it “very telling” that there is no ethnic diversity among the Democratic candidates.

“I find Republicans much more open to diversity and different thought,” he said. “On the Democratic side, you must toe the line. They are more intolerant, especially of people like myself. If you’re black and you think for yourself, you’re an Uncle Tom.”

The candidate said he “continues to walk through doors that the good Lord opened.”

‘Citizen statesmen’

Carson said the pundits contend he has no business succeeding as he has, running second in most national polls behind Trump, “but I view myself as the first in a long line of citizen statesmen.

“There is a sizable list of people in our country who are more adept at solving problems than politicians, but they are hesitant to run, knowing they will be abused and their families will be abused,” he said.

The U.S. military has suffered under Obama, Carson said, with budget trimming “cutting the heart out of our personnel numbers at the same time jihadists are growing.

“Morale is low, recruitment is down 14 percent, and 22 veterans commit suicide every day. It’s a dismal situation, and with what’s going on in the world today, (it’s) the wrong time for our military to be going down.”

Carson said so far he has visited every state except North Dakota, and he has a donor base in every state.

He said he often visits Texas, “and I’ve found it full of people with common sense, though it is being infiltrated by more and more people from California, so I suspect it’s going to change. Right now, it’s still OK.”

If elected, Carson said, he would immediately call a special session of Congress to announce that “we work for the people; they don’t work for us.” He would sign no budget increases, he said, adding, “Do that for two or three years, and we’d have a balanced budget.”

-----

If you go

Republican presidential candidate Dr. Ben Carson will hold a book signing in Waco:

When: 7:30 p.m. Monday

Where: Barnes & Noble Booksellers, 4909 W. Waco Drive

Book: “A More Perfect Union: What We the People Can Do to Reclaim Our Constitutional Liberties”