Photo

We are entering a season of packages, of wrapped and packed commodities, that many of us rewrap in colorful paper and ribbons to present as holiday gifts. Thus we disguise the mass-produced, try to effect an aura of mystery and magic, and hope our gifts fulfill, or even awaken, the desires of their receivers, with the latest “must-have” toy or fashion. This really curious habit has been common in the United States and elsewhere for over a century. In fact, it closely parallels the advent of packed and wrapped goods for daily use.

Think of Coca-Cola, that drink many people once recognized by its distinctive green bottle, and now recognize as much by its red-and-white can as by its caramel-colored caffeinated sugar kick. Since the 1890s, Coca-Cola has been replacing milk, fruit juice and water in the diets of millions of people around the globe. Coca-Cola is only one of hundreds of new commodities, engineering and marketing feats, that have liberated us from the limits of nature, for both good and ill.

If, as often told, we humans are makers (Homo faber), we are also packagers, and have been since the ancients first poured wine into colorful amphorae. We wrap the stuff of nature (foods, drinks, but also sights, sounds and other sensual pleasures) in skins that entice, but that can also deceive us, much like the holiday gift box. By the 1880s, merchandisers learned that the boxing, bottling and labeling of often quite ordinary bulk foods and drinks not only made for personal portable convenience (as in that Coke can or box of Cracker Jack), but that the labeling with colorful logos coordinated with massive advertising in magazines, newspapers and on billboards created special meanings that made the ordinary extraordinary, almost like the beribboned gift. This has been the hallmark of the twin occupations of the merchandiser and the advertiser ever since. From childhood, we are trained to long for the wrapping as much as for what’s inside, just as kids are taught to believe that the wrapped toys under the Christmas tree come from Santa, not Wal-Mart.

But what’s inside is not just chopped liver (usually). We try to pack as well as to wrap, like holiday gifts, besting the ordinary. Thus we preserve food and drink that would otherwise easily spoil in sealed pots, and since the 19th century, in metal cans. We try to improve on nature by besting its ephemerality and seasonality. Packaged food and drink have eliminated the need for the traditional harvest festival as a time for feasting on soon-to-spoil fruits and vegetables, and on the pork and beef from domesticated animals that could not be fed through winter. With packing, we have it all whenever we want, whatever we want.

Yet the packing means much more. It has long been about intensifying sensation: turning sweet grape juice into psychotropic wine. And that quest to pack more punch into nature’s delights has exploded in modern times with the extraordinary concoctions invented toward the end of the 19th century. Think of Jell-O, little more than powdered gelatin made from animal byproducts and enhanced with sugar and flavoring that from 1897, through advertising, but also through the appeal of convenience and the delight of its jiggle, won over mothers and especially their children, supplanting all-American apple pie. Every industrial society has some variety of these concoctions (say, the Anglo-Australian yeast spread Marmite/Vegemite or Scotland’s soft drink Irn-Bru, both acquired tastes). One of the most successful of these repackaged natural products is, of course, the cigarette, the dark side of modern packaging.

The packed and the wrapped extend beyond the sense of taste, including efforts to capture, preserve and often to duplicate the ephemerality of sight, sound and even touch. Although drawing and painting were attempts to possess the visual, it was the arrival of the camera (1839) and the motion picture (1891) that created the fixed and the flickering image; these were amazing feats that both displaced and perpetuated vision. And the phonograph (invented in 1877, made practical starting in 1887) magically captured voice on the continuous groove of a cylinder or disc.

These devices created what no painting or sheet music could: an exact and seemingly infinite reproduction of images and sounds, accessible anytime, anywhere. And, as we all know, these technologies soon repacked sight and sound, creating experiences of surprising intensity.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Note the accelerated pace of the quick-cut film (as in “The Great Train Robbery” of 1903). This technique was endlessly copied and refined in action pictures since the 1970s, from “Dirty Harry” to “The Lego Movie.”

The packed and preserved sensations of film and vinyl were often enhanced by wrappings: enticing motion picture posters and trailers, as well as record sleeves with provocative images on the front and “liner notes” on the back. The image of the Beatles on the psychedelic-themed album cover for Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band (1967) is iconic and perhaps as memorable as the songs themselves.

Thus, it’s both the external wrapping and the internal packing that make packaged commodities what they are today. Lately these principles have been applied with renewed vigor: consider the current wave of new “foods” manufactured from vegetable proteins and engineered to taste like meat (Tofurky and Soyrizo), or the shift from physical movies, records or books to the streamed digital song or e-book. This swing from the physical/tactile to the virtual has been sweeping and sudden, but this new product is still a package.

Yet, these seemingly unstoppable trends are inevitably met by packaging luddites. These are people who still favor the old packaging — vinyl records or CDs that can and must be stored, displayed and ritualistically set up for play; and bound paper books that take up space on shelves and tell you and your friends something about who you are or were. There are still those who insist on nature’s original wrapping, like bananas that can be peeled, and who value the process of selecting, cleaning and cooking fresh vegetables for stir fry. Some people may even reconsider those piles of presents and opt for other ways of sharing and celebrating the winter solstice.

We are a packaging people as we once again prepare for the gift season. Optimally, we can both enjoy the benefits of packaging and continue to embrace ephemeral and intermittent natural pleasures. Need the one completely supplant the other?