Related Stories Boulder council supportive of city staff's aggressive renewable electricity goal

Boulder may ask voters in November to weigh in on the controversial matters of City Council compensation and the building height limit, as well as the far less contentious matter of slightly updating the city's open space parameters.

No official moves were made at the council's study session on Tuesday, but council members were asked to provide feedback to city staff on potential ballot measures for the Nov. 8 election.

While it appears that up to three city-initiated measures are now in play for the upcoming ballot, neither city staff nor the council felt the ballot should include any tax or debt items.

There are two taxes in Boulder set to expire at the end of 2017, and five others that will expire between then and 2039. Though Boulder leaders say they're disinterested in bringing any tax questions to the voters this year, those voters have historically been very supportive of tax hikes. In fact, the city has asked for voter support of 22 taxes since 2002, and has gotten its way on 20 of them — including three on last year's ballot.

Council compensation

One of the measures recommended for the ballot by the city's Charter Committee — on which council members Lisa Morzel, Sam Weaver and Mary Young sit — is a proposal to allow City Council members to participate in the life and health insurance program presently offered to full-time, non-union city employees.

Advertisement

Last fall, Boulder voters rejected a raise for City Council members, who make just north of $200 per meeting, with maximum annual pay capped at about $10,700. As Mayor Suzanne Jones and others said Tuesday, there's some thought that offering slight financial relief via an optional insurance policy would have some of the same impact that a raise might.

"I think the underlying impetus is to encourage more diversity of people to run for council," Jones said. "If the voters don't want to pay more, this is another way they could benefit and make it more affordable for people to participate as council members."

Added Councilwoman Mary Young: "This is one way to provide some compensation for future council members that is not monetary, but it would make a difference for a lot of folks."

Councilman Andrew Shoemaker said it is "silly" to think that offering participation in the city's insurance program would inspire people from a wider range of income levels to seek public office.

"I don't think this is going to move the needle at all," he said.

The conversation turned when Councilman Matt Appelbaum suggested asking voters again for a raise. He said that he expects it might do better this time around.

"There's nothing wrong with insurance," he said, "but given a 45 percent 'yes' last time, and this being a general election this time with a lot more voters ... I would just put it on again."

Now, city staff is going to investigate two potential ballot measures on council compensation. One would involve insurance only, and the other would involve insurance and a pay raise.

Neither would kick in until 2019.

Height limit

The Charter Committee decided early this month that it would be best to pull any consideration of a potential ballot measure that would have asked voters to allow some rooftops on buildings to exceed Boulder's 55-foot height limit.

Morzel, Young and Weaver felt at the time that the proposal was undone because it became much more complex than they had originally intended. Though numerous city officials said last week that the plan had died, it was resurrected Tuesday when Appelbaum said he felt it should be reconsidered for the ballot.

In response, Morzel said she'd support the measure in 2017, but that there isn't time to put something workable together for this year's ballot without asking city staff to add something else to its already full slate.

"We keep asking them to do more and more," Morzel said. "Everybody's just maxed out."

She also said it would be politically unwise to bring the height limit to voters this year.

"I don't think doing another divisive ballot issue will be conducive to trying to bring our community back together," she said.

By a "nod of five," however, the council went against the Charter Committee's recommendation and returned the matter to staff for reconsideration.

The 'Blue Line'

In the 1950s, while Boulder was in the middle of a huge growth spurt, two University of Colorado professors formed an alliance that many now credit with laying the foundation for the city's world-renowned open space program. Their research led to a 1959 vote in which Boulder citizens overwhelmingly approved the "Blue Line," a boundary that roughly follows the contour line north from Eldorado Springs, west of which the city would no longer provide water.

As the Open Space and Mountain Parks department's land has shifted slightly over the years, however, the Blue Line has remained unchanged for 57 years.

The proposed ballot measure would see a revision of the line, which no council members appeared to have an issue with on Tuesday.

Senior Assistant City Attorney Kathy Haddock assured the council that a revised Blue Line would not have a negative impact on any current property owner's ability to be included in water services.

"Nobody is being cut out that previously would have had an opportunity to be part of the city," she said.

Citizen ballot initiatives

As of Tuesday, the city clerk's office had confirmed three citizen-initiated ballot petitions. One was brought by coalition Healthy Boulder Kids and seeks to place an excise tax on soda and other sugary drinks; another, led by a group of University of Colorado graduate students, seeks to overturn the city's housing occupancy limit; and a petition from the citizen advocate organization Open Boulder seeks to install a three-term lifetime limit on City Council members.

If any of those three petitions is to reach the November ballot, the roughly 4,630 signatures they'll need from registered Boulder voters must be verified by the city clerk's office no later than July 11.

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness