Louis Lane

Amateur archaeologist

29-8-1919 – 4-1-2015

Mrs Louis Lane was born in 1919 as one of two daughters to Ruby and George Shepherd, and grew up in the family home in Geelong East. She married her first husband Willem Boetje during the Second World War but they soon separated after the birth of her only son.

Advertisement

In 1956 she married Samuel Lane and moved to Newcastle, NSW, changing her name to Mrs Louis Lane, which is how she referenced herself in her extensive research. They divorced in 1969.

Later in life, she changed her surname by deed poll to Rubella, which is a compaction of her mother's (Ruby) and sister's (Helen) names.

Formally trained in manual arts, and then as a teacher-librarian, Lane often had her hair tied back in a tight bun, remarking that it was her "librarian bun". As a librarian she worked in various schools before retiring in 1977 from Port Kembla High School in NSW. Her training as a librarian was carried through in the methodical approach she applied to her archaeological research.

While working as a librarian in NSW, Lane started collecting gemstones and petrified wood. This ignited an interest in Aboriginal cultural artefacts as she participated in archaeological expeditions around Queensland and NSW.

After returning to live in Geelong, her anthro-pological interest focused on the local Wathaurong culture, the indigenous people who live in the Greater Geelong region and beyond, as far as Beaufort, Cressy, Aireys Inlet and Queenscliff.

Lane became a leading expert in researching and documenting the Wathaurong culture, and she actively participated as a volunteer to the Victoria Archaeological Survey (VAS) for more than 20 years.

Becoming an honorary warden under the Archaeological and Aboriginal Relics Preservation Act in the early 1970s, she carried out many surveys in the Geelong region herself and led survey teams with the regular VAS summer schools.

The VAS Records often include activities reports where Lane is mentioned extensively.

Lane was a well-respected author of articles published in the VAS Records series and generated prolific typescripts of her findings that are largely unpublished.

During her retirement she spent more than 25 years, when not making her famous zucchini wine, dedicating her time to researching the Wathaurong culture.

She prepared more than 200 unpublished typescripts containing more than 8000 pages of text covering many topics, from Aboriginal protocols to compiling a language dictionary and investigating how indigenous plants were used in their everyday lives.

A self-motivated and driven woman who loved looking for Aboriginal sites and evidence to tell the Wathaurong story, her years of dedicated researching and documenting were undertaken without funding.

Lane was regarded as an enthusiastic amateur archaeologist by many and although she may have lacked some of the rigour of those professionally trained, her work was considered by those within the VAS of a high standard.

Her research methods included archaeological surveys of the region, extensive secondary research and oral translation through indigenous networks.

Her prolific and dedicated research made her the "go to" person within the Geelong region for indigenous interpretation, giving many an address to communities, to school groups and various societies during the 1970s and '80s.

Even as an elderly lady, she would always drive herself in her big XB Falcon to archaeological sites or to deliver an address.

In 2003 she suffered a mild stroke and needed to be moved to residential care in Queensland. She passed away in a Queensland nursing home, leaving only her son.