Pittsburgh Bishop Zubik optimistic about challenge to Affordable Care Act, despite death of Scalia

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Pittsburgh Bishop David Zubik said Tuesday he is optimistic about his challenge to the Affordable Care Act, despite the death of U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, who likely would have sided with the church.

“I'm not giving up hope. I think we have a cause, a cause to be defended,” Zubik said. “(Scalia) has been outspoken for as many years as he's been on the court for the preservation of religious freedom. It's not only a loss on this case. It's a loss around the whole issue of religious freedom.”

Zubik and the Catholic Diocese of Pittsburgh contend a mandate in President Obama's health care law infringes on religious freedom by requiring employers to provide coverage that includes birth control or to sign an opt-out form created for religious institutions, nonprofits and others that object.

The Roman Catholic Diocese of Erie and Geneva College, a Beaver Falls school affiliated with the Reformed Presbyterian Church, and six religious organizations across the country joined the suit. The Diocese of Greensburg has filed a similar challenge. Its case is on hold pending the outcome of Pittsburgh's case.

Scalia, a Catholic who ruled against the government in a similar case involving Hobby Lobby in 2014, died Saturday. His vote could have secured a 5-4 victory for the church.

Scalia's death and the vacancy on the court set up a scenario in which the remaining eight justices could deadlock at 4-4. In that case, the justices could affirm the decision of the lower courts — which ruled against the church — or put the case on hold until the court's next term.

“The sooner the better that we could have a favorable decision, that is what I would like to see,” Zubik said.

The Catholic Diocese of Pittsburgh is not complying with the health care law under an order issued in April by Justice Samuel Alito. Zubik believes Alito's stay will continue until the Supreme Court rules. The church otherwise would face fines for not complying with the contraception mandate.

John D. Goetz, an attorney with the Downtown law firm Jones Day, which is representing the church, said his team is pressing ahead as planned and preparing to argue the case before the court March 23.

Zubik said he will send letters to clergy throughout the diocese asking them to hold a special time for prayer on March 23.

Aaron Aupperlee is a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at 412-320-7986 or aaupperlee@tribweb.com.