2015 was a sobering year regarding the prospects of oil for Montana and Yellowstone County.

Billings businesses were saved from the worst of the Great Recession, and were rapidly growing and expanding, in direct contrast to the rest of the country, because of the Bakken Boom in western North Dakota. But other things must also have been going on to spur the strength of the Yellowstone County economy, because as oil prices dropped over the last two years, the local economy continues relatively strong.

That is probably the one important message to be gleaned from economic news throughout 2015. Of course, oil field activity is still strong and oil companies and communities are taking advantage of what is hoped to be but a lull in the industry, to catch up on infrastructure needs, which were set aside during the boon. Spin off from that activity continues to support local businesses.

Agriculture is surely a significant part of the reason that the Billings economy remains strong. No other industry matches it as a basic pillar to the local economic base and in general it has been doing well. Cattle prices were at record levels until recently, although grain prices have remained flat.

Following is a review of some of the business news in 2015 – local news, as well as state and national news – all of which impact the local economy.

Continued investments in the three local refineries are significant support to the local economy. Hundreds of millions of dollars in investments creates thousands of jobs and generate considerable business for local companies. Phillips 66 is currently spending several hundred million dollars in a Vacuum Improvement Project, which will carry through 2017 creating between 200 and 350 jobs. The CHS refinery in Laurel is in the middle of, 3-year, $405 million project to increase its diesel production capacity.

Commodity prices have been dropping throughout the year. In late November, the price of copper dropped to a new six-year low at $2.12 a pound, from a high of more than $4 a pound in 2011.

While the Golden Sunlight mine, located near Whitehall, laid off 135 employees, the company has also announced plans to permit a new gold mine less than a mile from the existing open pit mine. It will be called The Bonnie Project. Gold prices are flat at $1,100 an ounce.

Among lay-offs in the state, Sun Mountain Lumber near Deer Lodge, laid off 45 employees in September, cutting back operation to just one shift. The cut in production comes as a result of a “timber recession.”

The Holiday Inn Grand in Billings sold this year for $7.85 million to Inner Circle US, a Florida company. New owners said they plan to make improvements to the hotel, and to the Montana Convention Center, in some kind of public-private partnership. The property will become a Radisson Hotel. Another major hotel in Billings also announced a brand change and plans for major renovations. The Crowne Plaza will become a DoubleTree by Hilton. The entire hospitality industry continued its rapid expansion this year with other properties improving and new ones being built. A Comfort Suite, restaurant and bar is planned for the former Geyser Park Family Fun Center on Southgate Drive. A Home2Suites by Hilton is under construction across from Albertsons on North 27th Street.

Oil prices could dip as low as $27 a barrel by mid-summer predicts Eric Sharpe, Energy Inc. magazine. The declining prices are already having profound impacts in the US, including the Bakken. It is hitting the service businesses especially hard, many will not survive. The low prices are triggering a consolidation of companies; a weeding out of the weaker companies, while others lay-off and cut back in order to survive the economic siege.

Big Sky Economic Development continues the process of developing an industrial park in Lockwood. Having acquired the funding to do so, they are in the process of developing a master plan to present for approval of the County Commissioners. To fund the development of infrastructure for the industrial park they plan to create a targeted economic development district (TEDD). Proponents claim that an industrial park will draw new and expanding businesses to the community.

Research is showing that some oil wells in the Bakken, with the right technology, could continue to produce for many years to come, according to Burt Todd, Assistant Professor and Chairman of Petroleum Engineering at Montana Tech. “There is a huge lifetime to these projects and it goes and goes,” said Todd in explaining the results of research which he has been doing. The Bakken can become the source of stable long term oil, he said. The computer models are showing that it may be possible that enhanced recovery efforts could rejuvenate some wells to continue to produce for another hundred years and turn a profit at $30 a barrel.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Montana signed a contract with the state of Montana to become the first commercial insurance provider to administer a state’s Medicaid expansion program under the Affordable Care Act. The $16 million contract can be renewed up to seven years. Following action by the state’s legislature earlier this year, Montana became the 30th state to fall into line with the Act by expanding its Medicaid program, which historically provides care to the poor.

The decline in oil prices has meant a 26 percent decline in revenues paid to the federal government for oil and gas sales. The federal government disbursed the $9.9 billion in revenues to states. Montana’s share of the revenues will be $34 million, down from $37.7 million.

A change that will have most of its impact in the new year, is the first increase in nine years in the federal interest rate. In December The Fed increased its key rate by a quarter-point to a range of 0.25 percent to 0.5 percent, in the prediction that the economy has gained enough strength to withstand a rate increase. Officials said that the rate will be incrementally increased more as the economy further strengthens and inflation rises from “undesirably low levels.”

Valet Today built a central cleaning plant that will serve all their retail outlets, and provide a new retail outlet. Stacy and Jason Frank bought Valety Today in 2006. The new 6,000 square-foot cleaning plant is at 2474 Enterprise Avenue and replaced the outlet at 741 South 24th Street West.

Howard Shen and Tina Wu opened a new restaurant, Wild Ginger Steak House, in the new Empire Parking Garage on Montana Avenue between North 28th and North 27th Streets. They also own and operate the Asian Sea Grill & Sushi Bar on King Avenue.

Wood’s Powr-Grip in Laurel built a new addition – one that will allow the company to expand to meet a growing market. The company manufactures and distributes vacuum lifting equipment, to markets around the world. “We are fortunate to see sales back on an upward trajectory and we want to make sure we position ourselves to handle this,” said Bryan Wood, CEO of Wood’s Powr-Grip. But the recession is over, as far as Wood’s Powr-Grip is concerned.

Bretz RV and Marine in Lockwood at 2999 Old Hardin Road is in the process of building a major sales and service center. A 36,000 square foot showroom, service center, maintenance and administration offices is the center piece of a 44 acre expansion. The new space will allow for the display of thousands of models of a wide range of recreational vehicles sold by Bretz RV and for hundreds of boats, along one of the state’s busiest thoroughfares.

RiverStone Health Foundation kicked off an $11 million capital campaign to build a new primary care clinic with the announcement of a $1 million grant from the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA).The new, 25,000 square foot clinic, with 48 exam rooms, will be built just south of the existing RiverStone Health Clinic. The $1 million grant from HRSA, adds to $5 million in accumulated savings and early pledges that RiverStone Health will put toward the project.

Late in the year, the Montana Public Service Commission rejected a proposal from Montana-Dakota Utilities to raise electricity rates by $10.9 million. The increase would most affect Eastern Montana.

Montana came under a federal mandate to produce electricity in a way that reduced carbon dioxide emissions by 47 percent. The Environmental Protection Agency’s final version of its Clean Power Plan, released in August, required Montana to reduce CO2 emissions more than any other state. Patrick Barkey, Bureau of Business and Economic Research said that the law could be “the biggest economic event to occur in our state in decades.” It could involve walking away from assets that have provided low-cost power and supported thousands of jobs for years, as well as spending hundreds of millions of dollars to build the capacity to replace them in a short period of time.

Federal regulations imposing caps on carbon emissions are forcing power plants in all states to either close or shift fuels from the use of coal to natural gas. The presidential action is threatening the continued existence of coal mines. Piling onto their situation, in Wyoming, where the Powder River Basin Resource Council and the Western Organization of Resource Councils filed a complaint with the Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality and the federal Office of Surface Mining, claiming that Arch Coal is not setting aside sufficient funds to reclaim land it disturbs. Arch posted a $2 billion loss in the third quarter of 2015 and has said that bankruptcy is possible. Another Wyoming mine, Alpha Natural Resources, is already going through Chapter 11 bankruptcy.

Impacting Montana even more directly are reports that because of the decline in the use of coal, coal power plants at Colstrip have dropped 87 percent in value over the past two years. The double whammy of cheap natural gas prices and far-reaching federal regulations leaves questionable the future of an entire Montana town – Colstrip, whose economic base is wholly dependent on coal. In order to meet the federal mandate to reduce carbon emissions in Montana by 40 percent – the highest reduction required of any state – closing plants at Colstrip are considered the most likely recourse available.

Meeting the proposed carbon emission reductions being required by the Environmental Protection Agency’s new standards, would be equal to the closure of the state’s four smaller coal fired generators and two of the four Colstrip plants, said Todd O’Hair, Senior Government Affairs Manager for Cloud Peak Energy. The state is required to submit a plan, on how they will meet standards, to the federal government, by June 30, 2016. The regulations are to go into effect in 2022. The situation “might not be as bad as we think, or it could be worse,” said O’Hair.

Big Sky Collision in Billings is expanding. In September the company acquired Bozeman’s most noted collision repair business, A & D Auto Body. According to company President, Mathew McDonnell, it’s the first step toward a vision of expanding the company to every major city in Montana. The twenty some employees at A & D have joined the 35 people employed at Big Sky Collision in Billings. Technology is driving Big Sky Collision to undergo a lot of changes, foremost among them is a focus on how to train employees. Not only are they being trained to be the best technicians, but at a new training center employees will learn leadership skills.

Building a convention center in Billings would cost in the neighborhood of $60 million, and require an almost $700,000 annual subsidy. But, such a facility could turn Billings’ prospects around from possibly losing 25 percent of its convention business by 2020, to more than tripling it. A convention center would increase the economic impact of conventions held in Billings by about $12 million annually, generate about 170 new jobs and contribute almost $80,000 annually in additional tax revenues to the city, according to a report compiled by HVZ Convention, Sports & Entertainment, on behalf of the Billings Chamber of Commerce. “The cost is relatively high compared to its economic impact,” said Thomas Hazinski, who presented the report to a room full of civic leaders and hoteliers, who are contemplating building such a center.

Nearing its potential opening is a proposed silver and copper mine near Libby, under the Cabinet Mountains Wilderness. After a ten-year process Mines Management Inc. completed an environmental study to become permitted. A decision is expected in January. The company plans to remove up to 120 million tons of ore. Environmental groups are opposed to the project and threaten lawsuits over claims that it will harm the grizzly bear population, despite studies that indicate it won’t.

Congress reauthorized the EX-IM Bank which was fundamentally important for businesses in Montana that make products that are eventually exported. International trade supports over 137,000 jobs in Montana.

The US Congress passed a $305 billion federal transportation bill – the first in over ten years. The bill will fund repairing and expanding the nation’s highways and related infrastructure, over the next five years, of which Montana will get its share.

Following extensive effort by the state to develop a plan to protect the sage grouse and prevent it from being listed as an endangered species, in September the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service said the sage grouse didn’t need federal protection, under the Endangered Species Act. But, now, the U.S. Bureau of Land Management plans to withdraw 10 million acres of public lands in six western states, including Montana, from potential mineral extraction to protect habitat for the greater sage grouse. They are accepting public comment until Jan. 15, 2016.

To keep Logan International Airport in Billings competitive, officials are pursuing a federal grant that would help expand its capacity. Big Sky Economic Development Authority (EDA) on behalf of Billings is applying for a $750,000 grant from the federal Department of Transportation. The

Tourism Business Improvement District and local businesses have committed matching funds. Delta, Allegiance, United and American Airlines are prospective companies with whom they might negotiate.

Employers’ contribution to unemployment insurance rate in Montana will drop in 2016 from an average of 1.50 percent of wages to 1.12 percent.

Gallatin County was projected by the Bureau of Business and Economic Research, to experience 5.8 percent growth in 2015, following 2.4 percent in 2014. Madison County was projected to experience 10.8 percent growth. Yellowstone County, 2.4 to 2.8 percent.

Mid- year the Bureau of Business and Economic Research, Projections for Montana’s economy in 2015 are being revised slightly upward as economists take a mid-year look at the factors that impact economic growth. Growth is being projected to end near three percent, slightly higher than the 2.8 percent earlier predicted. Yellowstone County is also projected to finish the year on a stronger-than- expected note.

Lockwood will become home to a new Ace Hardware store in May. It will be the fifth Ace Hardware store in Billings and Laurel for owner Skip King.

Billings Flying Service announced that they anticipate more than doubling the size of their business over the next two years. Sparking the new vision for their company was the acquisition of three Chinook CH-47D helicopters, which they purchased from the US Government.

The three new machines will allow the brothers to ratchet up the level of service they can offer their clients. Billings Flying Service is already noted for the wide variety of heavy-lift helicopters they operate and lease.

BNSF Railway Company announced that its 2015 capital program for operations in Montana will be an estimated $124 million for rail maintenance and capacity improvement projects. Their maintenance program included 1,227 miles of track surfacing and undercutting work, the replacement of 52 miles of rail and about 345,000 ties as well as signal upgrades for federally-mandated positive train control. They also started grading for four miles of double track along the Glasgow subdivision.

The Tongue River Railroad Co. placed its proposed plan for a 42-mile railroad through the Powder River Basin to Colstrip on hold because of the uncertainties faced by the coal industry and the proposed Otter Creek Coal Mine it is intended to serve.

MDU Resources Group and Indianapolis-based Calumet Specialty Products Partners cancelled plans to build a second diesel refinery following the construction of its first one near Dickinson. The company built the $430 million Dakota Prairie Refinery and began selling fuel last May, however, they reported losses of $12.6 million because of the decline in the petroleum industry. The second proposed plant was to be located at Minot.

Enell, Inc. has quietly been doing business in Havre, serving an international market for the past 22 years. Like so many successful companies, ENELL serves a niche market – one ignored by the big companies catering to the mainstream. ENELL makes sports bras for well-endowed women. The product was invented by Renelle Braaten, when she found there was nothing available on the market. She was recognized as Montana Ambassador Entrepreneur of the Year in 2015.

Yellowstone Valley Woman magazine is a regional women’s publication based in Billings. Established in 2001 by Jay Hansen, YVW is the longest standing lifestyle magazine in the Yellowstone Valley. A loan from the U.S. Small Business Administration enabled Haley Vanatta and her husband, Jeremy, to purchase the magazine in 2007. Haley was named SBA 2015 Woman-owned Small Business of the Year.

In Montana, 54,266 consumers selected or were automatically re-enrolled in health insurance coverage through the “Health Insurance Marketplace” as of Feb. 22, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. In Montana, 45,583 “Marketplace” consumers qualified for tax credits to make their coverage affordable — about 84 percent of all consumers of the government sponsored market.

Herberger’s, located in Rimrock Mall, expanded and relocated to a 60,000-square foot space in the center’s south wing. As part of the Herberger’s expansion, Claire’s and Foot Locker are moving to newly remodeled locations within the center. Claire’s new store opened in the mall’s north wing on May 22. Foot Locker, known for its basketball, running and training footwear and apparel, is operated in a temporary space in Rimrock’s south wing while a new space was built for them.

Insulation Snakes manufactures a reusable, weather-proof, economical, insulating system for surface equipment mainly focused on the oil and gas industry. Their new location is at 6840 Trade Center Avenue. Headquartered in Alberta, Canada, Insulation Snakes and Parent Company, Gazelle’s Group of Companies Inc.” was started by Brian Impey in 1985. The operation in Billings will employ four to start, and will manufacture all of the Insulation Snakes or the U.S. market.

Jefferson Bus Lines opened a new bus station in downtown Billings this fall. They purchased and remodeled the former Underriner building at Fourth Avenue North and 18th Street North. It is planned as the company’s Montana hub.

After three years in business, The Wine Market and Deli, 1942 Grand Avenue, owned by Bill and Mary Kennedy, moved and expanded into a full-fledged restaurant and catering business, changing its name to “Kennedy’s, Food, Wine, Beer & Catering.” A move to 2420 24th Street West, near Sanctuary Spa, will give the shop plenty of space to allow seating for up to 70 people, expand into evening hours and do more catering, as well as continue the retail sale of fine cheeses, meats and wine.

Legacy Corporation International is planting roots in Billings, with the goal of advancing truck driving as a profession that reflects the high degree of training, technology and accountability that being a good truck driver demands. Legacy Corporation is the family enterprise of Lew Grill and his wife, Carmella Campanian, who have purchased the building formerly owned by Sanjel at 1236 Cordova, for their headquarters. The facility, which is in the process of being refurbished, will serve as a training center, utilizing the most advanced technology, to train truck drivers and other support jobs for individuals, fleets, businesses and government.

Seven businesses based in Montana received Family Business Day awards, including one from Billings. They are presented annually by Montana State University Jake Jabs College of Business and Entrepreneurship State Farm Insurance Family Business Day. Parker’s Hangover Tonic of Billings was one of two businesses recognized as outstanding new businesses. The other was Triple Dog Brewery of Havre. Cove Deli and Pizza of Polson was recognized in the very small business category; Mountain Valley Foods of Kalispell in the small business category; George’s Distributing of Helena, in the large business category; Helle Rambouillet and Associated Enterprises (Duckworth) of Dillon in the old business category. The special recognition award winner is Williams Companies of Bozeman.

Nationally, pro-energy policies could, by 2034, increase US production by approximately 8 million boe/d and support 2.3 million more jobs in just one decade. Such policies would provide a cumulative $1.1 trillion in additional tax revenue and add $433 billion to the nation’s gross domestic product, according to the American Petroleum Institute. By contrast, stringent regulatory policies could cut US energy production by 3.4 million boe/d and reduce energy-supported jobs by 830,000. EPA regulations could cut revenue to the government by a cumulative $500 billion and shrink the country’s gross domestic product by about $133 billion per year. For Montana, at stake by 2035, is a difference of 5,000 more jobs with pro-energy policies over a baseline estimate of some 41,000 industry jobs, or 2000 fewer jobs below the baseline, if the oil and gas industry is engulfed in a stringent regulatory environment. Also at stake are some 226 companies in Montana that provide support services to the oil and gas industry – 56 of which are in Billings.

In an effort to consolidate operations and reduce costs, Burlington Northern Sante Fe relocated 55 workers to Laurel from Forsyth and Glendive. They have adopted changes that require moving 45 workers from Forsyth and 10 workers from Glendive to Laurel, which is the location of the largest rail yard in the region. They also furloughed some workers, as they reduced hiring plans for several months.

For 27 years, a company in Forsyth has been manufacturing and marketing its product to the world proving it is possible to do business in a small town in Montana. There haven’t been many drawbacks to building a business in Forsyth, said Celeste Rohrich, who with her husband, Richard, founded Spanwell, a company that whose signature product is the s-hook, a simple device invented by Richard. The S-hook is commonly used on worksites to keep what is often a tangle of electrical cords, welding lines, air hose etc. out of walk ways and work areas.

The state legislature created a new program called the Montana Health and Economic Livelihood Partnership (HELP) Act, as part of the state’s expansion of Medicaid, to take advantage of federal subsidies under the Affordable Care Act. The HELP program is aimed at helping those who cannot afford to pay premiums, by helping them get jobs.

Stockman Bank announced plans to build a new state-of-the-art Data Center in Miles City, which is where the company’s headquarters is located..

Two different firms announced plans to establish medical schools in Montana. A group of New Mexico investors are proposing the Burrell College of Osteopathic Medicine in Bozeman, and an international firm based in India, Manipal Education Americas, has announced plans for a school in Missoula. Manipal has since withdrawn their plans, and Burrell has dropped discussions with MSU while they complete their study.

Rich Naylor, Founder and President of My Handyman Service & Construction, a small business in Billings, launched in October 2010, has been selected as this year’s SBA Small Business Person of the Year for Montana. Started as a one-employee businesses, just four and half years later, the business has grown to seven employees.

Manufacturing continues to improve following a four-year upward trend in production, employment and worker earnings, and the trend is projected to continue on into 2015, according to Todd Morgan, Director of Forest Industry Research with the Bureau of Business and Economic Research at the University of Montana. Almost all of Montana manufacturers – 92 percent – expect a good year in 2015, according to responses in a recent survey.

First Montana Title has moved to new offices at 2737 Montana Ave., the first floor of the new Empire Parking Garage. Owner, Quinn Donovan said that this is the first move for the company since it was established in 1954. The move marked the beginning of a new year in real estate, which Donovan foresees with optimism.

North Dakota oil producers are getting more out of the ground because of accelerated new fracing techniques in core areas in McKenzie County. As a result—despite 100 fewer rigs drilling in the state—production has jumped 32,000 barrels in one month to over 1.2 million BOPD in May.

Billings and Yellowstone County will have to find living space for 70,000 people in the next 20 years. That’s how much the largest community in Montana is projected to grow, according to Candi Millar, Director of the City County Planning Department, who is overseeing the development of an update to Yellowstone County’s Growth Policy, which is a master plan of sorts about how planners would like to see growth happen.

Brad Anderson of Anderson Management Group, owner and founder of Montana’s chain of Buffalo Wild Wings, was named “retail champion” by the National Retail Federation. The company built a new store in Kalispell, bringing its total stores in Montana to seven. The Billings store underwent a complete remodel in July.

Ten thousands of athletes and their families engaged in The Big Sky State Games in Billings on July 17-19, which was celebrating their 30th anniversary. It is estimated the economic impact of the event on the community is $1.5 million.

Caterpillar Oil & Gas announced that Caterpillar has made an equity investment in Billings-based company, GTUIT, a manufacturer of mobile gas treatment systems. The companies plan to collaborate to deliver equipment to reduce flaring and emissions from flaring gas in the process of oil production. Brian Cebull, President and CEO of GTUIT stated, “As a result of the Caterpillar investment, we are looking forward to expanding beyond the Bakken into other North American basins as well as global markets.”

The annual Northern Livestock Video Summertime Classic Sale, at the Public Auction Yards in Billings on July 20-22, was the biggest sale ever – selling over 100,000 of cattle with receipts in excess of a $150 million. The two-and-a-half day sale had no live cattle, it was all video with buyers able to make bids over the phone or over the internet, but many buyers come to Billings to buy in person and some producers come to observe.

Coldwell Banker Commercial CBS in Billings, announced the addition of David Mitchell and Chandler Griffin as principles in the company. They will instill new ideas for development, and plan to resurrect languishing commercial areas of the community. The commercial real estate market has been “incredibly busy,” and “has overtaken Billings, in the last couple of years.”

The Billings Chamber of Commerce held a dedication ceremony to officially adopt the name, Clarks Crossing, for the point at which Sargent Pryor and his party crossed the Yellowstone River. The Chamber placed the name on the list of Geographic Names in the US.

New legislation will make the local food market – or cottage foods – a more viable market in Montana. As consumer demand grows for foods that are locally produced, small farmers in Montana have struggled with a myriad of laws and regulations that often stand as barriers to meeting that demand in an economical way. The Montana State Legislature passed two bills that will go a long way to removing many of those hurdles. The legislation removed prohibitions against selling honey at farmer markets and removed processing restrictions that make it too cost prohibitive to for local producers to compete and explore market opportunities.

The State Legislature approved building a second crime lab. This one will be located in Billings. The first is in Missoula.

The Sindelar family is donating 720 acres along the Yellowstone River for public use. The acreage stretches for two and a half miles along Dover Road. The property then undulates across the high land before dropping abruptly down to the Yellowstone River bottom, where the river marks the southern boundary. Called the John H. Dover Memorial Park, it is a gift from Jim and Virginia Sindelar, to the community through the Yellowstone River Parks Association, which is overseeing is development and management.

Billings came in third in the nation as one of the easiest cities in which to find a job. In a report from Ziprecruiter.com Rapid City, South Dakota topped the list of the ten easiest cities to find a job, followed by Duluth, Minn.

According to a TRIP report the improvements needed to address Montana’s 20 transportation challenges will cost approximately $7.4 billion. However, at this time, funding is only available for $1.2 billion in needed improvements on these corridors, leaving a backlog of nearly $6.2 billion in needed improvements and upgrades.