'The pinnacle of what's possible with cycling sports'

Nearly three months after closing its doors, the local retailer of high-end road bikes is expected to open this week under new ownership.

Boulder Cycle Sport, a Boulder-based bicycle retailer with shops at 4580 Broadway and 629 S. Broadway, recently acquired Pro Peloton and plans to have a soft opening of the shop at 2615 13th St. on Tuesday.

Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.

The Pro Peloton name and original concept will remain, said Brandon Dwight, an owner of Boulder Cycle Sport.

"When it opened in 1998, (Pro Peloton was) one of the first shops to cater to road cycling and, in particular, more of a higher-end road product," Dwight said. "It really was more of a shop that tried to have the best equipment and offer the best bike-fitting services and provide an all-around great experience when it came to the sport of cycling.

" ... We want it to be Pro Peloton; we don't want it to be Boulder Cycle Sport, Part 3."

Boulder Cycle Sport's influence would be more on the back end, applying 10 years of experience and industry contacts to areas such as inventory management, Dwight said.

"Plus, it gives us the opportunity to expand our reach within the Boulder and Colorado community with different brands we don't carry at Boulder Cycle Sport," he said.

Boulder Cycle Sport promoted from within its staff of 25 employees and placed an experienced service manager and professional bike fitter at Pro Peloton, he said.

Pro Peloton will continue to carry existing brands such as Boulder's Mosaic in addition to some new offerings, Dwight said.

"There's been a renaissance the last few years with smaller, handmade, hand-crafted bicycle frames," he said.

Bicyclists from beginners to experienced riders also are looking for products that are more unique, he added.

Those trends have helped launch companies such as Mosaic into global firms, said Kevin Batchelor, head of new business development of the custom frame outfit off Lee Hill Road.

Mosaic has worldwide reach, but the resurrection of Pro Peloton holds great significance locally, he added.

"(Pro Peloton) is the pinnacle of what's possible with cycling sports," he said. "I think to see Boulder Cycle Sport bring the energy that they bring and the community ties they bring is exciting."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or or wallacea@dailycamera.com. Follow her at twitter.com/dc_alicia