LCC's Josh Day hit a ground ball up the middle in the top of the 8th to drive in the winning run in the third game of a four-game Empire Conferene series with the Otero Jr. College Rattlers on Friday, Feb. 28 at Merchants Park. Adam Norblom led off the 8th with a triple and scored on the hit by Day for a 4-3 victory. Both teams split games in a doubleheader played in La Junta on Thursday. LCC won the first game (6-1) but lost the second game (4-0). In Friday's doubleheader, LCC won the first game but dropped the second game, 4-3. LCC is now 6-2 in conference play and 10-5 overall. (John Contreras/The Lamar Ledger)

LCC pitcher Teague McFadden fires a pitch in the third game of a four-games series against Otero Jr. College on Friday, Feb. 28 at Merchants Park. Both teams split a doubleheader at OJC on Thursday. LCC won the first game 6-1, but saw the Rattlers win the second game, 4-0. In Thursday's doubleheader in Lamar, the first game went eight innings with the 'Lopes winning 4-3. McFadden came on in relief to pitch the seventh and eighth innings to pick up his first win of the season. In the second game, the Rattlers won 4-3. LCC is now 6-2 in conference play and 10-5 overall. The 'Lopes will return to action when they host Garden City Communty Collegef for one nine-inning game on Wednesday, March 5 at 1 p.m. (John Contreras/The Lamar Ledger)

The LCC 'Lopes baseball team was back in action for a four-game Empire Conference series with the Otero Jr. College Rattlers.

Advertisement

LCC had to settle for a split against the rival Rattlers.

The first doubleheader of the four-game series was played at La Junta on Thursday, Feb. 27.

LCC won the first game, 6-1.

Austin Moore (3-1) was the winning pitcher for Lamar. He threw 6 innings and allowed no runs on four hits with 7 strike outs and 0 walks.

Adrian Ramirez pitched one inning in relief and allowed 1 earned run with 2 strike outs and 0 walks.

At the plate, the game was highlighted by 3-run home run by Adam Norblom in the top of the 7th inning.

The 'Lopes pounded out 12 hits.Mitch Robinson went 3-4; DJ Knott 2-3 with 1 RBI; Norblom 1-3 (3-run HR), 3 RBIs, and Shane Fessel 1-2.

In the second game, LCC fell to the Rattlers, 4-0.

Matt Valdez (2-1) took the loss for Lamar. He pitched three innings and allowed 4 earned runs on 6 hits with 2 strike out and 1 walk.

Alex Werbach threw 3 innings in relief and allowed 0 runs on 1 hit with 5 strike outs and 2 walks.

LCC had 5 hits with Conner Crane 2-3; Josh Day 1-2; Tyler Lee 1-1; and Luis Hernandez 1-3.

In Thursday's doubleheader at Merchants, LCC had to rally to win the first game, 4-3, in eight innings.

The 'Lopes scored two runs with two outs in the sixth to tie the game 3-3. In the sixth, DJ Norton singled up the middle to drive in Conner Crane. With the bases loaded, Josh Day scored on a passed ball to tie the game.

In the top of the seventh, OJC threatened with runners on first and third with two out. LCC reliever Teague McFadden got out of the jam when he struck out Marcus Gilmore.

Marcus Wirth led off the bottom of the seventh with a walk, but was left stranded as the game went into extra innings.

With two outs, McFadden gave up a single to Juandy Mendoza but he was left stranded when Marcus Steward flied out to Mitch Robinson in center field to end the inning.

In the bottom of the eighth, LCC got a big lead off triple by Adam Norblom on a hard hit fly ball to right center field. Josh Day then came through with a key hit with a ground ball up the middle for the walk off win.

McFadden pitch the seventh and eighth innings in relief to pick up his first win of the season. He allowed 0 runs on 3 hits with 1 strike out.

Eric Moreno started the game and went 5 innings. He allowed 1 earned run on 3 hits with 5 strike outs and 1 walk.

Nate Dominguez threw 1 inning and allowed 2 earned runs on 1 hit with 1 strike out and 1 walk.

The 'Lopes had 6 hits in the game. Day finished 2-4 with1 RBI; Robinson 1-3; Crane 1-3; and Knott 1-3 with 1 RBI.

In the second game, the 'Lopes fell to the Rattlers, 4-3.

Taking the loss for Lamar was Walker Williams. He worked 4 innings and allowed 4 runs (2 earned) on 5 hits with 1 strike out and 1 walks.

Alex Werbach threw 3 innings in relief and allow 0 run on 0 hits with 3 strike outs and 0 walks.

LCC had 8 hits. Norblom went 1-2 with 1 RBI. Kelly, Crane, Knott, Fessel all went 1-3, and Lee was 1-1.

“It was a hard fought series,” said LCC head coach Scott Crampton. “The first game was the best pitched and played game with Austin Moore picking up his third win of the year.”

“In the next three games, OJC pitching did a nice job of keeping us off balance,” Crampton said. ‘In Game 2 we had no chance at the plate. In Game 3 we scored two runs with two outs in the six to tie the game 3-3. We got a big lead off triple by Adam Norblom and then a key hit by Josh Day for a walk off win in the bottom of the eight.”

“Game 4 was a poorly played game with five errors and poor hitting,” bemoaned Crampton. “If we plan on winning the league this year we will have to figure out how to put four good games together on the weekend. We did see some bright spots out of the bull pen with Alex Werbach and Teague McFadden coming in and controlling the game.”

LCC is now 6-2 in conference play and 10-5 overall. The 'Lopes will return to action when they host Garden City Community College for one nine-inning game on Wednesday, March 5 starting at 1 p.m.