Is Carly Fiorina a liberal chameleon wearing conservative colors? And if she is, will it give Clinton what she needs to win the White House?

SAN ANTONIO, Sept. 29, 2105 – Carly Fiorina, candidate for the Repubican party’s nomination for president, has enjoyed quite a bounce in the polls since the most recent Republican debate. Ironically, however, Fiorina’s policy positions more closely mimic those of Democrats than those of Republicans.

Fiorina will not be able to draw a distinct line between her and the Democrat candidate, which will lead to a repeat of 2008 and 2012, when millions of conservatives chose not to vote and a statist Democrat was elected president. If she is ever chosen as the Republican nominee, Fiorina would lose in a landslide due to all of her flip-flops and poll-driven policy decisions.

Read Also: Can Carly Fiorina claim conservatism?

For example, in 2013 Fiorina firmly and without question supported the individual mandate in Obamacare. The individual mandate is the requirement that all citizens purchase insurance or pay a penalty. A recent CNN article further clarified her position during a panel discussion on CNN’s “Crossfire” in 2013 about the law with former CNN host Stephanie Cutter. Fiorina said she supports keeping the requirement that every American purchase health insurance.

“Now there is a requirement for people to take responsibility, which you know most people have insurance,” Cutter said. “So do you agree with the mandate idea? That is a Republican idea, came out of the Heritage Foundation. One of our co-hosts, Newt Gingrich, was behind it. And the ban on pre-existing conditions? Do you agree with those two provisions?”

“I actually do agree with those two provisions,” Ms. Fiorina said.”

The same CNN article stated that the Fiorina campaign clarified this by stating that she believes only that every American should be forced to purchase catastrophic health insurance. Fiorina, if president, would impose a mandate, but one that would allow Americans to purchase an insurance plan that covered only catastrophic disabilities, essentially Obamacare Lite.

Any candidate that is not for repealing the entirety of Obamacare is not a conservative and should not be even in the discussion for the Republican nomination for president.

It is also critically important to understand how liberal Fiorina’s record truly is on immigration.

Fiorina ran for Senate in California in 2010, and in order to gain the support of many Hispanic groups she decided to support efforts to curb illegal immigration.

First, she supported the DREAM act , which is amnesty for young illegals, noting, “I would support the DREAM Act because I do not believe that we can punish children who through no fault of their own are here trying to live the American dream.”

In June of 2015, on the Morning Joe program on MSNBC, Fiorina said that she is open to granting legal status to adult illegal immigrants and citizenship to their children. “I think legal status is a possibility for sure . . . I think their children maybe can become citizens . . . But my own view is that it isn’t fair to say to people who have played by the rules … that you know it just doesn’t matter.”

She has also been a supporter of the “Gang of Eight” bill, which was for amnesty and very weak border security that President Obama and the Democrats tried to ram through Congress a few years ago. For example, in February 2013 on Meet The Press she stated, “I applaud and salute the Gang of Eight`s proposal. Let`s move forward and vote on that.”

Fiorina has recently come out against Donald Trump’s position on doing everything possible to end birthright citizenship, saying to an audience in Iowa this past month in regard to her position on the issue. “I’ve been very clear I don’t support deportation. I don’t support amending the Constitution or challenging the 14th Amendment.”

Fiorina’s assertion implies that there is no question that the 14th Amendment provides for birthright citizenship, when this issue has never been decided by the Supreme Court and is the subject of much debate by legal scholars. It is dishonest to present the issue as if it has already been settled.

In 2010, Fiorina used the Democrat talking point of accusing Republicans of being racist for demanding a secure border and an end to illegal immigration to attack her more conservative challenger for the Republican nomination for Senate, Chuck Devore. She told Politico:

There has been a very unfortunate racist tone that has emerged in a lot of the discussion about immigration and that’s inexcusable. We must be a country that welcomes legal immigrants to this country. We must be a country that recognizes that we have industries like agriculture that have depended on temporary migrant labor for generations.

Just imagine if Fiorina gets the nomination: Hillary Clinton would destroy her in advertisements and in debates because Fiorina’s positions on these issues directly mirror those of Hillary and the progressive Democrats!

Carly Fiorina surges to #2, giving women, and men, another choice

In October 2013, when Sen. Ted Cruz attempted to use Congress’ power of the purse to fight against funding the train wreck that is Obamacare, Fiorina went all-in with the Democrats and the mainstream media in blaming Cruz. For example, on the show “The Lead” on CNN Fiorina stated: “There’s no honor in charging a hill that you know you can’t take, only casualties, although Ted Cruz maybe got name recognition and money along the way, but President Obama wanted this shutdown. And Ted Cruz played right into his hands.”

Fiorina said she felt “badly for Speaker John Boehner,” and emphasized that “this is Ted Cruz and President Obama’s shutdown.” She was also very critical of conservative attempts to avoid raising the debt ceiling, or at least to attach important conservative issues to a raise in the debt ceiling.

It is as if she was reading directly from the Democrats’ talking points. This is another issue that Hillary Clinton will devour her on.

In a Fox News interview with Greta Van Sustren in October 2008, Fiorina strongly supported Obama’s wasted $800 billion stimulus bill (the only problem in her mind was that it needed to be even larger!) and the TARP bailouts, and she advocated for a massive federal government intervention in the housing markets.

These policy positions are expected of the Democrat nominee, and any capable Democrat will destroy her with past comments like these.

Carly Fiorina is very, very similar to Hillary in that she is a wet-finger politician. If the polls say she should support the DREAM Act, as they did in California in 2010 when she ran for Senate, then she will support the DREAM Act — as she did; if the polls say, as they do today, that the majority of Republican primary voters do not support the DREAM Act, then she won’t — as she hasn’t.

Fiorina’s liberal record will be exploited by Clinton in order to make her look like the poll-driven, manipulative, chameleon that she is. Fiorina’s nomination, like the nomination of big government progressives Romney and — Carly’s old boss — McCain before her, will be nothing short of a disaster and will lead directly to at least four years of Hillary Clinton running this country.