I don’t own any Bitcoins. But then, I never bought a pet rock or a mood ring, either.

Bitcoin is a virtual currency, and the controversy over who created it has served a great purpose to whomever created it, as the perhaps-solved question has completely subsumed the more important mystery: Why would anyone take Bitcoin seriously or invest actual currency in it?

The premise behind Bitcoin is that it allows people to transfer money (make that “money”) over the Internet without going through the trouble and expense of dealing with banks. That’s understandable – it’s always irritating to pay a fee for merely exchanging your dollars for euros or yen. But then, why would banks provide the service without getting a little something for their trouble? I never understood, during the 1990s, why middle-aged Albanian men would sell local leks on the black market, on the main square in Tirana right near actual banks, but offer the same rate. How did they make any money? And aside from avoiding the trouble of standing in line, what was the incentive for the buyer?

[Read blogger Pat Garofalo on regulating bitcoin.]

Leks were not hard currency, and this weren’t at all valuable outside of Albania. But at least it was an actual currency. Bitcoin is completely made up; it’s not grounded in anything, let alone a cache of gold at Ft. Knox. It’s only valuable if enough people give it value by buying and trading it – and even then, it’s only worthwhile to the circle of people who have decided it’s something of worth. It has no objective value. It’s reminiscent of the scene in "Gone With the Wind" where Scarlett O’Hara’s father announces, post-Civil War, that Tara is safe because he has lot of cash. Unfortunately, it was all Confederate money.

Who would try to start a new currency, given the potential pratfalls? Bitcoin is not attached to a particular country or community (the cyberspace community hardly counts), and so is not backed by a government or central bank. It would actually be easier to start one’s own country than one’s own currency – at least, with a new country, you have actual land and living, breathing people to give it legitimacy.

Newsweek believes it has found the creator of Bitcoin in the form of Satoshi Nakamoto, a Japanese-American engineer. He denied it (sort of), fearing reprisals, according to Newsweek. Then, when other journalists pursued him, he asked them to buy him lunch, then declared after downing some sushi that he was not, in fact, the creator of Bitcoin. Meanwhile, the virtual currency has been attacked by hackers. “Mt. Gox,” as it was known, went bankrupt after trading Bitcoins, having lost some $400 million from theft. A Canada-based trader also went bankrupt, and the apparent suicide of an American businessman in Singapore is being investigated for connections to Bitcoin.

Money troubles are aggravating enough when a legitimate currency is involved. Why take on the added risk of trading in something that only exists in code?