ST. LOUIS —In the wake of the Rockies’ stunning trade of Troy Tulowitzki to the Toronto Blue Jays, we’re left with so many questions, so few answers.

This much we do know: This season is another bust. The Rockies are careening down a path toward a 93-loss season, which, in a mathematical sort of way, is in balance. The Rockies have averaged 93 losses over the past four seasons.

That leads to an overriding question: When will the Rockies field a contending baseball team again?

First-year general manager Jeff Bridich was asked that question during a conference call Friday. He danced around it, as front-office types are prone to do.

“Can we marry that wave of pitching with some of the young talent on offense and start to be competitive and start to play meaningful games in August and September?” Bridich said. “That was the goal this year. Can we do that next year if things work out? I do believe that we can.”

I don’t. Optimistically, I think 2017 provides a glimmer of light at the end of the tunnel.

That leads to the next question: Can the Rockies fix their problems on the mound during the same window when there is talent on the field? There is some hope. Top prospect Jon Gray, still serving his apprenticeship at Triple-A Albuquerque, is the real deal. Right-hander Chad Bettis — knock on wood that his elbow inflammation is not the beginning of something serious — has shown toughness and an effective variety of pitches. Right-hander Eddie Butler continues to tease us with talent and frustrate us with inconsistency.

Right-hander Tyler Chatwood, coming back from his second Tommy John surgery, still has chance to be a No. 4 or No. 5 pitcher, but coming back twice from T.J. surgery creates doubt.

Righty Jeff Hoffman, acquired in the Tulo deal, was the ninth overall pick in 2014 draft. He’s pitching at Double-A, but he’s not that far from being major-league ready. Hoffman probably would have been selected earlier in the draft but was recovering from Tommy John following a successful season at East Carolina. He owns a good changeup that pairs well with a heavy, two-seam fastball he throws in the mid-90s. He fits the Rockies’ pitching template.

RELATED: Jorge De La Rosa turns in solid start in Rockies’ 6-2 victory over St. Louis

Of course, my glowing mini-synopsis of Colorado’s talent must be tempered by the organization’s dismal record at developing its own pitching.

Bridich, a smart and forward-thinking man, has drawn up his blueprint for the Rockies’ future. That became clear when he persuaded owner Dick Monfort to part with Tulo. So how’s he doing so far? I think it’s too early to tell.

One thing is certain, he has changed the mentality of the franchise. Monfort was too emotionally attached to star players like Tulo. Bridich, who approaches his job with a businesslike demeanor, established precedent to cut those ties.

“For (Bridich) to be successful, he has to be able to make trades he thinks he has to make,” a teary-eyed Monfort said last week as Bridich officially announced that Tulowitzki was been shipped north of the border.

That leads to another question: How are the Rockies dealing with Tulo’s departure? On the field, they are a lesser team. New shortstop Jose Reyes has his attributes, but he’s no Tulo.

In the clubhouse, I don’t think Tulowitzki’s departure will have a huge impact, except on Nolan Arenado, who had grown very close to his former infield mate. It’s no secret that Tulo’s tunnel vision approach to his craft means he runs in a tight circle.

Having said that, the manner in which Tulowitzki was traded left a number of Rockies players wary and less trusting of the organization. There is a feeling, by some, that the club’s notion of creating a Rockies “family” rings hollow. There are some hard feelings that need to be patched up on a team that’s searching for an identity.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp

Spotlight on …

Nelson Cruz, designated hitter, Mariners

What’s up: The Rockies have seen their fair share of American League sluggers pass through Coors Field this season, including the Angels’ Mike Trout and Albert Pujols. Now Seattle’s Cruz arrives with a chance to see how far his missiles fly at 5,280 feet.

Background: Cruz, for a long time one of the best sluggers in the majors, went 4-for-5 with a double, a homer and two RBIs in the Mariners’ 6-1 victory at Minnesota on Friday. It was his first four-hit day since September of last season. Entering Saturday, Cruz had hit in 11th consecutive games, during which he batted .400 with six home runs. Cruz’s homer Friday was his 27th, tying him for sixth in the majors. At age 35, Cruz is having one of the best seasons of his career.

Saunders’ take: The Mariners are an enigma. They were picked by many, including me, to compete for the American League West title. But they entered Saturday’s play 10 games under .500 and 11 games behind the division-leading Astros. Ace Felix Hernandez has been good but erratic at times. Robinson Cano, now battling a pulled abdominal muscle, was having a subpar season until he got hot in July. Cruz, however, has cruised most of the season. His power had lagged a bit — just one homer in July — until he tweaked his stance. Manager Lloyd McClendon said recently that he expected Cruz to break out “any day now.” He was right. Cruz is hot, hitting with power to all fields, which makes him especially dangerous at Coors Field.