Theater audiences are invited to a family reunion

It won’t be easy — it’s family, after all. But the return of siblings Ogun and Oshoosi Size and the younger brother’s seductive and dangerous friend Elegba to the stage will be worth the brilliant discomfort it may cause.

Starting in spring 2015, the Curious Theatre Company will take on “The Brother/Sister Plays,” Tarell Alvin McCraney’s heralded trilogy about denizens of a Louisiana bayou, which includes “The Red and Brown Water,” “The Brothers Size” and “Marcus, Or the Secret of Sweet.” Curious will be only the fifth company in the nation to present McCraney’s full cycle.

“One of the things I want, as Curious evolves, is to expand the size of the palette of our work,” says artistic director Chip Walton. McCraney was named a MacArthur Fellow in 2013.

“What are the ways we can make these experiences for our audience bigger than what a typical theater experience is? This is the beginning of what will become an ongoing commitment on our part to do these bigger-scope projects.”

The trilogy is set to open in 2015 with “The Red and Brown Water.” (March 7-April 18)

Local actors Cajardo Lindsey, Laurence Curry and Damion Hoover will return to the roles that helped make “The Brothers Size” the theater event of last season.

The return of the combative/loving brothers of “Size” is not the only homecoming on Curious’ slate. Denver native and Broadway vet and playwright/performer Martin Moran brings two solo shows to town.

About the actor’s 2013 off-Broadway show, New York Times’ critic Ben Brantley wrote, “(T)his chatty but soulful show leads you into thought- and emotion-stirring territory that you don’t often visit at the theater.”

Moran will also reprise the 2004 Curious show “The Tricky Part,” about his experiences becoming involved with the pedophile who molested him when he was 12. (Sept. 6-28)

Walton and his creative team remain dedicated to bringing bold new voices to the Denver stage.

Curious’ 17th season also features Lisa D’Amour’s “Detroit.” Last May, the dark comedy shared the Obie Award for Best New American Play with Julia Jarcho’s “Grimly Handsome.” (May 9-June 20)

As part of the National New Play Network, the company will present a “rolling world premiere” of Robert Caisley comedy “Lucky Me” (Oct. 25-Dec. 6) Also on tap: Jessica Dickey’s “Charles Ives Take me Home” (Jan. 10-Feb. 14)

It is indeed the time of year when a number of high-profile companies reveal what’s next on their stages. Denver Center Attractions announced its upcoming national touring shows at the start of the week. Quick on the heels of its successful 9th Colorado New Play Summit, the Denver Center Theatre Company will soon pull back the curtain on its offerings. The Aurora Fox is set to throw a season announcement party Feb. 20.

Yes, the stars and playwrights and directors are aligning, not by accident but often by canny design. And ambitious theatergoers will likely have their cultural curiosity rewarded.

For information on the season and subscription packages go to curioustheatre.org or call 303-623-0524.

Lisa Kennedy: 303-954-1567, lkennedy@denverpost.com or twitter.com/bylisakennedy