Dentists in North Carolina, a state lawmaker from Iowa and Teddy Roosevelt — yes, really — can all claim some credit for a new proposal that aims to rein in the power of regulatory boards and occupational licensing schemes.

State licensing and regulatory boards no longer have protection from Roosevelt-era antitrust laws, thanks to a U.S. Supreme Court ruling earlier this year. With the threat of lawsuits from the federal government or the private sector, at least one state lawmaker is trying to preempt those potentially expensive legal battles by giving state governments a new tool to bring regulatory boards to heel.

In many cases, these boards operate without any direct oversight from state lawmakers or executive branch officials. Often, they are filled with representatives of the very industry the board is supposed to regulate, and the rules they approve are intended not to protect the public’s health and safety, but rather to erect barriers that limit competition and keep prices artificially high.

That’s bad for consumers and the economy.

State Rep. Dawn Pettengill, an Iowa Republican, has first-hand experience with those kinds of regulatory schemes. She says her 2007 vote in favor of a bill that created a new state licensing system for plumbers and electricians was the biggest mistake she’s made since taking office.

It was sold as a way to protect consumers and ensure public safety, but after the licensing requirements went into effect in 2008, she saw the dark side of it all: long-time plumbers and electricians lost their jobs because they were unable to pass a one-size-fits-all state exam that was a mandatory part of the licensing scheme.

“There is a distinction between being a gatekeeper versus being a protector of public health and safety,” she told Watchdog. “We have a shortage of skilled laborers out there because we have all these restrictions on who can do the work.”

It’s not just plumbers and electricians who feel the pain. Iowa is home to some of the strictest occupational licensing laws in the country. One out of every three jobs in the state requires a license, the highest ratio in the United States.

Nationally, one out of every five jobs now requires some form of government license. That’s up from only one in every 20 jobs that required one in 1950.

Those mandatory government permission slips can be expensive and often redundant. Aicheria Bell, a professional hair braider in Des Moines, is challenging the state’s licensing rules, which requires her to be licensed as a cosmetologist. The licensing process costs thousands of dollars and requires a stunning 2,100 hours of training — more than 17 times what’s required to become an EMT in Iowa.

Those rules were written, not surprisingly, by a board that is controlled by already licensed cosmetologists.

Bell says she does not need to learn how to apply makeup or do fancy hair styling in order to run her hair braiding business and make a living. But she’s running afoul of the State Board of Cosmetology and constantly fears they will shut her business down.

It’s because of cases like Bell’s that Pettengill is now pushing for the American Legislative Exchange Council to adopt legislation that would empower attorneys general to act as a regulator for the regulators. If approved by a panel of fellow lawmakers within ALEC, the idea could become a model for other states.

And the timing is perfect, because out-of-control regulatory boards that stifle competition are a ripe target for lawsuits after a Supreme Court ruling earlier this year.

North Carolina dentists get white-washed

Though it was lost amid the high-profile decisions on gay marriage and the Affordable Care Act, the U.S. Supreme Court issued a ruling in 2015 that opened the door for Pettengill’s proposed licensing reforms.

Since 1943, the federal government and state governments — because they have a monopoly on decision-making powers — have been granted immunity from Sherman Act antitrust laws, famously used by President Teddy Roosevelt to break-up industrial monopolies more than 100 years ago.

But does that immunity extend to the various boards and authorities created by state governments? For a long time, it was assumed the answer was “yes,” but that’s not the case anymore.

In North Carolina Board of Dental Examiners v. Federal Trade Commission, the Supreme Court ruled that state licensing boards do not have protection from antitrust lawsuits if a majority of the board members are actively engaged in the same industry the board regulates, and if the board is not overseen by any other part of the state government.

The case originated when dentists in North Carolina complained to the licensing board that nondentists were offering teeth-whitening services. A majority of the board’s members are professional dentists, so it should come as little surprise the board subsequently voted to make it illegal for nondentists to offer those services.

That’s when the FTC got involved. It claimed the board’s actions were a “conspiracy, in restraint of trade” that violated the Sherman Act because the dentists who sat on the board would directly benefit from the board’s restrictions on who could provide teeth-whitening services.

The Supreme Court sided with the FTC.

“The Sherman Act protects competition while also respecting federalism. It does not authorize the states to abandon markets to the unsupervised control of active market participants,” wrote Justice Anthony Kennedy in the majority opinion. “If a state wants to rely on active market participants as regulators, it must provide active supervision.”

The feds are coming

Pettengill says active supervision of state licensing boards is the whole point of her proposal. Ultimately, there are two goals.

First, this is an easy way for states to avoid situations like the one in which North Carolina found itself. The FTC has made clear it is willing to challenge onerous state licensing laws and take on regulatory boards that are overstepping their boundaries.

Together with the U.S. Department of Justice, the FTC recently issued a warning to Virginia it should take steps to change licensing rules for medical facilities, for example.

It’s probably just a matter of time before the FTC takes aim at other states where rouge regulatory boards are shutting down competition, now with Supreme Court precedent on their side.

Second, and more importantly in Pettengill’s eyes, empowering attorneys general to keep an eye on state licensing boards would be good for workers because it might erase some of the barriers erected by anti-competitive boards. An attorney general might take a look at Iowa’s rules for hair braiders, for example, and decide those regulations should be removed to protect the state from an antitrust lawsuit.

Real reform or bureaucratic bloat?

Don Racheter, president of the Public Interest Institute, a free market think tank based in Des Moines, says overly burdensome licensing rules are bad for just about everyone, but he’s not convinced Pettengill’s approach is the right one.

Creating a new position within the attorney general’s office might only add to bureaucratic bloat without producing the hoped-for results, he worries. After all, most states already have executive branch or prosecutorial offices dedicated to consumer protection, but those have proven to be mostly worthless when it comes to taking on the powerful special interests that control licensing boards.

But he agrees that getting rid of barriers in the workplace and increasing competition can mean lower prices for everyone else.

In a recent study of government regulation that add to the cost of American goods and services, the Heritage Foundation said occupational licensing rules cost the average family as much as $1,000 per year — a higher price tag than the deeply flawed federal ethanol mandate and all state-level green energy mandates.

Pettengill’s proposal could soon be popping up in states around the country. Her bill was approved earlier this month by a task force of state lawmakers who are members of ALEC. The next step is a final vote by ALEC’s National Board, a group of 23 state legislators, which must sign off on any proposal before it can become an official “model bill” that will end up on the radar of state lawmakers from coast to coast. That vote is expected to take place within the next two months.

Once that happens, licensing boards will have to shape up or ship out, Pettengill says.

“If you set up a board to be a gatekeeper,” she says. “Then you’re setting yourself up for a lawsuit.”