There's only one outstanding issue left to resolve before Congress can pass a permanent “doc fix”: how to cover the roughly $140 billion price tag.Last year, that nagging detail derailed a much celebrated bipartisan, bicameral deal to permanently do away with Medicare's widely loathed sustainable growth-rate formula for paying doctors. That resulted in a 17th consecutive patch that expires at the end of March. If Congress doesn't take action, doctors will face a 21.2% cut in payments for treating Medicare patients, an outcome that's viewed as untenable by both Democrats and Republicans.The perennial issue was back on the agenda Wednesday on Capitol Hill. Legislators from both parties expressed support for finally coming up with a permanent solution to the financing problem during a hearing before the House Energy and Commerce Committee's Subcommittee on Health. Experts who testified criticized the stop-gap measures that have become an annual Washington ritual as predictable as the blooming of the cherry blossoms.“This makes our legislative process look ridiculous,” Alice Rivlin, founding director of the Congressional Budget Office and former top budget official in the administration of President Bill Clinton, said during the hearing.“Kicking the can down the road and having only temporary fixes is a really poor way to do policy,” added Marilyn Moon, a fellow at the American Institutes for Research.But fault lines over how to pay for it were already on display. A few possible ways of generating revenue from within the Medicare program were debated, including raising the eligibility age for coverage and increasing costs for wealthier beneficiaries. Another idea that remains under discussion is combining Medicare Part A, which pays for hospital care and is supported by the payroll tax, and Part B, which covers physician services and comes out of general taxes.Rivlin also cited payment reforms, particularly accountable care organizations, as showing some promise of delivering better coverage for less money. “The knowledge here is very much a work in progress,” she said. “Accountable care organizations seem promising, and I would suggest we strengthen them.”But Democrats chafed at funding a permanent fix through cuts to other parts of the Medicare program, arguing that it would weaken the safety net for poor seniors. They suggested instead that all revenue sources should be on the table.“People cannot afford to retire in the United States of America,” argued Jan Schakowsky (D-Ill.). “Shame on us as a country that we can't afford to provide healthcare to our seniors and people with disabilities.”But Rep. John Shimkus (R-Ill.) countered that wealthier beneficiaries, particularly those with incomes above $1 million, can easily afford to pay more for coverage. “I don't think that's out of line,” he said. “These entitlement programs are for the needy.”In recent years, Medicare has seen an unprecedented slowdown in spending growth. Costs have grown by an average of roughly 4% over the past five years despite adding more than 1 million beneficiaries a year. Debates have flourished over whether that's primarily attributable to the Great Recession or changes to the Medicare program, most notably the addition of the prescription-drug benefit in 2004 and payment reforms that were part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.But Rivlin, now a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, argued that the slowdown shouldn't disguise the fact that the program remains on a financially unsustainable trajectory if changes aren't made to reduce costs. “It's very real,” Rivlin said of threats to Medicare's solvency. “There isn't an exact drop-dead date.”The debate over the doc fix will continue Thursday with another hearing before the same committee Follow Paul Demko on Twitter: @MHpdemko