SAN FRANCISCO -- Everyday for the past three years, Ricky Chan has strolled into the offices of KTSF-TV news in San Francisco. At 30, Chan is the youngest member on the team, connecting a new generation of viewers to the country’s oldest Chinese-language nightly newscast.



“You need a face you can identify with,” said anchor and Digital News Executive Director Kwokshu Leung. “When you see someone your own age you can relate more to what they are bringing to you.”



KTSF was the first station in the nation to provide Asian-language programming in efforts to reach an under-served community. In 1989, it launched the first nightly newscast in Chinese, and today the station provides news programming in 11 languages, including Mandarin, Cantonese and Taiwanese.



“Ricky is very instrumental in this market,” said Leung. “Our only target audience in the past was first generation immigrants, but we need some new blood too.”



Chan left studying telecommunication and networking in his native Hong Kong for the Bay Area at 22. “My parents said they don’t care what I major in,” he recalled. “They said just finish the whole thing and bring a Bachelor’s degree back.”



Chan decided to pursue a degree in film and television. He graduated with honors in 2010 from San Jose State University, after interning with KTSF his last semester.



“Ricky wears many hats here,” said Rose Shirinian, KTSF director of news and public affairs. “His background provides a connection for many of our viewers coming from the same part of the world.”



San Francisco was the first stop for Chinese immigrants into the U.S. and they have made a recent charge into public office here, most notably when the city voted in its first-ever Chinese mayor in 2011.



The recent arrest of State Senator Leland Yee has created waves, however, with fears the scandal could stall the community’s growing political clout.



Chan said KTSF has focused its coverage on the figures in the case, including one-time gang leader Raymond “Shrimp Boy” Chow. But he added, “It’s too early to say” how the case will unfold.



Yee was detained in March in an FBI operation targeting figures in the Chinatown community. He pled not guilty in a San Francisco courtroom on Tuesday.



Yee has long advocated for the city’s Chinese residents, including in 2011 when he fought efforts to ban the sale of shark fin soup. It was a topic Chan covered extensively.



“Every Chinese restaurant serves shark fin for wedding banquets and important occasions. “This is a big business for them,” said Chan, who admits he supported the ban, calling the practice of killing sharks for their fins “cruel.”



Today housing and healthcare are the main concerns in the Chinese community, said Chan. With the run-up to the March 31st deadline to sign up for insurance under the Affordable Care Act, he said a number of non-English speaking Chinese in the Bay Area still don’t understand how it works, adding many do not receive health benefits from their employers. Others just generally prefer to avoid doctors, he said.



Chan shared a recent experience with his hairstylist, who admitted he did not know how to apply for insurance under the new law. Chan walked him through the process, but later learned he had received information packets from the insurer that were all in English. He couldn’t read them.



“If they are signing up for healthcare, they still don’t know how to use it,” said Chan. “I think the insurance companies and the government should work together to help our community be more informed.”



Chan spends a lot of time working to tailor stories to his audience, but said he also recognizes the need to connect the community more closely to mainstream issues, such as changes within the city, important events and pending legislation that could affect them.



“Some of our older audience may only get their news by watching us,” said Chan. “So unless we report on something, those people won’t be made aware.”



Chan modestly declines the idea of him being a popular face in the Chinese community, but has had some moments of appreciated recognition.



“When I started doing a Saturday technology segment, a man noticed me on the street and thanked me for bringing the tech news to him,” said Chan. “When they recognize me and give me feedback, it does make me feel closer to the community.”



Chantel Genest studies journalism at San Francisco State University. This story is part of a NAM series profiling members of Bay Area's ethnic media.