California Life Sciences Association (CLSA), the statewide public policy organization representing over 750 of California’s leading life sciences innovators, applauded Assemblymember Jim Wood (D-Healdsburg) for introducing AB 2115, a measure which would help ensure patients in California receive important information about the availability of essential medicines.

AB 2115 would require health insurance companies to notify any California customer losing their health insurance of free or low-cost prescription assistance programs provided by pharmaceutical companies. Awareness about these benefits can help thousands of Californians who lose their coverage maintain access to important, and sometimes life-saving, medicine.

“We applaud Assemblymember Jim Wood for introducing AB 2115,” said Sara Radcliffe, President and CEO, California Life Sciences Association (CLSA). “Even with improvements in healthcare brought about by the Affordable Care Act, it is important that people who find themselves without health insurance, such as after losing or changing jobs, have the information necessary to ensure they still have affordable access to the important medications they need. This increased outreach and transparency will help us continue to close the gap among the uninsured, and help ensure all Californians have access to healthcare.”

Many Californians don’t realize the options available to them when they lose their existing coverage. AB 2115 will help people whose insurance may be in limbo obtain the information they need about how to maintain access to key healthcare services for themselves and their families.

AB 2115 passed out of the Assembly Committee on Health by a unanimous vote of 19-0 on April 12.

About California Life Sciences Association (CLSA) California Life Sciences Association (CLSA) is the leading voice for California’s life sciences sector. We work closely with industry, government, academia and other stakeholders to shape public policy, drive business solutions and grow California’s life sciences innovation ecosystem. CLSA serves over 750 biotechnology, pharmaceutical, medical device, and diagnostics companies, research universities and institutes, investors and service providers. CLSA was founded in 2015 when the Bay Area Bioscience Association (BayBio) and the California Healthcare Institute (CHI) merged to create the state’s most influential life sciences advocacy and business leadership organization. Visit CLSA at www.califesciences.org, and follow us on Twitter @CALifeSciences, Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn and YouTube.