Burlington, Vermont (CNN) It wouldn't be the first time a revolution sparked in New England changed the world.

But two and a half centuries after the insurrection that birthed America, the idea that a rumpled radical like 73-year-old Vermont socialist Bernie Sanders could overthrow the U.S. economic, health care and tax systems seems farfetched at best.

Yet that's exactly the task the fiery U.S. senator has set himself in a presidential campaign targeting billionaire "oligarchs" who he says have hijacked America's economy and inflicted misery on the middle class.

Sanders, an agitator who doesn't suffer fools, political opponents or journalists gladly, is testing whether the kind of populist, liberal agenda that gave him 75% approval ratings in his adopted home state can catch fire nationwide.

"Brothers and sisters: Now is not the time for thinking small," Sanders told thousands of supporters in Burlington on Tuesday.

"Now is not the time for the same-old, same-old establishment politics and stale inside-the-Beltway ideas," Sanders said in an implicit denunciation of the runaway front-runner for the Democratic nomination, Hillary Clinton.

The obstacles Sanders faces in the presidential primary race, however, are immense.

Sanders has no viable countrywide political organization, so he must foment a grassroots uprising. His task is complicated by the fact that although he caucuses with the Democrats in the Senate, he has always been a political independent wary of formal party affiliations.

Taking on the Clinton machine

He must take on the Clinton political machine that has retooled after its defeat in 2008. He's a minnow in the money game in a campaign that will be awash in billions of dollars.

He's not exactly a polished pol either, with an unrepentant message of class warfare that makes him an unlikely candidate to win over Middle America.

And many Democrats are only beginning to learn who Sanders actually is. He's a long shot, but has shown some momentum since indicating he would take the plunge into the presidential race late last month. In a new Quinnipiac University poll released on Thursday, Sanders was at 15% of Democratic voters nationwide, up from the 5% he managed in a CNN national poll last month.

His campaign launch, on a Lake Champlain boardwalk that he saved from developers as Burlington's mayor, had the air of a hippie revival or a folk festival.

One woman twirled a hula hoop and shouted "Hooping for Bernie"; people lined up for free helpings of locally made Ben and Jerry's ice cream; and kids carried banners naming Sanders their political superhero. Vermont-based warm-up act Mango Jam pumped out a fusion of Zydeco, Cajun and Caribbean rhythms.

JUST WATCHED Bernie Sanders' brother is also running for office Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Bernie Sanders' brother is also running for office 02:20

The place pulsed with the hopeful political energy that is unique to the start of U.S. presidential campaigns when anything seems possible -- even in minute, ultraliberal blue states with three electoral votes.

Of course, in the highly unlikely scenario that Sanders is elected president, enacting his revolutionary agenda faces even greater odds. Another long-shot, transformational president has already demonstrated how hard turning campaign slogans into reality can be.

If there's one lesson of Barack Obama's White House, it's that passing social reforms such as Obamacare -- which falls way short of the kind of single-payer health system Sanders prefers -- can be almost impossible and exact a heavy political price.

Sanders surely knows this.

He might be a dreamer, but he knows the realities of politics: A pragmatic streak leavened his idealism during four terms as mayor; he railed against the Iraq war but became a champion of veterans in the Senate.

So it may be fair to question whether, unlike his devoted Vermont cadres, a politician as experienced as Sanders thinks he can actually win the presidency, especially as political reality is weighted against him.

America's middle class, while hurting, is hardly a simmering proletariat ready for the economic shock therapy he prescribes.

Opponents attack Vermont's record

And political opponents argue that for all his flamboyance, Vermont has not done that well in the Sanders era.

"Fear and frustration are a powerful political cocktail," said a statement from the Vermont Republican Party on Tuesday.

"All you have to do is take a good look at Vermont's demographic and economic realities -- and our growing crisis of affordability -- to get a good look at what the hangover from a Sanders administration would look and feel like."

But to simply write off the Sanders campaign as some kind of personal vanity project, or a token quest to insert progressive values into the 2016 campaign, does him an injustice.

His messages, the timing of his campaign, the polls and his personal qualities suggest that the Sanders campaign could end up more than a flight of political fancy and become a real headache for the Clinton machine.

For starters, the 2016 Democratic primary campaign seems to be shaping itself around the issues of economic justice and fairness for which he first fought amid the political turmoil of 1960s Chicago where he was a student.

In a recent interview with CNN, the candidate's UK-based brother Larry disputed the notion that Sanders is a man of the fringe.

"I don't think we are out of the mainstream. I think that what we have noticed is that the mainstream has been ignored for a long time," he said.

While the solutions that Bernie Sanders advocates to fix America's problems are radical, his diagnosis of the national mood is not.

Health care, child care, college and medical costs preoccupy middle class families, whomever they vote for, a fact reflected in the way Clinton and Republicans Marco Rubio, Jeb Bush and Rick Santorum have emphasized income inequality in their campaigns.

One advantage Sanders may have over this crowd is the crucial elixir of presidential runs -- "authenticity" -- said Vermont University political science professor Garrison Nelson, who has known Sanders for decades.

"Bernie Sanders has been saying these same things for over 40 years. Bernie is not tailoring his speeches to the agenda. The agenda has caught up with Bernie Sanders."

Another way Sanders debunks the hopeless crusade metaphor is that he's not just some political gadfly. He narrowly won his first race for mayor, then got elected over and over again, and has been in Congress for a quarter century.

Iowa could be a tough sell for Sanders

But it's not a given that his brusque style and pyrotechnical calls for a revolution will go down well in Iowa, for instance, where voters like to be wooed rather than harangued.

"It is going to be a hard sell," said Nelson, who said his friend must find a sweet spot on the issue of income inequality. "Bernie is counting on that -- that degree of resentment and that degree of anger."

While Sanders is a novelty in Iowa, he's a known commodity in New Hampshire -- where the overlap from the Burlington media market makes him well-known and could give him a leg up in the primary campaign.

But Sanders must also show that he has got the financial muscle to even get that far -- though he says he is certain he can raise $50 million, after quickly pulling in contributions of around $4 million within days of first saying he would run for president.

"That should give him enough money to be competitive in the four early states," said Eric Davis, a veteran Vermont political analyst and professor emeritus at Middlebury College, referring to Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina and Nevada.

But Davis asked: "What state is his campaign going to be in at the end of those four early contests?"

And if by some miracle he won the nomination, he would then find it difficult to counter questions about whether his left-wing politics would be palatable to a wider electorate.

Still, polls suggest that Sanders is a viable candidate to be the leading alternative to Clinton among Democrats -- though he lags behind the former first lady by 50%.

A Quinnipiac University poll in Iowa found that 15% of likely caucus goers would back him while 18% of likely Democratic voters in New Hampshire prefer him -- numbers that give him a genuine platform in the race.

He's ahead of other possible Democratic long shots, including former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley and former Sen. Jim Webb of Virginia.

And while he may not beat Clinton, Sanders can at least shape the economic debate in the Democratic primary and force her to confront her liabilities on trade and the influence of big money in politics.

Appealing to liberal Democrats

Clinton will also be wary of alienating liberal Democrats who support Sanders and are suspicious of her candidacy, but whom she needs to swell her margins in Midwestern swing states if she is to win the general election.

Sanders' hopes of causing a stir in 2016 also depend on his capacity to show the side of his character that has won him such a loyal following in Vermont, where he has convinced voters he is on their side.

Ann Taylor of Burlington, a self described "old hippie," said Sanders was pushing a message that America needed to hear: "This is probably the only candidate that is going to fight for working people. And I know he is influencing Sen. Clinton. Bernie will do so much for working people, it is unbelievable."

23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders, an independent from Vermont, is battling Hillary Clinton for the Democratic Party's presidential nomination. He is the longest-serving independent in the history of Congress. Hide Caption 1 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders, right, leads a sit-in organized by the Congress of Racial Equality in 1962. The demonstration was staged to oppose housing segregation at the University of Chicago. It was Chicago's first civil rights sit-in. Hide Caption 2 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders takes the oath of office to become the mayor of Burlington, Vermont, in 1981. He ran as an independent and won the race by 10 votes. Hide Caption 3 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders, right, tosses a baseball before a minor-league game in Vermont in 1984. U.S. Sen. Patrick Leahy, center, was also on hand. Hide Caption 4 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight In 1987, Sanders and a group of Vermont musicians recorded a spoken-word folk album. "We Shall Overcome" was first released as a cassette that sold about 600 copies. When Sanders entered the presidential race in 2015, the album surged in online sales. But at a CNN town hall, Sanders said, "It's the worst album ever recorded." Hide Caption 5 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders reads mail at his campaign office in Burlington in 1990. He was running for the U.S. House of Representatives after an unsuccessful bid in 1988. Hide Caption 6 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight In 1990, Sanders defeated U.S. Rep. Peter Smith in the race for Vermont's lone House seat. He won by 16 percentage points. Hide Caption 7 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders sits next to President Bill Clinton in 1993 before the Congressional Progressive Caucus held a meeting at the White House. Sanders co-founded the caucus in 1991 and served as its first chairman. Hide Caption 8 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Barack Obama, then a U.S. senator, endorses Sanders' Senate bid at a rally in Burlington in 2006. Hide Caption 9 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders takes part in a swearing-in ceremony at the U.S. Capitol in January 2007. He won his Senate seat with 65% of the vote. Hide Caption 10 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders chats with Dr. John Matthew, director of The Health Center in Plainfield, Vermont, in May 2007. Sanders was in Plainfield to celebrate a new source of federal funding for The Health Center. Hide Caption 11 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders speaks to reporters in 2010 about the Obama administration's push to extend Bush-era tax cuts. Three days later, Sanders held a filibuster against the reinstatement of the tax cuts. His speech, which lasted more than eight hours, was published in book form in 2011. It is called "The Speech: A Historic Filibuster on Corporate Greed and the Decline of Our Middle Class." Hide Caption 12 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders and U.S. Rep. Jeff Miller, chairman of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs, walk to a news conference on Capitol Hill in 2014. Sanders was chairman of the Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs. Hide Caption 13 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight In March 2015, Sanders speaks in front of letters and petitions asking Congress to reject proposed cuts to Social Security and Medicare. Hide Caption 14 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight In July 2015, two months after announcing his run for the presidency, Sanders spoke to nearly 10,000 supporters in Madison, Wisconsin. "Tonight we have made a little bit of history," he said. "You may know that some 25 candidates are running for President of the United States, but tonight we have more people at a meeting for a candidate for President of the United States than any other candidate has." Hide Caption 15 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Seconds after Sanders took the stage for a campaign rally in August 2015, a dozen protesters from Seattle's Black Lives Matter chapter jumped barricades and grabbed the microphone from the senator. Holding a banner that said "Smash Racism," two of the protesters -- Marissa Johnson, left, and Mara Jacqueline Willaford -- began to address the crowd. Hide Caption 16 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders shakes hands with Hillary Clinton at a Democratic debate in Las Vegas on October 13. The hand shake came after Sanders' take on the Clinton email scandal. "Let me say something that may not be great politics, but the secretary is right -- and that is that the American people are sick and tired of hearing about the damn emails," Sanders said. "Enough of the emails, let's talk about the real issues facing the United States of America." Hide Caption 17 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders embraces Remaz Abdelgader, a Muslim student, during an October 2015 event at George Mason University in Fairfax, Virginia. Asked what he would do about Islamophobia in the United States, Sanders said he was determined to fight racism and "build a nation in which we all stand together as one people." Hide Caption 18 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders waves while walking in a Veterans Day parade in Lebanon, New Hampshire, in November 2015. Hide Caption 19 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders sits with Killer Mike at the Busy Bee Cafe in Atlanta in November 2015. That evening, the rapper and activist introduced Sanders at a campaign event in the city. "I'm talking about a revolutionary," Killer Mike told supporters. "In my heart of hearts, I truly believe that Sen. Bernie Sanders is the right man to lead this country." Hide Caption 20 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Comedian Larry David and Sanders appear together on "Saturday Night Live" on February 6. David has taken the role of Sanders in a series of sketches throughout the campaign season. Hide Caption 21 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders and his wife, Jane, wave to the crowd during a primary night rally in Concord, New Hampshire, on February 9. Sanders defeated Clinton in the New Hampshire primary with 60% of the vote, becoming the first Jewish candidate to win a presidential primary. Hide Caption 22 of 23 23 photos: Bernie Sanders in the spotlight Sanders speaks at a campaign rally in Ann Arbor, Michigan, on March 7. Sanders won the state's primary the next day, an upset that delivered a sharp blow to Clinton's hopes of quickly securing the nomination. Hide Caption 23 of 23

It's rare to find a lawmaker or leader who is as beloved on his home turf as Sanders. The key to his popularity may lie to some extent in Vermont's compact geography and a population that is much smaller than that of many American cities. He will have a harder time making personal connections in a presidential race.

So the fate of the Sanders campaign likely lies in whether the rest of America, and not just liberal Vermont, is hankering for a liberal class warrior who shoots from the lip.