TILLAMOOK, Ore. – Last night, Thursday, Nov. 12, members of Tillamook County’s Local 2734, Oregon AFSCME Union voted against ratifying a contract with the County and in favor of strike authorization.

While a strike is not guaranteed at this point, if one were to occur, it would be the first time Local 2734 members will have called a strike.

Since December of 2014, the Union has bargained with the County on a new contract, with no success. “The primary issue in bargaining has been insurance,” said Issa Simpson, Oregon AFSCME Council representative. “The Local’s bargaining team has agreed to no wage increases for the duration of the contract, which would only run through Dec. 31, 2016, in order to hold on to their current insurance plan. The proposed plan has an 80/20 co-insurance with a higher annual maximum out of pocket amount. We have agreed to take a different life insurance policy that saves the County quite a bit of money as well.”

A strike authorization vote, said Simpson, “Gives the bargaining team the ability to call a strike.” The Union would be required to give the County 10 days’ notice prior to going out on strike, she added.

The 128 members of the Local 2734, Oregon AFSCME, which was chartered on May 1, 1974, represent the Tillamook County Health Department as well as its Roads/Public Works, Parks, Community Development and Tax Assessment departments, the District Attorney’s Office, custodial staff, payroll staff and a number of positions based at the Courthouse, said Simpson.

Tillamook County Board of Commissioners Chair Tim Josi told the Pioneer this afternoon that County legal counsel had advised commissioners not to talk publicly about the bargaining process “at this time.”

Also this afternoon, Mona Hamblen, Tillamook County Human Resources director, emailed the Pioneer a press release and wrote, “The County is prepared to offer the attached press release, however, we will not be answering any questions at this time.”

The press release follows:

Tillamook County is a party to an expired collective bargaining agreement with AFSCME Local 2734. The parties have participated in collective bargaining since December, 2014. Although we have reached agreement on many contract issues, the Union has not accepted the County’s last offers to settle.

The County is facing continual declining revenues and needs to reduce costs in order to stay within budget constraints necessary to maintain staffing levels. The two primary means to reduce costs are to keep wages unadjusted for the time being and to change insurance plans to a more affordable plan with lower premiums.Changing health insurance plans also helps to avoid future tax liabilities under the Affordable Care Act.

The parties have been bargaining under the rules of the Oregon Public Employees Collective Bargaining Act, and have met with a State mediator on three occasions. The County has followed all the statutory timelines related to bargaining. The County is now in a position that in order to change health insurance plans for Jan. 1, 2016, it must give timely notice to the insurance carrier.

The County has elected to notify the Union that it intends to implement its last offer to the Union related to health insurance and wages effective November 18, 2015. The County’s offer includes no changes to wages and to move to a different health insurance plan with lower premiums. The County will be increasing contributions to employee tax-free Health Reimbursement Account (VEBA) for Union members in an effort to minimize the impact of these changes on them. The health plan is with the same carrier and there is no anticipated change in access to existing medical providers.

The County is disappointed the Union has not agreed to this change, however the County seeks to maintain good labor relations with the Union and to continue discussions to help resolve concerns and reach agreement.

According to Simpson, members of the Union are also frustrated with the Tillamook County Salary Adjustment Committee’s compensation study on management positions in 2009 and 2010, “Which resulted in some very favorable raises for them. They used jurisdictions … such as Washington County not commonly used for Coast employers. You usually compare to counties of a comparable size. If you use the same jurisdictions for our member’ jobs, many are significantly below market.”

Simpson said the Union’s concerns about management-to-staff ratios “Have also been brought forward to the commissioners, but we have not seen any acknowledgement or actions that point to change.”

While it is unusual for public employee units to go on strike, “It is less so for a strike authorization vote” to occur, said Simpson. “It is certainly not unheard of though; OHSU (Oregon Health Sciences University), MESD (Multnomah Education Service District), Josephine County and other AFSCME units have been out on strike.”