Topics: From the Wires, News, Politics News

LINCOLN, Neb. (AP) — Nebraska’s longest-serving lawmaker drops to one knee and spreads more than five-dozen sheets of notepaper across the floor of his office.

Sen. Ernie Chambers points to pencil sketches of a man, a pig and a hairy Cyclops. Behind him sits a box of framed portraits, created with a childhood skill he’s quietly honed during a 40-year legislative career. Between drawn-out committee hearings and floor debates, Chambers has built a sketch-art portfolio featuring everyone from Malcolm X to Gov. Pete Ricketts.

“It’s therapeutic,” said Chambers, 77. “I watch the pencil and things just flow out of it — words that rhyme and pictures that shade themselves. Sometimes, I’m not even concentrating on making a picture. I’m just putting lines on a sheet of paper.”

His fellow lawmakers have taken notice — and even asked for copies of some of the work.

Chambers, of Omaha, served 38 years in Nebraska’s one-house Legislature before voters enacted term limits that forced him from office. The self-described “Defender of the Downtrodden” was elected again in 2012 after sitting out the minimum time required. He’s legendary for his repeated attempts to abolish the death penalty, his knack for derailing legislation he opposes and the sweatshirts and jeans he wears at the Capitol amid others’ suits and ties. In 2007, the left-leaning independent sued God to make a point about frivolous lawsuits.

Chambers said he doodles in committee hearings to fight boredom when familiar issues arise. In the first 45 days of this year’s session, he scrawled more than 60 images on sheets the size of a hotel notepad.

He captions his drawings with random thoughts. Beneath his Cyclops, Chambers wrote: “Man, oh, man. I can’t wait for evolution to kick in! Things can only get better!!!”

When Omaha attorney Dave Domina spoke this month in a hearing related to the Keystone XL pipeline, he wasn’t just testifying: He was unknowingly posing for a portrait. As Domina argued for tougher regulations on oil pipelines — a bill Chambers introduced — Chambers’ pen gave shape to a slender face, suit and glasses.