The Radnor Township School Board budget committee heard from the district’s auditor on Monday and discussed a draft audit of the 2012-2013 school year finances for the fiscal year that ended June 30.Carl Hogan went over the highlights with the committee members, saying the district is in good fiscal shape.For 2013-2014 the district has an $82.7 million budget and used $988,730 to balance its books, allowing the school board to reduce taxes by .5 mills. For the previous year, actual revenues were 2.82 percent more than budgeted and expenditures were $1.4 million less, resulting in a $3.6 million “net positive variance,” according to the audit report.Salaries and wages were down by $673,9996 because of an early retirement program the board offered, Hogan noted. But benefits were up $1.3 million due to increases in the required contributions by the district to fund the employees’ retirement plan. The general fund balance stood at $19.2 million as of June 30, up $657,874 from the previous year, the report stated.Resident Judy Sherry asked when the board would discuss how the employee healthcare plans will be affected by the Affordable Care Act. She also questioned why budget surpluses continue each year.“We’re finding at the end of each year that we’re having a surplus,” said Sherry. “It’s significant. We’ve become a culture for board members that it’s acceptable that we have a surplus.” She asked what if the district had a deficit.“What is the acceptable number we can overshoot or undershoot our budget?” Sherry asked. “Let’s say we had $4 million we hadn’t budgeted for. I assume that’s baked into the budget. Is it acceptable or should we be scaling back? I’d really like the board to think about that.”Resident Daniel Webster was unhappy that the draft audit had not been posted to the district’s website prior to the meeting so that he could study it and come in with cogent questions.“It was not posted in advance,” said Webster. “I don’t think it’s fair for the members of the public to provide a 55 page document when people come into the meeting for them to review it. It’s really not fair.”Board Member Patricia Booker, who is no longer on the finance committee also complained about the lack of prior release of the audit report. And, noting that there were not enough printed copies for the handful of people who came to the meeting, said that she was “equally frustrated as members of the public.” Continued...

Webster suggested that the board come up with a long-term financial plan for the district.Webster said he did notice that a $4.671 million surplus that Hogan had mentioned at an October meeting did not appear in the audit.“I come up with 5.7 million in this report,” said Webster.Hogan said that number had not changed, but the way of accounting for it differed because of regulations.Board Member Susan Michaelson, who is on the finance committee said that she “echoes the question Dan Webster asked. Can you give us a quick and dirty reconciliation how we got from $4.671 in October? How does that relate to one of the numbers on this page?”Hogan said, “It’s not easy to identify. This is not the vehicle to do it right here.”Board President Eric Zajac, who chairs the committee said, “You indicated the numbers haven’t changed. The question is do we want to include that as an appendix?”Hogan said he’d prefer to keep it separate. He noted that their previous discussion had been regarding assigning money for different purposes from the $19.2 fund balance. For example, $1.5 million was assigned to capital projects;$4.2 to capital improvements; $6.6 million to the unassigned fund balance, he said.Hogan also said that the board taken advantage of changing market conditions to refund bond issues from 2005 and 2006, saving $2.5 million in debt service. Tax revenues have also increased from $66 million to $68 million and delinquent real estate taxes were down.Sherry said that an expected appraisal of capital items owned by the district had not come in in time for the audit report. Continued...

The Radnor Township School Board budget committee heard from the district’s auditor on Monday and discussed a draft audit of the 2012-2013 school year finances for the fiscal year that ended June 30.Carl Hogan went over the highlights with the committee members, saying the district is in good fiscal shape.For 2013-2014 the district has an $82.7 million budget and used $988,730 to balance its books, allowing the school board to reduce taxes by .5 mills. For the previous year, actual revenues were 2.82 percent more than budgeted and expenditures were $1.4 million less, resulting in a $3.6 million “net positive variance,” according to the audit report.Salaries and wages were down by $673,9996 because of an early retirement program the board offered, Hogan noted. But benefits were up $1.3 million due to increases in the required contributions by the district to fund the employees’ retirement plan. The general fund balance stood at $19.2 million as of June 30, up $657,874 from the previous year, the report stated.Resident Judy Sherry asked when the board would discuss how the employee healthcare plans will be affected by the Affordable Care Act. She also questioned why budget surpluses continue each year.“We’re finding at the end of each year that we’re having a surplus,” said Sherry. “It’s significant. We’ve become a culture for board members that it’s acceptable that we have a surplus.” She asked what if the district had a deficit.“What is the acceptable number we can overshoot or undershoot our budget?” Sherry asked. “Let’s say we had $4 million we hadn’t budgeted for. I assume that’s baked into the budget. Is it acceptable or should we be scaling back? I’d really like the board to think about that.”Resident Daniel Webster was unhappy that the draft audit had not been posted to the district’s website prior to the meeting so that he could study it and come in with cogent questions.“It was not posted in advance,” said Webster. “I don’t think it’s fair for the members of the public to provide a 55 page document when people come into the meeting for them to review it. It’s really not fair.”Board Member Patricia Booker, who is no longer on the finance committee also complained about the lack of prior release of the audit report. And, noting that there were not enough printed copies for the handful of people who came to the meeting, said that she was “equally frustrated as members of the public.”Webster suggested that the board come up with a long-term financial plan for the district.Webster said he did notice that a $4.671 million surplus that Hogan had mentioned at an October meeting did not appear in the audit.“I come up with 5.7 million in this report,” said Webster.Hogan said that number had not changed, but the way of accounting for it differed because of regulations.Board Member Susan Michaelson, who is on the finance committee said that she “echoes the question Dan Webster asked. Can you give us a quick and dirty reconciliation how we got from $4.671 in October? How does that relate to one of the numbers on this page?”Hogan said, “It’s not easy to identify. This is not the vehicle to do it right here.”Board President Eric Zajac, who chairs the committee said, “You indicated the numbers haven’t changed. The question is do we want to include that as an appendix?”Hogan said he’d prefer to keep it separate. He noted that their previous discussion had been regarding assigning money for different purposes from the $19.2 fund balance. For example, $1.5 million was assigned to capital projects;$4.2 to capital improvements; $6.6 million to the unassigned fund balance, he said.Hogan also said that the board taken advantage of changing market conditions to refund bond issues from 2005 and 2006, saving $2.5 million in debt service. Tax revenues have also increased from $66 million to $68 million and delinquent real estate taxes were down.Sherry said that an expected appraisal of capital items owned by the district had not come in in time for the audit report.“Members of the public said, ‘What is the surplus?’ You said after the audit. Is there any way to expedite an audit so we can get it before? Is there a speedier process?Zajac said the audit is sometimes not ready until March.“We don’t want to rush the process,” Zajac said.The final version will be presented to the entire board Dec. 17. The draft audit is now on the district’s website at: http://www.rtsd.org/cms/lib/PA01000218/Centricity/Domain/807/6-30%20audit%20DRAFT.pdf