By Peter Ingemi | Watchdog Arena

As you might have heard between ISIS beheadings, the U.S. government has been building a database of license plates:

According to documents reviewed by the Wall Street Journal, the database was created by the Drug Enforcement Administration to track cartel activity, but it soon came to comprise millions of records that are regularly shared with police forces across the country

The Journal reports the DEA claims success for this program:

According to DEA documents, the agency said the database played a part in the seizure of 98 kilograms of cocaine, 8,336 kilograms of marijuana and the collection of $866,380 in cash. In fact, a 2010 email said the “primary” purpose of the license-plate program was asset forfeiture.

However, lawmakers on both sides of the aisle are not impressed:

The lawmakers, Sens. Charles Grassley (R., Iowa) and Patrick Leahy (D., Vt.), said the DEA’s database raises privacy concerns.

“We appreciate that all of these new technologies are potentially useful law enforcement tools,’’ the lawmakers wrote, but added that technology that scoops up lots of data from innocent Americans raises serious questions.

And sites local and national, consumer and tech, left and right are expressing concern. This paragraph from the ACLU is typical:

Automatic license plate readers must not be used to collect information on lawful activity — whether it be peacefully assembling for lawful purposes, or driving on the nation’s highways. Without strong regulations and greater transparency, this new technology will only increase the threat of illegitimate government surveillance.

In fact, legislative proposals in Utah to restrict the practice likely had a part in the DEA withdrawing a request to set up such readers on Interstate 15.

“The clear winner for most privacy-protective state is Utah,” the post says. “Which not only provides privacy protections against government abuse of location tracking, electronic communications content, automatic license plate readers, and drones, but also for electronic data.”

In 2015 America, widespread united public suspicion of these tactics may seem natural, but what I find striking is how much of a contrast this is, not just from the days of my youth, but to the recent past.

Turn on any of the classic series on networks like MeTV and you’ll notice a respect for authority, both police and government. Watch a season or two of Daniel Boone constantly urging friends accused of crimes to trust the system rather than running. Watch Perry Mason trusting the police he opposes in court and how the rural Sheriff Andy Taylor is portrayed.

With the rise of the left in the later Johnson years, pop culture proclaimed distrust of institutions and Richard Nixon did his best to prove them right. The slightest suggestion of the use of the IRS against his foes caused the people who elected him in a landslide to abandon him.

With Watergate, the media joined the pop culture in promoting suspicion of the government, but the prosperity and optimism of the Reagan Years kept America’s basic trust in institutions in place. The 9/11 attacks altered the media narrative of distrust in the police, military, and government; ignoring decades of media and culture suggestion, Congress backed the Patriot Act, giving the government new powers to deal with the Islamic terror threat.

But the memory of 9/11 soon faded and the small government libertarians who consistently warned against government and police authority were joined by the left en masse who, despite years producing movies, TV and film attacking the administration, despite news shows daily pillorying George W. Bush as a liar and fool, and despite gathering without hindrance to protest in large numbers for years, insisted to all who would listen that George Bush’s government was using its new powers to repress dissent.

All argued without the slightest bit of irony.

Even so, as Barack Obama took power, the basic trust of the people that the authorities would not misuse the power granted them remained.

Then came the Obama administration’s use of the IRS against the tea party, the spying on reporters, the lies concerning Obamacare, Fast and Furious and Gunwalking, the spy revelation on allies and a Justice Department willing to use their powers to inflame situations to their political advantage in Florida and St Louis while finding no interest in groups like the New Black Panthers in Philly and racial incidents in cities like Memphis and Lansing.

And now the federal government plans to take control of the internet with new FCC regulations. Yes, the same government that spies on you online is also going to regulate internet service providers as if they were providing a 20th century-style utility.

The FCC is voting Thursday to give itself such authority to implement net neutrality, which they claim they can do under a law that dates back to the 1930s.

Can we really trust the government that spies on us, both online and off, to also be fair in how it regulates the internet? Yet again President Obama is looking at using regulations and executive actions to achieve his goals, instead of working with Congress.

George Bush may have said he was a “uniter and not a divider,” but in the end Barack Obama has managed to unite people in distrust of the authorities in a way George Bush and over 30 years of cultural persuasion has not.

I suspect it will take a lot longer for authorities to win back the people’s trust than it did for this administration to squander it.

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.