This property in New Zealand's Bay of Islands—a popular tourist destination in the northern part of New Zealand's North Island and renowned for its beaches, fishing and sailing—is located in the town of Kerikeri. Briton Richard Salmon, a fund manager, and his British-American wife Roberta, purchased the 25,478-square-foot property, which is elevated above the Kerikeri river, in 2002. They demolished the original house, which Mr. Salmon says was 'basic and average,' and built this refined yet practical home with a variety of spaces for entertaining guests. The couple moved in with one of their two children in 2004. Dean Wright …

Subtle detailing such as crown moldings, paneled walls and ornate friezes add to the design's elegance. The 6,600-square-foot house has three bedrooms and five bathrooms. It is built primarily from a natural sandstone called oamaru stone, which is sourced from the east coast of New Zealand's South Island. The floors are a combination of a rich and detailed wood called jarrah, which is the Australian Aboriginal name for timber from a type of eucalyptus tree native to Western Australia, and polished travertine and black granite. There is also under-floor heating throughout the home. Dean Wright …

One of the focal points of the home is the double-glazed glass vented roof in the dining room. 'It lets a huge amount of light in—and at night it can be very dramatic for entertaining where you've got the stars above your head,' Mr. Salmon says. There is also a sunken dining area to create a better view of the river and inlet, and an open fireplace. 'We like to entertain a lot and have big dinner parties.' Dean Wright …

The bronze statue in the dining room, shown here, was purchased in Bermuda, where the family used to live. 'The dining area has an under-floor irrigation system whereby someone could fill the whole dining room, if they wanted to, with bougainvillea,' Mr. Salmon says. Dean Wright …

Another main feature of the home is the library, which opens out onto a private garden. The space is intricately decorated with handcrafted wood-paneled walls, wood cabinetry, and rope carved panels and friezes. Dean Wright …

'The design is very practical and easy for us to use, as we actually live our lives,' Mr. Salmon says. Dean Wright …

The home has panoramic views of Cape Brett and Percy Island. 'The only room that doesn't have a full view is the library, because that's on the other side of the house,' Mr. Salmon says. Kerikeri's attractions include historic buildings, artisanal stores and vineyards. 'It has become a magnet for people from all around the world with a wide variety of backgrounds.' The property is 2½ miles from Kerikeri's city center, and approximately 135 miles from Auckland. Dean Wright …

The master bedroom has folding glass doors, which open directly to the swimming pool. Dean Wright …

The master bathroom has marble countertops, a double shower and heated towel racks. Dean Wright …

'When friends and family stay, we use the balconies and different areas for breakfast and lunch or drinks,' Mr. Salmon says. Dean Wright …

There is a separate guest studio, shown here, with its own entrance, lounge area and deck, which is adjacent to and slightly below the pool level. Dean Wright …

'The idea was to give guests their complete privacy if they wanted it—and then they can come up to the main house if they want to,' Mr. Salmon says. Dean Wright …

The kitchen has a view of the river and overlooks the dining area. It features granite countertops and De'Longhi appliances. Dean Wright …

Some of the furniture pieces are vintage reproductions from the U.S. Dean Wright …

The couple is selling because 'the family has grown up' and they would 'probably like to travel more,' Mr. Salmon says. Dean Wright …