Map shows affordable housing clusters in Jefferson County. (Photo: 2014 Metropolitan Housing Coaliton report)

The Louisville Metro Council is poised to take action on changes to the city’s land code Monday that would provide incentives for private developers to construct more affordable housing so low-income units are not concentrated in western and southwestern Louisville.

The proposed changes are an effort to tear down Louisville’s historically segregated housing rules and encourage builders to construct more multifamily units in the East End.

However, some council members worry the amendments do not forbid developers from concentrating low-income housing in their districts or specify the need for high-end housing in others.

Advocates, for years, have said Louisville’s housing barriers remain built into city policy from the civil-rights era. Under those regulations, for instance, about 80 percent of Jefferson County is zoned under the single family residential category, which prohibits the construction of affordable and small rental units.

“We have work to do to make Louisville a better place to live, particularly where children can climb up the income ladder,” said Councilman Bill Hollander.

The council created a special ad hoc committee to take a comprehensive look at the city's land code nearly two years ago.

This week the panel will consider a pair of amendments aimed at zoning regulations related to affordable housing.

The first would allow a “density bonus” for builders in exchange for a commitment to provide multi-family units and affordable units within areas of mass transit and business corridors.

The second would allow affordable housing to be built in office residential districts.

Council officials say the ad hoc committee may also consider a third change that would permit building low-income housing in special zones without requiring an overall zoning change.

To qualify for the incentives, the developments must have at least 10 percent multifamily units and 5 percent must be affordable, according to low-income-housing tax credit standards.

“We know a critical step to do that is to end economic segregation,” Hollander, D-9th District, added. “And a critical way to do that is to allow people to live nearer to where they work, out of concentrated pockets of poverty, and to do that we need multifamily in more parts of the county, and these are incentives to try to encourage people to do that.”

The Metropolitan Housing Coalition outlined in a report issued last December how that has burdened western and southwestern Louisville with the bulk of the city’s public and subsidized housing stocks.

It found 87 percent of the city’s total public housing units are concentrated in just four council districts -- Districts 1, 3, 4 and 6 -- and around 70 percent of all Section 8 housing units are located within many of the same neighborhoods.

The report shows, for instance, 35 percent of the housing units in District 4, which includes the Butchertown, Phoenix Hill, Russell and Smoketown neighborhoods, are subsidized compared to less than .02 percent in District 16, representing Prospect and Indian Hills.

Metropolitan Housing Coalition leaders have said that if city leaders are serious about tackling affordable housing, lawmakers need to undertake serious reforms to the land code in order to build low-income housing in other parts of the county.

Councilman James Peden, who chairs the ad hoc committee, says he believes the amendments will easily pass. The obstacle, he warned, could be a bipartisan group of lawmakers who don’t want developers building more low-income housing units in their area or duplicating the concentration of that type of housing stock in other districts.

“As far as the Metropolitan Housing Coalition or even as far as the mayor’s office is concerned, it’s all about quantity, and not about geography,” said Peden, R-23. “My big thing is let’s stick an amendment in here that basically says in order to use these incentives, they have to be spread out.”

Reporter Phillip M. Bailey can be reached at (502) 582-4475, follow him at @phillipmbailey on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1S47SOy