Working to make motivation match the power

Daniel Ramos talks to Alex Pardo and Alejandro Plata at Ramos' home in Longmont on Saturday morning, as part of an effort to help get out the Latino vote for the upcoming election. ( Jonathan Castner / Daily Camera )

Longmont-based immigration-reform activists pitched a group of volunteers Saturday on what they said is the importance of convincing Latino voters to choose incumbent Mark Udall over challenger Cory Gardner in this year's U.S. Senate contest.

Gardner, a Yuma Republican who now represents Colorado's 4th Congressional District, which includes Longmont, "has failed us" when it comes to supporting other federal lawmakers' bipartisan efforts to pass comprehensive immigration reforms, said Sonia Marquez, the North Region organizer for the Colorado Immigrant Rights Coalition Action Fund.

Marquez told about 20 people who'd gathered to prepare for a door-knocking canvass of some of Longmont's registered Latino and Asian and Pacific Islander voters that the local effort — along with similar get-out-the-vote drives elsewhere in Colorado — will be important in helping re-elect Eldorado Springs Democrat Udall.

"Latinos votes have been a deciding vote in many elections," Marquez said. "The power is there. We just have to motivate people."

The Longmont gathering was one of several such Saturday events sponsored by the Colorado Voter Accountability Project, whose organizers said in a news release will eventually try to reach as many as 45,000 Latino and Asian and Pacific Islander voters to tell them that Republicans "obstructed immigration reform in the House of Representatives this year" and to ensure that those voters "know how candidates have voted on this and other key issues.

Voter canvass kick-off events were also scheduled for Denver and Pueblo. Longmont's was held in office space at 515 Kimbark Street that the Colorado Immigrant Rights Coalition shares with Intercambio, a nonprofit organization that provides classes and training in English, life skills, and self-sufficiency, as well as other resources to immigrants.

Plans to continue 'until the end of the election'

The news release announcing the three voter canvass volunteers' gatherings didn't specifically say they'd be targeting Gardner in their door-to-door visits But Marquez and other speakers at the Longmont rally made it clear that that's the Colorado election contest they're emphasizing for now.

Gardner "hasn't represented our community," said Liz Alvarez, a 19--year-old Front Range Community College student whose own parents were undocumented immigrants and who said she's voting for the first time in this fall's election.

Canvass leader Garrison Bennet, a Silver Creek High School graduate who's attending Metropolitan State University of Denver told the Times-Call that the Colorado Immigrant Rights Coalition's Action Fund has compiled a list of about 1,200 registered Latino and Asian Pacific Islanders living in the Longmont area — most of them Latino — that the get-out-the-vote organizers have will be trying to contact.

Marquez said that effort had already begun prior to Saturday, and Bennet said that "we'll be actively doing this until the end of the election," when all the ballots have to be in by 7 p.m. Nov. 4.

During a March town hall meting in Longmont, Gardner said he didn't support "a special pathway to citizenship" for undocumented residents who are in this country illegally but that "I think we have a mess on our hands" when it comes to current immigration laws and policies.

Gardner said at that meeting that it's important to secure the nation's borders against illegal immigration and that there's a need for a temporary-guest-worker program "that actually works."

While Gardner didn't lay out many specifics during his March Longmont town hall about what he'd like to see in comprehensive immigration-reform legislation, he noted that there were people there, including Marquez, "with ideas" and said "I look forward to hearing your thoughts on this."

'We've chased him down at town halls'

On Saturday, though, Marquez and Bennet and others at the vote-canvass kickoff in Longmont expressed frustration at Gardner's responses when they'd tried to get him to discuss immigration and commit to the reforms they favor during subsequent encounters in his congressional district.

"We've chased him down at town halls" and at one point were locked out of his Greeley district office, Bennet said.

Gardner, for his part, wrote in an Aug. 11 newsletter that immigration came up during town meetings he'd recently held in Morgan Washington and Logan counties, "I stressed the need to see measurable success in securing the border before tackling other reforms.

"Although I believe there are many areas in the country's immigration system that should be fixed, I would not vote for any legislation that did not begin with a secure border," Gardner wrote in that August newsletter.

Gardner campaign spokesman Alex Siciliano said during a Saturday afternoon telephone interview that the confrontations with Colorado Immigration Reform Coalition representatives and disagreements about approaches have been going on for more than a year, but that the congressman has frequently said "that the immigration system is broken and in need of reform."

Volunteers meeting in Longmont for Saturday's canvass were given background materials listing such points as Udall having "fought for an immigration reform bill that would have kept families together while Cory Gardner voted to deport DREAMers — kids who have been living in the U.S. their entire lives but aren't citizens. Cory Gardner hasn't fought to keep families from being torn apart by deportations."

Siciliano disagreed, pointing to Gardner's July 2013 testimony during a congressional subcommittee hearing on the status of illegal immigrants who were children when their parents brought them here.

According to a transcript of that testimony, Gardner said such individuals "deserve to be afforded some form of legal status that recognizes that they are here through no fault of their own," but that that it should be "part of a step-by-step reform package."

Contact Times-Call staff writer John Fryar at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com