Traders at the Egyptian stock exchange in Cairo. Reuters

Egypt’s benchmark stock index tumbled 4.2% on Monday as foreign-exchange-related woes and violence in Sinai weighed on investor sentiment.

The index crashed through some key support levels and is now down nearly 12% for the year.

Among the companies worst-hit by the sell-off was the Egyptian subsidiary of Dubai-based property giant Emaar Misr, which had listed on the exchange only the day before. The company’s shares plunged more than 10% to close at 3.53 Egyptian pounds, well below the company’s IPO price of 3.8 Egyptian pounds.

The sell-off was a sharp turnaround for Emaar Misr, whose IPO last week was heavily oversubscribed.

Egypt’s economy has shown signs of revival this year but its stock market has struggled to reflect that.

Part of the reason may be that the economic resurgence appears quite fragile. According to investment bank EFG Hermes, citing Ministry of Planning data, Egypt’s GDP grew just 3% in the first quarter of this year, much slower than 6.8% and 4.3% in the third and fourth quarters of last year respectively.

Analysts at EFG expect growth to continue to be moderate in the second quarter of 2015, and to have averaged about 4.5% for the financial year ended June 2015.

Egypt’s foreign exchange woes have played a big part in restraining cash-strapped Egypt’s recovery from years of political turmoil, which slowed foreign investments and tourist inflows.

The government tried fixing the foreign-exchange problem by imposing currency controls. And last week it imposed more rules, asking local investors who bought shares on the Cairo-based bourse but sold them via their overseas listings to collect the proceeds in Egyptian pounds.

On Thursday and Sunday, it devalued the local currency by a total of about 2.7% in an apparent bid to attract more capital inflows. The moves only spurred investors to take cash out of the local stock market, analysts say.

Sentiment has also been affected by the bloody clashes between Egyptian army forces and Islamist militants since last week in the northern Sinai Peninsula, which have renewed concerns about security in the country.

Ahead of Emaar Misr’s debut this week, the chairman of the Egyptian Stock Exchange, Mohamed Omran, said the demand for the property company’s IPO underscored “domestic and international investor confidence in the outlook for the Egyptian economy.”

Investors will be hoping the sell-off doesn’t signal a collapse in that investor confidence.

Write to Nikhil Lohade at nikhil.lohade@wsj.com.