Hospitals can go largely unnoticed until someone needs one. Cue the flashing lights of an ambulance, with rushing doctors and nurses in an emergency room.

But rarely in the spotlight are the follow-up visits and unexpected re-hospitalizations — detours on the road to recovery for many patients.

Federal healthcare programs penalize hospitals that have patients who are readmitted without advance notice within 30 days of a procedure.

These 30-day unplanned readmission rates are an indicator used by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in an effort to reduce costs for the federal healthcare programs.

As businesses — even nonprofits — hospitals have a bottom line and readmissions cut into their net income. Nationwide, the penalties averaged $125,000 per hospital and totaled $280 million in 2013,according to the CMS data analyzed by the Commonwealth Fund, a private foundation.

Every hospital in the Rio Grande Valley was levied penalties from the federal government since 2011, after the Affordable Care Act was enacted.

Due to the way that Medicare payments are released to hospitals, which is based on a percentage rather than for each procedure, the exact penalties levied against Valley hospitals cannot be estimated for individual facilities.

“Sadly you will not be able to independently calculate penalties,” said Eric Coleman, head of healthcare policy and research at the University of Colorado who has spent two decades studying ways to reduce medical discrepancies. In 2012, Coleman was awarded a MacArthur ‘genius’ grant for his work.

He said readmission rates have been an important indicator for decades but widely ignored by hospitals because there wasn’t a strict financial stick.

“I would say in 2014 hospitals are by and large paying attention,” he said, adding that the average cost of a Medicare beneficiary’s readmission for each service is $9,600.

READMISSION REASONS ‘ARE COMPLEX’

The penalties are tied to readmission rates, and in 2011 all hospitals in the Valley had at least a quarter of patients return unexpectedly within 30 days of treatment. Since then, the rates have dropped but some hospitals remained above the national patient readmission average of 16 percent in 2013.

Starr County Memorial Hospital had the most money taken away from the hospital’s budget from Medicare payments in 2014. Hospital officials did not reply to several requests for comment for this story.

Mission Regional Medical Center had the highest readmission rate across the Valley, with 18 percent in 2013.

“The reasons for readmissions are complex, often out of a hospital’s control, and may reflect demographics of the community and its population,” said Nick Espinosa, the hospital’s spokesman. “Differences in hospital readmission rates are more closely linked to the patient socioeconomic and community factors than to hospital performance.”

Espinosa added that new strategies implemented by the hospital since the Affordable Care Act reforms have been rolled out, like Project Re-Engineered Discharge (RED), a 12-point system that aims to reduce readmissions.

Espinosa countered the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services rates with other data collected by Premier, a national hospital alliance representing 2,800 U.S. hospitals. In the last six quarters, Mission Regional had nearly a 7 percent readmission rate, according to Premier’s data.

Federal data is the only unbiased information widely available to the public and updated on a regular basis.

“Our community takes these numbers and these outcomes very seriously,” said Israel Rocha, CEO of Doctors Hospital at Renaissance, about readmission rate figures.

Rocha said that the hospital created what he termed a “patient navigation system” where patients were offered a lifeline of advocates throughout their visit to ease the transition back home.

“The amount of investment that we’re doing to ensure we have clinical quality standards far exceeds any penalty that would be assessed on readmissions," he said.

Rocha pointed to a 2013 Journal of American Medical Association study that noted an 11-percent reduction in re-hospitalizations of Medicare patients in the Rio Grande Valley as a mark of the region’s improvements.

Adriana Morales, spokeswoman for Rio Grande Regional Hospital in McAllen and Valley Regional Medical Center in Brownsville, also highlighted the hospitals’ individual efforts.

“During the discharge process, each patient and their family receives education about their home care, information about needed resources and tools identified by case management, and medication counseling,” said Morales of both hospitals, which are affiliated with the Hospital Corporation of America, the nation’s largest hospital conglomerate.

Knapp Medical Center in Weslaco declined an interview, but released a statement on its 15.1 percent readmission rate.

“Knapp Medical Center has demonstrated a commitment to providing excellent patient care for more than 50 years.” said Dinah Gonzalez, hospital spokeswoman, adding that they’ve introduced new processes to improve its numbers.

Officials with South Texas Health System, which owns several local hospitals including McAllen Medical Center and Edinburg Regional Hospital, declined requests for an interview for this story, but released the following statement:

“The STHS readmission rate is consistent or better than other hospitals in the area,” company spokeswoman Cari Lambrecht said.

When asked about the financial impact, the hospital declined to disclose any penalty totals — as did all hospitals contacted for this story.

‘THEY END UP RETURNING’

To help tighten the federal budget, Medicare penalized more than 2,200 hospitals nationwide and 169 in Texas that had readmission rates higher than the national average.

“There were all these different pieces in the Affordable Care Act and they were supposed to be implemented in hospitals, and one was to be more efficient on the Medicare side,” said Anne Dunkelberg, associate director for the Center for Public Policy Priorities, an Austin-based nonprofit think tank.

“It would be partly offset by Medicaid, and they would start to get paid for people who were part of their charity care before, but in Texas and other states that don’t move forward, the hospitals don’t have that,” Dunkelberg said about Gov. Rick Perry’s decision not to expand Medicaid for Texans in the healthcare gap — working individuals with income 100 percent above the poverty line who don’t qualify for Medicaid or Medicare. “That’s a really big hit on them not having that population being taken care of.”

Lance Lunsford, spokesperson for the Texas Hospital Association, said there are unfair penalties for so-called safety hospitals that draw patients with mostly low incomes and no private insurance.

He added that hospitals are penalized without being able to control what happens when patients leave.

“As a result, they end up returning to the hospital,” he said.

kmosbrucker@themonitor.com

For the most complete version of this story, log in or subscribe to MyMonitorNews.com.