MOBILE, Alabama – The official deadline to buy health insurance under the Affordable Care Act may have passed, but efforts to enroll the uninsured continue.

Thanks to an extension announced by the Obama administration last month, people who did not sign up because of problems with HealthCare.gov have a grace period. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has confirmed the deadline for doing that is April 15. Anyone who completes the application by then will be covered starting May 1 and will not be subject to a financial penalty for not having insurance.

Mobile lawyer Henry Brewster, who took it upon himself to organize sign-up events throughout the city, said he is sponsoring one more for Saturday at his law office at 205 N. Conception St. from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m.

“We had 76 people come through on Monday, which was our heaviest day other than that one big push on Saturday in the churches,” he said.

Help by phone

The following organizations have “navigators” and “certified application counselors available to answer questions and provide help enrolling in a health insurance plan through the Affordable Care Act: Providence Hospital (CARE) – 251-633-1540 Enroll Alabama – 251-471-5277 251-471-527 Mobile County Health Department – 251-690-8158 251-690-8158 Franklin Primary Health Center – 251-432-4117 251-432-4117 Mostellar Medical Center – 251-824-2174 251-824-2174 The following organizations have “navigators” and “certified application counselors available to answer questions and provide help enrolling in a health insurance plan through the Affordable Care Act:

Of those people, Brewster said, only about 10 actually finished the process. He said the website was down much of the day, first for a scheduled maintenance and then because of heavy volume.

“This was a terribly frustrating day,” he said.

Brewster said he and other volunteers gave folks as much information as they could. He said he does not know how many of them since have been able to enroll on their own, but he said he suspects some of them – plus others – might show up Saturday. He said he thinks interest has picked up as people discover that their neighbors have found good deals on the exchange.

Bloomberg reported Thursday that many of the people who signed up late were younger, which would be good news for insurance companies who were counting on the younger and healthier to balance the sicker enrollees whom companies no longer can deny or charge more.

The story quotes Daniel Liss, the co-founder of Bama Covered, which was active on the state’s college campuses.

Brewster said he saw the trend first hand.

“I saw more young folks on Monday and definitely on the weekend than I had in six months,” he said.

Brewster said his interest in health care goes back to the early 1990s, when then-First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton led a White House task force that drafted legislation to extend coverage to the uninsured. Even though Brewster has lost many hours from his law practice, he said, it has been particularly gratifying to see people hugging volunteers who have just helped them sign up.

“There were a lot of people who were really moved by this,” he said.