The federal government last month gave the go-ahead to a study examining the use of marijuana in treating U.S. veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder.

The study, which had been approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2011, was delayed because researchers could not get permission to buy marijuana from a National Institute on Drug Abuse research farm that is the only federally sanctioned source of the drug.

Go figure.

In Colorado, an Iraq war veteran diagnosed with PTSD became the first person in the nation to buy recreational marijuana legally on Jan. 1. Many veterans of the Vietnam War began treating themselves with marijuana while in Vietnam as a way to deal with what was PTSD in real time — though it had no official moniker until 1980.

Nearly 44 years ago this month, on duty inside the turret section of a 155mm howitzer located some 40 miles northeast of Saigon (now Ho Chi Minh City) in South Vietnam, I was introduced to marijuana by a couple of seasoned veterans who said that pot helped them cope with the long stretches of boredom as well as the occasional horror of the war.

I would soon discover that there were many others like them, and I found some truth in their words.

About 10 months later, I returned home to an uncertain future, with my father dying from inoperable brain cancer and my mother — who hadn’t worked outside the home since World War II — facing the prospect of raising my two young brothers alone, with little or no income.

In the months following my return, I started college full-time on the GI Bill, took on the role of surrogate father to my youngest brother and, yes, continued smoking pot. By the time I’d graduated from college five years later, I assumed it would just be a matter of time before marijuana was recognized as a safe and effective way to deal with post-traumatic stress.

Although I have long since quit smoking pot, I never changed my position about the legality issue, and I have always regarded my pot smoking back then as one of the only reasons I was able to maintain somewhat normal behavior after being plucked from a firebase near the Cambodian border and dropped two days later back into a life I no longer recognized.

When I smoked pot for the first time in Vietnam, I enjoyed the distance that a few pulls on a marijuana cigarette put between my country’s publicly professed interest in Vietnam and the reality of what I was experiencing on the ground.

Since that time, I have raised two children, run 45 marathons, and taught in middle schools and high schools in four states. Both of my daughters have undergraduate degrees. One owns and operates a medical marijuana dispensary with her husband in Denver, where I have met several veterans who don’t need a government study to tell them about marijuana’s potential in treating symptoms of PTSD.

It’s sad to imagine how many veterans troubled by PTSD over the past 40 years may have wound up in psychiatric hospitals, prison, or worse.

In Colorado at least, veterans experiencing PTSD need not wait for a government study to learn for themselves if marijuana helps alleviates their symptoms and, at long last, they no longer have to worry about being thrown in jail for attempting to treat their PTSD in real time.

Mark McVay of Golden, a retired teacher, served in the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment in Vietnam in 1969-70.