With a few weeks left to think about New Year’s resolutions, I’ve got one picked out for Congress: In 2015, its members should resolve to pass fewer silly, politically-motivated bills that don’t pass the laugh test of legitimate legislation.

While I certainly sympathize with House Republicans’ concern and anger over President Barack Obama’s unilateral (and likely unconstitutional) actions on immigration, I was disappointed this week to see precious legislative time wasted on the Preventing Executive Overreach on Immigration Act — a bill that wasn’t ever intended to be a law, but merely intended to be a statement.

The vote on this act was reminiscent of the many votes that have been taken in the U.S. House to repeal the health care law. Again, I am in wholehearted agreement with the sentiment and alleged goal of repealing a truly terrible law, but a president will never sign a bill to kill what he views as his greatest achievement, meaning those votes, and others like them, are the legislative equivalent of crying wolf. Over time, it might become hard for constituents to discern the difference between a legitimate legislative effort and political posturing.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Congress]

Blurring the lines between politics and governing is, of course, the unsavory goal of many elected officials and the genuine misunderstanding of others. But whether a member of Congress is casting a vote to to prove their conservative or liberal chops to their gerrymandered districts, or sponsoring legislation in order to create a negative talking point for a future campaign ad, none of this has to do with getting the work of governing done.

Have both parties used political-posturing bills and votes like the Preventing Executive Overreach on Immigration Act for years? You bet. Do constituents see through this nonsense? My guess is that most of them do, making hollow votes a total waste of Congress’ time.

Moving and heralding a piece of legislation that is destined to hit a wall is an act of condescension to constituents, and voters can see that. The action assumes that constituents are too ignorant to realize that voting on these symbolic pieces isn’t really the same thing as “working hard to defeat the Obama agenda” or whatever other nonsense political fundraising letters might claim.

It’s hard work to find a solution of consequence that can move through a divided government. A hard-working member of Congress invests time building relationships with unexpected partners and researching the ways he or she can find common ground with the opposition.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Immigration]