Danny Trevathan walked through the locker room Monday. He will practice Wednesday. The twice-injured Broncos weakside linebacker, however, is not eligible to play until Dec. 14.

He can’t return fast enough.

Entering their biggest game to date, a matchup with AFC West title implications, the Broncos are dangerously thin and inexperienced at linebacker after Brandon Marshall’s concussion against the Miami Dolphins on Sunday.

The Broncos remain optimistic that the emerging star will clear league protocol and start at Kansas City this Sunday night. Marshall was staggered after a fourth-quarter hit and did not return Sunday. A year ago, he was on the practice squad. It speaks to his stunning ascension that it’s hard to imagine Denver’s defense without him, particularly on the road against a physical, familiar opponent.

If Marshall is unavailable — he must be cleared by the Broncos and an independent doctor — the alternatives include rookies Lamin Barrow and Corey Nelson, linebacker Steve Johnson and strong safety T.J. Ward, who serves as a linebacker in some sets.

“We’ve got some young guys who we are rotating. We are giving them looks, and hopefully they continue to improve,” Broncos coach John Fox said. “We have options.”

“Next man up” breeds confidence in players. But it is not a recommended strategy to win at Kansas City, where the Chiefs own a four-game winning streak and running back Jamaal Charles has hit his stride. Charles injured his ankle in the Sept. 14 game at Denver, exiting after two carries. The Broncos’ rush defense has regressed in consecutive weeks, allowing 114.0 yards per game, compared with 67.0 in their first nine games.

Marshall matches up well against Charles, given his closing speed in open space. He has made 94 tackles, reaching double digits in three of the past five games.

“He is a baller,” safety Rahim Moore said. “He practices and plays at one speed: fast.”

Marshall provides presence and leadership. When Trevathan originally hurt his left knee in training camp, Marshall took over the defensive play-calling. He embraces the role. The onus fell on Barrow after Marshall’s injury Sunday. It was not a seamless transition because of problems with his helmet’s audio.

Simply put, Barrow is learning on the job. Leading is a lot to ask for a kid who has been on the field for 49 of the team’s 775 defensive snaps. He participated in a season-high 21 on Sunday, seeing extra time in nickel packages.

“I thought he played well in spots and had some other plays, much like our football team,” Fox said, referring to spotty play by the defense.

Barrow makes mistakes typical of a young player adjusting to the NFL. The Broncos, however, can’t exercise much patience. They are built to win a Super Bowl this season, not to evaluate the development of prospects.

“You get comfortable in practice, but it’s a totally different feel in the game,” said Barrow, who nearly gave up football after Hurricane Katrina displaced his family before returning to the sport his sophomore year at John Ehret High School in New Orleans. “I am getting coached hard. I am my biggest critic, and my teammates are on me too. My knowledge of the game has to improve, period.”

He will lean on veterans in the film room and at practice in order to microwave his learning curve. The stakes are high, and Trevathan (left knee) isn’t walking through the door anytime soon. Marshall might not, either, and if not it would create a daunting challenge for the defense.

“We’re desperate for a win. We’re a hungry team,” defensive tackle Terrance Knighton said. “We want to separate ourselves in the division. We want to have the seeding we want so everybody has to come through Denver in the playoffs. Obviously them coming off an upset loss (to Oakland), a team they expected to beat, they’ll be juiced at home.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck