Age-Friendly Sarasota held a lunch this week to introduce visiting author Beth Baker to a couple-dozen locals with an interest in making this a better place for passing through every stage of life. Patterson Foundation CEO Debra Jacobs asked us all to introduce ourselves, state our age as 83, and say what we most wanted in the way of housing.

I said I hoped for caring neighbors who would check on me occasionally, but also honor my do-not-resuscitate order. Another guest who will be nameless wished for technology that would turn down his ability to hear whenever his wife's voice gets louder.

I wasn't kidding, and I'm not sure whether he was. But it was fascinating to watch adults of all ages imagine themselves at 83, and hear the concerns that emerged. Walkability. Safety. Health care. Love. Nothing about huge great rooms or matching mailboxes or fancy paver driveways -- which can be tough to navigate anyway after a certain age.

Kathy Black, a professor of social work at the University of South Florida Sarasota-Manatee who is leading the Age-Friendly initiative here -- the first in Florida -- said this type of thought experiment is rare.

"People are generally not thinking ahead" about how and where they want to live in their 80s and beyond, she said. "And a part of the problem is that we don't have a lot of options for them."

For instance, Black noted, the average American faces seven to 10 years of not being able to drive a car toward the end of life, but few plan ahead for this. The Age-Friendly program is about solving such problems as a community, instead of forcing individuals to puzzle out their own solutions.

Baker, who wrote "With a Little Help from Our Friends: Creating Community as We Grow Older," likes to call this collective approach "interdependence."

"I've stopped using the term 'aging in place,'" she said. "I prefer 'aging in community.'"

Baker sees baby boomers seeking better alternatives, after watching their parents grapple with unexpected longevity and dependence.

"It can be troubling, even terrifying, to imagine ourselves in their shoes," she told an audience at USF. "We’ve taken care of our parents and we get it. But we want to grow old in a way that feels right, that doesn’t feel scary, that doesn’t feel like losing who we are."

Black is collecting Sarasota County residents' impressions of what that future should look like, and has more than 700 surveys so far. To add your vision, go to the Age-Friendly website -- or ask for a paper copy at your public library.

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.