By Jason Hart | Ohio Watchdog

Hospital CEOs in the Ohio Hospital Association are pressing state lawmakers to keep Obamacare money flowing through Gov. John Kasich’s Medicaid expansion.

“We at University Hospitals commend and thank Gov. Kasich for including reauthorization of Medicaid eligibility in his budget proposal,” University Hospitals CEO Thomas Zenty III said in a statement released by Kasich’s office last week. “The governor is showing strong leadership on the issue of health care access for the working poor.”

In 2012, Zenty was paid $4,497,592 by the Cleveland-based nonprofit hospital network, which reported $238 million in net revenue to the IRS and ended the year with $1.3 billion in net assets.

A study published in The New England Journal of Medicine in 2013 found Oregon’s 2008 expansion of Medicaid did not significantly improve patient health or decrease emergency room utilization. But Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion has already resulted in more than $2 billion in new federal entitlement spending in Ohio.

Kasich, a Republican, implemented Obamacare’s expansion of Medicaid to able-bodied, childless, working-age adults over Ohio General Assembly disapproval. The governor lacks statutory authority to pay for his Obamacare expansion on an ongoing basis.

Given a choice between receiving more taxpayer money or not getting it, OHA member hospitals support the former. Kasich and his allies in Ohio House and Ohio Senate leadership have indicated the only debate around Medicaid expansion this year will involve how to tweak the program so Republicans will continue funding it.

Since 2013, OHA has helped Kasich push the narrative that hospitals throughout Ohio would go belly-up without billions per year in Obamacare money. Their message remains much the same today.

“Extending Medicaid imperative for local economies,” the headline of a Jan. 29 Chillicothe Gazette op-ed by Adena Health System CEO Mark Shuter warned.

“As a member of the Ohio Hospital Association, I saw first-hand how providing health coverage for an additional 451,000 Ohioans through Medicaid in 2014 is impacting the ability of working people to stay healthy and on the job,” Shuter wrote.

“It also means Ohio hospitals, as the direct employer of more than 240,000 Ohioans, are able to sustain their community mission of improving the health of local residents while providing 24/7 care and responding to every disaster or new illness,” he continued. “We can’t afford to go back.”

“Health care coverage means better health and better economic security for all of us,” wrote Shuter, who was paid $779,946 in 2013. “In this new year, preserving Medicaid coverage for hardworking Ohioans who have incomes too low to buy private insurance is key to keeping our state moving forward.”

Shuter asserted hospitals are responsible for 15,000 jobs and 6,000 indirect jobs in Southeast Ohio — an angle hospital CEOs throughout the state will likely emphasize as OHA pressures lawmakers to appropriate new Obamacare spending.

Adena Health System, a nonprofit network of health-care providers headquartered in Chillicothe, reported $420 million in total revenue to the IRS for 2013. Adena had $25 million in revenue less expenses and ended the year with $215 million in net assets.

The year before Kasich’s Obamacare expansion took effect, Adena reported $75 million in Medicaid expenses and $41 million in Medicaid revenue. In Ohio, Medicaid pays care providers roughly half as much as a private insurer would.

“Adena’s mission is to provide quality healthcare services to patients in our region who need it, regardless of their ability to pay. What Medicaid Expansion has done is assure hardworking men and women who didn’t have access to healthcare coverage the opportunity to seek preventive care, or to maintain their health,” Maria Smith, Adena’s director of corporate communications, explained in an email to Ohio Watchdog.

“If Medicaid Expansion ends or is significantly reduced, you can expect many people will not have the ability to pay for the healthcare they need and will revert to seeking out treatment only when they are in an emergent situation,” Smith said.

“Generally in these cases, the cost to care for the patient’s illness is likely to be much more costly than had they the opportunity for preventive care or chronic disease management.”

Smith told Ohio Watchdog all 10 of Adena’s primary care clinics accepted new Medicaid patients in 2014, with average wait times nearly identical to the wait times experienced by those with private insurance.

“Over the past several years, we like many other health systems in the nation have adapted to many changes and challenges in our industry,” Smith noted in response to a question about Medicaid reimbursement rates dropping at the end of 2014. “Each is a concern, but we must always put the needs of our patients first and make the necessary adaptations to do so.”