Buy Photo Michiganders have more options for insurance in 2015. (Photo: Detroit Free Press illustration)Buy Photo Story Highlights Some plans are more expensive, in part, because carriers can boost rates as members age

More insurers, more choices, more confusion — and a shorter time to sort it all out.

That's what consumers are facing in the second year of the Michigan Health Insurance Marketplace, established under federal health reform.

Enrollment began Nov. 15 and the first deadline is just eight days away — Dec. 15. That's to buy health care coverage that will kick in Jan. 1. Plans purchased between Dec. 16 and the close of enrollment, Feb. 15, are effective the following month if they're purchased and paid for by the 15th.

In 73 of Michigan's 83 counties, the number of plan options on the exchange have more than doubled, according to an analysis by the Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation in Ann Arbor.

Bumped off your old health insurance? Here's how to start shoppping for new plans. Robin Erb/Detroit Free Press

In Wayne County, a dozen insurers — up three from last year — offer 126 plans to consumers who purchase insurance on their own rather than receive it from an employer. That's up from 52 plans last year, according to the same report. Oakland and Macomb counties also are seeing a surge in choices — up to 123 plans this year.

But while the competition has forced premiums down in some plans, price tags have swelled in other plans.

That's especially true for aging consumers. The 2010 Affordable Care Act means carriers can't adjust rates because of a consumer's health status, but carriers can factor in your age in setting premiums.

Additionally, those whose income has increased may find the federal subsidy to help cover monthly premiums has decreased.

Consumers who don't reenroll will be automatically renewed in their current plans. That could mean big costs if they're not careful. Plan benefits can shift from year to year.

Tips: What you need to know as you shop for health care

Related: New challenges in health reform outreach

Asthma? : This insurer wants to talk to you

Related: Baffled by health reform? Here's free help

Marketplace: More insurers, more plans in Michigan

Glossary: First step in buying health insurance is tackling the terms

Related: Enrollment events for picking out coverage

Related: Health coverage subsidies facing court challenge

Related: Expanded Medicaid remains year-round option for many

So is it good news or bad news for you?

The answer is as complicated as the law itself, quipped Percy Richardson, an independent agent with Southfield-based Great Lakes Benefit Group.

"There's so many ways to look at this," he said. "It depends on how much of a subsidy you get. It depends on whether you had coverage before. It depends on how much your plan changed and how often you go to the doctor."

No doubt there will be more people asking those questions. More than 272,000 Michiganders on the individual market — those without employer coverage — chose a plan through March 31 this year at www.healthcare.gov.

But thousands more remain without coverage, including those who didn't decide in time, didn't know about the deadline or simply decided to face the tax penalty for going without insurance.

That means a second year, too, of outreach by consumer advocates who say last year's enrollment captured those who were waiting for coverage or who were approached when they sought emergency medical care.

This year will be tougher, and they'll be reaching into homeless shelters and into communities where English is a secondary language, for example.

"What we found is that while the remaining uninsured are harder to reach ... they're not harder to convince once they have the information," said Anne Filipic, president of Enroll America, a national outreach group with a Michigan chapter.

Open enrollment, which lasted for six months during the first year, is reduced to three months this year.

Contact Robin Erb at rerb@freepress.com or at 313-222-2708. Follow her on Twitter @Freephealth.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1A4VSPj