U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas gently differentiated himself from Republican presidential frontrunner Donald Trump on Thursday, saying that at some point voters will distinguish between “campaign conservatives” and “a consistent conservative.”

Candidates warn about future of first-in-nation primary Three Republican presidential candidates told Granite State voters on Thursday that 2016 could mark the last meaningful New Hampshire first-in-the-nation primary, and if it is, they said, it would be a tragedy for the entire nation. More

But Cruz said that while other Republican candidates “have gone out of their way to smack him with a stick,” he is pleased that Trump is running because Trump is bringing a lot of excitement to the race.

And, he said, as voters tune in to debates primarily to watch Trump, they also hear Cruz’s message, causing them, he said, to begin to unite behind his campaign.

“If conservatives continue to unite behind our campaign, we are going to win the primary, and that’s also how we win the general election,” he said.

But he said voters are looking for someone who has “walked the walk” and not just “talked the talk.”

“I am the only candidate running who has been a consistent conservative,” he said. “I’ve been a fiscal conservative, a social conservative, a national security conservative, and we’re seeing this in the debates. That’s starting to flesh out.”

“In many ways this Republican primary has boiled down to one simple question: Who will stand up to Washington? And just about every candidate there is saying, ‘I’ll stand up to Washington,’” he said.

But he said voters are now researching, “Who actually has stood up to Washington? And in that regard, my record is markedly different from every other candidate on that stage. In terms of standing up not just to Democrats, but to leaders of our own party.”

He said he has led the fight against the Affordable Care Act and funding for Planned Parenthood.

And in the Planned Parenthood fight, other Republican candidates “were nowhere to be found. It was like they were in witness protection.”

He also said he was the only participant in the Tuesday night debate in Milwaukee who never supported amnesty for undocumented immigrants.

Cruz was joined by his wife, Heidi, at the New Hampshire State House as he signed the necessary document to make his primary candidacy official.

Afterward, he joined several dozen supporters outside in the rain for a rally, where he was formally endorsed by members of the conservative 603 Alliance.

The group held an Iowa-style caucus in September. Cruz won the caucus and all members of the alliance agreed to support him for president.

Cruz energized the crowd by calling for a flat tax and by railing against “the Washington cartel” -- politicians of both parties who, he said, act in concert to promote their own interests at the expense of average Americans.

A flat tax, he said, would make the Internal Revenue Service unnecessary, and the agency could be abolished and said the “cartel” uses the IRS as an “enforcer.”

“It is where the cronyism is handed out,” he said. “It’s where the subsidies are given. It’s where citizens are persecuted for exercising their constitutional rights.”