The Obama Administration already has a lot of support from celebrities in its effort to sell ObamaCare to Americans, particularly young people, who are essential to the success of the law. But Hollywood has found another way to promote the unpopular healthcare law. They’ll soon be promoting ObamaCare in television plot lines:

Coming soon to your favorite TV shows: plot lines about the Affordable Care Act. Hollywood Health & Society, a program with the USC Annenberg Norman Lear Center got a $500,000 grant this week from The California Endowment to help TV writers tell better stories about the new health insurance law. Why try to get your public health message into fictional story lines? People learn from TV,” says Marty Kaplan, the director of the Norman Lear Center. “Even if they know it is fiction, even if they know if writers can make stuff up, especially in the realm of medicine and public health, if a doctor says something to a patient, people tend to think that someone has checked that, that it’s true,” Kaplan says.

[…]

And that’s appealing to The California Endowment, which gave the $500,000 grant. Hollywood Health & Society will reach out to TV writers and editors says Daniel Zingale, Senior V.P. of Healthy California at The California Endowment. “They’ll be giving them content, storylines, information, so that people watching those programs will learn about Obamacare and useful information about how to get enrolled.”

The group has a lot of experience working on plot lines and ensuring that medical aspects of shows are accurate. Their resume includes some of the best and most popular shows on television, including 24, Bones, Breaking Bad, Mad Men, and NCIS.

The grant, half of which will be used for Spanish-language television, will also be used to create public service announcements to go along with the plot lines that deal with healthcare, according to Deadline. So this is propaganda, more than anything else, and it’s the latest development in the Obama Administration’s courting of Hollywood to help sell ObamaCare to a skeptical American public.

What Hollywood likely won’t mention is how ObamaCare is dramatically increasing the cost of health insurance or how employers are cutting hours and taking other steps to scale back benefits for employees to avoid rising healthcare costs.