To respond to the Great Recession, the county in 2010 asked the voters for a hand. Those hit hardest were not just struggling more than usual. They were living on the edge: And falling off could mean the difference between barely scraping by and becoming seriously impoverished.

Nearly everyone was impacted by the recession: Successful business owners were laying people off and seeing fewer orders; investors saw their retirement portfolios plummet; and homeowners all over the state saw the housing market crater. Nonetheless, Boulder County voters in 2010 approved a property tax mill levy (It's about $21 extra on a $300,000 house).

The tax is to expire in 2015; Boulder County Ballot Issue 1B asks the voters to extend it for 15 years.

We consider the safety net measure to be a good investment in neighbors. Issues like helping families with child care costs and food keeps parents from potentially losing their jobs, or from falling behind on rent or mortgages in order to eat. It's the sort of assistance that can make a temporary financial crises from becoming a cycle of poverty.

A story in the Colorado Hometown weekly, and illustrated with a photo of bare food shelves, said that the food bank at Sister Carmen Community Center is struggling to meet its client needs. Typically, before the holiday season of giving kicks in, the bank brings out its stock of dry goods.

Advertisement

"Right now, what's coming in is going straight out on the shelves," Sarah Jensen, a manager there was quoted as saying. "We have nothing to restock with, and a lot of the shelves are empty."

In a letter to the Camera published Friday, Barbara O'Neil, the director of the Harvest of Hope Pantry, wrote: "Sister Carmen, EFAA and Harvest of Hope are all facing the same issue regarding the communities which we serve: higher demand and a shortage of supply."

It's a story we've been hearing for years: From the pulpit on Sundays. On a tour of local nonprofits. From the struggling single parents who — quite correctly — point out that Colorado's child care costs for young children are more expensive than college.

That the recession ended and the economy improved is a technicality: Not everyone has benefited during the recovery.

The urgency of the recession convinced county voters to dig in and help those most in need. Our neighbors still need our support. The Camera adds its voice to the many worthy organizations in supporting Boulder County Ballot Issue 1B.

— Erika Stutzman, for the Camera editorial board. Email stutzmane@dailycamera.com. Twitter @stutzmane.