Kansas’ two U.S. senators were split Thursday on whether legislation to revise the No Child Left Behind education law went far enough in curtailing the federal government’s control over education standards.

On Thursday, the Senate approved by a vote of 81-17 legislation to return some power over education to state and local governments. Sen. Pat Roberts voted in favor of the Every Child Achieves Act, but Sen. Jerry Moran voted against it. Both senators are Republicans.

On July 8, the House passed its own version of the No Child Left Behind revision, setting the stage for a clash as the two chambers try to hammer out an agreement in a conference committee.

Virtually everyone in Congress agrees that revisions are needed to the 2001 education law, which is deeply disliked by many educators and administrators who feel it places too much importance on standardized testing. However, differences exist between Democrats and Republicans, senators and representatives over how the law should be changed.

The House legislation is far more expansive, eliminating funding set aside for school improvements and replacing federal education programs with block grants, allowing states to further mold their own education policies.

While the Senate bill does eliminate some programs, it also adds some early childhood programs and maintains school improvement funding. The Senate bill also keeps caps in place that keep states and local governments from further cutting education, while the House bill would remove such caps.

The 17 senators who voted against the Every Child Achieves Act includes some of the chamber’s most liberal members — such as Sen. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Sen. Cory Booker of New Jersey — along with conservatives such as Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky, Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida and Moran.

“The Every Child Achieves Act does not go far enough in reducing the counterproductive federal mandates currently dictating K-12 education,” Moran said in a statement. “Washington bureaucrats will still have a substantial say in curriculum development, school testing and assessment decisions — functions best handled by states and local school districts.”

Moran opposed the No Child Left Behind in 2001 when he was a member of the U.S. House. Among the Kansas delegation, Moran joined Rep. Jim Ryun in opposing the bill in 2001 while Reps. Dennis Moore and Todd Tiahrt voted in favor. Both senators from Kansas, Roberts and then-Sen. Sam Brownback, approved of the original legislation.

Roberts, a member of the Senate Education Committee, pushed this year to place language in the Senate bill that he argues would prohibit the executive branch from using waivers or “any tool of coercion” in advocating for Common Core standards.

“I’m pleased the Senate has passed this bill that will permanently end Washington’s Common Core mandate and give decisions about what children are taught back to the local and state level,” Roberts said. “This legislation will restore the responsibility of decision-making back to states, local school districts, superintendents, principals, teachers, local school boards, parents and especially students. We can finally say goodbye to federal interference in what we teach our children in school.”

On July 8, three members of the state’s all-Republican House delegation approved of the bill, known in the House as the Student Success Act, to revise the 2001 law. U.S. Reps. Lynn Jenkins, Kevin Yoder and Mike Pompeo voted in favor while Rep. Tim Huelskamp voted against.

“Every time I am back in the district I make it a priority to visit a local Kansas school, and there has never been a time that a student, parent, teacher or administrator has asked for more federal government restrictions and power over how to teach our kids,” Pompeo said in a statement after the vote.

With no Democrats voting in favor of the House bill, it passed with a narrow five-vote margin, 218-213. If a conference committee is unable to craft a bill that garners Democratic support while placating conservative Republicans such as Huelskamp, prospects for passage in the House could be precarious.