Welcome to Florida sign, image from Wikipedia.

Florida will audit 31 hospitals which failed to meet a deadline to certifying that their contracts with Medicaid managed-care plans comply with state law, according to Gov. Rick Scott's office.

Scott released the list of 31 hospitals that either did not comply or did not submit information by the August 1 deadline.

The deadline was imposed by Elizabeth Dudek, secretary for the Florida Agency for Health Care Administration. In a July 17 letter, Dudek expressed what she said were "grave concerns that hospital contractual arrangements may have ballooned to unreasonable proportions and higher than what is allowed by state law."

[Also: CMS proposes changes to Medicaid managed care, targets rate setting]

Dudek requested hospitals receiving payments and health plans reimbursing hospital providers to certify none of the contractual arrangements are above 120 percent of the Medicaid fee schedule, the allowable limit.

Hospital profits, with the exception of those of government-owned hospitals, have risen over the past 10 years, Dudek wrote.

"It is clear that the Florida Legislature did not intend for the creation of MMA … to be a windfall for hospitals," she said.

Most Medicaid beneficiaries are required to enroll in managed-care plans, as lawmakers and Scott have sought to better control the costs of the program, according to published sources. However, increases in prescription drug prices have caused private health plans in Florida serving Medicaid beneficiaries to seek a 12 percent rate increase.

The following hospitals are on the list to be audited by the Office of Medicaid Program Integrity: Cleveland Clinic Hospital; Baptist Hospital Physicians Regional Medical Center – Collier Boulevard; Physicians Regional Medical Center – Pine Ridge; Flagler Hospital; Venice Regional Bayfront Health; Bay Medical Center; Sacred Heart Health System; Bayfront Health Punta Gorda; Calhoun-Liberty Hospital; Campbellton-Graceville Hospital; Doctor's Memorial Hospital; Healthmark Regional Medical Center; Kindred Hospital in Melbourne, Ocala, The Palm Beaches, Bay Area – St. Petersburg, Bay Area – Tampa, Central Tampa, North Florida, South Florida, Coral Gables, South Florida – Ft. Lauderdale, and South Florida – Hollywood; Martin Hospital South; Martin Medical Center; Tradition Medical Center; Lake Butler Hospital; Select Specialty Hospital in Orlando (North), Palm Beach, and Panama City; Shands Live Oak Regional Medical Center; and West Gables Rehabilitation Hospital.

Twitter: @SusanMorseHFN