Democrats have every reason to feel good about the resolution of the Republicans' latest concocted crisis. The nation was on the brink of default. The government was shut down. People were hurt and much worse was threatened. But Democratic leaders stood tall, they didn't bend, and it was the Republicans who broke.

On policy, this was a defensive victory, as Democrats weren't trying to gain anything new, but they did stop the Republicans from taking things away. On process, this was a momentum changer, as Democrats finally refused to accede to Republican brinksmanship, and forced them to concede a humiliating defeat. On politics, this was a huge victory. By refusing to engage, the Democrats allowed the Republicans to reveal themselves for what they are, and because of that the Republican brand is in unprecedented ill repute.

Having failed to taste the blood for which they'd been slavering, Republicans have begun to cannibalize themselves. The sane but cruel Republicans are in a death match with the deranged lunatic Republicans, and both factions are realizing that they no longer can pretend to be able to live with each other. They can smell the rot, but they don't recognize that it emanates from their shared political decomposition. In a demographic death spiral, their core issues resonating less and less, and with fewer and fewer voters, their desperation is as obvious as it is ugly.

The Republican Supreme Court majority is undermining campaign finance reform, and giving a green light to voter suppression, but that won't save their party. Aggressive gerrymandering alone temporaraily preserved the Republican House majority, but that has a time stamp, and now may expire prematurely. Their attempt to use the politics of bullying and extortion to invalidate elections they couldn't win at the polls blew up in their own faces. The Republican war on democracy and republic is failing. It is becoming transparent even to the apolitical. The Republicans cannot disenfranchise an entire nation.

The Democratic Party has been suffering from its own factional tensions, but President Obama's most ardent supporters and his liberal critics both have reason to feel vindicated. They also both need to pay attention to the polls, for while people have turned overwhelmingly against Republican extremism, a considerable majority is not impressed with the Democrats, either. There are lessons here. The president's most ardent supporters need to acknowledge that he was not playing 11th dimensional chess during the previous showdowns with the Republicans, and in fact made terrible mistakes both in process and content. He himself seems to recognize it. His liberal critics were right about how badly he handled the 2011 and 2012 budget and debt crises. But those liberal critics also need to acknowledge what it takes for a president to learn from such mistakes. Those who were expecting more bad deals, and more capitulations and compromises, were just as wrong as were those who defended those earlier bad deals and capitulations and compromises.

All Democrats need to accept that everyone has been wrong, but they should celebrate that everyone also was right. The president made terrible mistakes in negotiating with and appeasing extortionist Republicans in 2011 and 2012, but he is not an idiot, he is not weak, and he is not a sell-out. Before and during the Republican shutdown, he had every opportunity to repeat those past mistakes, or to prove that he was only looking for excuses to jettison traditional Democratic principles, but he didn't. He said he wasn't going to play the Republicans' games, and he didn't. Some doubted him. They might even have had fair reason to doubt him. But he proved them wrong by doing right. Democrats won this. All Democrats. The president, Harry Reid, Nancy Pelosi, and the entire Democratic caucuses in Congress won this. Grassroots Democrats won this. Democrats who were wrong in the past and Democrats who were wrong about how this would play out won this. The country won this. Democrats should be united in celebrating this moment, and in preparing to use it to best advantage.

Read more about this victory below the fold.