New lot may serve downtown residents and employees who work on Main Street

The purchase of a new parking lot may relieve concerns about long-term parking for downtown Somerville employees and residents. (Photo: ~File)

SOMERVILLE - The borough's downtown parking woes may be eased by the acquisition of an 80-space lot that will be designated for use by downtown residents and workers.

The 0.72-acre property on High Street, east of Davenport Street, is adjacent to a municipal parking lot and may be reserved for long-term parking, said.Beth Anne Macdonald, executive director of Downtown Somerville Alliance. The property has been used for parking by the adjacent Stires Associates



The parking lot will relieve worries from store owners and downtown residents that the borough's new parking rules, which include higher rates, would create a financial hardship for those who work at Main Street stores and inconvenience for residents who would have to wake up early on Saturday mornings to feed the meters.



"I wish we had done this three months ago," Mayor Brian Gallagher said at the Nov.16 Borough Council meeting.



The Downtown Somerville Alliance, the organization charged with promoting the downtown business district, will contribute $250,000 toward the $750,000 acquisition.



The lot will be purchased by the Somerset County Improvement Authority. Somerville has entered into a lease-purchase agreement with the authority.



At the end of the lease, the borough will buy the lot from the authority for $1, the mayor said.



The borough's parking task force will develop a plan on how to manage the lot, Gallagher said.



In January, Gallagher created a task force to review parking policies after the borough received an increasing number of complaints.



After six months, the task force concluded that while the borough had changed since the last revision to parking laws in 1984, the laws had not, and needed to be updated to keep pace with the changes.

The task force recommended changes to promote turnover of parking spaces by discouraging store owners and employees from feeding parking meters. That would free more parking spaces for customers.

"There is no reason not to park in the Main Street spaces and feed the meters," the task force wrote in its report. "This creates pressure on the areas closer to Main Street through people continually hunting for a parking space."

The report says that many of the Main Street spaces are used by store owners and their employees "reducing the ability for shoppers/visitors to park near the location they wish to go to."

The task force also concluded that while the borough had changed since the last revision to parking laws in 1984, the laws had not and needed to be updated to keep pace with the changes.



The task force found that parking rates had not changed in the last decade and had fallen behind rates in other towns and that enforcement ended before peak parking times.



There are more than 1,000 paid parking spaces in the borough, with 60 percent of those in municipal parking lots.



That does not include the 372 spaces at ShopRite, the 270 spaces in the parking garage at Post Office Plaza on Division Street and 700 spaces in the borough-owned garage on Veterans Memorial Drive.The total also does not include the parking garage owned by Somerset County on High Street for county employees and jurors

The task force recommended that the rates be increased and parking would no longer be free on Saturdays. The task force also said that enforcement should be stepped up. The fine for overtime parking would go from $23 to $29.

One of the major changes is eliminating free parking on Saturday and extending the hours for parking to 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.

Once these changes go into effect, the borough's annual parking revenues, after expenses, could rise 145 percent to $363,884, according to the task force. That total does not include income from parking tickets.

In 2014, the borough collected $212,337 from parking tickets, with $85,640 going to the state. The increased fines could bring another $125,000 to the borough.

Staff Writer Mike Deak: 908-243-6607; mdeak@mycentraljersey.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search “MyCentralJersey” in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1HEUUlU