A conversation striving to answer: What works?

At a roundtable discussion Saturday afternoon in Boulder, county lawmakers law enforcement officials and concerned citizens gathered at the University of Colorado to brainstorm strategies to improve relations between police departments and the populations they serve.

"We can't legislate everything," said the event's host, Rep. Jonathan Singer, D-Longmont. "We try, apparently, but we can't legislate better community relations every day. So the question is: What works?"

The conversation, while wide-ranging, centered around a thesis that seemed almost unanimously held: Many across the country, from Boulder to Ferguson, Mo., to New York, find it increasingly difficult to trust police.

Mike Butler, public safety chief for Longmont Police, has a theory: "I believe police departments have way too much power in our communities.

"We have a relationship now that, in my mind, is a dependant relationship. It's an unhealthy dependency. I don't think the equilibrium is really there to build the kind of trust we want to build."

Butler posited that the imbalance may be an unintended consequence of a gradual abdication of power, on the people's behalf.

"Saying to police, 'We want you to take care of our business,'" Butler said.

As Butler and various others in the room, including Boulder Deputy Police Chief Curtis Johnson, noted on Saturday, a huge portion of police calls don't actually need police involvement.

In Longmont, for example, only about 20 percent of calls have a crime attached to them. Johnson pointed to Boulder's well-documented struggle with the containment and treatment of homelessness as an issue that can be helped, by not entirely solved, with law enforcement alone.

"Policing the homeless is a challenge," Johnson said. "Trying to find the right services that may have nothing to do with the police department is also a challenge. We have a very disparate network of people who all want to help, but they don't communicate with each other."

Boulder police staff officers who work specifically with transient populations, and local activist Darren O'Connor said the police presence in areas of homeless congregation has drawn mixed reviews from the homeless themselves.

"I know that there are certain officers that homeless folks will run when they see them coming," he said. "There are others where they'll say, 'Yeah, she arrested me, but she's my best friend.'"

Longmont attorney Ian McKinley, who works almost exclusively with undocumented immigrants struggling with English, agreed that a multi-sided approach is better than giving singular power to officers. But, he added, his clients take note when a cop goes out of his or her way to become more accessible.

"I've witnessed firsthand that, when the police make that effort to engage with the community, and especially with that demographic, it really causes them to be able to come forward and have more trust in their communities," said McKinley, of grassroots organization El Comite de Longmont.

Increased engagement is a stated aspiration of Boulder Police, and of Chief Greg Testa. In a public discussion last month that followed a screening of the film "Selma," Testa promised to explore the city's racial disparity in arrests, and to promote a "community dialogue as we talk about he police perspective." Boulder police haven't yet announced any findings, or any new initiatives, but Johnson reiterated the department's expressed desire to make positive in-roads in all pockets of the community, including those who may feel marginalized.

"There are lots of people that live in Boulder who never have contact with the police," he said. "We know we can win or lose trust on each individual contact we have in the community."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness