Pair of W.Pa. practices team for Medicare program

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Two of the largest independent physician practices in Western Pennsylvania are teaming for a government program that pays medical providers for keeping patients healthy and out of the hospital.

Genesis Medical Associates Inc. and Preferred Primary Care Physicians Inc. formed the first Accountable Care Organization in the Pittsburgh region, the doctor practices said Tuesday. A joint venture company established by the practices, Keystone Clinical Partners, will participate in Medicare's ACO program starting Jan. 1.

The Medicare ACO program, started under the Affordable Care Act health overhaul law, attempts to improve patient care and reduce costs by paying doctors a set amount for providing medical care to patients, rather than reimbursing them for each time a patient comes to the office or for each procedure performed.

The theory behind an ACO payment scheme and other similar value-based programs is doctors will have financial incentives to perform fewer procedures and more efficiently manage patient care if they aren't paid on a piecemeal basis.

“Keystone Clinical Partners will be joining a program that is one part of this administration's vision for improving the coordination and integration of care received by Medicare beneficiaries,” said Sean Cavanaugh, deputy administrator of the Center for Medicare.

Keystone is expected to manage care for about 7,500 seniors who see Genesis or Preferred primary care physicians, said Mark Kissinger, executive director of Genesis. Patients of ACO practices aren't restricted in which doctors they can choose to see, and their Medicare benefits won't change, the government said.

“We are recognizing that the ACO model may not be the end game for how patient care is paid in the future, but it's headed that way,” Kissinger said.

ACOs have been criticized for doing little to lower health spending. More than 400 ACOs have been formed since the program began in 2011, and the program has produced savings of $417 million in that time, the government has reported.

Medicare, the second-largest government program, spent about $492 billion in 2013.

Greg Erhard, executive director of Preferred, said his practice was drawn to the program because it knows these value-based payments models are becoming the norm.

“The program provided a very good, almost no-risk opportunity to really start to cut our teeth in this space,” he said.

Scott-based Preferred has 37 physicians working out of 21 offices, primarily in the South Hills region of Pittsburgh. It has about 80,000 active patients.

Genesis, which is based in McCandless, has 20 physicians in 11 offices, mostly in the North Hills area. It treats about 45,000 patients a year.

Highmark Inc., the state's largest health insurer, and UPMC, the region's biggest hospital system, have each developed programs similar to an ACO in which they incentivize doctors to keep patients healthier.

Alex Nixon is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-320-7928 or anixon@tribweb.com.