Funds are being raised to pay for surgery for "Beefcakes," the dog found in Boulder County with a bullet wound to his head ( Courtesy photo )

The Longmont Humane Society is asking for the community's help to cover the cost of medical care for Beefcakes, a friendly, 62-pound bulldog mix found shot in the jaw at close range.

By Sunday night, a fundraising campaign with a goal of $7,500 had raised about $6,800. Longmont Humane Society officials estimated that his medical care will cost about $10,000.

"This has been probably one of the worst cruelty cases we've seen in our area," said Patty Henderson, animal care team supervisor at the Longmont Humane Society. "He has a long road ahead of him."

Beefcakes was badly injured and found wandering in an empty parking lot Tuesday near St. Vrain Road and U.S. 36 .

The person who found him called police and reported seeing a two-door red pickup truck driving away from the area.

On Sunday, Boulder County Sheriff's Office officials were still looking to speak with the driver of the red truck or anyone with information about the dog's injuries.

Despite his serious injuries, Beefcakes offered what was described as an extremely friendly greeting to the deputy who responded to the call.

The deputy took the injured dog for treatment, where it was discovered that the dog had been shot at close range. The bullet, lodged in his jaw, fractured the jaw bone.

Deputies dubbed the stocky dog Beefcakes. Beefcakes, who's estimated to be 3 years old, will require surgery to remove the bullet and reconstruct his jaw.

Longmont's Aspen Meadow Veterinary Specialists has offered to perform the specialized surgery at a discount. To cover the rest of the costs, officials at the Longmont Humane Society are seeking donations.

"Every little bit helps," the Humane Society's Henderson said.

She said Beefcakes is in foster care with a staff member and will go in for pre-surgery tests Monday.

"He's doing fantastic for a dog with a bullet in his jaw," she said.

Though he was bleeding and in pain when he was brought in to the shelter, she said, "his tail did not stop wagging."

"He was just happy to see everybody who came in," she said. "He shows the resilience and true nature of dogs, which is unconditional love."

She said he will likely need a couple of months of recovery after the surgery before he's available for adoption.

For more information on how to help Beefcakes, go to the Longmont Humane Society's Facebook page.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa