Samuel Ramey, left, will reprise his role as Bluebeard in the Colorado Music Festival's performances of Bartók's "Bluebeard's Castle" on Thursday and Friday. ( Wichita State University / Courtesy photo )

If you go What: Colorado Music Festival: Week 4 • Tuesday, July 21: Music Mash-Up Concert No. 2, Copland + Bon Iver featuring SHEL, 7:30 p.m. • Thursday, July 23-Friday, July 24: Krisztina Szabó and Samuel Ramey perform Bartók's "Bluebeard's Castle" with the CMF Festival Orchestra, also featuring Stravinsky's "Firebird" Suite, 7:30 p.m. • Sunday, July 26: "Sounds of the Mediterranean" with guitarist Ana Vidovic and the CMF Chamber Orchestra, 7:30 p.m. Where: Chautauqua Auditorium, 900 Baseline Road, Boulder Tickets: $25-$45 for Tuesday, $12-$54 for Thursday-Friday and Sunday Info: 303-440-7666 or comusic.org

Jean-Marie Zeitouni planned a semi-staged production of Bartók's 1911 one-act opera "Bluebeard's Castle" as the centerpiece and anchor of his debut season with the Colorado Music Festival.

And he wanted to present it in the original Hungarian, not in the first or even the second tier of operatic languages. But even though the piece contains only two sung roles and its limited action is ideal for a concert performance, the idea still was fraught with hazards.

"When we did the season planning, we looked everywhere, and there were only a handful of qualified singers," Zeitouni said. "We decided to go with native speakers to give it some authenticity."

So Hungarian bass-baritone Gábor Bretz was engaged to play the title role and Hungarian-Canadian mezzo-soprano Krisztina Szabó to play Bluebeard's bride Judith.

But when Bretz's visa application was delayed, Zeitouni's centerpiece nearly faltered. Enter world-famous bass-baritone Samuel Ramey. The Kansas native recently moved back to his home state to teach at Wichita State University. And "Bluebeard" is one of his most famous roles: He sung it at the Metropolitan Opera — in English — with Jessye Norman in 1989.

"We never would have dreamed of having him," Zeitouni said of Ramey, "but sometimes in our field, when a last-minute disaster strikes, it's natural for someone to come to the rescue. We reached out to Sam's management, and he was sensitive to that.

"It's a tremendous honor for me, to perform with somebody I never would have dreamed of, and it really was a dramatic turn to get help from a legend."

Ramey, now in his 70s, performed "Bluebeard" in Wichita last spring. Despite the last-minute engagement, Ramey found time to speak with the Camera about the role and the prospect of coming to the festival.

His slow-burn introduction to the art that would make him famous is the stuff of legend, and Ramey confirmed he got to know "Bluebeard" through a record.

"I knew nothing of the piece, listened to it and immediately thought it was fantastic," he said. "But I didn't have the opportunity to sing it for quite some years."

That opportunity came at the Met, five years after his debut there in 1984, but the offer to record the piece in Budapest — now in Hungarian — left a more lasting impact.

"The recording was my first experience with the language," Ramey said, "and it was terrifying because everybody else involved was a native speaker."

The recording became a legend, and his history with the short opera continued.

Regarding the CMF performance, Ramey said, "I'm not a young singer any more, my career is winding down, I'm not busy, and I can still do 'Bluebeard' pretty well."

Although this will be his first visit to Boulder, his first operatic experience in 1963 came in Colorado, at the Central City Opera.

"I had just started college and went to Central City as part of their workshop for young singers," he said. "I found myself onstage in an opera before ever seeing one. That's when I decided I wanted to make it my career."

And what a career it has been. Ramey has performed at all the world's major opera houses and is associated with the repertoire's greatest bass roles.

Mezzo-soprano Szabó spoke with the Camera before Bretz had to cancel, but she has performed the work with Ramey in Chicago. A Canadian native, her parents are Hungarian immigrants, and she speaks the language fluently. She spoke in glowing terms about Bartók's music for the short opera, whose plot is derived from a well-known fairy tale.

Mezzo-soprano Krisztina Szabó will play Bluebeard's bride, Judith, in Bluebeard's Castle." (Bo Huang / Courtesy photo)

"The music is quite thrilling and amazing," Szabó said. "It's loud, and the brass section is huge."

She said that each of the story's seven doors has its own music attached. Regarding the plot, she said "it's kind of like a B-movie thriller, with a young girl falling for a dark, rich, mysterious man."

The opera treats the disastrous opening of doors like psychological drama.

Szabó also spoke of the Hungarian language's difficulties.

"It has 46 letters, each with a specific sound," she said. "Some of the sounds are unusually dark, with no English equivalent."

Zeitouni said the ambience will largely be created through lighting. Each of the doors is represented by a color. The singers will perform without stands but will stand in front of the orchestra, as in a concert setting. The opera is only an hour long and will be preceded by Stravinsky's familiar 1919 suite from the groundbreaking 1910 ballet "The Firebird."

"It's also based on a fairy tale and opposes light and darkness in a characteristic way. And it also has a huge, lush orchestration," Zeitouni said. "Both Stravinsky and Bartók were great orchestral innovators early in the century."

After the large concert Thursday, July 23, and Friday, July 24, Zeitouni completely changes course with the chamber orchestra concert July 26. Titled "Sounds of the Mediterranean," it couples Mendelssohn's "Italian Symphony" with two guitar concertos.

"It's light and easy music after the darkness of 'Bluebeard,' " he said.

The concertos are played by Croatian guitarist Ana Vidovic. She pairs Joaquin Rodrigo's ubiquitous 1939 "Concierto de Aranjuez" with the D-major concerto, originally for baroque lute, by Vivaldi.

Vidovic told the Camera that she gained a special affinity for the guitar while growing up in Croatia because all her family played the instrument. She is now a rising star in the classical guitar world.

Regarding the Vivaldi, Vidovic said it "works wonderfully on the guitar." It was the first concerto she played. The Rodrigo, easily the most popular guitar concerto, is "the best-written concerto for guitar," she said. "Everybody loves to play it because we just don't have that many concertos. Each movement is very different, and the quiet ending is really interesting."

Zeitouni will open with the North American premiere of "Festive Overture" by Spanish composer Benet Casablancas, written in 2013.