Employees at the University of Missouri will have a new medical plan option in 2015, and a new cap on the amount of their benefits.

A Total Rewards task force charged with reviewing the UM System medical plan options, retirement plans and other benefits announced changes to employee benefits at the Board of Curators meeting this week. Total Rewards is a name for the university system's comprehensive benefits package for employees and retirees.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Betsy Rodriguez, UM System vice president for human resources, spoke on behalf of the task force Thursday. Rodriguez outlined the progress the group has made on several issues, including medical plans.

Starting in 2015, the UM System is piloting a new medical program at all Columbia operations to provide a third plan option for employees. The new plan will fall somewhere between the existing two options in premium cost, Rodriguez said.

Employees have two options now: The preferred provider organization traditional option lets employees go to any provider and has about a $400-per-month premium for a family. The high-deductible plan offers similar freedom with providers with a higher deductible. For a family, the premium is about $250 per month.

The new plan would limit employees to MU Health Care offices and will have lower co-pays and no deductible.

Rodriguez also announced a new 28 percent cap on the benefits rate — the percentage of an employee's salary the department they work for pays back to the UM System so the system can then pay for medical benefits.

Department chairs have been budgeting for a 1 to 2 percent increase in benefits each year. The rates have increased from 20 percent to 28 percent during the last 10 years.

Rodriguez said the change allows department chairs or managers to give raises while the UM System receives more money to put toward medical benefits each year. Because of that, the cost doesn't shift to the employees.

The cap will be in place three years, Rodriguez said, but it likely won't extend beyond that. Afterward, the system could put a limit on benefits at the same level or at a different percentage, or not have a cap at all depending on such factors as performance of university investments and employee participation in wellness programs.

Rodriguez said she anticipates announcing progress from the task force on time-off plans by next spring. More information on changes in retirement and retiree medical benefits is expected in about a year.

Becky Stafford, Staff Advisory Council chair at MU, said she is pleased with the way Rodriguez's task force and the UM System's human resources office has asked for input as they've worked through changes, and they've promptly addressed concerns or questions from employees along the way already.