Published Aug. 9, 2015 at 9:08 a.m. Tweet

The OnMilwaukee.com Summer Festivals Guide is presented by Pick 'n Save, Where Wisconsin Saves on Groceries. Pick 'n Save is Wisconsin proud, and excited to help promote and feed the great Milwaukee summer that includes festivals and fun nearly every day. Click to save here!

Every year, the Wisconsin State Fair has numerous adventurous new foods, from chocolate-smothered bacon to deep-fried butter.

This year, Big Sky Country Bar & Grill, located at Third and Central Streets on the north end of the fair grounds, gets the blue ribbon for the fair's boldest grub. The item is listed on the menu as "Rocky Mountain oysters," however, if one thinks about it, the chance of finding oysters in the Rocky Mountains – or any mountains – is slim to none.

So what the hay is this new fair fare?

"Bulls' testicles," says Big Sky co-owner Eric Wrigley Schroeder.

Big Sky Country offers a variety of daring food items for breakfast, lunch and dinner, including maple-glazed black pepper bacon and a pork belly burger buster that comes with a side of "boom boom" sauce, but the "oysters" – which are available breaded or buffalo style – are undoubtedly the most daring.

We sampled the breaded version ($9) and found them less round than we expected. They taste, no joke, a lot like chicken – or chicken fried steak. A little chewier, but certainly a familiar meat taste. The breading was flavorful with a spicy kick.

Schroeder says he and co-owner Kevin Riley were trepidatious about ordering 200 pounds of bovine testes, but they sold all of them within two days and ordered more.

"It started out as a joke, but people really like them. A couple from the Southwest, where they are more common, said they were the best they've ever had," says Schroeder.

Schroeder opened Big Sky Country last year with Riley. Both men are longtime employees of Kelly's Bleachers and would eventually like to expand Big Sky to a year-round concept somewhere in the city.

"The name has nothing to do with Montana. It's about driving from Milwaukee to Madison and seeing only fields, the horizon and sky," says Schroeder. "Or when you're driving across Illinois or Indiana and it's all big sky."

This is Big Sky Country's second year at the Fair – it replaced the Starlight, which was on the fairgrounds for 40 years. This season, Schroeder and Riley added a new speaker system, live bands twice daily and big yellow flags with words "music," "food" and "beer" on them to alert people they were a bar and restaurant.

"Because we're on the north end – the agricultural area – and we're in a barn-like building, people didn't always realize we had music, beer and food," says Schroeder.

Schroeder says some fairgoers have bought the deep-fried bull testicles for friends without telling them what they were eating until after they swallowed a few bites.

"I thought about even printing at the bottom of the container 'you just ate bulls' testicles.' We're having fun with this," he says.

And no, the bulls' balls are not served on a stick.