Jackson Graf, 9, hands out Family First Boxes to his fellow fourth grade students at Silver Creek Elementary School. (By Jenna Esarey, special to The Courier-Journal) November 25, 2014.

For too many families, mealtime is Internet time — or texting time — rather than a time for catching up and sharing news. A fourth grade student at Silver Creek Elementary School in Sellersburg wants to change that.

Jackson Graf, 9, along with his sister, Mikayla, 11, created the Family Fun Box, a cardboard box designed to be placed on the dinner table. Cellphones go in the box and cards with family-friendly jokes and conversation starters come out.

"It keeps you from having to be on your phone during dinner, so you can talk to your family more," Jackson said.

The Family Fun Boxes came about following a family outing to a local restaurant about a year ago. "I looked around the whole restaurant and everyone was on their phone," Jackson said. "I just saw all the grown ups and some kids on their phones."

Jackson and Mikayla talked about what they had seen and came up with the idea to place a shoebox on the table to hold cell phones and other devices, removing the temptation to use them at the table.

Jackson took the idea to his friend, Austin Jewell, also 9 years old. Austin and his sister, Kiersten, 12, eagerly offered to help and the idea evolved into the Family First Box. "They really liked the idea," Jackson said. "They helped me get a bunch of shoe boxes."

The boxes evolved from shoeboxes, to pencil boxes, to the final white cardboard box. "It's blank so the family can decorate it," said Mikayla.

A $1,000 grant from the ABC Summer of Service Award and the donation of graphic design work by L & D Mail Masters allowed the kids to create 1,000 Family Fun Boxes.

The kids distributed the first 200 to Jackson and Austin's fellow fourth grade students at Silver Creek on November 25 after a brief presentation.

A sea of hands shot into the air as Jackson asked how many of them had ever been ignored by their parents during dinner because they were on their cellphones. The hands shot up again when they were asked if they'd ever ignored their parents for the same reason.

FAMILY FUN: Top events for parents and kids in Louisville this week

"I think it's great," said Jackson's teacher, Kim Etheridge. "I just hope it works. I hope it makes people realize what they're doing."

Mikayla and Kiersten said they hope to be able to distribute boxes at their school, Silver Creek Middle, but no plans have been made yet. "Big kids, like teenagers, are some of the ones that use their phones most at the table," Mikayla said.

The boxes have a Facebook page and the kids encouraged their fellow students to post pictures of their families using the boxes over Thanksgiving.

For more information, or to request a box of your own, visit the Facebook page at Facebook.com/Familyfirstboxonedinneratatime.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1rtDikR