Patients seeking birth control pills today typically have to get a prescription from a doctor, but reproductive health advocates have long argued that this process is unnecessary since the pills are safe for a vast majority of women. Now two states are about to allow patients to get them from a pharmacist without seeing a doctor first. Other states should consider similar moves.

Laws in California and Oregon will soon allow pharmacists to prescribe pills, patches and rings after screening patients for possible risk factors like smoking or a history of blood clots. The measures will allow patients to get birth control quickly, without the need to schedule an appointment with a doctor. Pharmacies are more plentiful in many areas than doctors’ offices and clinics, and they often have longer hours, making them a more convenient option. The change could help reduce unintended pregnancies, especially for low-income women who might have trouble traveling to see a doctor or getting time off for an appointment.

Oregon’s law takes effect in January, and California’s is likely to start in April. A pharmacy chain is pushing for a similar bill in Nevada, and efforts to introduce one are underway in New Mexico as well.

Photo

Some supporters of the current system have argued that the need for birth control acts as an incentive for women to visit doctors for regular Pap smears and other screenings. But one form of health care should not be used as coercion for another, and it is insulting to assume that women will not seek necessary preventive care unless their contraceptives are held hostage.

The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists is concerned that the California and Oregon laws will hamper efforts to make birth control pills fully available over the counter, and that the laws merely substitute one intermediary for another, when patients are fully capable of making informed decisions about birth control themselves.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Birth control pills meet the Food and Drug Administration’s criteria for over-the-counter safety, and they are just as safe as many medications that are already sold that way. Only a small minority of women have medical conditions that increase the risks of using birth control pills, and, as studies have shown, women can accurately assess whether the pills would be too risky for them.

No drug manufacturer, however, has yet applied to the Food and Drug Administration to sell a birth control pill over the counter, and such an application, once submitted, would take years to be approved. Over-the-counter status might also jeopardize insurance coverage, since the Affordable Care Act mandates coverage only if a patient has a prescription. Republican senators have introduced a bill that could speed up the process of applying for over-the-counter status, but it does not require insurers to cover the purchases. Democrats have introduced a bill that would require such coverage.

In the meantime, laws like those in California and Oregon could help many women get the contraceptives they need.