Bishop Joseph Walker III is presiding bishop of Full Gospel Baptist Fellowship International and senior pastor of Mt. Zion Baptist Church in Nashville. (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights There are many people who live in fear, suspicion and even hatred of people who they have never met.

These phobias hinder our ability to benefit from experiencing amazing cultures, people and resources.

I would assume that all of us carry around a little implied bias when it comes to our views of others.

Whether it’s race, class or religion, our perspective of people is often the result of the previous experiences we have had. If we were honest, we would probably agree that we tend to project generalizations upon people because of a few negative isolated experiences. It is this process of generalization that accounts for, in part, the influence of past relationships on future relationships.

Generalizations are the enemy of collaboration and community. Whenever we label others unfairly based on experiences that had nothing to do with them personally, we limit the potential that exists in those relationships from coming to fruition. There are many people who live in fear, suspicion and even hatred of people who they have never met.

When we look at the political landscape today and other social issues in our country, it is important to look critically at how we perceive others. There has never been a time in my life where I have seen people so marginalized and distrustful of others.

Though I am saddened by what I see, I do understand that there are some people who have given us all good reason to have the proverbial “raised eyebrow.” However, I am an optimist and believe that most people are decent, honest and loving.

Just because you have encountered or seen the worst among a certain group does not make it right to judge the whole for their actions.

Many of the phobias we carry around are unnecessary and hinder our ability to benefit from experiencing amazing cultures, people and resources.

Therefore, in new relationships or experiences, when previous biases are not necessarily appropriate, they may nonetheless persist in guiding our behavior, even if it is in a pathological manner.

Author Malcolm Gladwell says, “Another word for generalization is stereotype. Stereotypes are usually considered negative dimensions of our decision-making lives. A doctor could, with some statistical support, generalize about men of a certain age and weight. But what if generalizing from other traits — such as high blood pressure, family history and smoking — saved more lives? Behind each generalization is a choice of what factors to leave in and what factors to leave out, and those choices can prove surprisingly complicated.”

Our perceptions and generalizations of others cause us to yell rather than have substantive discourse about our differences.

There is so much we can learn from each other. We must be willing to engage what we do not understand so that the myths and assumptions we harbor can dissipate as a result of our intentional efforts at building community.

It is not realistic to believe that we will all agree or completely understand each other’s culture, religion or political perspective. However, our willingness to be in conversation with each other is far greater than the lines we draw to separate ourselves.

Amid the sweltering violence, bigotry and disrespect we are seeing today, we have an amazing opportunity to learn from each other with civility and find common ground to make our community a better place.

Bishop Joseph Walker is presiding bishop of Full Gospel Baptist Fellowship International and senior pastor of Mt. Zion Baptist Church in Nashville.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Rqx3p7