Volunteers will pack meals for starving children worldwide Feb. 27-28 during inaugural NoCo effort

If you go What: NoCo is Slammin' Famine! the first MealPack event for Feed My Starving Children. When: Shifts are two hours, 12:30-9 p.m., Friday, Feb. 27, and 9 a.m.-8 p.m. Saturday, Feb. 28; Sunday shift added, noon-2 p.m. Where: Thomas M. McKee Building, The Ranch, 5280 Arena Circle, Loveland. More info: Visit www.SlamminFamine.com. To donate: Visit the website or mail a check to FMSC, Attn: MobilePack #1502-228, 401 93rd Ave. NW, Coon Rapids, MN 55433.

When Eric Dowdy saw volunteers energized after spending two hours packing meals for starving children, he knew he had to get a program started in Loveland.

Dowdy and co-founder Brian Zonnefeld will hold the inaugural NoCo is Slammin' Famine! event Feb. 27-28 at The Ranch to hand-pack meals to ship to children in nearly 70 developing countries. They need another 200 volunteers to sign up for the inaugural MealPack event for Feed My Starving Children, a Christian nonprofit hunger relief organization based in Coon Rapids, Minn., that helps communities in developing countries become self-sustaining.

"You spend a little time, and you make a huge impact," said Dowdy, team lead and co-founder of the event.

Dowdy and Zonnefeld co-founded Northern Colorado Outreach in Fort Collins last year to connect volunteers with nonprofits and to promote the Meal Pack event. For the event, Northern Colorado Outreach partnered with Northern Colorado Shares, a Fort Collins nonprofit that works on a new project or with an organization every 90 days.

Advertisement

So far, more than 2,500 volunteers signed up to work in two-hour shifts in teams of eight to assemble meals specifically formulated for malnourished children. The meals will be sent to areas that cannot grow sustainable food and face high starvation levels.

To assemble the meals, the volunteers will measure and scoop the ingredients into bags, which they will seal and put in shipping boxes, with each volunteer packing an average of 216 meals per session. The bags include four meals with dehydrated rice, soy, protein and vegetables as part of the manna rice packs.

"We have been absolutely blown away by the response, the interest level and willingness for people to come up here in the northern Colorado region and participate in this event," Dowdy said.

There will be 18 packing stations, and 360 volunteers working on any given shift.

"It's a fun, high energy event," Dowdy said.

Northern Colorado Outreach and NOCOShares aim to pack 500,000 meals over the two days and a third shift added March 1, and they need to raise $60,000 to help pay for the ingredients. Each meal costs 22 cents.

So far, the two organizations raised $45,000 and have eight corporate donors for the event.

The billionth meal was sent out last year.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm