Write a quick online greeting card for your chance to win prizes worth $5,000.

There are only three days left in our contest with partners Vancity and LOCO BC to celebrate the locally-owned businesses in our communities, and reader submissions are flowing in!

At the tail end of Buy Local Week (Dec. 2 to 8), we're seeing reader submissions flooding in. At the time of this update, we're at over 800 fan greetings for locally-owned businesses across B.C. (and beyond). If you want to read them all, proceed to the results page, where you can also find your way back to enter the contest.

If you haven't entered yet, all you have to do to is head to this page and write a few kind words to a business that makes your holiday season -- or your whole year -- bright.

Below, we've pulled out great examples of our readers' greetings to their favourite businesses. It was hard to choose, so we went with businesses that got two or more mentions, and we've listed them alphabetically. But there are hundreds of great businesses mentioned, so check them all out here.

But before we get into the posts, you'd probably like to know about the $5,000 worth of prizes, wouldn't you?

This $500 Vancity Visa gift card can be used anywhere that accepts Visa electronically. But of course, being the enlightened person that you are, you'll surely use it at locally owned businesses, right?

Like the sound of that? Enter now.

Thanks to the Tofino Chamber of Commerce, Long Beach Lodge, and Modo the car co-op, one lucky winner from the Greater Vancouver area will enjoy two nights accommodation, surf rentals and lessons for two, a complimentary Modo membership and $200 in car credits to get there.

Excited? Enter now.

Thanks to the Whistler Chamber of Commerce, Riverside Resort, Canadian Wilderness Adventures, and Creekbread Restaurant, one lucky winner from anywhere in Canada will enjoy two nights accommodation in a cozy log cabin, a guided snowmobile tour for two, and a $100 gift certificate for a delicious, locally sourced meal out. Travel not included.

Putting your snow boots on already? Better enter now.

Thanks to the Burnaby Heights BIA's efforts in rallying its members, one lucky Greater Vancouver reader will get to live large this season with a $2,000 shopping spree in this colourful 100-year old neighbourhood. Thirty-four different businesses have contributed gift certificates and prizes: restaurants, specialty foods, florists, yoga, kids art classes and much more await.

Sound like a great day out? Enter now.

Lunch and a wine tour for two at Clos Du Soleil Winery in Keremeos, B.C.

A local gourmand gift basket from Vancouver-based Saul Good Gift Co., filled with locally sourced gourmet foods and artisan chocolates. Yum.

A $100 gift certificate to Dayton Boots for a pair of your choice. Handcrafted, comfortable, durable and classic, Dayton Boots are made in East Vancouver with the same attention to detail and standards that have gone into every pair since 1946.

Delight the special kids in your life with a $200 prize package from locally-owned Toy Jungle, with locations in Vancouver's Kitsilano neighbourhood, South Surrey and West Vancouver.

For the tidy and environmentally conscious folks that read us, a five-month supply of 'Dish the Dirt' products -- environmentally friendly, non-toxic and biodegradable. (By triple-bottom-line Vancouver-based Live For Tomorrow.)

A $100 gift certificate for Hazel & Jools, a long-time fixture on Main St. With their own locally made stylish collection and a curated selection of other brands, you'll find lots to choose from.

Vancouver's Bird on a Wire Creations -- an eclectic boutique full of handmade and independent design from around B.C. -- is offering one lucky reader their choice of a $75 gift certificate or a $150 abstract painting by local artist Catherine Fields.

Here's a sampling of posts from our local-business-adoring readers:

Big Dog Little Dog Bakery, Burnaby Heights (10 letters)

Our yorkie (Romo) LOVES Big Dog Little Dog! When we drive down Hastings he starts to run around the car. By the time we park he's crying to get out so he can run into the store. Thank you for treating him with so much love and care.

Bird on a Wire Creations, Vancouver (3 letters)

Bird on a Wire is more than a store -- it's an inspiration filled with the creativity of local artists. I love that all the artists live and work within a 100 mile radius and that the store is locally owned. The owner and her staff are all creative, positive and knowledgeable. My favourite place to buy gifts for myself and others!

Bone Rattle Music, Vancouver (2 letters)

I love Bone Rattle Music on Commercial Drive in East Vancouver. Owner Phil Addington is super supportive of local musicians because he is one himself. I teach adult beginners and send all my students there. They rave about how friendly and helpful Phil and his staff are. Despite being small, they have a great selection and manage to keep prices competitive with the big chain stores. By offering music lessons, Phil provides local musicians with a source of income. It's good for everyone!

Brassneck Brewery, Vancouver (2 letters)

The Brassneck Brewery is one of the latest places to cater to Vancouver's obsession with local, craft beer. Although its automatic stardom was secured by the hipster community on Main St., the quality beer it serves up can sell itself better than any tight jean wearing youngin'. I love the friendly and knowledgeable staff and that I get to keep bringing my reusable growler back again and again to try out all their different brews. The space is friendly and the beer is truly delicious. I applaud this business for being dedicated to good drink and for making the act of drinking beer even more enjoyable.

Buddha-full Juice & Smoothies, North Vancouver (2 letters)

Buddha-full is a fun, funky, and relaxed vegetarian smoothie bar in North Van, by the sea bus. The staff are super friendly, and have given me several free beverages through their stamp card system! Their notice board by the washroom has introduced me to some cool yoga and eco-events. But, the best part, remains the smoothies. Super fresh, and lovely flavours. My favourite part of the walk to the sea-bus- all year-round!

Burdock & Co, Vancouver (2 letters)

Burdock & Co. is located at Main and 11th and is fast becoming a Vancouver original, everything about it is original, a new and creative menu, an unusual wine list, and a small vibrant space with wonderful service and a real commitment to natural foods and wines. It's a great place to share food and a beverage in a cozy small room with style.

Caffe Divano, Port Moody and other locations (4 letters)

Caffe Divano is a locally owned and operated caffe. They really care about their local clientele with taking our suggestions to heart. They do everything they can to be an environmentally responsible business not to mention they best brunch in Port Moody. It is a place you can go to in your sweats and runners and feel right at home. Thank you, Divano's!! I'm proud to live down the street and call you my regular caffe.

Cartems Donuterie, Vancouver (2 letters)

Cartems makes the best donuts ever. The people are refreshingly nice and love being social. I never go home to Saskatchewan without a box, or quite frankly I wouldn't be let in the door. Thanks Cartems, love everyone you do!

Chad Thai, Burnaby Heights (3 letters)

Thank you for serving lovely authentic Thai cuisine that we enjoy throughout the year in your restaurant. Happy Holidays and all the best for 2014 :)

Chez Christophe, Burnaby Heights (3 letters)

Chez Christophe is new to our neighbourhood, and has already contributed to Westridge school for our staff appreciation lunch, and offers the best chocolate croissants that I have tasted in my whole life. I am almost thankful that I don't live very close to them, as I would be about twelve pounds heavier already. They're helping to make Hastings classy!

Chez Mimi Baguette Bistro, Burnaby Heights (4 letters)

My husband, mother and I visit Chez Meme every chance we get. The food and service that Isabelle, Ross and co. provide is always impeccable. Each experience brightens our day, hearts and tummies. We are very lucky to have such a wonderful restaurant in our fantastic neighbourhood. Smiling faces and quality food is the perfect foundation for one happy community.

Choices Markets, Crest location, Vancouver (3 letters, multiple locations)

I don't know what I would do without Choices at the Crest. Thanks to them, I can shop healthy without having to go far. I feel like I'm home when I go there because I go so often and the staff know me. Really grateful. Thank you. Also love the great specials you have.

Cioffi's Meat Market & Deli, Burnaby Heights (11 letters)

Cioffi's is a fabulous part of this neighborhood. They offer a wide variety of deli meats and cheeses, lovely Italian groceries and their meat market is awesome. They are a great place for me to get gluten free foods imported from Italy (I have celiac) along with free range meats and organic dairy products! They are a culinary Disneyland and a truly enjoyable place to shop!

Cocoa Nymph, Vancouver (2 letters)

Cocoa Nymph is a really awesome local chocolaterie. Beyond the chocolate being amazing, particularly the Sea Nymph chocolate bar and superlative drinking chocolate, the owner, Rachel, supports local initiatives and culture.

Earnest Ice Cream, Vancouver (4 letters)

Happy Holidays Ben and Erica, makers of the best ice cream around! I've been a fan of yours since you guys first rolled up in your trike at the Main St Farmer's Market! So glad to see that you use locally sourced, seasonal ingredients -- it really shows in the quality of your product!

Eastside Fitness, Vancouver (5 letters)

Darnelle, Wendy and Eastside Fitness team: Thank you for all your energy and for dedicating so much of your heart and time into the community of Eastside Fitness. From run club, to the many weekly yoga/pilates/bootcamp classes, to our summer 'Commit to Fit' program, to the current 40 days of Sun Salutations, to your generous support of the women of the downtown eastside, to your entrepreneurial and go-local efforts with the South Hill BIA on Fraser, you "walk the talk" of being local, affordable and effective. I look forward to our Xmas Eve yoga, and to staying fit and happy through the holiday season and beyond. Though it's nearly impossible for you to take time off, I wish you very special moments of rest and family, and want you to know how very much I believe in your vision!

Edible Island, Courtenay (2 letters)

Funny someone else already sent them a merry christmas card -- i've been shopping there since they opened in a little shop out in Merville way back in the early 80's - best of the season to Edible Island and here's hoping for another quarter century.

Eternal Abundance, Vancouver (2 letters)

Eternal Abundance is a simple organic raw and vegan cafe/grocer on Commercial Drive. Their foods are completely organic and local where possible. They believe and practice sustainability and source extremely high quality ingredients like nuts, seeds, cacao locally as much as possible. They do not use any artificial ingredients in their foods and take time to prepare foods like soaking nuts and legumes before using. I absolutely love them and their dedication to providing high quality foods. They are one of the few restaurants in town that I absolutely trust.

Famous Foods, Vancouver (2 letters)

Famous Foods is a grocery store with a "natural" label that you can actually trust. The store has a wide variety of organic, gluten-free, organic food along with non-medicated meats, bulk foods, and an in-store deli. We feel very lucky to have such a store in our neighbourhood.

Finch's Tea & Coffee House, Vancouver (2 letters)

I often host meetings at Finch's as they have a great vibe and great music that isn't too loud. Oh right, and they give away cookies and treats if you're there at closing! Yum.

Fluevog Shoes, Vancouver (2 letters)

Happy holidays! I love coming into your store. It's full of creativity and colours. It always brings a smile to my face. People are all so friendly. A big thanks for brightening up Gastown!

Fujiya, Vancouver & Victoria locations (2 letters)

I miss the overabundant Japanese foods from home in Vancouver. Thanks to Fujiya for offering sushi and Japanese groceries here in Victoria -- it's a little reminder of home and lunch break sushi runs in East Van.

Glenburn Soda Fountain & Confectionary, Burnaby Heights (10 letters)

This little shop in North Burnaby is a delight. They sell home-made ice cream treats, sodas, and desserts. They are child friendly and they give families a chance to step back in time when the world was simpler and when people had time to sit back and sip the soda. A nice place to go for a treat.

The Good Planet Company, Victoria (3 letters)

This is one of our favourite stores. We're not a big consuming family, we buy only what we can't buy second hand or make ourselves but our first stop when we need something is always The Good Planet Company. Their friendly, helpful and most of all knowledgeable staff have helped us get our family sleeping in non-toxic beds, using non-toxic personal and household cleaning products and even facilitated a great date night, a class on soap making. It's our go to store not just for products but for information. We're always impressed with their ethical business philosophy, ensuring they bring in the most ethical and healthy products available for their customers.

Granville Island Toy Company, Vancouver (3 letters)

Thank you for stocking unique, quality children's toys. It is a pleasure shopping in your store with the great staff you have. By comparison going into a Toys R Us, there is never anyone to help. Line ups are long and the toys are nothing special.

Homesteaders' Emporium, Vancouver (4 letters)

Amazing resource for mindful, sustainable, down-to-goodness living. They have an amazing, inspiring mix if products -- from jam-making to chicken-raising and everything in between -- and they are toughing it out in a not-so-lovely part of E. Hastings! Friendly, knowledgeable, fantastic resource for Vancouver. Love it! Will get lots of my Xmas gifts from there this year.

Hopcott Meats, Pitt Meadows (3 letters)

My weekly trip out to Hopcott ensures that I feed my family healthy, clean, locally sourced meats. From delicious hot roasted chickens, our Thanksgiving turkeys, bacon, lunch meats, soup stocks, chicken wings ... it's all so good and I leave knowing there is no chance of getting 'off' meat. They have a wonderful selection of seasonal produce as well as a great selection of frozen items. We love that they sell pies from Krause Berry Farms, and always enjoy the samples of pepperoni, jerky, sausage, etc. The butchers come out from back and help out where needed, and the girls that work up front are awesome. We continuously feel that we're valued as customers, and I really trust everything they sell as top-quality. I could not sing higher praises for this business.

JJ Bean, Vancouver (6 letters, various locations)

Thank you, JJ Bean for your most delicious coffee, your charmingly plaid-garbed hipster baristas who don't bat an eye at filling my canning jar with coffee, and the steamy windows that entice chilled passerbys to enter the happy camaraderie inside. I walk extra blocks to go to your stores.

Karmavore, New Westminster (2 letters)

This great business recently suffering the devastating effects of the big fire in New West and now is on the verge of losing it all. So not fair! Any help they can get would be so worth it. In New West there is not a lot of vegan community access and they really need this shop to re-open!

Making Memories with Scrapbooking, North Burnaby (18 letters!)

During the past 11 years, I have been truly inspired and motivated by Making Memoires with Scrapbooking. This unique store is definitely a draw for me to cross 2nd narrows bridge and venture off the north shore! The owners Debbie and Diane are generous and supportive to their customers. I hope they continue to thrive and enjoy this business.

Marche St. George, Vancouver (2 letters)

Dear Marche St. George, You have captured the essence of being a local-minded business with your delicious coffee, freshly baked goods, quaint market offerings, and kind baristas. Popping in is always a treat -- any time, all year round. It's a genuine Vancouver experience that is really quite magical. Stay cozy this season and keep warming our hearts (and tummies). Happy holidays!

Mighty Oak Neighbourhood Grocery Store, Vancouver (2 letters)

I am so thankful to have delicious lattes right outside my door. You accept me, pajamas and all. Thank you also for: looking so beautiful, selling Earnest ice cream, and being so friendly every time.

Milano Coffee Roasters, Vancouver (3 letters)

Their location at 36 Powell Street has a wonderful minimalist decor and the coffee aroma draws you in! There is a reverence to the preparation of your coffee -- it is a great morning ritual for me. Nothing says good morning like a Turk's Island Pour Over

Modo the Car Co-Op, Vancouver (2 letters)

I'm really thankful for the Modo car coop. Because of them we don't have to own a car or truck. Or if you do own one, you have the option to drive a truck or van whenever you need one! There are Modo vehicles in your neighbourhood, reserve one and drive away! So easy. Modo takes care of the maintenance and fuel costs! It's a fantastic community concept that benefits everyone, even non-members.

Moksha Yoga Burnaby, North Burnaby (4 letters)

I have been enjoying "hot yoga" classes at Moksha Yoga Burnaby for over a year now, and have become a huge fan! Not only do I feel fantastic, but I love the fact that Moksha is solidly committed to supporting social & environmental justice and human rights. They donate 100% of their "Karma Yoga funds" to a different cause each month, such as Amnesty International, or BROKE-Burnaby Residents Opposing Kinder Morgan Expansion. They're awesome!

Mommy's Milk, Vancouver (2 letters)

Thank you so much for being there in our time of need. You are truly an angel. Our baby is breastfeeding now and is gaining weight. Your support in helping my wife breastfeed has been invaluable. Have a great holiday season.

Nice Shoes, Vancouver (2 letters)

Local vegan-friendly shoeshop!! Have been many times and will continue to do so. Cruelty-free footware!! Yay!! :)

Pages on Kensington, Calgary (2 letters)

This bookstore has long been a comfortable place to find a good book and something to intrigue or interest the people in the neighborhood. It continues to support authors and reminds us of the joy that is found in reading a good book.

Pasture to Plate, Vancouver (2 letters)

This year my family purchased our Thanksgiving turkey from Pasture to Plate, which was amazing! It was so great to share a meal of turkey that was raised so well. Jasmine and Felix are passionate about what they do and it shows in their work -- through the meat they raise, sell, and provide to folks in Vancouver. Try some of their juniper sausages or lunch specials… you won't be disappointed.

Posh Pantry, North Burnaby (5 letters)

Finally, a cookware place for foodies in North Burnaby. Opened a few months ago, it offers cooking classes and a wonderful selection of cooking wares and tools in a beautiful environment. I wish it a long life in our community.

Pulp Fiction Books, Vancouver (2 letters)

Pulp Fiction Books has a great collection of used books and also a well chosen collection of interesting new books. Best of all, they'll custom order new books for below the cover price!

Purebread, Whistler (2 letters)

PureBread creates the most mouthwatering, wholesome, baked goods! With their recent loss of their popular second location due to a fire, they need all the support and holiday cheer they can get. I wish them a wonderful Christmas spent with loved ones and I will be supporting their business by stocking up on holiday goodies!

Quality Foods, Qualicum Beach (3 letters)

Quality Foods Store in Qualicum Beach is an excellent venue for shopping, friendliness, customer service, great products and all around terrific atmosphere. The management are to be highly commended for their great support of all types of community events. Through their generous community spirit, many organizations are able to thrive and realize their goals. "Qualicum" Foods, as we know it, is the very BEST! Your community is very grateful and THANKS YOU! Merry Christmas & Happy New Year to ALL

Rainbow Food & Gas, Yarrow (2 letters)

I would like to send a huge thankyou to the owners and staff at Rainbow Food and Gas. They are family. Full service gas, free coffee on Wednesdays or will gas. Everyone is always happy and welcoming. I have been going to this store for 16+ years and every visit is the best. There is no other store around which has this kind of atmosphere, staff or owners. They treat everyone like family and have a huge following of customers for this reason. I wish them all a Merry Christmas and Happy New Year. They deserve all the best!!!!!

Red Cat Records, Vancouver (6 letters)

The guys at Red Cat are the nicest guys that I've ever dealt with at a record store, anywhere. They know their stuff, they aren't pushy, and they don't make you feel like an idiot if you're not listening to the "coolest" music. At the same time, they have a friendly bond with their customers and community. I've dealt with them as a customer and also for selling music and they've treated me fairly and with respect every time. That might not sound like a big deal, but after dealing for years with hipster jerks at record stores (they do have a reputation for staffing poseur pompous a**holes), I appreciate their whole method of running their business... Red Cat is a great place to feel welcomed and not pressured to buy anything at the same time. Even if you just want to talk music, they're always open to conversation and interested in discovering new music. The store is always stocked with interesting things, and they have the biggest section of local music that I've seen in any store. I had a choice of three other stores to sell my music at, and I deliberately only sold it there, because I like their attitude and how they do business. They are the first store I recommend to anyone coming into town and looking for a cool record store.

Regional Assembly of Text, Vancouver (2 letters)

Regional Assembly of Text (Brandy and Rebecca) create many, even most, of the items they sell, which include little books of drawings and text, cards, notebooks, pens, stamps, all kinds of odds and sods. They have a cozy reading room with a changing offering of local publications, host letter writing sessions on old typewriters, and are generally very peculiar and charming people. As are their goods.

Rocky Mountain Flatbread, Vancouver (2 letters)

Rocky Mountain Flatbread is a local Vancouver pizza company. Not only does it provide great play area for kids and serves award-winning pizzas, Rocky Mountain Flatbread also invests in its community. I love going there because the food is great, the kids have fun and I'm doing good for my community!

Salt Spring Coffee, Vancouver & Salt Spring Island (2 letters)

I'll never forget the campaign you guys ran where you surprised random Twitter followers with a Wake Up Gift, delivered to their door. It's refreshing to have such an incredibly unpretentious coffee company who wants to live and breathe the community mantra. Already looking forward to the next brew!

SMAK Healthy Fast Food, Vancouver (2 letters)

Smak sources local food and delivers quality gluten-free meals for take-out customers. It's a great service that combines tasty dishes with convenience. I like how they match local food with fast food customers: farm-to-takeout. Their willingness to incur extra costs to make sure everything is compostable is also impressive.

Smoking Lily, Vancouver & Victoria (4 letters)

I am always excited to walk into Smoking Lily on Main Street in Vancouver. The products are artful, practical and fun. Not to mention the clothing is incredibly comfortable to wear and unique. Every time I have visited their shop, even if just to marvel at fingerless gloves or find a card that gets it exactly right, I am met with friendliness by the staff that feels less like 'customer service' and more like genuine neighbourly warmth, which I appreciate wholeheartedly. I have also been to the start-up location in Victoria and spoken at length with the owner, who was delightful and offered me tips about what to check out in the area. As a student working through a masters degree, I don't have a lot to spend these days, but I am happy to support Smoking Lily in my small ways when I can.

Soap Dispensary, Vancouver (9 letters)

Dear Soap Dispensary: I was so happy to hear of your birth in our neighbourhood only 2 short years ago. Every time I visit, the good feelings last all day. I wish I could buy everything. This month I showed the store to my mom, who was visiting me from Calgary. She almost did buy everything! And I still smile thinking of her excitement in finding so many beautiful things. Thank you for coming, and for serving our community and our city. I hope you are here to stay. Happy holidays!

Spa Dog, Vancouver (2 letters)

I love this place because they use organic shampoo to groom dogs, not only that, this company is also in the bottle return and refill program!! My dog loved his grooming at spadog!!!

SPUD Grocery Delivery, Vancouver (3 letters)

I love SPUD. They help me keep my pantry well stocked so I can focus on being with friends & family. They also make being a "good citizen" easier. They offer to pick up my toy donation for the Christmas Bureau as well as make other charitable donations plus pick up select recyclables. Thank you SPUD!

Stong's Grocery, Vancouver (2 letters)

My favourite neighbourhood grocery store -- lots of organic and local options, friendly staff, a real part of the Dunbar community for many, many years.

Sweet Salt Bakery, Vancouver (2 letters)

Sweet Salt is a bakery and cafe, with a children's play-space, that has brightened up Fraser Street. My 2.5 year old little dude affectionately refers to it as "his coffee shop". A sunny and inviting space, with delicious sandwiches and yummy turnovers!

Sweet Tooth Caf&eacute, Vancouver (2 letters)

The Sweet Tooth Cafe is an unassuming place at the corner of Nanaimo & Hastings Streets. They make fresh baked goods every day, and offer day old discounts. They have the best cinnamon and pecan buns ever! They also have Thai food that is simple and delicious. The management supports local artists of all ages, and the service is excellent.

Take Sushi, North Burnaby (4 letters)

This sushi place has great food and very nice owner/chef who always greets us when we enter. I hope he has a wonderful holiday with his wife and baby.

Tao Organics, North Vancouver (2 letters)

I love Tao Organics for what they stand for: healthy, vegan and organic foods. Their foods and treats are superb and amazingly creative. I feel so grateful to access places like this.

Uprising Breads Bakery, Vancouver (2 letters)

Uprising Bakery is located in East Vancouver on Commercial Street. Uprising is located just doors away from the Kettle Society Mental Health Drop In Centre. Uprising owner Don and his staff have made a difference to many in so many ways including almost daily donations of baked goods, donating their tips, cash and goods donations. Most importantly they all treat our clients with the utmost respect!

Valley Bakery, North Burnaby (16 letters!)

Service at Valley Bakery is always exceptional! I placed a special order earlier this year and management and staff were happy to accommodate. I provided the recipe and they made great King Cakes for Mardi Gras. Thank you for helping to make my party such a success!

Vancity Credit Union, various Vancouver locations (5 letters)

Vancity should be the gold standard for every banking institution. Thank you for all you do in and for the community. The branch at Commercial Drive has been under renovation and the staff have continued to smile and provide excellent service through the saw dust and hanging wires.

Windsor Meats, Vancouver (2 letters)

It's always busy in Windsor Meats -- because the quality of their products is always fantastic. Love their steaks! I know that dinner will be great when I shop there. I appreciate their friendly service, too.

Woodfire Pizza, Gabriola Island (2 letters)

I spent about nearly three weeks on Gabriola Island this summer before I got the opportunity to go to Woodfire Pizza. I was on the Island WWOOFing on a small farm with my partner and we heard quite a bit of raving about the restaurant from quite a few people, but it was only on our last weekend that we had the time to go. The building itself is absolutely beautiful and very classy for the price. The service was personal and professional but with a uniquely local feel. I can't recall which West Coast beer we ordered but we were astonished by how cheap it was. And the pizza, that's what's most important. It was incredible. Even after having heard so much praise and thus having such high expectations, we were blown away. Fortunately we had a couple slices leftover for the next day.

Zulu Records, Vancouver (2 letters)

Thank You Zulu! For making me look cool since the 1980's. Still buying music from you and wearing your T-shirts all these years later. Phew, that's a lot of local business love.

Ready to write your own before midnight, Monday, Dec. 9? Head here to get started.

Have fun! Happy Buy Local Week, and our best wishes for a very happy holiday season.

Read more: Local Economy,