ISTOCK

TIM PAWLENTY: Unfortunately, it is probably not a matter of “if” companies will experience a cyber hack, but “when.”

While companies are spending billions of dollars to defend against cyberthreats, they also need to take other steps. One of those steps is taking time, in advance of a potential attack, to establish relationships with an outside entity that will play a key role in the wake of a cyberattack. I’m talking about law enforcement.

Dealing with law enforcement can be a new and confusing experience for many companies. Developing an advance understanding of how law enforcement handles cyberattacks will save valuable time and leverage key resources more quickly after an attack.

Companies can begin these efforts by: engaging law enforcement through informal meetings; participating in law enforcement sponsored cyber events; accessing cyber information law enforcement makes available via public websites and newsletters; participating in joint cyber planning and response exercises; and participating in industry events that include information sharing and relationship building with law enforcement.

A cyber crisis should not be the first time company representatives exchange business cards or meet law-enforcement representatives regarding cybersecurity concerns.

Law enforcement can offer much-needed help in responding to a cyberattack. For example, the FBI’s Cyber Action Team (CAT) provides valuable and rapid response capabilities in the wake of many cyberintrusions. Companies should understand, however, that law enforcement’s involvement might impact business operations. Developing an advance understanding of law enforcement’s process and related impacts will save valuable time in a crisis, and it will also allow companies to develop plans to minimize such disruption.

One example of the value of proactively reaching out to law enforcement regarding cyber matters is the importance of pre-emptively reviewing and completing a “Preauthorized Request for Technical Assistance” (RTA). Such a step removes delay and uncertainty associated with company lawyers trying to understand or negotiate an RTA in the middle of a cyber crisis and it allows the government to provide voluntary emergency technical assistance much more quickly.

Congress also has an important role to play in improving proper and more effective coordination between industry and law enforcement. Many cyberattacks are being launched by other nations, their proxies or very sophisticated international crime syndicates. Efforts by a single company to defend against cyberattacks by such entities is not a fair fight. We need a “Team America” approach that includes companies working with government, in appropriate ways, to combat escalating and alarming cyberthreats. Congress should immediately pass comprehensive cyber information sharing legislation that would enable companies to share threat (not personal information) with one another, the government and law enforcement in real time.

Effectively countering cyberthreats is going to take more investment, effort and improved coordination. Establishing better relationships and communications with law enforcement is only one part of those efforts, but it is important and achievable.

Tim Pawlenty (@TimPawlenty) is the president & CEO of the Financial Services Roundtable. He is a former GOP Presidential candidate and the 39th governor of Minnesota.

Read the latest Leadership Report.