Q: Why is whooping cough making a comeback now, when most children are vaccinated?

A: Whooping cough, a potentially life-threatening childhood illness, all but disappeared in the 1940s after a vaccine was developed.

In recent years, there have been several outbreaks reaching numbers not seen since the 1950s. A spike in 2012 sickened 48,277 Americans, and 20 died, most of them infants. There were 13 deaths in 2013 and again in 2014, the last year for which statistics are available. The respiratory illness induces such powerful, uncontrollable fits of coughing that older patients may break a rib or burst capillaries in the eyes. Children may have seizures. Babies, who cannot cough that hard, can stop breathing and die.

A recent study from California confirms what earlier reports have suggested: that the newer pertussis vaccine, reformulated to have fewer side effects, just isn’t as effective.

The study, by researchers at Kaiser Permanente’s Vaccine Study Center in Oakland, found that just three years after vaccination with the new vaccine and booster, teenagers had lost virtually all protection. The newer form of the pertussis vaccine and booster, without whole cells, in the 1990s replaced a whole-cell pertussis vaccine. (The pertussis vaccine is given in combination with those for diphtheria and tetanus.) The booster was introduced in 2005 when health experts realized the new vaccine was not conferring lifelong protection, officials with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said.

“The new vaccine provides reasonable short-term protection during the first year, but the protection wanes over the next few years, and not much remains by about three years after vaccination,” said Dr. Nicola Klein, a director of the Kaiser Permanente Vaccine Study Center and lead author of the study, published in Pediatrics.

Pertussis had never been eradicated. Having the disease does not confer lifelong immunity. But the last time there were more than 40,000 infections in the United States was in 1959.

“The biggest driver is waning immunity from our vaccines,” said Tami Skoff, an epidemiologist with the division of bacterial diseases of the CDC. “The protection doesn’t last as long as we originally thought it would.”

Despite concerns about the effectiveness of the new vaccine, there are no plans to return to the old one. The earlier vaccine carried a high risk of alarming but temporary side effects like pain, swelling at the site of the injection and fever, as well as more serious complications like febrile convulsions or loss of consciousness, said Dr. James D. Cherry, professor of pediatrics at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. There had also been reports of a brain disorder, encephalopathy, after vaccination.

“The older vaccine had some significant downsides; the new one is much better tolerated but may not be providing as robust protection,” said Dr. Wanda Filer, the president of the American Academy of Family Physicians.

That does not mean you should skip vaccinations. Even if the vaccine does not prevent disease entirely, it reduces the severity.

That is important, Skoff said, because the disease — which once killed thousands of Americans each year — can be miserable and prolonged. It can last for months and is often called the “100-day cough.”

— Roni Caryn Rabin, The New York Times