WASHINGTON — John Cornyn is the even-keeled insider. Ted Cruz is the brash, ambitious bomb-thrower.

The GOP takeover of the Senate last week puts the two Texas Republicans in a white-hot spotlight — and potentially a collision course.

As deputy majority leader, Cornyn’s main task will be to keep the party unified behind an agenda and strategy set by the incoming majority leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky. Cruz, by contrast, wouldn’t even pledge to support McConnell for the leadership post, before or after Tuesday night’s sweeping victory.

“Ted’s going to be a leader. He’s not just going to be an agitator,” said Ralph Reed, chairman of the Faith and Freedom coalition and a longtime Cruz friend. “But sometimes to become a leader, you’ve got to rattle the cage.”

The friction Cruz has caused in the Senate has been so overt, McConnell made light of it the day after the elections. Speaking in Louisville, Ky., he mentioned four people who’d called with congratulations. Apart from House Speaker John Boehner, it sounded like a list of adversaries, including a chastened president, a deposed majority leader, and an unruly backbencher.

“I got a call from the president. Also Senator [Harry] Reid, and the speaker, and Ted Cruz, too. I thought you’d be interested,” McConnell told reporters, drawing chuckles. “All of them have the view that we ought to see what areas of agreement there are and see if we can make some progress for the country.”

Cruz has made efforts in recent months to ingratiate himself with colleagues he irritated in the first 18 months of his tenure. He stumped for Senate nominees in key races in Iowa, Georgia and Kansas, all of whom won. He made a long trip last weekend to Alaska to stump for Republican Dan Sullivan, who has a healthy lead with absentee ballots still being counted.

Cruz also donated generously to the party’s Senate campaign arm. And he steered clear of states where his presence might inflame Democrats more than it would help fellow Republicans.

Still, he could pose some of the biggest headaches in coming months for McConnell and Cornyn.

Former Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, who held the No. 4 spot in GOP leadership for a time, sees a big set of challenges for Cornyn. Cruz’s role in the Senate could require attention, along with corporate tax changes, energy issues and other legislative priorities.

“If we’re going to be productive and keep the trust of the American people, we need to be an effective team, and that’s going to be Senator Cornyn’s responsibility,” she said.

As for Cruz, who won the seat she gave up in 2012, Hutchison said: “He’s going to set his own course. … What he’s done so far has been what he said he would do. I hope that Senator Cruz will work with Senator Cornyn. When your senators are divided, it really lessens the clout that your state has than when they’re united.”

Cornyn and Cruz are surely the highest wattage Senate duo from Texas since Phil Gramm and Lloyd Bentsen, or maybe even Sam Houston and Thomas Rusk.

Both are lawyers, deeply conservative with agendas that largely overlap. Stylistically, they are opposites.

Cruz, a 44-year-old tea party icon, crushed Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst in the 2012 primary.

His efforts to remove funding for Obamacare included an overnight talkathon. He’s broken with Senate tradition by huddling regularly with House conservatives, encouraging them to buck Boehner at key moments; he engineered the 16-day government shutdown by goading allies into quashing a budget deal.

Cornyn, along with other GOP leaders, continues to regard that tactic as unwise and damaging.

“You cannot just defund Obamacare. That may have been a difficult lesson to learn,” said House Rules Chairman Pete Sessions of Dallas, a Boehner ally and member of House leadership.

Cruz “can work well within the system,” Sessions predicted. “He will see that we get more together than we do apart.”

Cornyn, 62, coasted to a third term Tuesday. He’s worked his way up. He spent four years as the party’s chief campaign strategist and the last two as minority whip — a job that revolved around stymieing the Obama agenda.

As majority whip, he will be the second most powerful member of the Senate — and the most powerful Texan in the chamber since Democrat Lyndon Johnson’s stint as majority leader in the 1950s.

“The responsibility is enormous and Senator Cornyn is definitely up to the task,” said GOP strategist Ron Bonjean, a former top aide to a Senate majority leader and a House speaker.

He predicted occasional run-ins with Cruz and predicted Cornyn would respond with the “statesmanlike and classy” approach of a senator who prefers operating in “a senatorial, closed-door sort of way.” Unlike Cruz, he said, Cornyn is “not a flame thrower. … But he also has a strong backbone and can stand up with Mitch McConnell to President Obama.”

Both senators declined interview requests last week.

While GOP leaders and the White House have offered olive branches in recent days, Cruz has struck something other than a conciliatory tone. At the Texas Republicans’ Election Night party in Austin, he reiterated his no-compromise stance.

“Now is the time to go after and do everything humanly possible to repeal Obamacare,” he said. “Now is the time to stand up to the president. … The era of Obama lawlessness is over.”

Democrats see Cruz as polarizing and will exploit any hint of division he causes. After McConnell renewed his commitment to repealing Obamacare, Reid spokesman Adam Jentleson taunted that “McConnell is already letting Senator Cruz set the agenda.”

Reince Priebus, the GOP national chairman, said Friday that Cruz’s demands that Republicans push back against Obama are entirely appropriate. “The American people … are sick and tired of the abuse, as well. They want answers on the IRS. They want answers on Benghazi,” he said.

If he remains an agitator, Cruz could risk being shunned and marginalized just as the GOP is positioned to actually legislate. But the more accommodating he is, the less authentic he might look to staunchly conservative Republican primary voters in Iowa and New Hampshire who are shopping for a champion.

“Among the base, there’s a sense that we give up too easily,” said Steve Munisteri, the Texas Republican chairman. “He is not reluctant to buck Senate leadership. … That really makes Senator Cruz a folk hero.”

Cornyn’s path is different.

For him, it’s “not about being a national leader of the conservative movement. His course is to get government to move in a more conservative direction,” Munisteri said. That makes the Texans a “yin and yang,” with complementary roles.

While Cruz was refusing to pledge his leadership vote to McConnell, a tea party rival for the presidential nomination — Sen. Rand Paul — was stumping with his fellow Kentuckian. Paul and another 2016 contender, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, have generally distanced themselves from Cruz and his tactics.

“Mitch [McConnell] has very carefully, very methodically, very much under the radar isolated Ted Cruz,” said Bob Bennett, a Utah conservative ousted from the Senate by Cruz’s closest ally, Mike Lee, in the tea party wave of 2010. “Cruz is going to look around, and there aren’t going to be that many people with him.”

Martin Frost, a former Dallas congressman who served in Democratic leadership for years, agreed.

“Ted Cruz can’t be the tail wagging the dog,” he said. “The test for Senator McConnell will be whether he is willing to” stand up to Cruz.

Reed, who worked with Cruz on the 2000 Bush campaign, sees him evolving as a senator. He noted that Sen. Pat Roberts, hardly a tea partier, “sure wanted him to stand by his side” in Kansas as he struggled for re-election, and Cruz obliged.

“He’s one of the most brilliant guys I’ve ever met,” Reed said. “He’ll have a big impact on the Senate, as he already has. And if he decides to run for president he’s going to have a big impact on the race.”

Staff writers Kimberly Railey and Michael Marks contributed to this report.

On Twitter:

@toddgillman