This week was supposed to be a celebration of thanks and Americana. However, a grand jury decision in Ferguson shifted the nation’s focus to Ferguson, Mo. The unrest quickly spread across the country.

Hopefully, in between some turkey and stuffing, you were able to catch up with loved ones. The photos below feature those stories and other news about immigration, turkey pardons and possibly the best NFL catch ever.

A turkey named “Cheese” survived this year. Turkeys get this same pardon every year.

Between a grand jury decision, riots in Ferguson, Mo., and protests around the country, the unrest has been felt by everyone. The best coverage of Ferguson lives here.

The. Catch. Of. The. Year.

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel resigned Nov. 24 after less than two years in the post amid the struggles of President Obama’s national security team to respond to a slew of global crises.

Taylor Swift won the first-ever “Dick Clark Award for Excellence” at the American Music Awards. She also debuted the first live performance of her hit “Blank Space.”

A week after President Obama announced his immigration executive order, Americans are split on the move.



A new report from the Congressional Research Service says that the House Appropriations Committee was incorrect last week in saying the government agency most responsible for implementing Obama’s action—U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services—cannot be defunded by Congress.

“Saturday Night Live” mocked Obama’s executive action to grant legal status to 5 million illegal immigrants by twisting a staple of the TV classic “Schoolhouse Rock!”

Gross school lunch pictures went viral after students took to social media to protest first lady Michelle Obama’s healthy lunch ideas.

In year two, Obamacare is off to another bad start. Big challenges loom, including the administration of the law’s hideously complex insurance subsidy system, as well as coverage and cost problems.

The Pope spoke to the European Parliament.

The first phase of local elections in Kashmir began on Nov. 25.

With Black Friday deals creeping their way to Thanksgiving morning, more employees are speaking out. Some don’t mind, and some are very frustrated.

Travelers encountered chaos this week. Several airlines canceled hundreds of flights as a snowstorm struck the Northeast.