Former Planned Parenthood worker: “Money-grubbing, evil, very sad, sad place to work”

posted at 11:34 am on February 17, 2014 by Ed Morrissey

Marianne Anderson should know. She worked at the Indianapolis franchise of the nation’s biggest provider in the abortion industry, until Abby Johnson helped her to leave her job and turn her life around. In an interview for The Criterion, the nurse describes some of the horrors she witnessed at the clinic:

“One young girl came in with her mom,” Anderson told the paper. “She was about 16. Her mom had made the appointment. That’s not supposed to be how it works. It’s supposed to only be the patient who makes the appointment. I checked her in, and she thought she was there for a prenatal checkup. The mom was pushing it. She blindsided her own daughter.” Another time, said Anderson, “This guy brought in a Korean girl. I had no doubt in my mind this girl was a sex slave. This guy would not leave her side. They could barely communicate. He wanted to make all the arrangements. During the ultrasound, she told one of the nurses that there were lots of girls in the house, and that the man hits them. She never came back for the abortion. I always wondered what happened to her. One of my co-workers said, ‘You’re better off to just let it go.’” When women cried during the abortion procedure, Anderson said, abortionist Michael King would shame them. “These girls would start crying on the table, and Dr. King would say, ‘Now you chose to be here. Sit still. I don’t have time for this.’” “One doctor, when he was in the POC [products of conception] room, would talk to the aborted baby while looking for all the parts. ‘Come on, little arm, I know you’re here! Now you stop hiding from me!’ It just made me sick to my stomach,” Anderson said. “The sound the suction machine made when it turned on still haunts me.”

If you’re unfamiliar with the term POC, read up on it here, when Abby Johnson explained it at an event for Pro-Life Action Ministries here in the Twin Cities in 2011.

Here’s more from the interview:

Q. What was it like working there? A. “It was a money-grubbing, evil, very sad, sad place to work. “We would get yelled at if we didn’t answer the phone by the third ring. They would tell us we’d be fired [if we didn’t] because they needed the money. “They would remind us in our weekly staff meeting that we need to tell everyone [who called to schedule an appointment] to avoid ‘those people’ [the sidewalk counselors] because we need the money. We were to tell them, ‘Don’t make eye contact with them, and don’t stop in the driveway. If you make eye contact with them or if you stop and roll down your window, they’re going to try their darnedest to talk you out of it.’ “You have to have so many [abortions] a month to stay open. In our meetings they’d tell us, ‘If abortions are down, you could get sent home early and not get as many hours.’ “They would allow girls to have ultrasounds that were obviously way too far along [the legal limit for having an abortion in Indiana is 13 weeks and six days]. They said, ‘If they want to be seen, you just put them through, no problem,’ just taking advantage to make money. “I was always getting in trouble for talking too long to the girls, asking if they were sure they wanted to do this. “It was absolutely miserable going in there.” … Q. When did you start having qualms or misgivings about working for Planned Parenthood? A. “I started feeling uneasy working there when people came from [the] national [office] in New York City to teach us the conscious sedation process. It was disgusting. These two ladies had this chant they would do: ‘Abortion all the time!’ I thought, ‘I’ve got to get out of here.’ That was about six to eight months after I started. “Those women from New York acted like an abortion was a rite of passage. They were like, ‘How can you not offer abortion to women? It’s their body. They should be able to do whatever they want. How can you force them to have a baby? Abortion should be free to anybody, anytime.’ ”

Be sure to read it all.

Recently in the Green Room: