Official volunteer program organized, with the goal to have 100 volunteers in the near future

She has enjoyed being around dogs for as long as she can remember, so it is not a surprise that Cañon City High School sophomore Narissa Lamere would volunteer at the Humane Society.

"I go after school Tuesdays and Thursdays, then on Saturdays," she said. "I walk dogs and groom them if they need groomed. The satisfaction is spending time with different dogs."

The Humane Shelter recruited volunteers to come into the facility during an event Saturday at Tractor Supply. It already has 34 volunteers and hopes to attain its goal of 100 volunteers in the near future.

Recently, the shelter started an official program as part of some of the changes to the facility.

"We had some issues with some of the volunteers (in the past)," said Volunteer Coordinator Tim Bennett. "They thought they should be in charge of things. That just wasn't working well, so we decided we needed to scrap the program and start over."

In October, Bennett volunteered to organize an official volunteer program at the shelter. To learn the state standards, he visited Pikes Peak Humane Society, Pueblo Animals Services, the Dumb Friends League in Denver and the Longmont Humane Society. From that, he used them to start the volunteer program at the shelter in Fremont County.

"We developed our manuals for dog walking and kennel tech, cat attendant and all the different jobs that we have," Bennett said.

Advertisement

For instance, volunteers now walk the dogs in a large confined area with a fence, which alleviates the danger of walking the dogs on the streets.

Another thing that is different from before is the kennels for the cats have been expanded to double from their previous size.

In the past, the Humane Society also had other issues, which are easy to substantiate, Bennett said. The Department of Agriculture identified the issues, which have been addressed. Some were paperwork issues while others were physical plant issues, which have been fixed.

"They did a follow up inspection and we passed that inspection completely," he said. "They have said there was never any sign of animal cruelty or inappropriate crematory responsibilities. All of our staff that do crematory work or euthanasia work are certified and properly trained."

Bennett said the majority of euthanasia that the shelter conducts is currently 95 percent owner requests because their pets have some kind of illness.

For more information, call the shelter at 275-0663 or visit 110 S. Rhodes Ave.