There is a war raging in Tallahassee.

It is not, however, between Republicans and Democrats.

It is between Republicans and other Republicans.

Between the practical and the ideologues.

Between the solutionists and the obstructionists.

Between those who want to make a difference and those who want to make a scene.

They are battling over guns, gays, health care and more.

On one side you have the Republican Senate, led by President Andy Gardiner and workhorses such as David Simmons. These are the people who actually want to get things done. They want jobs created, kids educated and people protected.

Gardiner and his band of serious-minded senators have pushed to cut taxes, fund schools, curb testing and expand health care. They passed a budget unanimously — Democrats and Republicans working together.

On the other side, you have the House … which is fueled by hate.

House Republicans hate that Barack Obama is president. They hate that gay people have equal rights. They hate that the Affordable Care Act is the law of the land.

So they are determined to take Florida back … back to a day when equal rights and health care were reserved only for those they deemed worthy.

House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, with the help of local Republicans such as Eric Eisnaugle, Scott Plakon, Jason Brodeur and most of the rest of the local delegation, has reveled in divisiveness and obstruction.

The most notable divide has been the battle over $50 billion in federal Medicaid money that Florida has so far refused to use to provide health care for the working poor.

Support for taking this money is widespread. It has been championed by hospitals, business leaders, advocates for the poor, local governments and senators from both parties. The majority of U.S. states have accepted this money — including ones led by Republicans.

But Republicans in the Florida House have said no, mainly because they hate "Obamacare."

What do they care that 800,000 Floridians might go without health care? These politicians already have their generous, taxpayer-subsidized insurance packages. So they're telling their GOP peers in the Senate — and the working poor — to pound sand.

House members also showed their ideological stripes last week when Sanford Republican Jason Brodeur decided to slip a provision into an adoption bill to let agencies deny children to gay couples.

It's as if Florida politicians were mad that Indiana had briefly stolen the spotlight when it came to discrimination … and they wanted it back.

This is the difference between statesmen and politicians. The former want to solve problems. The latter want to create them.

There are plenty of other examples. Senators tapped the brakes on a bill to allow guns on college campuses — a proposal that is wildly hypocritical, since legislators want to keep a ban on guns in their own legislative meetings.

And House members also have whipped themselves into a frenzy about which bathrooms transgender citizens should be allowed to use — a nonissue that the Senate has ignored.

These are not the issues that everyday Floridians care about.

Most citizens care about jobs and public safety. They care about education and equal opportunity.

There are still four weeks left in this session. A lot can happen. Senators could cave in and support the divisive issues. House members could theoretically realize they are doing more harm than good.

Some of that may depend on you. Do you know where your reps stand on these issues? Do you even know who your reps are? Have you told them what you want or expect?

This might be a good time to get informed and speak up. You can get contact and bill info at myfloridahouse.gov, flsenate.gov or by calling the House switchboard at 850-717-5650.

I've long said there are decent people from both parties. But right now, decency, progress and equality are fighting a losing battle in the Florida House.

smaxwell@orlandosentinel.com