Buy Photo Tess Reiter, 6, dresses as Princess Leia for Star Wars Day at the New Albany-Floyd County Library on Saturday. (Photo: Jenna Esarey, Special to the CJ)Buy Photo

Storm Troopers roamed the book stacks while a Tusken Raider shared fist bumps with children at the Star Wars Day event at New Albany-Floyd County Public Library on Saturday.

Nearby, Jim and Wendi Merkle dressed up as Darth Vader and Princess Leia and worked with their own little storm trooper, son Colton, 4, crafting a copy of the Millennium Falcon out of paper plates.

It may have been held in the children’s section, but the "Star Wars" characters in full costume appealed to adults as well.

“My fiancé is going to be so mad he didn’t come,” said Austayia Martell after posing for a quick photo with a gaggle of characters from the Star Wars universe. “We didn’t know this was happening today, so he didn’t come.”

A variety of "Star Wars" themed games and activities kept the kids busy, while adults filled the Strassweg Auditorium for a talk by local author David West Reynolds on The Archaeology of "Star Wars".

Reynolds has written several "Star Wars" reference books, including “Star Wars: the Visual Dictionary,” and he worked for franchise creator George Lucas at his Skywalker Ranch before returning to his native New Albany.

As a newly minted archaeology Ph.D. in 1995, Reynolds challenged himself to locate the lost shooting locations from Star Wars Episode IV in Tunisia.

“No one had kept records,” he said. “Nobody knew the movies were going to be a hit. I went looking for them as a test of my skills as an archaeologist.”

After locating the sites, Reynolds was hired by Lucas Films to both share his findings of the original locations and to scout new locations for "Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace."

Star Wars costuming groups Rebel Legion and 501st Legion provided realistic costumed characters for the event. The groups make regular public appearances for community and charitable events.

“I told you there’d be storm troopers here!” said Skylar McCall, 10, as she bounced excitedly while collecting autographs from the characters.

“She’s a big fan,” said her mother, Erin McCall. “She’s seen all the movies and couldn’t wait to get here today.”

Jon Reiter brought his daughter Tess, 6, in full Princess Leia costume.

“She loves all the 'Star Wars' movies,” he said. “All the female characters are really great role models.”

Reynolds said he believes the appeal of the "Star Wars" movies is universal.

“'Star Wars' went beyond entertainment into being myth,” he said. “Everyone could identify with things the characters were feeling; the worries that we’re not good enough. Despite all the sci-fi dressing, there was a real story there.”

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1OAyOOe