Hillside employees accompanied a group of students to the gym on Monday. (Photo by Walt Mancini/Pasadena Star-News)

Two of Southern California’s leading child welfare agencies are planning to merge their operations.

The boards of directors for Hillsides and Bienvenidos signed a memorandum of understanding last week that will allow them to consolidate their resources and offer expanded services to at-risk children and their families.

Pasadena-based Hillsides serves more than 6,240 children and families throughout Los Angeles County via its 26 locations which include school-based mental health offices in Pasadena, Los Angeles and Baldwin Park unified school districts.

Bienvenidos, headquartered in Los Angeles, serves 7,000 children and families, operating its programs out of nine locations in East Los Angeles and San Gabriel Valley. That includes licensed foster homes that serve Los Angeles, Orange, San Bernardino and Riverside counties.

“We’ve been looking at doing this since October,” said Joseph M. Costa, Hillsides’ chief executive officer. “We both have very similar missions. When you look at our leadership at the board level and our executives management folks, we all came into this work with the same kind of sentiment — to improve the lives of kids and their families who are vulnerable.”

Hillsides and Bienvenidos will retain their individual names with Bienvenidos becoming an affiliate of Hillsides.

The merger is being driven by the Continuum of Care Reform legislation (AB 403), the Affordable Care Act, the integration of Los Angeles County’s health and behavioral health services and the creation of a Nonprofit Sustainability Initiative by Los Angeles area foundations to encourage increased collaboration.

“The greatest benefit will be in terms of infrastructure,” Costa said. “This will allow us to have a relatively robust and expanded infrastructure while not spending any more dollars on administrative services. The county sees us as principle partners with them in child and family care.”

Hillsides provides parenting classes, mental health support and additional resources for vulnerable children and families. The agency also offers residential treatment for children who suffered trauma or have severe emotional or behavioral challenges, and individualized education for students with emotional, learning and/or behavior challenges.

Hillsides also runs a Youth Moving On program that provides former foster youth with affordable housing and other support services so they can become self-sufficient.

Advertisement

Costa noted that Bienvenidos offers a foster family and adoption program, which Hillsides doesn’t have. But AB 403 calls for the establishment of “resource” families that would function much like foster families, although the goal would be to stabilize the child and the child’s family so they could be reunited in a healthier environment.

“This is a real innovation,” he said.

Bienvenidos President and CEO Ritchie L. Geisel said the agencies’ combined resources and workforce of 600 will increase their impact in L.A. County and surrounding counties.

“Our clients’ resilience and resolve to improve their lives inspire us every day to further our collective mission,” Geisel said.

With an annual operating budget of $32 million, more than 90 percent Hillsides’ funding comes from contracts with the Los Angeles County Department of Children and Family Services, the county Department of Mental Health and area school districts that have contracts with the agency. The remaining 10 percent comes from private foundations, individual donors and special fund-raising events.

Bienvenidos draws its funding from many of the same public sources and has an annual budget of $16 million.

Costa said the merger should be finalized by the end of the year.

“There’s a process we have to go through that has to do with the assignment of contracts to Hillsides by various public entities that have agreements with Bienvenidos,” he said. “That will take several months and we have to meet with staff and do planning. And at some point we need to come together as one board. It should be completed by the end of the calendar year.”