The live chat starts at 11 a.m. in the comments section below.

WASHINGTON, D.C. – So how's Obamacare working out?

Let's discuss it, using the comments section below as our forum.

We'll start at 11 a.m. and address lots of questions about the Affordable Care Act, or ACA. We'll discuss—and you can, too, if you sign in -- ACA enrollment, premiums (are people paying them?), problems and glitches, demographics (what will happen to premiums next year since Ohioans who enrolled tended to be older) and so on.

The ACA is the law, an expansion of government now embedded in public policy. Like it or hate it -- but either way, some facts and answers will serve you better than political rhetoric. Joining the hour-long chat will be:

Kathleen Gmeiner, project director for the Universal Health Care Action Network of Ohio, a pro-ACA group. She was heavily involved in ACA enrollment efforts.

Miranda Motter, president and CEO of the Ohio Association of Health Plans, which represents 14 health plans providing insurance to Ohioans. Not all of those plans chose to get involved in the ACA marketplace in Ohio.

Bishop Tony Minor, founder and senior pastor of the Community of Faith Assembly in Cleveland. He serves as the advocacy director at the Lutheran Metropolitan Ministry, one of the largest social service agencies in Greater Cleveland. He engaged African-American churches to counsel and help enroll people in individual ACA policies.

Luke J. Clark, a senior consultant with Oswald Companies, a Cleveland-based insurance consultancy that works with businesses. The ACA's coverage requirements and taxes have created critics and worries among employers.

Cathy Allen, of Marblehead, who got health coverage through the ACA. President Barack Obama highlighted her story in 2011, with the White House saying that her systemic Lupus made it impossible to get insurance after she left her job and started a business as a consultant, even though she didn't require much medical care. The ACA enabled her to get in a high-risk insurance pool until she could buy a regular policy. Insurers are now barred from rejecting people with pre-existing conditions or charging them more.

Join this Plain Dealer chat on Cleveland.com at 11 a.m.