The Tenet Healthcare Corp. is now among the 10 largest public companies in Texas based on revenue, according to an analysis by The Dallas Morning News.

The health system slid into the 10 position, improving from 12 last year and causing Texas Instruments Inc. to fall to eleventh. Revenue jumped 50 percent in 2014, an increase attributed to the $4.3 billion acquisition of Tennessee’s Vanguard Health Systems that added 29 hospitals and 39 outpatient centers to its portfolio.

The company’s quarterly financial reports since have taken on the air of a broken record—each have been marked by year-over-year revenue increases, and organic growth from its acquisition strategy is becoming more attributable for admission increases than factors like the Affordable Care Act. Last year, it posted revenue of $16.6 billion. Too, the company’s purchase of healthcare services company Conifer has been a significant gain (revenue jumped 20 percent last quarter year-over-year and its earnings increased by 71 percent).

Much in that same line, Tenet believes its joint partnership with the Addison outpatient facility company United Surgical Partners International will help foster further growth. The grouping creates the largest ambulatory surgical center network in the country, targeting the rapidly growing outpatient set. According to Avanza Healthcare Strategies, 65 percent of all visits are now outpatient and services provided at ambulatory centers are up more than 300 percent since 2003. Tenet’s looking to capitalize on that.

“It’s really the way healthcare is moving,” Trevor Fetter, the CEO of Tenet, said at the time. “So many procedures now can be done on an outpatient basis. The physicians prefer to practice in these more convenient, simpler environments.”

The Affordable Care Act has also helped Tenet drop the uncompensated care it provides. In the last quarter, uncompensated admissions system-wide dropped by nearly 14 percent as Medicaid admissions jumped by 8 percent. In the six states where it operates that expanded Medicaid, the effects are even more stark: a 50 percent drop in uninsured plus charity admissions and a nearly 10 percent increase in Medicaid admissions.

Tenet is the third-largest hospital system in the nation, trailing the Hospital Corporation of America and Community Health Systems, both based in Tennessee. Its headquarters are located in Fountain Place downtown.