The Twitterverse was all a-twitter Monday night about U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell's quote in the Kentucky Educational Television debate when he talked about challenges hospitals face under the Affordable Care Act.

"Our hospitals are being rimracked by these Medicare reimbursement reductions," he said.

Cue the laughter.

VIDEO: The Most Heated Moments from the McConnell-Grimes Debate

My former colleague at The Courier-Journal, Eric Crawford:

.@Mac6493@GoCardsGuy Didn’t miss anything. Five years from now, all anyone will remember is the word “rimracked.” Don’t ask. Just walk away — Eric Crawford (@ericcrawford) October 14, 2014

Republican activist Tres Watson:

Thoughts of @howardfineman and @d_yetter looking up rimracked on urban dictionary is disturbing beyond words. — Tres Watson (@treswatson) October 14, 2014

And Glasgow lawyer John Rogers:

Daughter with her parents watching the #kysen debate: "Mom, what's rimracked mean ?" — John Rogers (@johnrogersatty) October 14, 2014

Rimracked, according to the web site Urban Dictionary, means ... Uh. .... Oh, go ahead and look it up yourself. But only if you don't embarrass too easily. And for gosh sakes, don't let your kids do it. Just don't.

Anyway, the late Justice Potter Stewart once said of obscenity, "I shall not today attempt further to define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced within that shorthand description; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I see it."

He might see it in this word.

Joe Sonka, of Insider Louisville:

Veteran KY political reporter just leaned over & whispered into my ear: "Joe, I need to go home and get rimracked." #kysen#HauntingMyDreams — Joe Sonka (@joesonka) October 14, 2014

Wonkette reported that he used the word twice in a floor speech in 2004. "I was rim-racked -- rim-racked -- by the two big newspapers in my state," he said.

And there were memes.

Rimracked: Memes about McConnell went up quickly.

But if you look a little deeper on the internet -- a lot deeper -- you'll find what the 72-year-old senator said wasn't so bad.

I found several references to the word that had absolutely nothing to do with sex -- but couldn't find a definition for it other than the Urban Dictionary's. Then I found a notation that suggested there might just be a definition for the word in the Dictionary of American Regional English, published by Harvard University Press.

The dictionary allows you to look things up online only if you pay a subscription fee. Just $5,500. I figured my boss would balk at my expense report.

The Louisville Free Public Library had a copy of the dictionary, so I stopped there on my way to the office. Darn it. It was missing the fourth, fifth and sixth volumes.

Next was the University of Louisville's Ekstrom Library, where they had volumes five through six.

Bingo. I had a friend on campus run over and look it up.

The dictionary says it comes from the words rim (of a wheel) and rack (to twist or strain) and it means "to damage or destroy, esp. by misuse," or "to ruin, cheat," or "ruined, worn out, rickety," or "a foul-up."

The word has been around since 1841, according to the dictionary. More recently, its come to be a fishing expression that is used when a fisherman's net gets snagged on rocks on the bottom of the water.

Nothing to get all a-titter about.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell and Democratic Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes traded jabs Monday night in the only debate of their closely watched Senate race.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1w6Aklw