Presidential candidate Ted Cruz is joining Obamacare? It's complicated. (Jay Paul/Bloomberg)

So, irony of all ironies — Sen. Ted Cruz could now be joining Obamacare.

Cruz said Tuesday he may sign up for the health insurance program he's promised to repeal "every word of" because he's no longer on his wife's plan. His wife, Heidi, is taking a leave of absence from Goldman Sachs during her husband's newly unveiled presidential campaign, meaning the Cruzes will need to find health insurance elsewhere.

Cruz told the Des Moines Register: "Well, it is written in the law that members will be on the exchanges without subsidies just like millions of Americans so that's – I think the same rules should apply to all of us. Members of Congress should not be exempt."

That may sound like a done deal, but his campaign stressed Tuesday evening that Cruz is still weighing his options. "Senator Cruz said he would ‘presumably’ use his employer health insurance, for which the only option is Obamacare," campaign spokesman Rick Tyler said in an email. "But there are other options that the senator is considering before making a final decision about how to make sure his family is insured."

It seems worth noting here that Cruz doesn't have to sign up through an Obamacare exchange. He could opt to purchase a private family plan off the exchange. Some of his Republican colleagues, also opposed to the health-care law, had previously told CNN they would do just that.

However, this shouldn't be seen as simply an Obamacare gotcha moment for the Texas Republican, who's made Obamacare repeal a central part of his political identity. When it comes to health insurance, lawmakers and most of their aides are unlike the vast majority of the nearly 12 million Americans who have signed up through the exchanges — and that's thanks to an amendment from a Republican lawmaker.

The Affordable Care Act changed the way that lawmakers get health insurance if they decided they still wanted to have an employer-sponsored plan — their employer being the federal government. They used to get their benefits through the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program, the country's largest employer-sponsored health insurance program. However, Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa) added an amendment to the Affordable Care Act requiring lawmakers and most of their aides instead get their coverage through the exchanges.

This amendment, however, created another politically volatile issue — should those lawmaker and aides still continue to receive the generous employer contribution to premiums they received under the FEHBP system? No other large employer is allowed to cover workers through the ACA exchanges, so the answer wasn't obvious, and the law didn't specifically address the issue.

Under pressure from many members of Congress who feared losing their employer contribution, the Obama administration in the summer of 2013 issued a rule that the federal contributions could still be provided through the exchange. That decision prompted outcry from some notable conservative members of Congress — Sen. Ron Johnson (R-Wis.), with the support of at least 38 Republican lawmakers, sued to block the administration's rule.

Cruz contended that the rule on congressional health plans amounted to an illegal exemption from Obamacare. Cruz had even proposed changing the ACA to require all federal employees — not just lawmakers and their aides — to join Obamacare exchanges and forgo the federal contribution, Politico reported in September 2013.

If he signs up on an exchange plan, Cruz won't be taking the federal contribution, his campaign told told CNN. So, in that sense, he's sticking to his guns.

This post has been updated.