The Ginkgo Bioworks team Ginkgo Bioworks

If microbes could be programmed as easily as software, the varieties of molecules used in foods, fragrances and other products would multiply–a vision that Ginkgo Bioworks Inc. aims to achieve after raising $9 million in Series A venture financing.

Ginkgo genetically programs microbes to produce molecules used in flavors, fragrances, cosmetics and nutritional ingredients. The company, the first biotechnology startup to go through the Y Combinator accelerator, has industrialized the engineering of specific yeast, bacteria and algae strains. With help from software-directed robots, 10 technicians in its factory can equal the output of 50 to 100 scientists working by hand at a bench, according to co-founder and Chief Executive Jason Kelly.

Genetic programming isn’t new, but Ginkgo and other venture-backed startups are taking synthetic biology in new directions and enabling it to be performed on a greater scale. This could speed the introduction of new products across various industries, such as food, agriculture, energy and pharmaceuticals.

While Ginkgo sells microbes, venture-backed Gen9 Inc. and Twist Bioscience Corp. use their technologies to create large quantities of genes used in used in genetic programming. Meanwhile, venture-funded Synthorx Inc. expands the genetic alphabet to aid the discovery of drugs, diagnostics and vaccines.

While advances in DNA-sequencing technology have come quickly, there haven’t been facilities to enable high-throughput engineering of microbes until recently, according to Dr. Kelly, who holds a doctoral degree in biological engineering from Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In 2008, when he earned his degree, he teamed up with fellow MIT graduates Reshma Shetty, Barry Canton and Austin Che and computer scientist Tom Knight to assemble the tools to program biology as easily as designers create software.

With funding from Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Ginkgo spent its first four years proving it could build such a platform. In mid 2013 it began fielding significant interest from corporations. With business picking up, it took its first equity by going through Y Combinator’s summer 2014 program. It is now working on 20 microbial strains for customers working in markets such as nutrition, flavors and fragrances, cosmetics, sweeteners and natural pesticides.

In addition to development fees, Ginkgo receives royalties on ingredients developed using its strains. Customers include Robertet Group, a French company whose business includes perfume compositions. Venture financing from Data Collective, Felicis Ventures, iGlobe Partners, OS Fund and Vast Ventures have enabled it to expand its space on the South Boston waterfront to 18,000 square feet from 11,000.

“It’s one thing to say this market is going to be big and the technology is going to work, it’s another to have customers and pipeline,” Felicis Managing Director Aydin Senkut said.

Ginkgo’s foundry occupies the top floor of a former U.S. Navy warehouse. Inside “organism designers” sit at a row of computers creating designs for microbial strains. Down the hall, in a glassed-in, 4,000-square-foot room filled with freezers and analytical instruments, lab technicians carry out the designers’ plans.

On one end, a robotic system programs cells with DNA sequences. Across the room, another robotic system cracks open genetically programmed cells so their contents can be analyzed through liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. Advanced instrumentation, developed with complex mammalian cells in mind, help Ginkgo rapidly analyze much simpler yeast and other microbial cells, according to Dr. Knight.

Ginkgo initially is designing microbes to produce compounds that have historically been extracted from plants. As new, more advanced technology becomes available Ginkgo expects to expand the productivity of its initial foundry, Bioworks1. It is also designing a new foundry, Bioworks2. It is expected to open in 2017 and will have five times more capacity, according to Dr. Kelly.

Write to Brian Gormley at brian.gormley@wsj.com.