Kaitlyn Faye, 13, works with her Catch-A-Calf steer Gonzo during her daily chores Jan. 8 at her home near Firestone. Kaitlyn raised her steer for the past year. It was judged, weighed and auctioned off at the National Western Stock Show. ( Matthew Jonas )

If you go The National Western Stock Show runs through Jan. 26. For more information, visit nationalwestern.com.

When the 644-pound steer arrived on a stock truck in May, Kaitlyn Faye called him El Diablo -- "the devil" in Spanish.

But by last weekend, when she left her family's Longmont ranch to show him at the National Western Stock Show in Denver, the Angus/Hereford cross had a new name.

"Now, I call him Gonzo," said Kaitlyn, 13. "My horse's name is Kermit, like Kermit the Frog, and I just wanted a Muppets theme."

Kaitlyn Faye, 13, brushes her steer Gonzo during her daily chores at her home near Firestone. ( Matthew Jonas )

Kaitlyn and Gonzo both placed during last Sunday's livestock competition. She took 10th place in the junior Catch-A-Calf showmanship's class 100, and he ranked seventh in his live evaluation for Catch-A-Calf general entries class 100D, according to the Stock Show's online results.

Later this week, the Denver slaughterhouse that bought him as a 1,364-pound market steer will cut her a check.

But the real payoff came from learning how to make him safe to show, she said.

Cowgirl adventures

The adventure began on a whim, when the 91-pound Sunset Middle School student followed her older brother to enter last January's Catch-A-Calf Contest.

Advertisement

Forty calves weighing between 200 pounds and 400 pounds ran helter-skelter in the arena during the Stock Show event while twice as many 4-H Club members, ages 12 to 18, from Colorado, Wyoming, Nebraska and Kansas chased them.

Against all odds, the slight girl caught a token calf and later got a yearling sponsored by The Boettcher Foundation in Denver and delivered to her door to raise for the 2014 Stock Show.

Faye began her cowgirl adventure to gentle and grow the steer by digging 4-foot deep holes for 8-foot poles. She used them to anchor a makeshift squeeze chute, a narrow space that made it safer to feed, groom and doctor the half-wild animal fresh off a sprawling Wyoming ranch.

"Nobody had touched him before Kaitlyn, and he was unpredictable around people," Michelle Faye, Kaitlyn's mother, said.

For this reason, Kaitlyn began halter-breaking Gonzo this summer by tying him to the family's tractor and driving slowly around their property.

She knew that she needed to feel comfortable leading him with a halter and show stick and bathing and brushing him by Stock Show time.

"But getting a better relationship with him was hard because at first he knew nothing about me, I knew nothing about him, and we were both afraid of each other," Kaitlyn said. "It took time, and it took courage."

Barn business

While her progress in gentling the steer waxed and waned, the bills related to his care kept coming -- something her record book shows.

It documents vet, farrier and feed receipts to help her drill down to the cost of bringing a steer to market.

Entries recounted Gonzo's escape in August to a nearby alfalfa field and treatment for possible bloating. In September, the book shows that the vet cared for an abscess on his jaw.

Kaitlyn Faye, 13, brushes her steer, Gonzo, during her daily chores at her home near Firestone. She took 10th place in the junior Catch-A-Calf showmanship s class 100, and he ranked seventh in his live evaluation for Catch-A-Calf general entries class 100D, according to the Stock Show s online results. ( Matthew Jonas )

Kaitlyn also documented the farrier's visit this fall, which began with loading Gonzo into a special cage and then rotating the steer 90 degrees off the ground to safely and conveniently trim his hooves.

However, the biggest stack of receipts came from feed stores.

Gonzo gobbled 35 pounds of hay and two scoops of grain daily to gain 2 to 3 pounds every day just before the Stock Show, she said.

Tracking his weight gain and calculating the cost per pound of feed, depending on both vender and the volume bought, gave her data to share in her monthly letters to her sponsor. She also used it for talking points during her interview with Catch-A-Calf Contest judges this month.

For all of these reasons, the Denver-based Boettcher Foundation considers the process educational and has underwritten the cost of at least one calf every year since the Catch-A-Calf Contest debuted in 1935, said Tim Schultz, the foundation's president and executive director.

But when it comes to her yardstick for success, Kaitlyn reflects on the warm fuzzies.

"By the end, when I was filling the water tank, he would rub my leg until I give him pets," she said.

Pam Mellskog can be reached at Mellskog@msn.com or 303-746-0942.