Michelle Obama's "Drink Up" campaign aims to educate Americans on the importance of drinking water for better health.

Michelle Obama's "Drink Up" campaign aims to educate Americans on the importance of drinking water for better health. Creative Commons

First Lady Michelle Obama is once again teaming up with the Partnership For A Healthier America (PHA) to help launch the “Drink Up” campaign, which encourages Americans to drink more water — whether it’s from the tap or the bottle.

Michelle Obama, a fitness enthusiast and honorary chair of the nonprofit healthcare organization PHA, said she realized how important water was to our health after the start of her anti-obesity initiative “Let’s Move” back in 2010.

“Since we started the Let’s Move! initiative, I’ve been looking for as many ways as possible to help families and kids lead healthier lives. I’ve come to realize that if we were going to take just one step to make ourselves and our families healthier, probably the single best thing we could do is to simply drink more water,” the First Lady said in a statement. “That’s it – it’s really that simple. Drink just one more glass of water a day and you can make a real difference for your health, your energy, and the way you feel. So Drink Up and see for yourself.”

Americans can expect to see the “Drink Up” logos on close to 300 million packs of water bottles, 200,000 packs of reusable water bottles, and over 10,000 outdoor public taps. The PHA is encouraging people join in a virtual “Cheers!” by visiting www.youarewhatyoudrink.org.

Supporters of this initiative include actress Eva Longoria as well as water purifying companies such as BRITA, Aquafina, Dasani, Evian, and Nestle. “Drink Up” has also received backing from the American Beverage Association and the International Bottled Water Association.

“Lots of people want to live healthier, but life gets busy and sometimes making the healthier choice can seem difficult,” Longoria explained. “Drinking more water is a simple, easy choice that most people can make every day. I’m thrilled that so many organizations have come together today to help remind people that you are what you drink, and drinking water is you at your best.”

The Institute of Medicine states that water and even caffeinated beverages account for 80 percent of a person’s total water intake, while the remaining 20 percent comes from food. Although there is no set figure for the maximum amount of water one should consume, the Food and Nutrition Board recommends at least 2.7 liters a day for women and 3.7 liters a day for men to prevent dehydration.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 35.7 percent of U.S. adults and 17 percent of U.S. children are considered obese. A dramatic rise in obesity statistics has sent healthcare professionals scrambling for a solution. A study published in the Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine revealed that switching sugary drinks for water can cut 235 calories out of a person’s daily intake.

"The evidence is now clear that replacing these 'liquid calories' with calorie-free beverage alternatives both at home and in schools represents a key strategy to eliminate excess calories and prevent childhood obesity,” said the study’s lead author, Y. Claire Wang, M.D., Sc.D.