LAKELAND | The clock is ticking down on a pool of money Florida hospitals rely on in treating Medicaid patients and the uninsured.

There's been concern before about whether federal Low Income Pool dollars will continue coming to Florida, but the stakes are particularly high and the uncertainty greater this year because of the Affordable Care Act.

Losing LIP would cost Lakeland Regional Medical Center and Winter Haven Hospital, Polk County's two largest and not-for-profit hospitals, $8 million or more per year each, their representatives said.

Florida gets nearly $2 billion per year in LIP money and asked last year to get more than double that amount.

The money wasn't increased and Florida got only a one-year extension of LIP, said Charlotte Joseph Cassel of Florida Legal Services.

She and others spoke Thursday in a conference call organized by the League of Women Voters of Florida.

The LIP funding is due to end June 30. The rest of a Medicaid waiver Florida sought was approved for a longer period, she said, raising fears the government is sending a threat LIP will be reduced or eliminated.

"It's an $8 million-a-year issue for us," said Evan Jones, executive vice president and chief financial officer for Lakeland Regional. "It's potentially a very big issue."

In addition to the $8 million, Lakeland Regional gets $2 million for its Family Health Center through an arrangement with the county's indigent care program that brings more LIP dollars into Polk, he said.

Winter Haven would lose more than $8 million per year. The BayCare Health System, to which WHH belongs, gets $77.5 million in Medicaid supplemental payments, which are at risk if LIP isn't renewed or health care expanded, said spokeswoman Lisa Patterson.

"We encourage the legislature to develop a Florida-specific solution for health-care expansion, which provides a consumer-driven approach to health coverage while also addressing the looming shortfall in uncompensated care funding," she said in an email.

The federal government expected Florida to start getting federal help in treating low-income residents by expanding its Medicaid as part of the Affordable Care Act, instead of through LIP, speakers in the teleconference said.

"LIP will not continue in its current form," said Joan Alker, executive director of the Georgetown University Center for Children and Families.

Florida is "giving up" billions of dollars available for expansion because its legislature rejected the money for expanding Medicaid, Alker said.

"Florida has one of the highest uninsured rates in the nation and is lagging behind other states in bringing in federal Medicaid dollars," she said, accusing lawmakers of "turning their backs on their own constituents who need health care."

Florida would get $51 billion during a 10-year period for that expansion, according to a 2013 Social Security Estimating Conference Report.

"It would help people working in tourism, retail, construction and other industries that often don't provide health coverage," Alker said.

Funding also is being cut for another federal program, called DISH for Disproportionate Hospital Program, which gives Florida $240 million per year.

Lakeland Regional is getting $1.5 million less through DISH this year than it did before, Jones said, and stands to lose more.

It currently gets $13 million through DISH.

An analysis by Cassel showed Polk hospitals potentially losing $27.3 million in annual LIP dollars, but with the potential to get about $191 million if Florida accepted the Medicaid coverage expansion dollars. Those are one-year figures, said Cassel, an Equal Justice Works fellow.

With the Medicaid expansion envisioned under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government initially would pay 100 percent. Its share would go to 90 percent within 10 years.

Asked why the league expects Thursday's appeal to sway lawmakers, President Deirdre Macnab said there's a "growing drumbeat" of business support for finding a solution to the impasse.

Some are working to find alternative solutions that the federal government and state lawmakers might accept.

A Healthy Florida Works, a bipartisan coalition of businesses, some chambers of commerce and community leaders, has proposed an alternative that would extend coverage to 1 million working Floridians.

It would extend publicly covered health care, with those covered paying a premium, and link coverage to having a job or training for one. Details are available at www.ahealthyfloridaworks.com.

Some of its supporters were in the Tampa Bay area Wednesday to talk with elected officials about their plan.

"There are some interesting, exciting ideas," Macnab said.

[ Robin Williams Adams can be reached at robin.adams@theledger.com or 863-802-7558. Read her blog at robinsrx.blogs.theledger.com. Follow on Twitter @ledgerROBIN. ]