People in Business for June 29, 2014

People in Business for June 29, 2014

BATON ROUGE AREA

Tracy Evans has been named senior director for development at the LSU School of Veterinary Medicine, responsible for strategic development and philanthropic endeavors.

She was director of professional and bar relations, managing fundraising, for the LSU Law Center’s Chancellor’s Council.

Jenna Tedrick Kuttruff has been named head of the LSU College of Agriculture’s new Department of Textiles, Apparel Design and Merchandising.

She is a 26-year veteran of the textiles, apparel design and merchandising program at LSU and has served as interim department head since the department was established last fall. It was a division in what was the School of Human Ecology, where she served as division head for two years.

Steve Buttry has been named the first Lamar Visiting Scholar in the Manship School of Mass Communication’s Reilly Center for Media and Public Affairs.

In addition to teaching, Buttry’s primary roles are to work with Jerry Ceppos, dean of the Manship School, on the school’s $150,000 grant from the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation to develop student-led ideas to use social media to communicate the news. He will provide advice about the construction of its new Social Media Laboratory.

NEW ORLEANS AREA

The Fowler Rodriguez law firm has elected to partnership Jacques DeGruy, Jacob Gardner, Michael Harowski and Stuart Ponder.

DeGruy’s practice includes personal injury defense, including charter agreements, master service agreements and other contracts on behalf of clients.

Gardner’s practice is in admiralty law, maritime and non-maritime personal injury defense, marine insurance and civil litigation.

Harowski’s practice is in maritime law, environmental law, and marine and pollution casualty response.

Ponder primarily practices in the areas of insurance defense, admiralty and maritime law, corporate litigation and bankruptcy.

St. Tammany Parish Hospital in Covington has named Angela Clements as manager of revenue cycle integrity, auditing and analytics; Sandy Matthews as department head of the Community Wellness Center; Kim Meyer as department head of health information management; and Lisa Sharp as night shift supervisor for the emergency department.

Clements was an internal coding educator consultant, senior associate analyst and abstractor at Ochsner Health System. Matthews was manager of the Community Wellness Center and worked in human resources, surgical services and the medical staff office. Meyer was HIM operations manager. Sharp served as a registered nurse.

Ann C. Ravichandran, administrative assistant at West Jefferson Medical Center, has been elected president of the NOLA chapter of International Association of Administrative Professionals.

Other officers are Cassandra N. Jackson, executive assistant at Gibbs Construction LLC, vice president; Ginger L. Gravois, executive administrative assistant at Laporte CPAs and Business Advisors, secretary; Donna V. Murray, director of administration at George’s Enterprises, treasurer; and Desiree Dubroc Miller, administrative assistant at Oakwood Center, director.

Joseph L. Adams, a pharmacist at the Walgreens pharmacy in Covington, has been installed as president of the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy.

AROUND SOUTH LA.

Gov. Bobby Jindal has appointed to the Early Identification of Hearing Impaired Infants Advisory Council from the local area Barbara Gordon-Wendt, a practicing pediatric audiologist and an associate clinical professor at the LSU Health Sciences Center in New Orleans; Dr. Anita Jeyakumar, an otolaryngologist specializing in pediatric cochlear implantation on staff at Children’s Hospital in New Orleans; Alla Tarasyuk, the American Sign Language coordinator at the Louisiana School for the Deaf in Baton Rouge; Gina Easterly, of Geismar, a licensed speech and language pathologist and assistant program manager for EarlySteps; and Michelli Hanks-LeFors, of Baton Rouge, the parent of a deaf child.