Every weekend we select a handful of in-depth articles we think are worth a bit of your valuable time, either because they peel back the layers on a compelling business story, or somehow make us look at business in a different light.

A big data approach to public speaking. Data scientists in Silicon Valley analyzed more than 100,000 presentations from corporate executives to identify the combination of vocal, verbal and visual variables that define a good talk. Beyond confirming best practices they found a forth variable they call “Vital,” determined by how well the speaker communicates empathy. “To be seen as warm, you should acknowledge your audience’s needs by verbally echoing them (e.g., “Like you, I once…”) and by telling stories that convey your understanding of their needs,” writes Matt Abrams, a lecturer at Stanford University’s Graduate School of Business. The scientists at Quantified Communications, a company which makes an analytics platforms to evaluate corporate executives’ communication skills also recommended that speakers “maintain an engaged posture by leaning forward.” Speaking with your hands in your pockets is still a no-no.

Fire the jerks. Silicon Valley rewards the “aggressive, think-on-your-feet” types–who happen to be mostly male–and that’s a problem as far as solving the region’s diversity problem, argues Minnie Ingersoll, co-founder of startup Shift, writes in Quartz. “I want the business world to not just encourage women to ‘lean in,’ but create space for non-aggressive, soft-spoken people to succeed,” she writes. Her solution: Start firing all the jerks who can make “others feel small, shut down constructive debates, and generally create miserable environments.” A workplace that allows for “value different viewpoints and work styles,” will be better at attracting women than any bro-led startup that includes egg-freezing as a perk.

Culture is not the culprit. As sure as night follows day, every time news breaks of a company in turmoil calls for cultural change follow. Actions speak louder than blurbs, argue Jay W. Lorsch and Emily McTeague in Harvard Business Review, who describe how executives at companies under pressure like Ford Motor Co. and Delta Air Lines Inc. used available tools, such as decision rights and performance management, to address particular business challenges. Organizational culture evolved as a result. “Organizations are complex systems with many ripple effects—and reworking fundamental practices will inevitably lead to new values and behaviors,” they write.