Eight teenagers stand on one side of a long piece of patterned duct tape, debating how to get everyone across the “poisonous peanut butter river.”

With specific rules about the use of “magic boots” and how many times one person can cross the river, they try to talk it out and draw it out on paper. Some shout over one another while quieter ones take in the scene.

Within 45 minutes the group has successfully gotten everyone across. They cheer for one another, amazed by those who ferried across two people at a time.

« GALLERY: Grief support retreat for teens »

The Tidewell Center’s Teen Retreat lasted for two days in August, but the lessons and friendships gained by these eight teenagers will most likely leave a lifelong impression.

Parrish Daugherty, a Tidewell grief specialist, has worked with these teenagers over the years as they’ve dealt with the loss of a parent, sibling, friend or other close loved one. Those who participated in the first retreat are heading into their final years of high school or about to start college.

INTERESTED?

Anyone interested in more information can contact the Tidewell Hospice Grief Education and Support Center at 552-7515 or toll free at 855-843-3935, or visit the Anyone interested in more information can contact the Tidewell Hospice Grief Education and Support Center at 552-7515 or toll free at 855-843-3935, or visit the center's web site

“We wanted to bring it to another level of intensity,” Daugherty says.

The retreat was a chance for busy teenagers to interact with one another, not only talking about their lost loved ones, but also enjoying some spirited play time at the Treeumph Adventure Course in Bradenton — overcoming challenges, testing their strengths and encouraging one another.

Daugherty is already planning to have the group come back together again around the holidays to see how everyone is doing.

“Teenagers are a population that is not served as well,” she says, “and this opportunity to focus on them was a good opportunity.”