Sen. John Watkins leaves legacy: policy over politics

By Jim McConnell STAFF WRITER

The conservative wing of his own party may be cheering state Sen. John Watkins’ decision to retire from the state legislature when his term ends in January 2016, but a longtime General Assembly lobbyist believes that the departure of a leader with Watkins’ experience and demeanor will be a significant loss for Chesterfield.

“It takes years to build that seniority and you don’t replace it overnight,” said Charlie Davis, a county resident who has worked in and around the General Assembly since the early 1980s.

“It’s going to be difficult for anyone else to gain the stature that’s been amassed by Watkins because he came along at a different time. As fractured and contentious as the political process has become, it’s harder for the cream to rise to the top.”

Davis noted that in 1981, when Watkins was first elected to represent Chesterfield, Powhatan and Colonial Heights in the Virginia House of Delegates, if someone had called Central Casting looking for an ideal state legislator, “John Watkins would have wound up on their doorstep.

“The world has changed a lot,” Davis added.

Indeed, by deciding to walk away after more than 30 years in public service, the 67-year-old Watkins won’t have to face a likely GOP primary battle next summer for the 10th District’s seat in the state senate, which he has held since 1998.

The 10th District includes all of Powhatan County and parts of both Chesterfield and the city of Richmond.

“One of the things my wife said when we were making the decision not to run again was, ‘You have to recognize the fact that you’re leaving on your own terms, not somebody else’s,” Watkins said.

Given his stature, an interparty challenge to Watkins would have been considered folly 10 years ago. That was before Obamacare became law and a little-known college professor used it to bludgeon the second-most powerful Republican in the U.S. House of Representatives last summer.

Following Dave Brat’s stunning upset of House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, Watkins predicted that tea party conservatives within the Republican Party of Virginia would come gunning for him in 2015.

Long considered one of the state GOP’s most moderate members, Watkins placed himself squarely in the cross hairs of conservatives in February when he rolled out a proposal to assist thousands of Virginia’s uninsured citizens.

Watkins took pains to draw distinctions between Marketplace Virginia and an expansion of Medicaid, which most Republicans vehemently oppose over concerns about future costs, and its connection to federal funds made available via the Affordable Care Act.

Marketplace Virginia passed the Virginia Senate with bipartisan support. But Republican leaders in the House called Watkins’ proposal “Medicaid expansion by another name,” and it died without coming to a vote.

“It’s very difficult today to be more concerned about policy than politics,” Watkins said. “I don’t work like that. I don’t care if you’re a Republican or a Democrat; if you’re only voting because of politics, you’re not looking out for the people you were elected to serve.”

Davis, who described Watkins as “about as balanced overall” as any elected official he’s ever dealt with, believes that losing “the middle of the road” isn’t healthy in the long term for his district or the state.

Perhaps Watkins’ greatest legislative accomplishment came in 2012, when he spearheaded the passage of a landmark transportation bill that generates new revenue streams for road building and stands to benefit Chesterfield and other Central Virginia localities for decades to come.

A successful businessman from a prominent Virginia family, Watkins is well-known for his courteous manner, a willingness to consider alternative points of view and a keen interest in solving problems.

In a statement last week, state Sen. Donald McEachin (D-Henrico) called Watkins “the true epitome of a statesman and Virginia gentleman.

“Although we do not always agree, Senator Watkins is always cordial, open to new ideas and willing to work with anyone to benefit Virginia. He refrains from knee-jerk partisan responses and vitriol,” McEachin said. “His devotion to principle over partisanship, to committed and invested constituent service and to involvement in the community is an example to all of us.”

Donald Williams, chairman of the Chesterfield Republican Committee, described Watkins’ work in the General Assembly as “thoughtful and consequential.”

“Republicans may not be monolithic on every issue, but if you happened to disagree with John Watkins on an issue, he was never disagreeable,” Williams added.

While acknowledging it’s not easy for lawmakers to carry themselves as statesmen in an era of extreme political discourse, Watkins insisted it’s not impossible.

He also balked at the suggestion that his lasting legacy will be that of a man who was willing to buck his own party leadership.

“I have a long record, and I’m sure there are things people can point to and criticize, but you’re never going to make everybody happy all the time,” he said. “I’ve done this for 34 years and I‘ve given it everything I have. I haven’t always been right, but I always did what I thought was right for the people who put me in office.”