Several of the health insurance policies to be offered to New Jersey residents during the third year of the Affordable Care Act will come with premium hikes of more than 10 percent, according to the federal government.

Under new rules, insurance companies are required to report if they've submitted a rate request that increases more than 10 percent. The new rates go into effect Jan. 1, 2016.

Any increase below 10 percent does not have to be publicly reported.

At last count, some 208,000 state residents buy their health insurance through Obamacare, with more than 80 percent of them getting help from the taxpayers in the form of a monthly subsidy.

Just about half of them will see increases of more than 10 percent when it comes time to renew their policies this fall.

Horizon Healthcare Services, Inc. has requested an average increase of 10.81 percent for two of its Advantage EPO plans. A third plan, the so-called catastrophic plan, which covers about two percent of Horizon's exchange enrollment, has a proposed price increase of 14.4 percent.

In all, 86,000 customers would have to pay more, according to the company's rate memorandum.

The other Advantage EPO plan, which is anticipated to have more than two-thirds of the Advantage EPO membership by the end of 2015, will see an increase below 10 percent, said company spokesman Tom Vincz.

He also indicated the company plans to offer five new "competitively priced" policies.

Oxford Health Plans (part of UnitedHealthcare) has requested a average price increase of 15.65 percent for policies in its IP HOM product line, according to its filing with the federal government. Within that product line, increases range from 0.8 percent to 24.2 percent, affecting about 6,000 customers.

The other carriers that opted to sell individual plans to New Jersey residents through the federal marketplace - AmeriHealth, Health Republic of New Jersey, and Oscar -- submitted no rate increase requests that hit 10 percent and thus triggered public disclosure.

Insurers cite several factors pushing up their costs:

• When Obamacare was first unrolled, insurance companies had access to federal funds -- called reinsurance -- to protect them from an anticipated surge of new patients who needed treatment for multiple conditions they may have ignored when they were uninsured. The amount of those payments has been reduced each year, by design, as companies become better able to set accurate rates for these new customers.

• Some of the newer speciality prescription drugs are very expensive. While they account for just one percent of the prescriptions written, they account for 25 percent of insurance payments, said Sarah Adelman of the New Jersey Association of Health Plans.

• "The number of office visits continues to grow," reported Oxford in its filing.

Most Jersey residents had a choice of anywhere from 35 to 50 plans, depending on the county in which they live. For example, the newest carrier to join the New Jersey market, Oscar, sells plans in just nine counties at this stage.

The final rates will be set by November, just in time for the start of the next ACA open enrollment period on Nov. 1.

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com, or at (732) 902-4557. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.