A plan to pass on traditional art to students

Six Boulder art teachers, all from different schools, spent two days last week learning metalsmithing techniques from local artists so they could introduce the art form to their students.

The Boulder Metalsmithing Association created the workshop because, President Beth Merckel said, teaching students to use metal to create jewelry or sculptures has all but disappeared from local schools.

"We don't want metalsmithing to be a dying art," she said. "We want to give students some exposure to it so, if it's their thing, they can pursue it."

The two biggest barriers, she said, are that teachers don't have training in metalsmithing and schools can't afford to buy expensive tools.

In Boulder Valley, both New Vista High School and Horizons K-8 in Boulder provided some metalsmithing instruction last school year, but it doesn't appear to have been offered at any other schools. In the neighboring St. Vrain Valley School District, officials said, jewelry making is offered at all of the district's large high schools.

To create its training program, Boulder Metalsmithing used an Art in Education grant from Boulder Arts Commission, a donation of matching funds from Boulder-based jeweler Todd Reed and an equipment donation from Rio Grande jewelry supply.

As part of the program, the association bought about $2,000 worth of tools and equipment to "rent" to teachers for a small fee for three weeks at a time.

Advertisement

In the fall, association members also will conduct an introductory metalsmithing session in each of the teachers' schools — Boulder and Arapahoe Ridge high schools, Casey and Manhattan middle schools, Watershed School and Shining Mountain Waldorf School.

In the two-day teacher workshop, teachers worked with pewter, tin, steel, copper and brass to learn pewter casting, chain making, stamping and riveting, sawing and piercing, salt water etching and stone setting. The workshop focused on projects with inexpensive materials that are good for beginners.

"It's so much fun," said Dawn Deming, an art teacher at Manhattan Middle School.

She said she likes that metalsmithing is a future career possibility and that the skills students learn could be used in high school art classes.

"People tend to think of art in middle school as crafty kinds of things," she said. "I want them to work on things that are truly fine art."

In one session, Erie artist Leslie Maya-Charles taught the teachers to twist steel wire and then use hand saws to cut it into jump rings. Then they used pliers and hammers to create shapes from the wire and strung the shapes together with the rings to make chain necklaces.

Maya-Charles shared tips that included using inexpensive paste car wax on the final product and using ear plugs during the hammering stage — especially important with a large class.

She said she agreed to teach a session because she started learning metalsmithing in high school and "I'm nobody without my teachers."

"Having a skill that uses inexpensive materials makes art really accessible," she said.

Molly Hoverstock, who teaches art at Casey Middle School, said she took a jewelry class last fall and wanted to learn more.

"Kids love working with metal and tools, but I just didn't have that background," she said. "With a kit I can check out, it's something I could actually do in my classroom."

Boulder High fine arts teacher Kate Villarreal said she signed up for the workshop because she wanted to add another material to her pottery classes, both to challenge herself as a teacher and to keep the classes fresh for students.

"Whenever I talk to the kids about it, they get so excited," she said. "I think the kids are hungry for it."

An added benefit, the teachers said, is the opportunity to share ideas with their colleagues.

"We should have more ways to meet art teachers," said Joan Bremner, who teaches 3-D arts to Shining Mountain Waldorf's high school students. "That's the biggest gift."

For more information, go to bouldermetalsmiths.com.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com.