On Tuesday, a Superior Court judge dismissed the legislature’s lawsuit attempting to block the expansion of Medicaid.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) increased the reach of the Medicaid program, effectively making health coverage available to people earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

There are an estimated 42,000 Alaskans eligible for health coverage under Medicaid expansion.

Though the ACA mandated that the states cover this expansion population or lose federal Medicaid funds, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down that mandate in National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB) v Sebelius, thereby making expansion optional.

After the House Finance Committee declared it would not advance Gov. Bill Walker’s proposal to cover the Medicaid expansion population, Walker unilaterally expanded Medicaid using a statute that allows executive receipt of federal funds.

The Alaska legislature, via the Legislative Council, subsequently sued Walker and Department of Health and Social Services (DHSS) Commissioner Valerie Davidson.

In August, Superior Court Judge Frank Pfiffner denied the Legislative Council’s motion for a preliminary injunction, saying they were unlikely to prevail on the merits of the case.

“This case turns on the meaning of one word: ‘required,’” Pfiffner said when he rendered that decision.

The Alaska statute relating to Medicaid eligibility (AS 47.07.020) reads, “All residents of the state for whom the Social Security Act requires Medicaid coverage are eligible to receive medical assistance under 42 U.S.C. 1396 – 1396p (Title XIX, Social Security Act).” (emphasis added)

The Medicaid expansion population is included in a Social Security Act list for whom states “must… provide for making medical assistance available.”

“Therefore, the Social Security Act textually commands participating states to provide medical assistance to the expansion group,” Pfiffner wrote in his Tuesday opinion.

This is the interpretation held by the Walker Administration.

In NFIB v Sebelius, Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts wrote:

As for the Medicaid expansion, that portion of the Affordable Care Act violates the Constitution by threatening existing Medicaid funding. Congress has no authority to order the States to regulate according to its instructions. Congress may offer the States grants and require the States to comply with accompanying conditions, but the States must have a genuine choice whether to accept the offer. The States are given no such choice in this case: They must either accept a basic change in the nature of Medicaid, or risk losing all Medicaid funding. The remedy for that constitutional violation is to preclude the Federal Government from imposing such a sanction. That remedy does not require striking down other portions of the Affordable Care Act.

“NFIB created a unique situation where, for the first time, the Social Security Act textually commands states to cover a group but it does not penalize noncomplying states,” Pfiffner explained. “This requirement may lack the coerciveness that Congress intended, but it is still a requirement.”

Judge Pfiffner: Walker More Convincing, Relies on Plain Language

The Legislative Council disagreed, concluding that this makes the expansion population optional and subject to a 1974 statutory amendment stating, “Additional groups may not be added unless approved by the legislature.”

Further, the Legislative Council argued that requiring coverage for the Medicaid expansion population violates the “anti-commandeering principle” that limits federal interference in state legislative processes.

“The United States Supreme Court has struck down laws under the anti-commandeering principle on only two occasions,” responded Pfiffner. “Both of these cases were decided in the 1990s. It is unlikely that the 1974 Alaska Legislature infused the word ‘requires’ with a special meaning premised on a constitutional doctrine established in 1992.”

“[T]he Governor’s interpretation is more convincing because it relies on the plain, rather than a specialized, meaning of the statute,” Pfiffner ruled.

Though in August Pfiffner said he would defer to Davidson on interpretation of relevant statute, Pfiffner relied Tuesday on the 2015 decision in Alaska Department of Health and Social Services v Gross in rejecting Walker’s argument that DHSS should be shown deference.

“The primary question in this case is what the phrase ‘for whom the Social Security Act requires Medicaid coverage’ means,” wrote Pfiffner. “Answering this question does not implicate Department expertise or specialized knowledge. Instead the answer depends on the legislature’s intent in amending Alaska’s Medicaid statute in 1974.”

But Gross also affirmed that “[A] remedial statute is to be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes.”

“As a part of the Social Security Act, Medicaid is a remedial statute. The primary purpose behind Alaska’s Medicaid statute is to provide ‘the needy persons of this state… uniform and high quality care that is appropriate to their condition and cost-effective to the state,’ Pfiffer wrote, quoting from statute.

“Interpreting the statute to require coverage of needy individuals rather than interpreting the statute to forbid coverage promotes this remedial purpose,” he concluded.

Pfiffner’s determination is that it was the legislature, not Walker, who ultimately required coverage of the expansion population when it wrote, “All residents of the state for whom the Social Security Act requires Medicaid coverage are eligible[.]”

Likely referring to Article III, section 16, Pfiffner noted, “[I]f the legislature does make a group eligible, the governor would potentially violate the Alaska Constitution if the governor did not cover the group.” (emphasis in original)

During oral arguments on the motion for preliminary injunction, Pfiffner was incredulous that the legislature placed intent language in the FY 2016 budget blocking Medicaid expansion, a move the Alaska Supreme Court has deemed a violation of the confinement clause of the Alaska Constitution.

“If it so desires, the current legislature can change state law to reject the expansion. Until then, state law requires the Governor to provide Medicaid services to the expansion group,” Pfiffner ruled Tuesday.

He added, partially quoting Roberts in NFIB, “This order interprets the law. It says nothing about the merits of expanding Medicaid. It says nothing about the merits of giving that choice to either the executive or the legislative branch of government. ‘Under the Constitution, that judgment is reserved to the people.'”

Legislative Minority Celebrates Ruling

“I am a strong believer in our court system and today’s ruling validated that belief,” Rep. Andy Josephson (D-Anchorage) said Tuesday in a statement. “By not properly considering Medicaid expansion legislation, the Majority leadership in the House and Senate left the Governor no choice but to use his executive power to help thousands of Alaskans get life-saving healthcare. That decision was the right one morally, and now we know it was the right one legally.”

Despite advice from Legislative Legal Services that Walker’s expansion of Medicaid was likely legal, the Legislative Council voted to sue. They authorized up to $450,000 for legal representation in the case, including $400,000 for Outside firm Bancroft, LLC.

Rep. Sam Kito III (D-Juneau) is the Council’s only minority member and the only member to vote in opposition.

In a press release, Sen. Bill Wielechowski (D-Anchorage) said:

Our own legislative attorneys predicted this, and the court agreed. It’s disappointing that the Majority in the legislature has now spent hundreds of thousands of dollars to come to the same exact conclusion that our own attorneys did months ago. We can’t change the past, but it is time to move on, accept the court’s decision, and acknowledge the benefits of Medicaid expansion which have been touted by the Majority’s own hired consultants, and the Department of Health and Social Services.

“Lawmakers should be working towards Medicaid reform and the hundreds of million[s] in savings, not wasting money by suing the Governor for doing something he was obligated to do by the law,” said Rep. Geran Tarr (D-Anchorage).

“During these times of fiscal crisis, we simply do not have the money to waste on this issue, and my sincere wish is that the Majority will accept the court’s decision and not appeal this frivolous lawsuit,” Wielechowski agreed.

On the contrary, Senate Majority Leader John Coghill (R-North Pole), who sits on the Legislative Council and whose office drove the lawsuit, told KTUU Wednesday afternoon that the legislature will appeal to the Alaska Supreme Court.

Like this: Like Loading...