Buy Photo File / The TennesseanMTA will operate on Christmas and New Year’s Day. An MTA bus parks at the Music City Central bus depot. The transit authority last week approved one its largest additions to bus services. File / The Tennessean Nashville hopes to attract more bus riders on Friday. (Photo: LaVondia Majors / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights Residents say better transit is one of their top five priorities for Nashville's future.

Transportation solutions include a comprehensive, regional approach

Commutes are getting ever more challenging in Middle Tennessee

The SEC Tournament was a boon for Nashville and continues to add to the city's growing cachet.

However, if you were one of the thousands of commuters who was stuck in traffic, you probably hoped for a minute that you were somewhere else.

Traffic in Nashville and surrounding communities is already a headache even without all the visitors. It's the price of being in "It City," but there will be a bigger price to pay if we don't invest in our road infrastructure and alternative transportation solutions. Remember that one million more people are expected to move to the region in the next 25 years.

The 2014 Vital Signs report, produced by the Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce and the Nashville Area Metropolitan Planning Organization, documented that about three in five commuters in Middle Tennessee have a drive today that exceeds 20 minutes and one-third of commuters say they are frequently in traffic jams. That is only expected to worsen.

That's why it's no surprise that Nashville residents listed transit as one of their top five priorities in the three-year NashvilleNext urban planning community process, which drew 17,000 comments, and provides a road map for Nashville's future. The draft plan is scheduled to be released by Metro Government on March 27 for public input and the city's Planning Commission will vote on it this summer.

More than half of residents in Middle Tennessee counties drive to another county to work, and most of those are commuting into Nashville, which is why a regional approach is essential.

That approach will be critical to improve bus transportation, add new transit options, fix and build roads, and find innovative ways to improve traffic patterns, keep commuters better informed about road conditions, and help alleviate congestion.

The list of challenges includes:

• 32 percent of urban roads are congested in Tennessee;

• The state gas tax hasn't been increased in 26 years so the Tennessee Department of Transportation only has money to maintain roads, not build them;

• The federal gas tax has not risen since 1997 and the National Highway Trust Fund balance continues to decline;

• Two out of five roads in Nashville have potholes, cracks or are in distress — and that reflects the state of our roads prior to the recent snow and ice storms

In addition, the newly formed Transportation Coalition of Tennessee has called attention to 254 unfunded projects in Tennessee, exceeding $6 billion.

Among the Middle Tennessee projects identified were State Road 96 from Franklin to Murfreesboro ($82.5 million) and Interstate 40 at the Donelson Pike interchange ($57.5 million).

Middle Tennessee local leaders – including the regional Mayors' Caucus and the Metropolitan Planning Organization, among them – are thinking ahead and have offered solutions and 25-year plans to address these issues.

They require money, however, from federal, state and local government, and that's where citizens should make their voices known to their lawmakers.

On transit, 54 percent of Vital Signs report respondents said they would be willing to dedicate more in taxes to expand options, which is going to require money, political will and strategic infill of residential and commercial property to make it more conducive.

As more people, especially Millennials and those who want to downsize, wish to move in or near the urban core, better transit and more sidewalks and bike paths are essential.

The Metro Planning Department has estimated that building a high-capacity transit network will cost in the range of $1.4 billion (in traffic) to $7.2 billion (out of traffic), and you can add $1 billion to $2.7 billion to make regional connections.

In a recent bus ride-along with Nashville Metropolitan Transit Authority CEO Steve Bland, editorial board members heard a vision for the future of transit.

Even though the Amp project, which would have connected East Nashville to the West End, is dead, there are other options that can create bus rapid transit across the county to increase frequency. You can learn more and ask your questions in a live chat with Bland on www.tennessean.com on Tuesday, March 17 at 10 a.m.

As a frequent bus rider who lives the urban experience, I am excited about the possibilities for this community, but it's going to take engaged citizens and thoughtful leaders who follow through with the necessary investments.

Investing in high capacity transit network

$1.4 billion

Cost of in-traffic transit expansion investment

$7.2 billion

Cost of out-of-traffic transit expansion investment

(Regional connections will add between $1 billion to $2.7 billion)

Nashville Planning Department

Live chats with experts

Join or replay live chats with experts on different topics at 10 a.m. daily Monday through Thursday at Tennessean.com.

Monday: Live chat with Richard C. Bernhardt on an overview of NashvilleNext

Tuesday: Live chat with Steve Bland of Nashville MTA on transit

Wednesday: Live chat with Kathleen Williams of TennGreen on open spaces

Thursday: Live chat with Metro Planning Commissioner Jessica Farr on affordable housing

NashvilleNext timeline

March 27: Draft NashvilleNext plan to be posted online, ready for online comment

April 18: Public event celebrating NashvilleNext plan at Tennessee State University

April 20 and 27: Public drop-in sessions (another may be added on April 28)

April 30: Public comment period on the draft plan ends

May 11: Static draft to be posted online (tentative)

June 11: Metro Planning Commission to hold public hearing on NashvilleNext plan

Source: Metro Planning Department

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1ba5rWW