OFA encourages Americans to sign up for Obamacare using creepy Prince memes and a trip to meet Obama

Supporters of the Affordable Care Act have pulled out all the stops in encouraging Americans to sign up for insurance under the new healthcare law, from bros doing keg stands to celebrity endorsements. But one organization’s newest ploy is tapping into its bank of creepy GIFs featuring the “artist formerly known as Prince” in an effort to sway those not yet enrolled.

In an email sent to supporters Tuesday, Organizing for Action, the nonprofit spurned from the president’s reelection campaign, encouraged potential donors to help with the “final push” to spread the word about Obamacare and incentivized their need with a chance to win a trip to Washington, D.C., to meet President Barack Obama in the flesh. Though the organization is no stranger to recruiting supporters of the Affordable Care Act, OFA decided to top off their email with a few GIFs of Prince to sweeten the deal.

“This is your chance,” the message reads. “There’s no good reason not to get in on this.”

Prince is featured staring at the reader as he moves across the screen, raising an eyebrow as if to say, “duh.”

OFA goes on to encourage email recipients to make a pledge to spread the word about Obamacare. The president’s signature healthcare law rolled out Oct. 1 with a nonfunctioning health insurance exchange, millions of cancellation notices from insurance companies and skyrocketing premiums and deductible. As a result, enrollment figures fall far short of the Obama administration’s projections, resulting in an 11th-hour push for enrollment in the law as the end of the open enrollment period, March 31, quickly approaches.

Those who do commit to spreading the word about the Affordable Care Act are automatically entered into a drawing to meet the president at OFA’s National Organizing Summit on Feb. 25. Hotel and airfare, the group boasts, are included.

“Seriously, what are you still waiting for?” the email states.

The message closes with a GIF of the “Kiss” singer staring with his eyebrows raised in a way that echoes, “seriously? Go.”

The deadline to sign up to meet President Obama is tonight at midnight.