Topics: Donald Trump, Elections 2016, History, Lee Atwater, Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan, The House of Representatives, The Republican Party, The South, News, Politics News

About 50 years ago, the Republican party made a conscious decision to become the party of white men. It was a smart strategic move that ushered in an era of neoliberalism and GOP dominance throughout the final decades of the 20th century, though it has always been an odd alliance between poor and working class white Southerners and wealthy business and financial elites. This alliance, widely known as the “Southern Strategy,” has remained generally stable for nearly half a century, but today, the cracks are starting to widen, and it is seemingly falling apart. As William Greider pointed out in The Nation earlier this week:

“The party establishment, including business and financial leaders, seems to realize that Republicans need to moderate their outdated posture on social issues. But they can’t persuade their own base—especially Republicans in the white South—to change. The longer the GOP holds out, the more likely it is to be damaged by the nation’s changing demographics—the swelling impact of Latinos and other immigrants, and the flowering influence of millennials, the 18-to-30-year-olds who are more liberal and tolerant than their elders.”

While the country at large is moving past the social intolerance that has long plagued our political discourse, a significant part of the GOP has refused to budge when it comes to issues like gay marriage, immigration, and reproductive rights. Leading candidates in the GOP primary — like Donald Trump, Ben Carson, and Carly Fiorina, who are all doing their best to rile up social conservatives — reveal this stubbornness.

However, America’s changing demographics — or as Ann Coulter calls it, the “browning of America” — is the most damning change for the Republican party. The fact that America is becoming more and more diverse, while the GOP is seemingly doubling down on its white identity politics, does not bode well for its future.

The Southern Strategy came about during the Civil Rights era, particularly after the President Lyndon Johnson, a Democrat from Texas, signed into law the Civil Rights Act of 1964. “I think we just delivered the South to the Republican party for a long time to come,” Johnson presciently said to a White House aide.

Richard Nixon was the first Republican candidate to run on the Southern Strategy, with the backing of the nation’s foremost “Dixiecrat,” Strom Thurmond, who had sustained the longest filibuster in history in order to delay a vote on the 1957 Civil Rights Act. In 1972, Nixon swept the historically Democratic South, and, except for a hiccup in the form of Georgia native Jimmy Carter, the region has been a Republican stronghold ever since.

But it was Ronald Reagan who was the first truly neoliberal president to ran on the Southern Strategy, using dog-whistle terms like “welfare queen” and promoting states rights’ issues in the deep South, where civil rights demonstrators had been terrorized a decade earlier. The late Republican strategist, Lee Atwater, notoriously described the southern strategy in an off-the-record interview: