I like to joke that because RCN has runs all 15 of my annual Christmas Light shows around the holidays, people have the opportunity to watch me age grotesquely before their very eyes.

When you're seeing someone every day, it's hard to notice the incremental change. When you compare now with 15 years ago, it's another story.

I think it's the same way with the times we live in. I suspect that when people look back later on the first 15 years of this century, they'll realize — better than we can as we're living them — that there has been incredible change.

Technologically, for sure. I just saw a video that reported the amount of human knowledge is doubling now every 13 months, and that by 2020, it will double every 12 hours.

But we've also seen tremendous social change.

Certainly this summer's Supreme Court decisions solidified that idea. First, the last real threat to Obamacare was squelched, and then the right to same-sex marriage was ratified. Depending on your point of view, these decisions were catastrophic or exhilarating, but either way, they represented confirmation that our country and our world are changing fast.

I think it's one reason some people actually are embracing the buffoonish presidential candidacy of Donald Trump. He has no solutions to our problems, but by spouting outrageous exaggerations regarding hot-button issues, he's striking some kind of sour chord with people who feel frustrated and helpless, in part because of the way things are changing.

There are a lot of them. Somebody mailed me a photo this spring of a billboard in Spanish. The anonymous note that accompanied it read:

"Sending this photo to you because you have a public voice in the community. This display is on S. Seventh Street just before Walnut Street, Allentown. Since when have we changed our language. I am an 80-year lifelong resident of the city.

"If you think I am prejudiced, just tear this up. If not, what can be done to stop this? Thank you."

I don't know that he's prejudiced, but I do know that nothing can be done to stop this. Allentown has seen several attempts to keep government and others from publishing material in Spanish, and it's all been terribly ill-advised. This city is 43 percent Latino, according to the last census, and some people in that population haven't mastered English yet for a variety of reasons, one of which is that there aren't enough programs to help them learn. They always have waiting lists.

So when the government wants to get important information to its residents, it makes sense to publish it in more than one language — just as it did back in the days when the German language was so common around here.

There's no reason to get upset about this. It's just the reality of the city's population in 2015, which has a much different makeup than it did for most of that 80-year-old resident's life.

Change.

The shift in attitudes toward gay people in general and gay marriage in particular has been strikingly swift. Fifteen years ago, there would have been no public outcry because the Boy Scouts banned gay leaders and youths. Now, even after lifting its ban on gay Scouts two years ago, the organization is reeling from the public backlash over its restrictions, and its executive committee recently decided to lift the ban on gay leaders. It had no choice.

Robert M. Gates, the former defense secretary and president of the Scouts, spoke at the Scouts' annual meeting in May about the need to reconsider the ban on gay leaders.

"We can act on our own or we can be forced to act, but either way, I suspect we don't have a lot of time," Gates said.

The Confederate flag became another pivot point this summer, as the church shooting in Charleston finally generated enough pressure to remove it from South Carolina's capitol and perhaps in other official settings in the South.

As a young person who was born in Tennessee and had lived in Virginia, I once admired that flag as a symbol of my shallow roots. I still have a little one, badly faded, in a drawer somewhere. What I didn't understand until later was that the flag also was a symbol of official oppression of black people. That Confederate battle flag first flew over the South Carolina's capitol in 1961, at the height of the civil rights movement

That was not a coincidence. It symbolized resistance, not just against the union, but against desegregation.

Don't think for a moment that symbolism was lost on the black people of South Carolina or other Southern states where that flag of resistance has been displayed in a variety of ways — and will continue to be by individuals, including Northerners, who want to make a statement about race. It's a statement no government should be making, which made this change long overdue.

That's why the metaphor I began with is decidedly imperfect, when you consider the changes we've seen just this summer and the positive momentum they've generated.

I looked better 15 years ago. In many important respects, our country didn't.

bill.white@mcall.com

610-820-6105

Bill White's commentary appears Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays.