A dramatic rise in stabbings is due to a reduction in stop-and-search checks on youths, the UK's most senior police figure said.

Home Secretary Theresa May has championed the reining-in of police search powers, telling officials that they 'inflamed tensions' and last night said the numbers of searches must continue to fall.

But Metropolitan Police Commissioner Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe has hinted at an increase of targeted searches after teenage knife crime rose by almost 25 per cent in the last year.

Targeting crime: Commissioner Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe said the rise in stabbings and knife crime involving young people has caused the Metropolitan Police to review their position on stop and search

The country's most senior officer, Sir Bernard has voiced concerns about a recent spate of vicious knife attacks in the capital.

In the last fortnight, an 18-year-old man died in front of children at a north London playground, while a 26-year-old man was stabbed to death in south London.

More than 1,500 young people were stabbed in London in the last year, an increase of 23 per cent .

Sir Bernard said that while the Met had reduced its searches 'hugely' and new tactics had led to more arrests, he was looking into increasing 'targeted' checks in crime-heavy areas.

Speaking in an interview with BBC London, Sir Bernard said: ' Over the last three years we have listened to feedback from the public about too much ineffective stop and search. We have worked to make it more targeted and have seen a broad reduction in violence, shootings and stabbings.

More than 1,500 teenagers were stabbed in London in the last year, an increase of 23 per cent

'But over the last three months there has been a rise in stabbings and that has caused us to review our position on stop and search.

'We were doing too much; repeatedly stopping people who have done nothing wrong can't be right. But if we are getting to the stage where people think they can carry knives with impunity, that can't be good for anyone.

'Stop and search is a reasonable tactic when used in the right way.

'We don't want to see a return to a million stop and searches, but there is an argument for more use of stop and search focused on high knife crime areas and targeting gangs.

'Our 1,200 Trident Gang Crime officers have a big part to play in this.

'If we know people are violent and carry knives, then we have the power to prevent them hurting people and we should stop and search them every day. '

Mrs May announced in February at the Stephen Lawrence Charitable Trust lecture that she wanted to stop the 'excessive and inappropriate' use of the searches.

Mr Lawrence's brother Stuart, 37, said he has been stopped and searched 25 times since he was 17 years old because of the colour of his skin.

But last night the Home Secretary insisted that she wanted stop-and-search numbers to fall and warned new legislation would be brought in if it didn't.

Mrs May told the Times: 'If the stop and searches do not continue to fall, if the use of these powers does not become more targeted, and stop-to -arrests ratios do not improve, then I will not hesitate to bring in primary legislation to make it happen.'