Brad Vest/The Commercial Appeal Welders, fitters and other skilled craftsmen at Memphis logistics company AIL pose for a portrait along with Timothy Walls (second from right), senior vice president of corporate operations, and Wesley Barnett (center), senior vice president of construction services, inside of the AIL fabrication shop. The workers said they wouldn’t work there if the company hadn’t offered health insurance.

By Kevin McKenzie of The Commercial Appeal

Welders, fitters and other skilled craftsmen at AIL, a Memphis supplier to the logistics industry, said they wouldn't work there if the company hadn't offered health insurance.

With a workforce that can fluctuate from 30 to about 130, depending on government contracts and other business won, AIL is among the nation's small businesses that can't avoid the issue of providing health coverage to employees and their dependents.

After a two-year delay, Obamacare as of Jan. 1 calls for employers with 50 to 99 full-time employees to offer at least bare bones health insurance to full-time employees.

Larger employers, with 100 more workers, faced the health insurance mandate last year. Smaller businesses, with fewer than the equivalent of 50 full-time employees, are exempt.

In Shelby County, about 850 establishments, or fewer than 5 percent of a total of more than 19,400 business locations, had 50 to 99 employees in 2013, according to U.S. Census data. Only about 3 percent had 100 or more employees.

AIL, short for AVPOL International LLC, founded in 1997 and owned by a retired Air Force lieutenant colonel, Sandra Walls, has always considered health coverage to be part of an employer's incentives, said her son, Timothy Walls, senior vice president of corporate operations.

"So when the Affordable Care Act came out, honestly it didn't really affect us that much," Walls said. "We just felt like it was bringing everybody else on board to what they really needed."

At AIL's facility in Raleigh, Wesley Barnett, senior vice president of construction services, said AIL's health insurance helped him lure several skilled workers away from a previous employer who offered no benefits.

Barnett said that before joining AIL last summer, he was paying $1,200 a month for a health plan covering him and his wife. With rising costs, he expected that to jump to $2,250 a month. He bought his own insurance after his previous employer declined to offer the benefit, he said.

"We went to the other company because he promised us, and then he never did it," Barnett said. "After he found out what the cost was going to be, he said, 'Naw, get your own.' Benefits are a big thing for working people. All of these boys have some kind of family. They have to have insurance."

The government uses legal teeth to make sure employers offer insurance. The "Employer Shared Responsibility Payment" enforced by the Internal Revenue Service provides a possible penalty that can range up to about $2,000 for each full-time employee, although the first 30 won't be counted against employers that don't offer at least minimum coverage.

Calculating how full- and part-time workers add up and how much a company can charge workers for their part of the insurance premiums are among the new guidelines for employers.

Full-time employees are defined as working an average of 30 hours or more a week, although business groups including the National Restaurant Association are lobbying to raise that to 40 hours.

In 2014, 48.5 percent of Tennessee firms offered health insurance, a decline from 55.9 percent in 2010, according to a Health Policy Blog report issued in November by the Methodist Le Bonheur Center for Healthcare Economics at the University of Memphis.

Most of the decline was due to the number of small firms, with fewer than 50 employees, offering coverage, said the report by U of M health economics professor Cyril F. Chang and Dr. David Mirvis, professor emeritus at the University of Tennessee Health Science Center College of Medicine.

Health insurance agents in Memphis said that most employers in the 50-99 class prepared for the new year's mandate. New government reporting requirements, including IRS 1095 forms providing information to employees and the IRS about who has coverage and when, is another issue taking hold this year.

Some employers, largely in service industries with a lot of younger low-wage and high-turnover employees, have scrambled to meet the new mandate, said Don Lamb, president of the Mid-South Association of Health Underwriters and Collier Insurance life, health and benefits manager.

"We've seen a few of those, on the smaller employer side, less than 50, abandon the group plan and just let the employees go to the (federal Healthcare.gov) exchange," Lamb said.

However, the trend has been to provide some coverage or some benefit that would help employees avoid the individual penalty under the Affordable Care Act, he said.

For certain employees at companies that haven't offered medical coverage in low-margin, low-wage, high-turnover industries, the new mandate may not help workers, according to Timothy Finnell, founder and president of Group Benefits LLC.

Firms seeking to minimize costs and avoid the penalty may offer coverage with a very high deductible, such as $5,000, Finnell said. In that case, low-wage workers would find better, subsidized Obamacare coverage if their employer provided no coverage.

"Very, very, very few have just said, 'Forget it, I'm going to do nothing and pay fines,' he said. "It doesn't make financial sense when you can do something else and avoid that."

At AIL, Walls said the biggest issue for small businesses providing health insurance is the affording the cost.

"Get out there and get more business, that's the only way you really can," he said.