Law enforcement in 33 states have are collecting data on residents through their cellphones, according to a USA TODAY investigation. (Photo: Bebeto Matthews, AP)

A USA TODAY investigation revealed that police agencies in 33 states are collecting information from residents through their cellphones. Comments from Facebook are edited for clarity and grammar:

If you are not a drug kingpin, or a terrorist, or a child abductor, I really do not think you have anything to worry about. The police are not interested in your conversation about how Billy Bob done Barbara Jean wrong.

— Kristy Ondeck

When law enforcement runs out of big fish to go after, the small fish (everyday, law-abiding citizens) will start to look bigger.

— James Alexander

Maybe we don't have anything to worry about, but this is a big violation of our rights. And if we sit back and take it, pretty soon we will have no rights. Have you ever heard the saying, "Give them an inch and they'll take a mile"? The police can find ways to get the information they need without invading our privacy. They are just nosey and are using their power to find out what we the people are doing, saying and thinking.

— Margaret Edwards

Spying is illegal. This is, or used to be, America home of the free. Now it is becoming communist America. Spying on people, reading e-mails, being forced to get insurance (or pay a fine). That is not what America is about.

— Sam Morgan

I think some people are panicking to the extreme.

There are a lot of nut jobs in the world, and if I have to give up a tiny bit of privacy in order to be protected from the nuts, I am all for it.

People need to stop being paranoid. Who really cares if a street camera records me going to work or the National Security Agency has a look at texts I receive from my wife, my kids or a buddy?

— Tony Gjura

I'm not paranoid. But I am angry that our government is using the threat of terrorism to overstep its boundaries.

It looks at our e-mails and Facebook posts. It tracks our phone calls.

It doesn't need to track everyone to catch the terrorists that are out there. Paranoid? No. I'm not paranoid. I'm just aware of what's going on, and I don't like it.

We have the Constitution for a reason, and many Americans have died defending it.

Some people just sit back and believe everything our government says while it works at taking away our rights.

People like that make our government officials believe they can get away with anything.

— Brody Lee Boggess

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/JwC1Vx