News

Practicing safe sex and utilizing various forms of birth control and STD preventative measures is part of one’s sexual health. While there various forms of birth control available on the market, only the male condom helps prevent STD’s. The Female Health Company (FHCO) , a health care product developer and manufacturer, aims to place control in the hands of women by offering its condom alternative.

Headquartered in Chicago, illinois, The Female Health Company manufactures and markets the FC2 Female Condom®, the only currently available female-controlled birth control alternative approved by the FDA that also offers protection against sexually transmitted diseases. Since 2007, the company has shipped the FC2 to 144 countries and, moreover, the World Health Organization has approved the FC2 for purchase by U.N. agencies.

Today, the company has revealed a major development that serves as a major operational and financial milestone. The Female Health Company and Aspen Park Pharmaceuticals, a men’s health company, have entered into a definitive merger agreement. Per the agreement, both companies will be established as a men’s and a women’s health division that offers pharmaceuticals and consumer health products.

“For FHC, this is a transformational merger, creating a powerful company with solid cash flows and a deep product development portfolio that serves multi-billion dollar industry segments,” said O.B. Parrish, Chairman and CEO of The Female Health Company. “More specifically, APP brings numerous late and early stage product candidates focused in the areas of oncology and men’s and women’s health, as well as a first-class experienced management team. Importantly, the strategic benefits of the transaction deliver on our objective to add a diversified and complementary mix of products that has the potential to substantially expand our revenue base and grow our business.”

The merger is expected to close in Q3 2016.

Furthermore, in late March, the company addressed the reimbursability of the female condom under the Affordable Care Act through webinars developed in partnership with the National Coalition of STD Directors and the National Family Planning and Reproductive Health Association.

Having access to health essentials is key to maintaining one’s quality of life. Through this landmark merger, both The Female Health Company and Aspen Park Pharmaceuticals are positioned to provide men and women products and pharmaceuticals that are vital to one’s overall and sexual health. “We believe merging with APP is in the best interests of our shareholders,” said Parrish, “providing exciting new opportunities, while substantially mitigating the risks associated with being a single product company.”

DISCLOSURE: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors, and do not represent the views of equities.com. Readers should not consider statements made by the author as formal recommendations and should consult their financial advisor before making any investment decisions. To read our full disclosure, please go to: http://www.equities.com/disclaimer