Buy Photo Republican Carly Fiorina talks with the Des Moines Register editorial board May 7 in downtown Des Moines. (Photo: Michael Zamora/The Register)Buy Photo

Carly Fiorina, the former Hewlett Packard CEO who is seeking the Republican nomination for the presidency, has some original ideas about how to tame what she calls the "vast, bloated, bureaucratic monstrosity" that is the federal government.

In meeting with The Des Moines Register's editorial board last week, Fiorina, 60, said the president could inspire Congress to reform the federal government by encouraging the public to become more engaged.

"People vote on their smartphones every week for 'American Idol,'" she said. "What would happen, honestly, if the president of the United States went into the Oval Office and said, 'My fellow Americans, I'd like to ask for your help. We've just put up on the Internet, we've documented, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of billions of dollars — real money, your money — of fraud, waste, abuse and corruption. What do you think we should do? Press 1 for 'Nothing,' or 2 for 'Get it done.' I think people would respond, and I think when people responded, the political process would respond."

Reiterating many of themes that are an integral part of her recently published book, "Rising to the Challenge," Fiorina spoke of the need to eliminate the "web of dependency" that prevents people from advancing in life. Her own rise from a "Kelly-Girl" secretary to CEO of a Fortune 20 company was made possible by people who gave her an opportunity to succeed, she said.

"Everybody needs someone to take a chance on them, everyone needs someone to give them a helping hand," she says. "I needed a helping hand when I battled cancer. We needed a helping hand when we lost our daughter. This has to be a nation of possibilities for every American, regardless of their circumstances."

Fiorina's rise to the top at Hewlett-Packard ended in what she now calls a "boardroom brawl" over the direction of the company. "I was fired," she says. "What I learned is that when you lead, when you challenge the status quo, you are going to make enemies. It is the nature of leadership."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Republican Carly Fiorina talks about her exit as CEO of Hewlett-Packard, what she learned about leadership and defends her record while at the helm of the technology company.

Although her campaign for the presidency is just seven days old, Fiorina has wasted no time criticizing the presumed Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton, describing her as "untrustworthy" and unaccomplished. When asked whether there was anything she admired about the former senator and secretary of state, Fiorina responded, "Hillary Clinton is a highly intelligent, very hard-working woman, and I admire that about her tremendously. She has dedicated her life to public service, and I admire that about her… (But) it is totally legitimate to ask the question, 'What is your track record? I understand you've held big titles, but what have you accomplished?"

As Fiorina sees it, Clinton is part of a "professional political class" that has been presiding over an "ever bigger, ever more corrupt, ever more incompetent" federal government, and it will take a Washington outsider like herself to change that. She sees herself as a leader, who can change the status quo, rather than as a manager who would simply would work within the existing system.

"The fact that I've never held a political office before is considered by many people to be a huge asset," she says, while adding that she has advised the Central Intelligence Agency, two secretaries of defense, a secretary of state and a secretary of homeland security. So, she said, she is "not a neophyte about how government works."

While Fiorina's status as a political newcomer accounts for some of her appeal among conservatives, it also seems to be a factor in her grasp of certain issues, including health care, immigration and entitlements. With regard to the Affordable Care Act, she said that while she fully supports the law's goals — affordable insurance for all, with coverage for pre-existing conditions — she feels the law is not working.

When asked if there are any elements of the law she would fight to preserve, Fiorina said, "Who knows? I mean, really, who knows? Does anybody understand this law? I will challenge you to find me someone who has read the whole thing and understands it. I don't know what's in it."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Republican Carly Fiorina talks about the complexities of Obamacare during an interview with the Des Moines Register Editorial Board.

As for entitlements, Fiorina said she doesn't have a plan on how to pay for Social Security in the years ahead, saying the federal government must first deal with waste, fraud and abuse throughout the government.

"Let's go deal with that," she said. "When we've demonstrated we can deal with that stuff, then let's go talk about Social Security."

The Iowa caucuses are still nine months off. We hope Carly Fiorina will use that time to develop and articulate specific plans on how to address some of the more pressing issues facing the nation.

First impressions

About this series: The Des Moines Register has invited all declared candidates for president to meet with the editorial board. After each meeting, we will publish editorials giving our impressions of the candidates.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Republican Carly Fiorina talks with the Des Moines Register Editorial Board.

The Carly Fiorina file

Personal biography: Born Sept. 6, 1954, in Austin, Texas. She and her second husband, Frank Fiorina, raised two daughters, one of whom died in 2009 at age 35. That same year, Fiorina was diagnosed with breast cancer, but was given an excellent prognosis for full recovery after undergoing treatment.

Education: Studied philosophy and medieval history at Stanford University, received an MBA from the University of Maryland and an MS in management from MIT's Sloan School of Management.

Career: Served as president of Lucent Technology's consumer products business in 1996. In 1999, she was named CEO of Hewlett-Packard Co. In early 2005, after a dispute with the company's board of directors, Fiorina was forced to resign. In 2008, she served as an adviser to U.S. Sen. John McCain's presidential campaign, and in 2010 she waged an unsuccessful campaign to unseat U.S. Sen. Barbara Boxer of California.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1bJ9Vn8