The challenges of childcare affordability looks to continue for parents as the cost of the service is set to rise up to 30 per cent over the next four years.

Figures presented by the Department of Education predict parents who front up $100 a day for childcare would be hit with a rise of $40 by 2018, while parents forking out $80 a day would be paying $32 more within the same time frame, The Sunday Telegraph reported.

It means fees will rise an average of 7 per cent every year over four years, with a total 29.1 per cent rise by 2018.

Scroll down for video

Figures presented by the Department of Education predict parents who front up $100 a day for childcare would be hit with a $40 rise by 2018

It comes after Federal Treasurer Joe Hockey's less than favourable budget update earlier this month which saw $2.4 billion more spent on childcare payments than expected 'on the back of more parents looking to participate in the workforce'.

These growing costs means a handful of parents will breach the childcare rebate threshold for assistance to claim back 50 per cent of their out-of-pocket costs.

Right now, parents are eligible to claim a maximum of $7,500 per child per year under the scheme, according to the Department of Human Services.

To drive down the costs of the scheme, Mr Hockey said the government would 'announce a comprehensive families' package in the new year, including child care and parenting leave initiatives'.

It comes after Federal Treasurer Joe Hockey's less than favourable budget update earlier this month which saw $2.4 billion more spent on childcare payments than expected

He said it would aim to give greater work participation opportunities for parents.

In a statement to Daily Mail Australia, Shadow Early Childhood Education Minister Kate Ellis said these projections released by the Department of Education were another 'broken promise'.

'Tony Abbott promised to make child care more affordable, but families are facing bigger than ever expected increases in cost,' she said.

'This government is only good at one thing and that is breaking every promise they have ever made.'

A national parenting advocacy group recently called on the government to redirect funds earmarked for Tony Abbott's paid parental leave scheme into early childhood education and care.

A survey of 1,200 parents across the country done by The Parenthood found this was what 90 per cent of mums and dads wanted.

HOW MUCH WILL CHILDCARE COST YOU? Cost per day 2017-18 Percentage rise $75 $105.09 23.49 per cent

$90 $126.11 28.19 per cent $110 $154.14 34.46 per cent Total average percentage rise : 29.1 per cent Source: The Sunday Telegraph/Department of Education

Mr Abbott is looking to tweak this policy over the summer holidays in a bid to win Senate support next year.

He has said the paid parent leave scheme, to be funded by a 1.5 per cent tax on big businesses, would involve more money for childcare after a previous version looked at a rebate for parents using carers in the family home.

But The Parenthood spokeswoman Jo Briskley said the group's survey showed parents' biggest obstacle was finding affordable and quality childcare spots.

'Women are reporting that child care is just too expensive and that it's not worth working more hours or returning to work even though they want to,' Ms Briskey said.

'Only about 10 per cent of parents have said that money should go to subsidising nannies.