One of the bogus arguments in support of the case before the U.S. Supreme Court today is that King v. Burwell does not seek to undermine the Affordable Care Act. In fact, it does, and Florida will suffer great harm if the justices agree with those arguments.

The plaintiffs, financed by groups that oppose the health care law, claim that tax credits should be available only to people who buy insurance in states that created their own exchanges — not in the 34 states like Florida that use the federal exchange. The plaintiffs base this claim on language in the law that refers to "an exchange established by the state."

We will demolish that claim in a moment. First, though, let's be clear about the potential consequences.

As a brief from 22 states supporting the law says, "It is impossible to overstate the importance of those tax credits to enable low- and moderate-income Americans to afford quality health insurance." America's Health Insurance Plans, the industry trade group, says a ruling against the tax credits could create a "death spiral" for the federal exchange. Only the sickest would seek coverage, which would drive up premiums and could cause as many as 8 million people to lose coverage.

Florida would be hit hardest. The state's 1.6 million sign-ups through the federal exchange are the most of any state. According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the roughly 756,000 sign-ups in Broward, Palm Beach and Miami-Dade counties are the highest of any metropolitan area. Greater Orlando ranks eighth, and the Tampa Bay area is ninth. The tax credits average about $300 per month.

News reports show opponents crafted the tax-credit argument to kill the entire health care law. Last summer, they persuaded two judges on the District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appeals to back the plaintiffs in a split decision. The dissenting judge wrote, "This case is about the (plaintiffs') not-so-veiled attempt to gut the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act." On the same day, the 4th Circuit Court of Appeals unanimously upheld the tax-credit provision of the law. Because of that conflict, the case is before the Supreme Court.

The plaintiffs — who news reports show have a dubious case that the law has harmed them — argue that Congress didn't intend to offer tax credits unless a state set up its own exchange. The IRS thus overreached by granting tax credits in those 34 states.

Drafters of the law, however, have stated that they never meant any such thing. Another section of the law says that if a state doesn't create its own, the HHS secretary will "establish and operate such Exchange within the state and ... take such actions as are necessary to implement such other requirements."

Florida willingly and knowingly deferred to the federal government on the exchange. Congress did not compel Florida to do so. As that dissenting judge on the D.C. Circuit wrote, "There is no credible evidence ... that Congress intended to condition subsidies on whether a State, as opposed to HHS, established the Exchange."

A judge who was part of that unanimous 4th Circuit ruling wrote that the plaintiffs base their case on "a tortured, nonsensical construction of a federal statute whose manifest purpose, as revealed by the wholeness and coherence of its text and structure, could not be more clear." The Congressional Budget Office based its financial projections on subsidies being available in every state.

Though Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi joined the unsuccessful lawsuit against the health care law itself, she did not join the lawsuit against the tax credits. Still, Florida has no backup plan if the court strikes down the tax credits, and Gov. Rick Scott and the Legislature don't want to craft one. Meanwhile, Florida House leaders still refuse to consider offering coverage to roughly 1 million of the state's working poor by expanding Medicaid.

A functional Congress could have fixed the problem last year with a simple rewording of that phrase in the law, but Republicans want to end the law, not mend it. Their partisan intransigence prevents Washington from making helpful changes, such as making sure that those buying insurance through the exchange get a credible plan.

Rollout of the law has been choppy, as were the rollouts of Medicare and the Medicare drug benefit. Because of the Affordable Care Act, however, Florida's rate of uninsured dropped from 22.1 percent in 2013 to 18.3 percent in 2014, according to the Gallup Organization. The Supreme Court has no reason to yank coverage from all those newly insured.