ROBERT PLANT: For over a decade the “offshoring” movement has been a mechanism through which firms reduced their production costs. Now however, executives are considering “reshoring” as an alternative sourcing model, one that is increasingly becoming a viable and attractive option for many firms.

Manufacturing is in many ways the resultant of a complex systems dynamic, based upon technology, human capital, resources and scale to name a few. Disruptive changes can tilt the playing field and challenge the existing order. Just as the Internet and low-cost distributed computing allowed offshoring solutions to incubate and then flourish, technologies such as 3-D printing, lean design software and new materials are encouraging a new mode of build-to-order manufacturing, one in which production is localized closer to the customer.

This mode of manufacturing is good news for the American manufacturing base, as the traditional cost inhibitors of in-country manufacturing such as higher labor costs are diminished by lean manufacturing and low energy costs. Additional factors are also at play. As companies work to protect their intellectual property from leakage, develop their own human capital, and oversee quality control they are increasingly looking to the American regulatory environment and infrastructure as a new envelope within which they can operate more securely.

Another early indicator of the resurgence of U.S. manufacturing is the awakening of students to technology and its applicability to the production of material products. Business students are once again learning to code computers and refreshingly taking classes with engineering students. These millennials are creating physical products. They are a generation who rather than looking at careers in financial engineering are searching for meaningful careers in firms that innovate and engineer physical, low carbon, sustainable products, preferably with “Made in the U.S.A.” on the label.

Robert Plant (@drrobertplant) is an associate professor at the School of Business Administration, University of Miami, in Coral Gables, Fla.

Read the latest Leadership Report.