Please enable Javascript to watch this video

HUNTSVILLE, Ala. (WHNT) - Monday Congressman Mo Brooks provided a “Washington Update” to more than 900 people at the Von Braun Center. The Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce hosted the event. Brooks admitted quickly he would not be giving a 'rah-rah' speech and immediately delved into what he called the '800 pound gorilla in every room in Washington' -- America's current financial condition.

Brooks cited that America has suffered 4 consecutive years of trillion-dollar deficits between 2009 and 2012. But he claims since republicans captured the House in 2010, they've made tangible strides toward financial responsibility.

"The deficits dropped 63% to the current date at $483 billion," said Brooks. "Now, to put $483 billion into perspective, that's still worse than the worst of the George Bush years; so that's not something to brag about, although progress is."

Brooks went on to say future projections are 'not pleasant.' He said In FY2014, America’s debt service cost $229 billion – roughly the cost of 13 NASA programs. The Congressional Budget Office projects debt service will increase to $827 billion by 2025, a $600 billion annual increase in debt service. $600 billion is more than America’s FY2014 base defense spending, Brooks reminded.

The congressman suggested America has 3 possible solutions to its debt and deficit problem: huge tax increases, huge spending cuts, or, growing revenues by growing the economy.

Brooks says he prefers the economic growth route.

"The SBA has pointed out that the cost of federal government regulations per employee per year is over $10,000. That's significant."

Brooks said the government needs to cut taxes on employers to make us more competitive while helping reduce regulatory red tape and the cost of doing business.

Leadership Landslide

Brooks moved on to discuss the 2014 election and republican landslide. Republicans elected 246 Congressmen, the most since the 1920s, and now have 54 Senators, replacing Democrat Majority Leader Harry Reid with Republican Mitch McConnell. What does this power shift mean? Not as much as you may think, according to Brooks.

"In the House, we will continue to do our jobs, passing budgets and authorization, appropriations and policy bills. For example, in our first 2 months in office, the House has had 112 votes and passed 17 bills. On America’s energy security, the House passed the keystone pipeline and a bill to make transportation of natural gas more efficient and less expensive. On healthcare and jobs, the House passed bills to repeal ObamaCare, repeal ObamaCare’s job-killing medical device tax, and end ObamaCare’s policy of paying employers to limit worker hours to 29 hours per week. Also on Jobs, the House passed bills decreasing regulations and tax burdens on small businesses. On immigration, the House voted to defund President Obama’s unlawful and unconstitutional executive amnesty for illegal aliens. On moral issues, the House banned the use of federal tax dollars to pay for private sector abortions. On education, the House voted to expand Section 529 college savings plans," elaborated Brooks.

NASA & SLS

Brooks continued be addressing NASA budget issues and concerns. He said Science, Space & Technology Committee members understand the value of America’s space program and will fight for adequate NASA funding.

"Rep. Steve Pallazo of Mississippi chairs the House SST Space Subcommittee. I am vice-chair. Senator Ted Cruz of Texas chairs the Senate Space Subcommittee. I have a very good working relationship with both Rep. Pallazo and Senator Cruz. We meet frequently. Each of us is committed to human space flight and funding the missions described in NASA’s name: aeronautics and space. Our challenge is to shift NASA funds to aeronautics and space initiatives or find NASA funding from other agencies. Both paths are challenging because NASA, much like national defense, is a prime target for cuts by a significant number of Senators and Congressmen."

Immigration & 'Lost American Jobs'

During the 14 years form 2000 to 2014 in which the American economy added 5.6 million net new jobs, Brooks said American born citizens between ages 16 and 65 lost 127,000 jobs. Even worse, he said, job losses coupled with population growth mean there are 17 million more jobless Americans in 2014 in the 16 to 65 age bracket than there were 14 years earlier in 2000. Brooks said by contrast, illegal aliens and lawful immigrants gained 5.7 million net new jobs across the labor market.

"American born citizen had net job losses in many high paying fields such as: architecture, sales, office & administrative support as well as health care practitioners. Further, Americans of all races and both sexes lost ground."

Brooks cited a slide with the following data:

Black American born citizens’ working percentage dropped 9.2 points.

Hispanic American born citizens’ working percentage dropped 7.7 points.

White American born citizens’ working percentage dropped 6.1 points.

Female American born citizens’ working percentage dropped 5.6 points.

Male American born citizens’ working percentage dropped 9.1 points.