POLITICO’S Florida Playbook: Sugar wars; medical marijuana and Wasserman Schultz; Bush-fracked and jeweled; Marco heckled; Obama’s Miami migration

By Marc Caputo (mcaputo@politico.com, @MarcACaputo)

GOOD MORNING from Florida Playbook. The 60-day lawmaking session starts next week, on Tuesday, giving lawmakers just one more week to prepare. And if the lawmakers happen to live in the Tampa Bay, Orlando, Fort Myers, West Palm Beach or Tallahassee media markets, they might just see a new TV ad blitz from the Everglades Trust environmental group, ushering in a new round of….

Story Continued Below

SUGAR WARS – “A new TV campaign presses for purchase of US Sugar land,” by The Tampa Bay Times’s Adam Smith: “Everglades advocates today launch a six-figure TV, radio and online campaign to push state leaders to use Amendment 1 water and land conservation money to buy U.S. Sugar land south of Lake Okeechobee so more water flows to the Everglades. The campaign highlights a contract U.S. Sugar and the state signed in 2010 under Gov. Charlie Crist, a contract that will expire by the end of the legislative session unless the legislature acts. The cost of the land buy is roughly estimated at about $350-million.”

“U.S. Sugar signed a binding written contract, and just four months ago, 75 percent of Floridians voted for a constitutional amendment to set aside the money to pay for land acquisition projects such as this one. This is our last, best chance to protect drinking water, save the Everglades and reduce deadly discharges of pollution from the lake into the St. Lucie and Caloosahatchee Rivers and estuaries -- and time is running out,” said Mary Barley, President of Everglades Trust. “It’s now up to Governor Scott and the legislature to tell U.S. Sugar, ‘a deal is a deal.’” http://bit.ly/1AzujiZ

The real winner: consultants, TV stations. The reality is that the ad buy is small, and its effect will likely be minimal. Big Sugar dominates in Tallahassee, and a few environmentalists probably aren’t going to do much to persuade the GOP-led Legislature, especially in a non-election year. Indeed, House Speaker Steve Crisafulli is already opposed to the land buy. But at least the TV stations and political consultants will make their money.

….now as for that other crop ….

MEDICAL MARIJUANA – “In a twist, fight for medical pot goes to Florida Statehouse,” by the Associated Press’s Matt Sedensky: “Republicans lawmakers in Florida who once opposed medical pot are now embracing it, motivated by the strong show of support from voters and worried that another constitutional amendment during next year's presidential race could drive opponents to the polls. Last year, lawmakers in the GOP-controlled Legislature passed a law to allow low-potency strains of marijuana helpful to a very limited group of patients. It got about 58 percent of the vote in November, but needed 60 percent to pass under Florida law.”

“‘It's the ultimate poll,’ said Sen. Jeff Brandes, a Republican. ‘It shows that there is momentum for this issue, that it will likely pass in the future and that there is an ability right now in this window of time to address this issue in the legislative process.’” http://yhoo.it/1B8PPOQ

FLASHBACK: IT’S NOT A SLAM DUNK So said GOP political consultant Tre Evers after the November vote http://hrld.us/1DIcfHk

“DWS AND CANNABIS – WHAT IS BEHIND HER POSITION?” That’s what liberal blogger Kartik Krishnaiyer asks in The Florida Squeeze blog about Debbie Wasserman Schultz and her “bizarre positioning last year on Amendment 2.” Krishnaiyer speculates that she’s either out of touch with activists or “that Wasserman Schultz very well might be paying back pharmaceutical companies and perhaps even the insurance lobby with her inexplicable stand on Medical Marijuana.” http://bit.ly/1DN4wGp

“Debbie Wasserman Schultz denies claim, despite messages” I wrote Friday in POLITICO: “Democratic National Committee Chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz on Friday denied claims that her staff offered a deal to reverse her opposition to medical marijuana in order to silence a Florida donor’s criticisms — attributing the controversy to a misunderstanding. But text messages and emails obtained by POLITICO indicate her top political adviser was aware of some type of offer to donor John Morgan, who is accusing the South Florida congresswoman of after-the-fact spin.” http://politi.co/1BvEHLE

“Senate bid could be solution for Wasserman Schultz” Edward-Isaac Dovere wrote Friday in POLITICO: “Even if Sen. Marco Rubio doesn’t leave his seat open for a White House run, Florida often tilts Democratic in presidential years, and Clinton would most likely be at the top of the ticket drawing out women and African-Americans in heavy numbers. A high-profile congresswoman with a strong base and proven fundraising record, Republicans and Democrats agree, has all the makings of a very competitive Senate candidate. There’s just one problem: Many Democrats don’t want her to run for Senate either….”

“‘I don’t think the Senate is a default position,’ said Democratic consultant James Carville. ‘It’s not like, maybe you can be designated hitter.’” http://politi.co/1CU9EVj

HECKLED: “Immigration activists briefly interrupt Marco Rubio book-tour stop at Miami Dade College,” by The Miami Herald’s Patricia Mazzei: “A hometown visit by U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio to promote his new book drew a crowd of hundreds to Miami Dade College on Friday evening -- including at least a half a dozen immigration activists who interrupted the Republican several times before being escorted out by security. ‘You're a hypocrite,’ a young activist yelled at Rubio. Another flipped him off and swore at the senator as she was being ushered out.”

RUBIO’S RESPONSE: “I just hope they bought the book,” Rubio quipped. “I'm the only one who gets heckled by both sides of the immigration debate.” http://bit.ly/1AzyXxA

“This Marco Rubio statement on Rudy Giuliani is just about perfect” gushes the Washington Post’s Aaron Blake regarding the senator’s statement to WPBF in West Palm Beach after he took an Everglades air tour: “I don’t feel like I’m in a position to have to answer for every person in my party that makes a claim. Democrats aren’t asked to answer every time Joe Biden says something embarrassing, so I don’t know why I should answer every time a Republican does. I’ll suffice it to say that I believe the President loves America; I think his ideas are bad.” http://wapo.st/1B0twJG

FAMILY JEWELS: “Documents show the expensive tastes of Jeb Bush’s low-key wife,” by the Washington Post's Karen Tumulty and Alice Crites: “In 1999, Columba Bush, the famously private wife of then-Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, was detained and fined by federal customs officials for misrepresenting the amount of clothing and jewelry she had bought while on a solo five-day shopping spree in Paris… That purchase was part of a pattern by Columba Bush of borrowing to buy tens of thousands of dollars of jewelry at a time from the South Florida store over a 14-year period. Documentation available online, which does not include the details of two transactions made less than six weeks apart in 1995, shows that she spent a total of more than $90,000 at the store.” http://wapo.st/17oAjRi

A softer Columba profile was written by the New York Times’ Patrick Healy and Sheryl Gay Stolberg in “Bush Spouse Backs Jeb, but Is Wary of Family Business” http://nyti.ms/1AkrNy9

“Jeb Bush's private investments in fracking dovetail with public advocacy,” by The Tampa Bay Times’ Adam C. Smith and Alex Leary: “In the summer of 2013, well before he became an all-but-declared presidential candidate, Jeb Bush spoke to conservatives gathered in New York. ‘Some states, like yours here in New York, are choosing not to grow. They won't approve fracking,’ Bush said…. Bush left unmentioned that fracking in the Marcellus Shale beneath the New York-Pennsylvania border also presented a big opportunity for himself.” http://bit.ly/1DLAhQ3

“WHO’S WINNING THE GOP’S 2016 RICK SCOTT PRIMARY?” the Palm Beach Post’s George Bennett asks but doesn’t answer in this piece http://pbpo.st/17KIgAp

“Rick Scott will 'most likely' endorse before Fla. Primary” from POLITICO: http://politi.co/1CTep1c

“Rick Scott on relationship with Jeb Bush” from POLITICO http://politi.co/19Mb2SM

Here’s the full Rick Scott interview, conducted by POLITICO’s James Hohmann: http://politi.co/1vmi1eA

RICK SCOTT MUM… ABOUT OBAMACARE SUBSIDIES -- “What if the Supreme Court rules against Obamacare?” by Kyle Cheney, Sarah Wheaton and Rachana Pradhan: “POLITICO interviewed more than a dozen governors, from both parties, this weekend at the National Governors Association winter meeting. Most said they’re in a wait-and-see zone… ‘This is a federal program, it’s a federal problem,’ [Rick Scott] said at the American Action Forum on Friday.”

“Yet Florida has 1.6 million people enrolled in Obamacare plans, more than any other state, including California and New York, which run their own exchanges and have governors who back Obamacare. Nine in 10 of those Floridians get subsidies. Scott declined to answer questions about whether he’d share in the blame if the newly covered became uncovered.” http://politi.co/1LsJ6ip

$441,938,000 That’s the total value of Obamacare subsidies in Florida, The Washington Post’s liberal blogger, Greg Sargent points out, making Florida the number-one subsidy state with the most to lose http://wapo.st/180E94a

JOHN HOLDER, JANET RENO RIPPED IN SOUTH FLORIDA – “Ripping off your refunds: South Florida’s booming tax fraud racket,” by the Miami Herald’s Jay Weaver, who writes: “Former U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno, a Miami resident, and current Attorney General Eric Holder both have been victims of tax fraud in South Florida, according to law enforcement sources. In Holder’s case, perpetrators were suspected of filing a phony tax return in his name and using a refund-loaded debit card to withdraw money at local ATM machines.” http://hrld.us/1zZoh7H

HUH: “Bill Seeks to End Heterosexual Discrimination in Florida,” by The New Times’ Kyle Munzenrieder: “It's been technically illegal in Florida since the late 1800s for unrelated and unmarried man and woman to cohabitate. In fact, it's considered "lewd and lascivious behavior," and is punishable as a second-degree misdemeanor. Of course, no one has been prosecuted under the law... Well, Democratic state Senator Eleanor Sobel is finally trying to change that.” http://bit.ly/1D0NmRF

REP. JENNIFER SULLIVAN makes the Huffington Post’s “Meet The 12 Youngest Legislators In America (That We Could Find)” by Jess Rifkin: “Some young legislators may represent comparatively small constituencies in less-populated states. But that's not Sullivan's experience: Her Florida district totals more than 170,000 residents. ‘As someone entering this process, you have to prove yourself," the 23-year-old Republican said, ‘but that’s true at any age.’” http://huff.to/1BCXi8K

“ABSENTEE VOTING FROM THE GRAVE? Fla. Has 158-Year-Old on Voter Rolls” The Lakeland Ledger’s Lloyd Dunkelberger writes: “It's uncertain whether she voted in the last election. However, her registration is an example of the inaccuracies that can be found in the election records in a state with 12.9 million voters. The good news: Her birthdate of April 18, 1856, is the type of anomaly that is growing rarer in Florida voting records. But inaccuracies persist and remain a sensitive topic in state that decided a presidential election by 537 votes.” http://bit.ly/1D0S7uv

WELCOME BACK NORDBY -- Dan Nordby returns to become the Republican Party of Florida's legal counsel, The Tampa Bay Times' Michael Auslen reports http://bit.ly/1D0TucC

WOOF! “Bills would cover medical bills of retired police K9s” by The Palm Beach Post’s Christine Stapleton http://pbpo.st/1vZMvy0

MUST BE COLD IN DC -- President Obama will visit Miami Wednesday for an immigration town-hall style meeting at Florida International University's hosted by Miami-based Telemundo and MSNBC anchor José Díaz-Balart.