for 2015 alone, the ACS projects a total of 221,200 new lung cancer cases, as well as 158,000 deaths attributed to this deadly disease. (Photo: McLaren Greater Lansing)

According to the American Cancer Society (ACS), lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths for both men and women in the U.S. In fact, for 2015 alone, the ACS projects a total of 221,200 new lung cancer cases, as well as 158,000 deaths attributed to this deadly disease.

Mounting evidence regarding the benefits of low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) as a diagnostic test for lung cancer has prompted the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to take action. Consequently, effective Feb. 5, 2015, CMS agreed to start reimbursing for annual LDCT screenings provided that patients meet certain criteria. Additionally, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force has given lung cancer screening a grade B. Ultimately, under the Affordable Care Act, this means most private insurers must cover (with no co-pays or deductible costs) annual lung cancer screenings for qualifying individuals at high risk of the disease. A prior authorization may be required by your insurer.

The criteria for annual lung cancer screenings have changed as well. To be eligible, patients must be the following:

Aged 55-77

Asymptomatic of lung cancer (not experiencing a new or changing cough, hemoptysis, significant weight loss, pneumonia, etc.)

A current or former smoker with at least a 30-pack-year history (former smokers need to have quit within the last 15 years)

An added criterion is the shared decision making visit, which must take place between the patient and the primary care provider. During this appointment, a physician will determine the patient's eligibility for annual LDCT, discuss the benefits and risks of screening, and provide related counseling. At this appointment, if it's determined a patient meets the requirements for a lung cancer screening, the provider can refer him or her for LDCT.

If you require a lung cancer screening, ask your doctor about having this diagnostic test performed at McLaren Greater Lansing's screening site. A long-trusted source for lung cancer care, McLaren offers only the highest standards.

For more information about lung cancer services, call McLaren Lung Cancer Institute at (517) 975-8030.

Read or Share this story: http://on.lsj.com/1JKDmEE