Custer, SD

It isn't quite spring on the calendar. But after the first major forest fire of the year makes it seem a lot like summer to firefighters in the Black Hills. Unusually warm weather, dry conditions and a string of early wildfire have raised worries about the coming fire season.

A quick response to the North Pole Fire, the biggest so far in 2015, likely saved homes. Fire crews were able to keep Tuesday's fire at 60 acres. But U.S. Forest Service Fire-Management Officer Jared Hohn of Custer came away worried about what could come next.

"Conditions are very dry," Hohn says. "It's an open winter down here without the snowpack right now, prior to greenup. Fuels are very receptive to fire. It's extreme fire danger right now."

Crews are mopping up the burn area about 6 miles west of Custer, just off the North Pole Road. Crew supervisor Josh Morgan, a Forest Service engine captain who was initial incident commander on the fire, said firefighters were on the scene within minutes.

"Potentially, we could have lost five structures and I believe two outbuildings, had we not had people, resources on the scene in the timely manner that we did," he said.

Fire officials are still investigating to determine the cause of the fire. Crews will remain on the burn area until it's certain that increased wind won't spark another blaze on dry vegetation nearby.

Light winds and cool nights helped contain the blaze. Location was a factor, too, since it started just off Highway 16 west of Custer. Federal, state and volunteer crews were there in a hurry after a citizen report of the blaze came in. A more isolated fire, or one with strong winds, could have been a lot tougher.

Fire officials say that what the forest needs right now, is some real spring-like weather.

"We're hoping to get some measurable precipitation, which will also help with the green-up," Hohn says. "once you hit green-up, the fuels are less receptive to fire and the fire danger will go down."

Until then, fire crews - and those who live in the forest - will be on summer-like high alert.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.