Republican presidential primary candidate, Ohio Gov. John Kasich, was greeted by over 1,000 people Wednesday, March 9 inside the Palatine Park District Community Center gymnasium on Wood Street.

Kasich appeared in Palatine as part of a town hall meeting, six days before Illinois voters decide who will run in November's General Election.

Members of the governor’s political team, Prospect Heights residents Suzanne and Henry Petter, sat in the front row.

“He knows what he is doing and gives us straight answers,” the couple said. “He knows the ropes and is an honest guy.”

Kasich entered the gym with music blaring over the loudspeakers, the crowd cheering and applauding.

“All my life I followed the advice from my mom and dad, which is change the world and make it better,” Kasich told the crowd at the beginning of the one-hour event. “Coming to this town is like a town I grew up in, which is if the wind blew wrong, people would be out of work. You are the people I fight for.”

Kasich talked about the national budget facing a deficit in the trillions.

“If you cater to small roots or those most noticeable, you get lost,” he said. “We all win when the economy roars.”

Kasich went on to say it is up to each individual person across the country to make the nation better.

“I believe everyone here was born unique,” Kasich said. “No one is like you or will be like you. You were born special because the Lord made you special with a purpose.”

He said if people want to find satisfaction in life, they need to find a purpose. He told the crowd to live life bigger than themselves.

Kasich emphasized that teachers are the most underpaid professionals in the country. He wants to see schools fixed so children have the skills to be successful in the future.

He also addressed the fight on drugs. Kasich talked to one couple in the audience whose child is battling drugs.

Kasich said too much regulation exists in government, taxes are too high and the government needs to stop spending money it does not have.

If elected president in November, Kasich said within the first 100 days in office, he would freeze all regulations except for those pertaining to health and safety, he would lower the personal tax rate, reduce corporate taxes, implement a plan to balance the budget and meet with world leaders to inform them the United States is back on track.

“We will fix this country,” he exclaimed.

Kasich then went to the audience to answer questions.

One person asked him about global warming. He said he is concerned about climate change and is in favor of developing all types of energy sources such as wind, solar, geothermal, and battery technology where power can be stored.

He said is not in favor of the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare, claiming the system drives up the cost for health insurance and chokes small businesses.

“Nobody should ever lose health insurance because of pre-existing conditions and no one should ever go bankrupt because they get sick,” he said.

Kasich said toward the end of the event that he refuses to "get in the mud" to become president. He said the position is all about respect. By sinking that low, that quality becomes lost.