Buy Photo Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee campaigns in Carroll, Iowa Wednesday Jan 20, 2016. (Photo: Rodney White/The Register)Buy Photo

Mike Huckabee stood in the middle of the moving RV and pointed to the 23 photos of his five grandchildren stuck onto the walls around the inside of the vehicle.

The photos “remind me about why I’m doing this,” the former Arkansas governor and Fox News talk show host said as he rattled off the children's names and ages, their likes and dislikes.

He sees the photos each time he gets onto the RV and each time he disembarks to talk with Iowans about why they should support him in the Feb. 1 Republican caucuses.

None of Huckabee’s grandchildren had been born eight years ago when he made his first run for president. He often tells Iowa crowds he could have stayed at Fox News — “The easiest job I ever had in my life ... just talking about the people who run for office and who hold office” — but didn’t because he worries about his grandchildren's future.

“I’m not convinced that the America they are growing up in is one that is going to give them the same level of opportunity and freedom that I have been so blessed in this country to have grown up with,” he told a group at the Ogden senior citizens center in January.

He left his job at Fox News a year ago and in May announced he was running for president. The day after his announcement, Huckabee was in Iowa. Since then, he’s spent 65 days in the state, stopping in all 99 counties.

Buy Photo Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee works on his computer between Harlan and Carroll, Iowa Wednesday Jan 20, 2016, on his RV. (Photo: Rodney White/The Register)

The time spent in Iowa, though, hasn’t sparked high poll numbers for Huckabee.

The most recent Des Moines Register/Bloomberg Politics Iowa Poll showed Huckabee tied for seventh place at 3 percent. What gives Huckabee hope is that the poll also showed that 56 percent of likely caucusgoers could either change their minds about their first-place choice or had not settled on a first choice.

“He surprised us all in 2008; it could happen again,” said Jayme Neiman, assistant professor of political science at the University of Northern Iowa. Huckabee was trailing in the polls until a month before the 2008 Iowa caucuses but pulled out a win, garnering nearly 41,000 votes, the most ever for a Republican.

Neiman, though, isn’t convinced it will happen a second time, mostly because of the emergence of the Tea Party, she said.

“There’s an angrier, more discontented voter who (is) fed up with politics and politicians,” she said. “It’s an entirely different landscape” compared with 2008.

Huckabee remains optimistic.

“My sense is, folks haven’t nailed it down yet,” he told The Des Moines Register. “Some of them won’t until the night they go to the caucuses.”

That's why at each town hall, he tells audiences to go the caucuses regardless of the weather.

“But, if you’re not going to caucus for me,” he says, only half-jokingly, “stay home and watch it on TV because it will be cold outside….”

WHERE IN IOWA?: Track presidential campaign visits across the state

Using humor to make points

Huckabee’s town halls are informal events, held in a variety of settings from Pizza Ranch meeting rooms or American Legion Halls to the floor of a mattress manufacturing plant or fellowship area of a church. Regardless of the location, each gathering starts the same: The candidate thanks each person in the audience for taking the time to attend the event as he shakes everyone’s hand, poses for photos and autographs books or fliers.

He generally speaks for 20 or so minutes — always without notes — tailoring his talks to his audience. To groups heavy with people at or near retirement age, Huckabee emphasizes his belief that Social Security is an obligation, not an entitlement, and pokes at candidates who want to raise the retirement age or phase out the federal program. When there are veterans in audience, he deplores cuts made to military spending and the country’s aging aircraft and ships. At factories, he laments the 5 million manufacturing jobs lost since 2000 and how he believes implementation of the Fair Tax, a national sales tax that would eliminate the income tax, will help bring those jobs back to the U.S.

Humor is sprinkled throughout his talks, usually as a way to make a point.

During a discussion this week in Carroll about the Affordable Care Act Huckabee railed against the inability of consumers to select the type of health-care coverage they needed.

“I’m a 60-year-old male and — I know this is going to come to a shock to you — but I’m pretty sure I’m not going to get pregnant,” he said to chuckles. “However, if I do, I have paternity coverage because with Obamacare, we all have it…

”And folks, if I do become pregnant, I don’t need Obamacare. I’ll have a reality show and I’ll make more money than I need to provide for that baby…. We laugh about it, but it’s ludicrous that we’re paying for things we don’t need and can’t afford.”

Question-and-answer sessions, a staple of Huckabee’s meet-and-greets, can last up to 30 minutes, with the candidate fielding five to 10 questions a stop. He addresses those asking questions by “ma’am” or “sir” and always thanks them for their question.

Many address the candidate by his first name.

“Sorry we came in late, Mike,” Steve Anthofer of Carroll told Huckabee this week before asking about the Fair Tax.

“Oh, that’s OK,” the candidate replied before spending more than 6 minutes explaining his support for the plan that would tax consumption rather than corporate or individual income. The explanation prompted a follow-up question from Anthofer, which Huckabee again spent several minutes answering.

After Huckabee was done with his speech, the men resumed their conversation, chatting for another five minutes or so.

Later, Anthofer, a registered independent, said he appreciated the time Huckabee took to explain the Fair Tax. Still, Anthofer said he remained undecided on whom to support in the caucuses.

LOVE IOWA CAUCUS HISTORY?: Find historic galleries, recaps of the caucuses

Huckabee is 'not an angry guy'

That so many people remain undecided on whether to support Huckabee baffles Janis MacDonald of Scranton. “I don’t understand it. There’s got to be something else that we’re just not seeing,” said MacDonald, who, with his wife, Stacy, supported Huckabee in 2008.

Charles Parkhurst of Harlan and a Shelby County supervisor shared his theory about why Huckabee hasn't garnered more support.

“It’s because of the media,” Parkhurst said. “People are listening too much to all the stuff the media is saying. They’re listening to all that rhetoric and they’re not listening to how people like Mike say they’ll solve things in a civilized manner.”

Huckabee’s down-home, folksy air isn’t necessarily what voters are looking for this election cycle, UNI’s Neiman said.

“He doesn’t have that anger in him that seems to be resonating with people who were Huckabee supporters in 2008 and are now (Texas Sen. Ted) Cruz supporters…. He’s not an angry guy.”

Huckabee’s calm demeanor was apparent this month during an exchange in Washington, Ia., with Joseph Brown, a local pastor who supports Cruz. Brown asked Huckabee why he has said Cruz tailors his comments about same-sex marriage to the audiences he addresses.

Rather than lashing out at Brown, ignoring the question or bashing Cruz, Huckabee engaged the minister in a lengthy, but polite discussion that continued after the town hall was over.

Cruz has said he would let states decide the marriage issue, Huckabee told Brown. “He knows, like good lawyers do, how to say things that sound almost the same as something else.”

Huckabee told the Register that he won’t change who he is or how he campaigns just to get votes.

Iowans know “Huckabee is the same guy he was eight years ago,” he said.

MORE: Find all #iacaucus results by county, candidate since 1976.

Backer hopes 'we're surprised' on Feb. 1

Brad Sherman, pastor of Solid Rock Church in Coralville, backed Huckabee in 2008 but didn’t automatically throw his support behind the candidate this campaign cycle. Instead, he said he studied other candidates’ positions on issues he feels are important.

“Early on, I thought there wasn’t a nickel’s worth of differences between them,” Sherman said of the 17-plus candidates who entered the Republican race for president. “But, boy, as I got to know them…"

Sherman said he’s been surprised more Iowans — particularly those from the conservative wing of the Republican Party — don’t share his opinion. He said he thinks many Iowans who say they’ve made up their minds are influenced by polling data.

“I’m hoping that we’re surprised on caucus night,” he said.

Huckabee, too, remains hopeful. Instead of heeding calls by some for him to drop out of the race, Huckabee stepped up his campaign schedule by planning 150 events in Iowa in January. Between Jan. 2 and Friday, he had traveled around 2,215 miles crisscrossing the state to events in 53 communities.

“I’m still holding out that we can see the upset,” Huckabee said as he traveled between Harlan and Carroll this week. “Honestly, if I didn’t, we’d curtail this schedule back a lot. We wouldn’t be driving over the icy roads and doing 150 events this month.”

The campaign has “thousands” of volunteers and “hundreds” of people signed up to caucus for Huckabee, said J. Hogan Gidley, Huckabee’s spokesman. “We’ve picked up Iowans coming on with us in droves.”

The rigorous schedule is taxing, said Huckabee, who typically gets about 5 hours of sleep a night after attending up to six campaign events a day and sitting for TV and radio interviews with local and national media.

Though the schedule is grinding, Huckabee says he finds time to connect with his family daily, either via telephone calls or text messages.

"FaceTime is a fantastic tool, because I can talk to my grandkids every day," he said.

COMPARE CANDIDATES: See issue and stances for the presidential candidates

ABOUT MIKE HUCKABEE

Age: 60

Education: Huckabee graduated in 1975 from Ouachita Baptist University, completing his bachelor’s degree in religion in two years. He also attended Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary for one year.

Family: Wife, Janet Huckabee; three adult children and five grandchildren.

Current home: Santa Rosa Beach, Fla.

Elected office: Huckabee was Arkansas’ lieutenant governor from 1993-96. He became governor in 1996 after then-Gov. Jim Guy Tucker was convicted on felony fraud charges and resigned. Huckabee was re-elected to full terms in 1998 and 2002.

Other career highlights: Huckabee hosted a weekly TV show, "Huckabee," on the Fox News Channel, until stepping down in January 2015 to pursue another presidential bid. He is a best-selling author and has published 11 books.

TRADEMARK JOKES

Mike Huckabee sprinkles his speeches with witty comments and amusing stories. In Harlan this week, he talked about the 12 years he spent as a Baptist minister, serving two churches six years each.

“I left both churches because of illness — people got sick of me and I had to leave,” he quipped, eliciting chuckles from the room.

At the end of most speeches, the candidate holds up a campaign bumper sticker and asks people to put them on their vehicles. “I know a lot of people hate things on their car,” he told an audience in Ogden recently. “This however should be an exception, because even though it promotes my candidacy, there’s something in it for you. We’re getting reports from all over the country — when people put these on their cars, they’re getting better gas mileage in their vehicles!”

TOP THREE ISSUES

TAX REFORM: Huckabee supports implementation of the Fair Tax. The Internal Revenue Service would be abolished under the Fair Tax. The merchant and state level would be responsible for collecting the tax that would be turned into the Treasury Department. He believes that the more than $30 trillion in off-shore investments would return to the U.S. as would the thousands of manufacturing jobs that companies have moved to foreign countries. An improved economy would shore up Medicare and Social Security, he says. The Fair Tax would stop the incentive for illegal immigration and is a progressive tax that helps the poor more than the rich, he says.

NATIONAL SECURITY: Huckabee wants to rebuild the country’s military so that no country or terrorist group would want to tangle with the U.S. He has called ISIS a “cancer” and said it must be eradicated by doing such things as cutting of its access to money and supplies and bombing its holdouts.

MORAL CLARITY: Huckabee, who believes life begins at conception, would use the Fifth and 14th Amendments of the U.S. Constitution to protect the unborn. He has said that he'd likely face lawsuits, something he relishes, because it would be up to abortion supporters to prove that what is in a mother’s womb is not a baby. He also supports a constitutional amendment that defines marriage as a union between one man and one woman.

COMPARE THE CANDIDATES: See Huckabee's stances on the issues

Buy Photo Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee talks to a reporter on his RV between Harlan and Carroll, Iowa Wednesday Jan 20, 2016. (Photo: Rodney White/The Register)

ON THE CLOCK

4:30 a.m.: Got up after spending the night at a Council Bluffs hotel. Ate breakfast and recorded his daily podcast.

7 a.m.: On the road to a campaign event in Harlan.

8:25 a.m.: Arrived at the American Legion Hall in Harlan.

9:45 a.m.: Back on the RV.

10 a.m.: Interview with reporter traveling on RV with campaign.

11:30 a.m.: Campaign event at Central Church Youth Center in Carroll. Staff got lunch from a nearby Hy-Vee. Huckabee ate on the RV.

2 p.m.: Campaign event at Wall Lake Community Center.

4:15 p.m.: Campaign event at Cherokee Train Depot. After the event, he traveled to Sioux City, where he spent the night.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1VfuhWd