A sense that area is 'not as bad as other places'

Since the Nov. 13 terrorist attacks in Paris and the Dec. 2 shooting in San Bernadino, Calif., Farah Afzal has noticed a change in how people treat her and others in the local Islamic community.

"In fact, I've had people helping me out in grocery stores and in parking lots, and that's probably because I wear the hijab," said Afzal, 39, who is a full-time mom.

Contrary to what Muslims are reporting in other parts of the world since the attacks — verbal abuse, physical assault, harassment — many in the local Islamic community say they've experienced an outpouring of support ranging from gifts to kind gestures at stores to thoughtful emails and messages.

The Islamic Center of Boulder, where Afzal volunteers on the outreach team, has been "bombarded" with supportive messages, which get posted to the organization's Facebook page regularly.

One such message reads: "Hello, I am a non-Muslim resident of Boulder and I am horrified and outraged by the anti-Islamic hate speech that has been dominating our country lately, especially in the past couple of weeks. I wanted to reach out to offer my support to your community in this difficult time. You are loved and supported here."

Perhaps it's a reaction to businessman and Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump's proposed ban on Muslims entering the United States, or the support that statement garnered from his followers.

Advertisement

Or maybe it's a reaction to the anti-Islamic sentiment that flooded social media after the Paris attacks, which authorities say were perpetrated by Islamic extremists, or the increased number of hate crimes since the Dec. 2 mass shooting in San Bernadino by a Muslim husband and wife suspected of becoming radicalized.

Whatever the reason, Afzal said she feels lucky to live in Boulder County, where people ask questions about topics they don't fully understand, such as Islam.

"It's Boulder in general," said Afzal, who has lived in Louisville for more than 16 years. "(People) are more educated in what's going on around the world, more curious to learn from others."

'Putting assumptions aside'

Murad Kablan, a fourth-year doctoral student in computer science at the University of Colorado, said he has not experienced or heard of other Boulder County Muslims experiencing the kind of harassment described in other cities.

His little sister — who attends a Washington, D.C., high school — was shoved hard by another student recently while wearing a head scarf.

Mosques around the country have received threatening phone calls and voice mails. Women wearing hijab have been spat on and yelled at.

"You can see how sometimes people stare at you or look at you, but I don't think it's as bad as other places," he said.

Kablan, who grew up in Libya, said he feels most Islamophobia comes from a fear of the unknown. He joked that he wants to put a sign on his office door telling people to come talk to him, get to know him and learn about Islam.

"Bad people come from all religions," he said. "I can point out any religion or ethnicity in the world, there are always terrorists and bad people. That's the main thing people have to understand."

The university's leadership also believes that education and understanding are the keys to moving forward.

In a letter to the campus following the Paris attacks, Chancellor Phil DiStefano asked students and employees to renew their commitment to "scholarly inquiry."

"We expect our students, faculty and staff to willingly engage in inquiry and discussion by putting assumptions aside, dismissing stereotypes and fueling our natural curiosity about each other's cultures, views and experiences," he wrote, adding that intimidation and discrimination will not be tolerated on campus.

'Don't let this person be Muslim'

Still, Boulder County — and Colorado more broadly — isn't completely free of the subtle statements and actions that make Muslims, especially women, feel less safe when they leave the house.

Heraa Hashmi, a freshman at CU, says people regularly stare at her because she wears a head scarf to class. She can see the unconscious, immediate glimmer of anxiety in other students' eyes when she passes by an empty seat next to them in class.

"Whenever something violent does happen, we're all thinking, 'Please don't let this person be Muslim,' because if they are, there's a lot of backlash," she said.

In her daily life, Hashmi said she aims to make personal connections with other people. As soon as she says "Hi," she said, people relax.

Paola Elhob, too, has felt the effects of wearing a head scarf in public, particularly during her daily commute via public transit to Denver, where she is a community college foreign language professor.

"You're very quickly identified as Muslim," she said.

Elhob, who has lived in Longmont and Boulder for 12 years, said she's noticed more people staring at her since the terror attacks and she believes the neighbors in her apartment complex have been avoiding her.

People have made comments about her on the bus and one woman at a restaurant stared at her while sighing loudly for the entire meal, Elhob said.

"It's just kind of rough," said Elhob, 29. "I don't think they see that I'm human and I'm American and I ache for things that are happening and I don't support them in any way, shape or form."

Despite that, Elhob said she's encouraged that "people from all walks of life" are sending supportive messages and love to the Islamic community.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta