Buy Photo Application counselor Shawn Powell, left, assists Donna Kiernan of Green Bay with her health care application process at St. Vincent Hospital. Kiernan previously was unable to afford health insurance. (Photo: Jim Matthews/Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

Health insurance costs have climbed faster in Northeastern Wisconsin than anywhere else in the state over the past 14 years, according to an annual report released this week.

The cost of monthly premiums for large group plans in Green Bay ballooned 366 percent since 2000, a rate that greatly outpaces any other metro area in the state, according the ninth annual Wisconsin Health Insurance Cost Rankings Report.

The region had the lowest-cost premiums for large group insurance pools in 2000, but high rates of inflation have since pushed premium costs well above the state average.

"In 2000, Northeast Wisconsin had the lowest health insurance in the state, not Madison, and they've had a steady migration upward" said Robert Kraig, executive director of Citizen Action of Wisconsin, which wrote the report.

"We know the structure of the Green Bay marketplace has changed with new health systems coming in and that tends to — unlike in other forms of competition where it lowers prices — force insurance companies to pay for all the infrastructure."

Kraig spoke as part of a teleconference on Wednesday as Citizen Action of Wisconsin, a liberal-leaning group advocating for healthcare reform and Medicaid expansion, released the report.

The average monthly premium in a large-group program statewide is $763. In Green Bay, the average premium is $791. The region comes in under the state average for small group and individual program premiums, Kraig said.

The report only covers premiums. It does not address the cost of health care — how much doctors and hospitals cost — but it does include an insurance plan quality rating.

The greater Fox Valley area, including Appleton and Oshkosh, had the second highest increase at 247 percent.

Statewide, large-group program health insurance rates have more than tripled since 2000, increasing 211 percent, according to the report.

Rhinelander has the highest average large-group premium at $820. Madison has the lowest at $673.

"We continue to find, as we have through all previous nine years of this report, a huge variation between regions of the state," Kraig said. "There's a 22 percent variation ... between Rhinelander and Madison."

Citizen Action argues in its report that state officials could combat the rising costs and wide variation in premiums by taking advantage of powers granted under the Affordable Care Act to moderate costs through a state-run health insurance exchange.

Gov. Scott Walker opted to use the national marketplace instead of creating a Wisconsin-specific one.

"There have been huge problems in Oregon, Minnesota and Maryland," Walker said during a stop in the Green Bay area on Wednesday. "The state-based exchanges have not worked well around the country, and for all the promises they've made, they haven't lived up to those promises."

The Republican governor said the Affordable Care Act, also known Obamacare, has not lived up to its promise and he said he wants to see it repealed.

"My hope, long term, is they repeal Obamacare and allow us to make decisions when it comes to healthcare at the patient level," he said. "Not at the government or bureaucratic level."

State Sen. Chris Larson, D-Milwaukee, said the state could improve insurance costs by creating a state-based marketplace.

"Ignoring public policy that can fix insurance markets ... will only make us all pay more in the end to insurance companies," he said during the teleconference.

The report uses premium-payment information on government employees, retirees and their dependents in the Group Health Insurance Program (GHIP), about 194,000 individuals statewide.

The organization thinks GHIP is an adequate surrogate for health care premium costs in the private sector. It acknowledges it is more reflective of large-employer experience, but beginning last year it had access to more small-employer and individual costs because of the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

For small group and individual market rates, the report relies on data released by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for ACA exchange plans.

—arodewal@pressgazettemedia.com and follow him on Twitter @AdamGRodewald and on Facebook at Facebook.com/AdamGRodewald.

— Richard Ryman Press-Gazette Media

Health insurance inflation

A report by Citizen Action of Wisconsin ranks the state's metro areas based on the rate of health insurance inflation. The list below shows how much the cost of monthly premiums for a single person in a large group insurance pool increased since 2000.

Green Bay: 366%

Appleton: 247%

Oshkosh: 247%

Stevens Point: 229%

Fond du Lac: 225%

Manitowoc: 225%

Milwaukee: 224%

Racine: 223%

Rhinelander: 220%

Sheboygan: 219%

Wisconsin Rapids: 218%

Kenosha: 215%

La Crosse: 213%

Marshfield: 213%

Wausau: 209%

Eau Claire: 204%

Superior: 203%

Janesville/Beloit 201%

Dubuque Area (Wis.): 199%

Twin Cities Metro (Wis): 198%

Madison: 172%

State average: 211%

SOURCE: Wisconsin Health Insurance Cost Rankings Report

Health insurance premiums

A report by Citizen Action of Wisconsin ranks the state's metro areas based on the rate of health insurance inflation. The list below shows the average cost of a monthly premium for a single person in a large group insurance pool in 2014.

•Rhinelander: $820

•Superior: $811

•Racine: $810

•Milwaukee $807

•Kenosha: $807

•Eau Claire: $805

•Stevens Point: $805

•Twin Cities Metro (Wis.): $797

•Marshfield: $795

•Wisconsin Rapids: $795

•Wausau: $792

•Green Bay: $791

•Sheboygan: $791

•Manitowoc: $791

•Appleton: $788

•Oshkosh: $788

•La Crosse: $777

•Fond du Lac: $776

•Janesville: $749

•Beloit: $749

•Dubuque Area (Wis.): $730

•Madison: $673

•State average: $763

SOURCE: Wisconsin Health Insurance Cost Rankings Report

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1DPRJFp