Ahead of a scheduled visit by British Prime Minister David Cameron to the White House Thursday, Mr. Cameron and President Obama penned an op-ed reaffirming longstanding ties between the two countries amid recent global tumult.

“As we meet today at the White House, we reaffirm our belief that our ability to defend our freedoms is rooted in our economic strength and the values that we cherish — freedom of expression, the rule of law and strong democratic institutions,” the leaders wrote in The Times in the U.K.

Pressing challenges, they continued, include promoting global growth and combating global climate change.

“And as we were reminded so tragically again in Paris last week, terrorism, conflict and instability threaten the values that define us as free peoples,” they wrote. “Today we recommit ourselves to our enduring mission: protecting our peoples, safeguarding our economies and defending our values. Once more, Britain and America stand together. Once more, we need strong and determined leadership to meet the challenges of our time.”

Developments in the works, they said, include a new trade deal between the European Union and the United States.

“We also have to make sure prosperity is shared broadly,” they wrote. “For economic growth to be sustainable and meaningful, it must reach everyone, not just a few at the top.

“So we are working to help families to stake their claim to a better future and buy their first home,” they wrote. “We are supporting small businesses, expanding apprenticeships, improving education for all, and backing increases in the minimum wage. And we are co-operating to promote clean energy, reduce our carbon emissions and build our resilience to the impacts of climate change.”

They also pledged to continue to stand together against “those who threaten our values and our way of life,” saying that “we will not be cowed by extremists.”

“There are more than one billion Muslims in the world, the vast majority of whom are sickened by the evil these terrorists claim to perpetrate in the name of Islam,” they wrote. “The United States and Britain will continue to work closely with all those who believe in peace and tolerance. The terrorists know only how to destroy, but together we can do something infinitely more powerful: build security, strengthen justice and advance peace.”

The leaders also pledged to continue to stand up to Russia’s “aggressive actions in Ukraine.”

“Security and prosperity go hand in hand. By confronting the terrorists who threaten us, standing together against Russia’s aggressive acts and continuing our efforts to advance our economic growth, we will continue to advance the security and prosperity that our people deserve,” they wrote.