(ST. JOSEPH, Mo.) The fear of getting a concussion in sports is a concern to many.



A group of St. Joseph high school students with a passion for football developed a piece of equipment to try and reduce the impact of head jarring collisions.



The students in the Engineering Design and Development class at Central High School created the concussion collar.



"When a large amount of force comes in contact with the head, normally without the concussion collar the brain would jerk around," said Benton senior Cal Hensley. "Well, with this on here, it absorbs the impact and it's connected to the shoulder pads so the force is transferred to the shoulders to the head and the neck."



With the help of their instructor Mark Juhl, a long time football coach, the group of four from both Benton and Central high school tested four different prototypes throughout the year to reduce acceleration concussions.



"The helmet pretty much takes out the blunt impact concussion," said Central junior Jake Epperson. "It stops the head from moving to where it doesn't jostle the the brain and it actually hugs the head where you go down and it really balances out."



Using an accelerometer they recorded the power generated by each collision with and without the collar. They found wearing the collar made a difference.



"It took a high hitting power and made it act like it was a minor hit," said Epperson.



They plan to take their invention from the classroom to the field.



"I actually talked to three football players here at Central High School and I said even if this did limit your mobility a little bit as far as vision if it did, I'm not saying that it will, in order to prevent a concussion, would you wear this and three out of three said yes," said Juhl.



The group is working on patenting the concussion collar and says the next step is for players to test it out.



Copyright 2016 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.