In May 2012, Kansas’ all-Republican congressional delegation was split over whether to reauthorize the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Three members voted in favor — Sen. Pat Roberts, Sen. Jerry Moran and Rep. Kevin Yoder — and three members voted against: Reps. Tim Huelskamp, Lynn Jenkins and Mike Pompeo.

Three years later, the issue has again arisen in Washington. The bank’s charter expired July 1, and while attempts to revive it have been successful in the Senate, the House didn’t vote on the matter before adjourning Wednesday for its five-week August recess.

The Export-Import Bank is a credit agency for the federal government, financing and insuring purchases by non-American individuals and businesses when they purchase products from American businesses. Though its existence dates back to the Great Depression, its charter must be renewed by Congress every few years.

Depending on whom you ask, the bank is either a necessary financial institution allowing American businesses to compete overseas, an extravagant example of corporate welfare run amok, or something in between. In the minds of most members of Kansas’ congressional delegation, the bank seems to fall within the latter category.

“The Kansas economy is highly dependent on exporting our products, and I have been contacted by employers from all across Kansas who have attested to the importance of the Ex-Im Bank in their efforts to sell those products and services overseas,” Jenkins said in an email Thursday. “I have also heard from many Kansans who are concerned that the Ex-Im Bank places taxpayers’ money at risk for loans, too much of which benefits a handful of major corporations.”

Jenkins said she would prefer if export loans were financed in the free market. If the bank’s charter is to be reauthorized, the 2nd District representative said reforms should be put in place to remove taxpayers from any risk.

That sentiment was echoed by 4th District Rep. Mike Pompeo, who said in an interview last week that major revisions to the bank’s charter are needed.

“We should get taxpayers out of projects that benefit private enterprise,” Pompeo said, adding that “a half-dozen reforms” are necessary before the bank’s charter should be reauthorized.

Huelskamp, meanwhile, has been an outspoken opponent of the bank, calling it “an outdated, Depression-era program” and “special interest handout” in a news release last year. Huelskamp’s office and Yoder’s office didn’t respond to requests for comment last week.

Opposition to the Export-Import Bank has resulted in a strange alliance of fiscal conservatives, like Huelskamp, and progressives, such as Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders. While running for president, then-Sen. Barack Obama opposed the Export-Import Bank but as president Obama has urged Congress to reauthorize it.

On July 26, the Senate voted to approve an amendment to a six-year highway bill that would reauthorize the bank. With both Kansas senators voting in favor, the amendment passed 64-29. However, the House opted not to take up the highway bill before its August recess, leaving the bank unable to approve any new deals made by U.S. businesses overseas.

That uncertainty isn’t sitting well with companies that export many of their products. Boeing threatened last week to move portions of its manufacturing overseas to take advantage of export-import banks in other nations and both the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and Kansas Chamber of Commerce support reauthorization.

“Eliminating the program at this juncture, with no public or private U.S. alternative in place, essentially means unilaterally disarming ourselves in the economic battle to attract a market for our products,” said Emily Mitchell, the Kansas Chamber’s director of communications. “Our Kansas engineering, aerospace and ag partners, to name a few, need this tool in their international trade toolbox.”

Such a strong push from business groups has placed some Kansas Republicans in a tight spot between their fiscal conservatism and their support for agriculture and aerospace companies. For Moran, the choice is clear.

“Since 2007, the Ex-Im Bank has helped more than 83 Kansas companies and their workers compete in the global economy,” the freshman senator said in an email last week. “The Kansas Chamber of Commerce and many Kansas businesses — both large and small — asked that I support reauthorization because it is so important to their ability to compete and grow their businesses.”

Moran was asked about the bank’s charter during a town hall meeting in Emporia on Friday. He told the crowd that while he wished the U.S. and other countries such as China didn’t have export-import banks, Ex-Im’s charter must be renewed if American companies are to compete internationally.

“In my view, if you want to diminish further the manufacturing base in our country, if you want China to be more supreme than it is in the economy, take away one of the tools that allows our companies in Kansas and across the country to meet the competition that comes from all those other countries that have this bank,” Moran said.