DJ Helena who is one of Australia’s most successful female DJ’s and producers and has cracked the Vegas scene.

HELENA is the real deal. The Aussie DJ and producer is among the world’s best, having recently landed herself a residency at hip new Las Vegas super club Drai’s.

“I’m trying to be the best I can be,” Helena told Confidential.

“I’m hands on. I’m very technical and I play across four decks. I’m all about the music.”

Helena, 28, whose last name is Atherton, was born in the UK but grew up in Melbourne.

She’s lived in Sydney for most of the past decade and recently moved to LA where she’s quickly shot up the international ranks and is now the first Australian female DJ to earn a residency in Vegas.

DJ Helena loves the big events. Picture: Shane O'Neal.

DJ Helena was named in the line-up for Belgium’s Tomorrowland Music Festival. Picture: Shane O'Neal.

Just a few days ago, Helena was named in the line-up for Belgium’s Tomorrowland Music Festival, regarded the biggest electronic music fest in the world.

Helena began learning to DJ at 14 and is known for playing big room house.

She recently signed a global record deal with Sony Music.

“I want to be a staple name at all these big festivals,” she said. “I want to be playing alongside every big DJ in the world.”

Aside from herself, the other biggest Australian female DJ act is the Nervo twins.

“There’s a lot of female acts in the market but not really many at the moment that have broken through.”

Why?

“I think it’s because girls haven’t nailed the production to be quite honest,” she said candidly.

“These promoters are not going to give you a gig just because you’re a girl. It is about the music.”

Helena says that the main reason women don’t seem to have made as big an impact on the industry is ‘because girls haven’t nailed the production to be quite honest'. Picture: Shane O'Neil.

Although diplomatic, she agreed there was a trend of both male and females calling themselves DJs without actually having the skill to be one.

“Of course but you have that in a lot of sectors,” she said.

“You have people who play pre mixed CDs and stand around and call themselves a DJ. It’s like, are they a DJ or are they a performer, it’s a fine line between it all.”