Cathy Cortijo's work as an Affordable Care Act navigator wasn't over at the end of the open enrollment period in February.

That's because the Obama administration extended the enrollment deadline for anyone hit with the penalty for not having insurance last year. This "shared responsibility payment," as the government calls it, is deducted from tax refunds. So some people are only learning about it now, as they file their 2014 tax returns, which are due April 15.

"It's like, 'Oh, I need to fix this or I'm going to be penalized again!' " said Cortijo, an outreach and enrollment specialist for Neighborhood Health Centers of the Lehigh Valley in Allentown.

Unless they qualify for an exemption, people without insurance last year must fork over $95, or 1 percent of their income, depending on which is higher, to the Internal Revenue Service. According to tax preparation company H&R Block, which analyzed 40 million returns through mid-February, the average fine was $172.

Cortijo said some tax-preparers are sending uninsured customers to her, so she can help them sign up for coverage through the federal marketplace's healthcare.gov website. The deadline to do so is April 30.

So far, the response to the extension has been tepid in the 37 states served by the federal marketplace. By the end of March, less than 1 percent of an estimated 4 million eligible taxpayers had used the extra time to sign up for insurance, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Obamacare has complicated tax time for some filers in other ways as well. Even people who did have insurance last year might owe the IRS money.

Of those who received subsidies, or advance insurance premium tax credits, to help pay for their insurance, about half underestimated their income, H&R Block said. That means they have to pay back the government — $530 on average — typically through a reduced tax refund.

People might have underestimated their income for any number of reasons, including reliance on old information, according to Karen Gillette, a master tax adviser for H&R Block in Allentown. For example, those who enrolled for 2014 coverage in late 2013 would have had to use their 2012 information to estimate their income.

Others, such as anyone who got a new job with employer-sponsored health insurance, might have continued to receive subsidies for which they were no longer eligible.

"Our job is to educate them about why," Gillette said, "and that in the future they'll have to let the marketplace know when anything changes."

Conversely, roughly one-third of marketplace enrollees overestimated their 2014 household income, H&R Block said. As a result, they're getting, on average, an additional premium tax credit of $365, increasing their refunds 11 percent to $3,816.

Processing tax returns for customers who had insurance through the federal marketplace sometimes requires extra forms and therefore takes longer and costs more money, Gillette said. To handle the extra workload, her H&R Block office on Airport Road hired additional tax-preparers, more than doubling its payroll to 15 this year, up from seven last year.

"We certainly have been able to keep up with it," she said.

For the 2015 tax year, the penalty for not having insurance will go up — to $325, or 2 percent of income. Deductions for uninsured children will be half those of adults and the maximum penalty for a family will be $975.

Exemptions under the health law, however, are wide-ranging. One of the most common and most confusing is the affordability exemption, according to H&R Block.

The affordability exemption applies to taxpayers whose premiums would have cost more than 8 percent of their household income. To claim the exemption, people must consider the amount of the premium tax credit they would have received if they had actually enrolled in the coverage — something that requires extensive calculations to figure out.

Other common exemptions cover people who were uninsured for less than three consecutive months and those who experienced hardships, such as domestic abuse, the death of a close family member or medical expenses that resulted in substantial debt.

There is also an array of less common exemptions that apply, for example, to members of Indian tribes and prisoners.

skennedy@mcall.com

610-820-6130

OBAMACARE TAX TAB

Average penalty for people without insurance last year: $172

Average tax refund reduction for those underestimating incomes: $530

Average extra tax refund for those overestimating incomes: $365

Source: H&R Block