WWE heavyweight champion Seth Rollins suffered meniscus tears during a match in Dublin, Ireland, and will be out for six to nine months.

The news only seems to get worse for WWE.

On the heels of Randy Orton's shoulder injury and surgery that could sideline the star for up to six months, WWE was hit by an even bigger blow when world champion Seth Rollins suffered major ligament damage during a match last week during the company's European tour.

Rollins is expected to be out for six to nine months, and his title has been declared vacant.

Both will most likely miss the Royal Rumble and could possibly miss Wrestlemania as well, which puts a major crimp in planning for WWE's two biggest events of the year.

Rollins, 29, tore his right ACL, MCL and medial meniscus during a No Holds Barred main event with Kane when his knee buckled after doing a power bomb spot out of the corner. He collapsed but was able to finish the match before being helped to the back.

WWE immediately announced that Rollins' scheduled match with Roman Reigns will not take place at Survivor Series on Nov. 22 in Atlanta, and that he was stripped of the WWE title.

A tournament to crown a new WWE champion will be held at the event and could include a final four of Reigns, Dean Ambrose, Alberto Del Rio and Kevin Owens.

With the title picture wide open, it gives WWE the possible opportunity to elevate a rising star on the roster. Most insiders, however, point to Reigns, Rollins' former championship tag-team partner, as the most likely successor to his title.

John Cena also is on hiatus during the month of November and isn't expected back until mid-December. It can't be ruled out, however, that the 15-time world champ could be asked to come back for the tournament in order to strengthen the lineup.

Orton, 35, who has had a shoulder problem for most of his career, is expected to have surgery to repair a dislocated shoulder.

From MRI results, it was determined that Orton suffered a Bankart lesion in his shoulder, stretched ligaments and a partially torn rotator cuff.

“At this point it's a matter of when he dislocates the shoulder again, and not if,” said WWE doctor Steve Daquino. “Surgery seems imminent, and recovery time for such a surgery would be four to six months.”

Rollins' injury comes in the midst of a successful run on top for the former Shield member who appeared headed for a possible Wrestlemania main event next April at AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Texas.

He told the WWE website that he was genuinely touched by the outpouring of support from fans.

“Well, you know, for someone who is as universally despised as I am, I was pretty overwhelmed with the amount of love that I received from all of the fans in the WWE Universe,” said Rollins. All of the well wishes and, just in general, all the concern that everyone had for me as a person and as a performer. So, I don't do this very often, but I would like to extend a thank you to them. Their support means a lot to me and it's going to go a long way in my recovery and help me mentally get back to where I was at.”

Rollins will undergo reconstructive surgery on his knee Tuesday under Dr. James Andrews in Birmingham, Ala.

When Rollins does return, the stage will be set for him to come back as a top babyface intent on exacting revenge against The Authority, who stripped him of his world title.

But with Wrestlemania season around the corner and ratings near an all-time low, it might to be time for WWE creative to pull a rabbit out of its collective hat.

Monday Night Raw

WWE's Monday Right Raw returns to the North Charleston Coliseum on Dec. 7.

The last local televised Raw, which airs live on USA network, was held June 24, 2013.

Tentatively scheduled for the show is an eight-man tag-team match pitting Roman Reigns, Randy Orton, Dean Ambrose and Kane against Seth Rollins and The Wyatt Family (Bray Wyatt, Luke Harper and Erick Rowan). With Orton and Rollins now sidelined, replacements could be named, or most likely the bout will become a six-man match.

Seats start at $15 (plus applicable fees) and are available at the North Charleston Coliseum advance ticket office, charge by phone at 1-800-745-3000 or online at Ticketmaster.com.

Clash For Kids

The WNC Chapter of Toys for Tots is teaming up with Col. Tim, the owner of Florida's Coastal Wrestling Association, to put on a pro wrestling fundraiser Nov. 14 at the North Carolina National Guard Armory in Clyde.

The show features“The Beast Master” Rick Link and The American GI plus a special appearance by Bobby Fulton.

All toys and money collected at the event will be used to help families in eight counties in western North Carolina. Tickets are $10, or bring a new or unopened toy valued at $10 or more and get in for $5. Doors open at 6:30 p.m. and the action starts at 7:30.

For more information, call (828) 777-2610.

Reach Mike Mooneyham at 843-937-5517, or follow him on Twitter at @ByMike Mooneyham and on Facebook at Facebook.com/MikeMooneyham.