The pregnant wife of a Marine has been missing for one week in Southern California.

The search for Erin Corwin, 19, centers around her home in Twentynine Palms, California, and Joshua Tree National Park.

Corwin, who is three-months pregnant, was seen last on June 28 when she left her home to scout out the park for a future trip there with her mother, according to CBS News.

Her husband, Jonathan Wayne Corwin, a corporal in the Marines, reported her missing on Sunday, station KESQ reports.

"There were definite suspicious circumstances," about her disappearance a San Bernardino County Sheriff spokeswoman told the Riverside Press-Enterprise. There's also the "possibility of foul play," the spokeswoman said.

Her 2013 Toyota Corolla was found Monday, according to KTLA. The car was found in Twentynine Palms near the military base.

Corwin's family started a Facebook page to seek information about their missing relative.

"It's been one week since Erin has been missing. It's been four days since we have had any updates to aid in the investigation into the search for Erin," said a post uploaded on Saturday. "PLEASE PRAY that today is the day we find Erin, or, at the very least, that there is a direction we can be pointed as to what happened has to her."

Corwin is white, 5-feet-2, weighs 120 pounds and has brown hair and blue eyes. Anyone with information on her whereabouts is asked to call (909)-387-3589.

Related on HuffPost: Marine's Pregnant Wife Allegedly Murdered Marine's Pregnant Wife Allegedly Murdered

1 of 4 Missing Pregnant Woman This undated photo released by the San Bernardino County Sheriff's Department shows 19-year-old Erin Corwin, left, with her husband, Jonathan Wayne Corwin, a lance corporal in the U.S. Marine Corps. Authorities on Wednesday, July 2, 2014, were searching for the missing woman who disappeared after leaving her home on the Twentynine Palms Marine Corps base and was headed to Joshua Tree National Park. (AP Photo/San Bernardino County Sheriff's Department) Share this slide:

ASSOCIATED PRESS

More: Missing Persons