There was some baseball to be enjoyed Sunday for Rockies fans at Coors Field. Unfortunately for the team, that came only in the form of the 1993 film “The Sandlot,” which was shown on the ballpark’s giant scoreboard screen after the Rockies’ 13-5 loss to the Minnesota Twins.

A sandlot team is exactly what the Rockies (40-55) looked too much like in their final game before the all-star break. Not only were the Rockies routed Sunday, they dropped their seventh series in the past eight. If recent history is a guide, fans don’t have a lot to look forward to after the break. Since 2010, the Rockies have more than doubled the number of games back of first place they were at the break to where they finished at season’s end.

But, hey, they’re still a half game ahead of the Arizona Diamondbacks for last place in the National League West.

“Um … not very good,” Rockies third baseman Nolan Arenado said when asked to sum up his team’s first half. “Obviously, it wasn’t what we wanted. We make it a lot harder on ourselves, that’s for sure. But we’ve got a second half, and we’ve got some guys coming back, so we’ve just got to keep playing hard and try to get wins.”

PHOTOS: Minnesota Twins 13, Colorado Rockies 5

The return of left-hander Brett Anderson to the Rockies’ rotation for the first time since April 12 didn’t go well.

The Twins scored five runs on seven hits in the first inning Sunday and pounded out a season-high 18 hits overall.

“Not many positives about the outing. … My stuff was terrible, pretty much,” said Anderson (0-3, 4.95 ERA). “After the first inning, I battled and tried to give us a chance to win. I can only feel good about staying healthy, and just have to put this one behind me and go on to the next one.”

Brian Dozier hit two home runs for the Twins in the final two innings, turning a relatively close game into a rout.

To his credit, Anderson settled down and allowed only one run over the next four innings. He might have been in line for a victory if the Rockies could have hit a little better in the clutch.

The Rockies cut their 5-0 deficit to 5-4 by the second inning. In the third, they had runners at first and third with one out and Corey Dickerson at the plate. But Dickerson hit a short flyball to left field that failed to bring in Justin Morneau, and Wilin Rosario let struggling Twins starter Phil Hughes off the hook by striking out.

In the fourth, Carlos Gonzalez was up with the tying run on second and two outs. He swung and missed on strike three, but the ball got past Twins catcher Kurt Suzuki. That seemed to give Gonzalez enough time to reach first safely. But Suzuki made a quick recovery and barely beat Gonzalez with the throw. The play withstood a video review.

Things started to go sideways for good in the fifth inning, when Trevor Plouffe tripled to right-center and came home on DJ LeMahieu’s throwing error. That lifted Minnesota’s lead to 6-4. The throw to Arenado was on target, but the ball hit Plouffe in the hand and skittered into the dugout.

“That’s why baseball is the best game in the world, and the worst game in the world. It’s a game of inches,” Anderson said of the key Twins run.

Rockies manager Walt Weiss did his best to sound optimistic about the team’s second half.

“It’s important to get a breather here,” Weiss said. “When the second half starts, we have to play with a sense of urgency. I was hoping we could get this series going into the break. Didn’t happen.”