For chief executives of many companies acquired private equity firms, forming the right relationship with their new sponsors can be a challenge. More than half (57%) of 198 companies sampled in a study of European groups under private equity ownership have had their chief executives ousted since being acquired, according to a report today by Boston Consulting Group titled Private Equity and the CEO.

Boston Consulting Group outlined some of the key sticking points between chief executives and their private equity backers, and some of the mistakes the companies’ heads make.

Here is a list of dos and don’ts for chief executives embarking on a relationship with a private equity sponsor.

•Do:

Get to know how private equity works

Private equity firms are driven by increasing value within a relatively short holding period of around five years. Chief executives’ longer-term vision for a company may not be in line with the expectations of their private equity backer.

Drive operational change

Private equity owners often want less of a chief executive and more of a “super-charged COO [chief operating officer]”, said Antoon Schneider, a partner at Boston Consulting Group and co-author of the report. “They want chief executives to be less big-picture and visionary, and more results-driven.”

He said that while private equity owners tend to have a strategy for their portfolio companies, and usually have staff on the boards of those companies, they cannot manage the companies day-to-day. “If [the CEO] is not a good operator, [sponsors] can’t supplement that”.

Be prepared to take risks

“Private equity is action-oriented and they want someone [in the CEO role] with a similar bias,” said Mr. Schneider. He said that because private equity firms invest across a portfolio, they need to take risks, while “most corporates only care about the survival of that one company, and with public companies, the boards are very risk-averse. Private equity firms are incentivised on the upside.”

Be detail-oriented

Mr. Schneider said: “One person at a private equity firm we spoke to said: ‘if I ask about the company’s financials and a CEO looks to the CFO, I get nervous. I want someone who has a track record of operational expertise, knows the financials of the business and is close to the business and takes a hands-on approach.’”

•Don’t:

Keep any secrets

“Transparency about plans and performance helps to secure the CEO job,” said Mr. Schneider. He added that while companies are performing well and don’t face any problems chief executives might be able to get away with keeping information to themselves but that it was a risk. “For private equity firms, more transparency makes them more comfortable and if things go wrong, they are more patient if the CEO has been transparent.”

Over-promise

“Over-promising is generally a bad idea. In the corporate world you can promise the world and deal with it later but not in the private equity world. A lot of CEOs don’t understand or appreciate the importance private equity firms place on plans and sticking to them,” said Mr. Schneider. Private equity firms typically spend the first 100 days of ownership of a company ironing out a five-year business plan that charts the course for the business under their ownership.

Expect the sponsor to be hands-off

The industry has moved beyond the “give me your money and move on” attitude that some chief executives had towards private equity in the past, said Mr. Schneider. “In general, CEOs want a hands-off approach from private equity but there are areas that they can improve.” He added that private equity firms were unlikely to want to be involved in company infrastructure or supply-chain decision-making.

…And as for what chief executives expect from private equity firms? Many chief executives want insights about the market from their new sponsors, particularly those that have been carved out of a larger corporate, where they are used to receiving feedback and information from the head office, said Mr. Schneider.

Write to ayesha.javed@wsj.com and follow on Twitter @AyeshaJavedPEN