Buy Photo U.S. Senate candidate Joe Carr, left, talks with Rafael Cruz, who is a pastor and the father of Sen. Ted Cruz, as radio host Ralph Bristol listens on Saturday. (Photo: John Partipilo / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The father of conservative firebrand U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz roused a crowd of tea party supporters with stories of his journey to the United States and his call for constitutional conservatism.

Rafael Cruz, pastor of Purifying Fire Ministries in suburban Dallas, received multiple standing ovations throughout his speech, delivered at a We the People rally organized by the Nashville Tea Party at the Millennium Maxwell House Hotel on Saturday afternoon.

The Cuban native spent much of his lecture analyzing the merits of Declaration of Independence and accusing the federal government of straying from it. He also said how his beliefs are inspired by the same wellsprings as his son, the Texas senator who has enthused some conservatives enough to call on him to run for president.

"That passion has been like fire in him, and let me tell you, that fire has been as alive 32 years ago as it is today," Cruz said. "That's why I know he's not going to compromise in Washington."

Cruz threaded his life story — one that has him fleeing Cuba to come to school in Texas and establishing himself as a self-made businessman — with his belief that adhering solely to the country's founding documents was key to its success. He accused established politicians of telling "lie after lie" instead of enacting the policies they called for while running for office.

At times, he condemned the administrations of Presidents Barack Obama and Jimmy Carter, comparing them to the authoritarian and communist regime he left behind.

Throughout the speech, he breezed though a flurry of conservative assertions questioned by some even within the Republican Party — a call to end the federal education department, an accusation that death panels are part of the Affordable Care Act and the belief that a right to bear arms is intertwined with a right to life.

The pastor's message was one that spoke loud and clear to Brentwood resident Janice Murphree. She said Cruz put into words the feelings of many tea party conservatives in the region.

"He's able to speak the truth," she said.

The rally also served as a campaign event for Nashville-area candidates wanting to ally themselves with Cruz and tea party conservatives. U.S. Senate candidate Joe Carr, a Tennessee state representative, spoke before Cruz did, calling on Tennessee voters to take on the established leaders in Congress.

Even if it takes one man, he said he would fight business-oriented Republican leaders "who ignored the American worker or the needs of you and I when it comes to 'We the People,'" he said.

Reach Brian Wilson at 615-726-5970 or on Twitter @brianwilson17.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/politics/2014/07/19/ted-cruzs-father-sparks-revival-spirit-tea-party-rally/12890305/