An Old Town store was the target of a smash-and-grab burglary Monday morning. (Published Monday, Sept. 22, 2014)

Another high-end Chicago store has been targeted by thieves in a smash-and-grab burglary.

The burglary took place just after 5 a.m. Monday at the Luxury Garage Sale near Wells Street and North Avenue in Chicago's Old Town neighborhood, police said.

Officers were called to the scene after the store's burglary alarm was activated. When police arrived at the scene they confirmed there was a forced entry.

It was not clear what was taken from the store or how much the stolen goods are worth.

Oak Street Heist Linked to Suburban Louis Vuitton Burglary

9/15/2014: Sources say the same crew may have hit Chicago's Moncler store and Oak Brook's Louis Vuitton boutique. NBC 5's Dick Johnson reports. (Published Monday, Sept. 15, 2014)

Police said an investigation is ongoing.

It is the third smash-and-grab in the Chicago area this month as a crew of burglars targeted luxury retailers in the Gold Coast neighborhood and suburban Oak Brook.

Last week, a break-in was reported at the Moncler store on Oak Street and earlier this month a Louis Vuitton store was hit at a mall in Oak Brook.

Multiple sources confirm that the two crimes are connected and virtually identical, down to the early-morning hour the thefts occurred, the use of a minivan to break the windows and the speed in which the criminals got in and out of the store.

Police Investigate After Louis Vuitton Store Robbed

Police investigate after Louis Vuitton store robbed. (Published Sunday, Sept. 7, 2014)

It's not clear how much merchandise was stolen in the Moncler burglary, but coats at the store can cost as much as $3,000. Around $120,000 in goods was taken in the Louis Vuitton heist.

Luxury Garage Sale said last week it was on alert for stolen goods, but has apparently become a victim.

Upscale Store Hit in Gold Coast Heist

Thieves smashed into the Moncler store on Oak st. and took racks of expensive coats. Christian Farr reports. (Published Monday, Sept. 15, 2014)

Online designer consignment business, eDropoff, in Lincoln Park was also monitoring purchases for stolen goods.

"We monitor all luxury store break-ins locally so we can flag any suspicious merchandise that comes through our doors," eDropoff owner Corri McFadden said.

McFadden says all sellers are asked to sign a binding consignment agreement to ensure all items were legally obtained.