WASHINGTON, March 2 (Reuters) - President Barack Obama will take his campaign to increase the minimum wage on the road in the coming week in an effort to build pressure on Republicans who oppose the raise.

Obama will appear on Wednesday in New Bristol, Connecticut alongside four New England governors to make the case, the White House said. The president wants to increase the minimum wage to $10.10 an hour from $7.25, where it has been since 2009.

The president will make the pitch a day after presenting his federal government budget proposal for fiscal year 2015. His budget is expected to emphasize programs aimed at speeding economic growth and creating jobs, but is not likely to be enacted in a divided Congress.

Congress must act to raise the wage floor, but House Republicans have been reluctant to do so, saying it would hurt employers and lead to job cutbacks. Even so, Obama and Democrats see the issue as a way to draw a contrast between their party and Republicans in an election year.

Partisan divisions were on display at the White House last week, when Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal, a Republican, said after a meeting with Obama that raising the minimum was "waving the white flag of surrender" in the face of a persistently high unemployment rate.

Governor Dannel Malloy of Connecticut shot back, calling Jindal's remark "insane."

Malloy on Sunday called Jindal's remark a "cheap shot" and said it illustrated how Republicans want to score points with their followers simply by opposing the president.

"In the past we've seen wage increases under Republican administrations," he said on a conference call with reporters. "Now, because a Democratic president is talking about it, they're automatically against it."

The president's efforts to win support in Congress for the increase were set back earlier this month when the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office said that increasing the pay floor could lead to the loss of 500,000 jobs as employers raise prices for goods and services and cut back staff.

But Malloy said Congress should feel pressure to keep low-wage workers from living in poverty. A wage raise would be a shot in the arm for the sluggish economy because it would give people more money to spend.

"What we are talking about is bringing a level of relief to millions upon millions of people in the country," he said.

Vermont Governor Peter Shumlin, a Democrat, said regional solidarity behind raising the minimum was important.

"So often we hear states fearful of raising the minimum wage because other states around them might not," he said.

Both Connecticut and Vermont have higher minimum wages than the federal minimum. Connecticut's floor is $8.25 an hour and Vermont's is $8.60. (Reporting By Mark Felsenthal; Editing by Meredith Mazzilli)

Also on HuffPost: 8 States With The Highest Minimum Wage 8 States With The Highest Minimum Wage

1 of 8 8. Massachusetts Minimum wage: $8.00 (tied for 7th highest) Poverty rate: 11.9% (11th lowest) Union participation: 14.3% (12th highest) Cost of living: 8th highest Unlike the many states that tie minimum wages to inflation to ensure earnings keep up with living costs, in Massachusetts the minimum wage has not changed since 2008. The cost of living in Massachusetts is hardly low. Overall, the state is one of the most expensive places to live in the country. The cost of health care, for example, is higher than in every state except for Alaska. That burden, however, may not be felt as much by the state’s population because more than 95% of residents are covered by health insurance, the most in the nation. Other high costs may still be affordable for many living in Massachusetts. Median household income last year was among the highest in the United States, at $65,339. Union participation in the state is especially strong. Roughly 64% of public workers are union members, trailing only New York. $8.00 (tied for 7th highest)11.9% (11th lowest)14.3% (12th highest)8th highest Unlike the many states that tie minimum wages to inflation to ensure earnings keep up with living costs, in Massachusetts the minimum wage has not changed since 2008. The cost of living in Massachusetts is hardly low. Overall, the state is one of the most expensive places to live in the country. The cost of health care, for example, is higher than in every state except for Alaska. That burden, however, may not be felt as much by the state’s population because more than 95% of residents are covered by health insurance, the most in the nation. Other high costs may still be affordable for many living in Massachusetts. Median household income last year was among the highest in the United States, at $65,339. Union participation in the state is especially strong. Roughly 64% of public workers are union members, trailing only New York. Read more at 24/7 Wall St. Share this slide:

WikiMedia: