It’s open enrollment season, and for many workers that means learning they’ll be responsible for a larger portion of their health care costs in 2016. This growing burden is cutting into their retirement savings, according to a survey by LIMRA, an insurance and financial services trade association.

Six in 10 workers agreed that the rising cost of health insurance directly affects how much they set aside in their workplace retirement savings plan, according to LIMRA. That could mean leaving their 401k contribution rate the same when they really should be increasing it over time, or even reducing the rate at which they contribute, said Anita Potter, assistant vice president at LIMRA.

Employee healthcare costs have risen steadily in recent years as wages have stagnated. Single and family average premiums for employer-sponsored health insurance rose 4% this year over last, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation survey released this fall. The average annual premium for single coverage is $6,251, of which workers pay an average of $1,071; the average family premium is $17,545, of which workers pay an average of $4,955.

Deductibles have risen more sharply than premiums. That’s the amount that consumers must pay out of pocket before insurance pays for anything, except for certain preventive services that are covered at 100%.

The average deductible for workers with employer-sponsored health insurance who face a deductible is $1,318 for single coverage this year, up 44% from $917 in 2010, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. By contrast, over that same period, single premiums are up 24% and wages have risen 10%, just outpacing general inflation at 9%, according to Kaiser.

The question for workers becomes, “How will I manage my daily expenses on a lower paycheck?” said Erik Carter, a senior financial planner with Financial Finesse, a provider of workplace financial literacy education.

A growing number of employers are expanding their employee education beyond the traditional 401k talk to include more basic topics such as budgeting and debt management. For example, the Los Alamos National Laboratory held a Financial Fitness Boot Camp last year whose programs included sessions on the psychology of spending and how to be a better health care consumer.

Consumers on the individual insurance market have to contend with health plan deductibles that are even higher than those with workplace-based coverage. The average 2016 deductible for a silver plan on the Obamacare exchanges is $3,117 for individual coverage, up 6% from 2015, while the average silver family deductible is $6,480, up 8% from this year, according to a recent analysis by HealthPocket, a technology company that ranks and compares health plans.

Those are lofty sums when nearly half of Americans would have trouble paying an emergency expense of just $400, according to a survey reported earlier this year by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Some high-deductible health plans are compatible with health savings accounts, tax-advantaged savings accounts that can be used to fund current and retirement medical expenses. Internal Revenue Service guidelines set the minimum deductible level for health savings account eligibility for 2015 at $1,300 for individual coverage or $2,600 for family coverage.

Only 16% of employees who are contributing to a health savings account plan to use the funds for future healthcare costs in retirement, according to the 2015 Employee Financial Wellness Survey by PwC. Most of these are higher earners who don’t dip regularly into their health savings account and instead pay medical expenses with separate savings, financial planners have observed.

Most people in good health won’t hit their annual deductible without some sort of unforeseen diagnosis or accident. Hope for the best but budget for the worst, experts advise. “Don’t assume this is the year you won’t need healthcare,” said Jeff Smedsrud, CEO of HealthCare.com, an online health-insurance search and comparison engine. “Be realistic.”

More from MarketWatch