Timothy Jost

November 24, 2014

Two earlier posts this past weekend analyzed the massive Department of Health and Human Services 2016 Benefit and Payment Parameter Proposed Rule, released on November 21. Also on November 21, the Internal Revenue Service of the Department of the Treasury released a final rule on Minimum Essential Coverage and Other Rules Regarding the Shared Responsibility Payment for Individuals, while the Office of Personnel Management released proposed modifications to the multi-state plan (MSP) program rule. This post explores these rules.

Minimum Essential Coverage

The ACA requires Americans to either maintain “minimum essential coverage” (MEC) or pay a tax. There are a number of exceptions to the requirement, however, and the concept of MEC can become quite complicated. The final rule published by the IRS provides guidance as to the meaning of MEC and the rules governing some of the exceptions.

Medicaid medically needy coverage. The first category of coverage addressed by the final rule is Medicaid coverage for the medically needy. The medically needy are individuals with high medical expenses who would be eligible for Medicaid but for their income level. Medically needy coverage is often not comprehensive, and thus does not qualify as MEC. HHS can, however, designate some state medically needy programs as offering comprehensive coverage, and thus MEC. HHS released guidance on November 7, 2014 addressing when it will consider a state medically needy program as offering sufficiently comprehensive coverage to qualify as MEC.

Similar considerations arise with respect to Medicaid demonstration projects under Social Security Act section 1115(a) waivers, which may or may not offer comprehensive coverage. This issue is again under the jurisdiction of HHS and was addressed by the November 7, 2014 guidance.

Section 125 cafeteria plan contributions. The next issue addressed by the final rule is the application of employer contributions to a section 125 cafeteria plan (flex contributions) for purposes of determining affordability of coverage. Employees who must pay more than a certain percentage of their household income for the employee contribution to obtain employer-sponsored coverage (8 percent in 2014) are exempt from the shared responsibility requirements. An employee may also be able to qualify for premium tax credits if the employee’s required contribution for minimum value sole-employee coverage exceeds a certain percentage of household income (9.5 percent in 2014). The question thus arises whether employer contributions to a section 125 plan should be subtracted from the required employee contribution to determine whether coverage is affordable.

Under the final rule, the required contribution is reduced by employer contributions to a 125 cafeteria plan if 1) the employee does not have the option to take the contribution as a taxable benefit (such as cash), 2) the contribution may be used to pay for MEC, and 3) the contribution may only be used to pay for medical care. The IRS rejected suggestions that 125 plan contributions reduce the required contributions whether or not the employee can choose to receive taxable benefits instead of the contribution or whether or not the employer contribution could be used to pay for benefits other than medical care.

Health reimbursement accounts. The final rule addresses a number of issues involving health reimbursement accounts (HRAs). Many of these issues were addressed in an earlier IRS guidance released in May of 2013 and discussed in the preface to the rule. Under the final rule, amounts newly made available in the current plan year under an HRA that is integrated with an eligible employer-sponsored plan are taken into account in determining the affordability of the employee’s or a related individual’s required contribution if the employee may use HRA funds to pay for the employee’s share of premiums for coverage under the plan.

The final rule clarifies that an HRA is only taken into account in determining affordability of employer-sponsored coverage if the HRA and the employee’s employer-sponsored coverage are offered by the same employer, and not if the HRA is integrated into a plan offered by a different employer, such as that of the employer of the employee’s spouse. An HRA may also not be integrated with marketplace coverage. If an HRA may only be used to pay premiums, or if it may be used to pay both premiums and cost sharing, employer contributions are counted toward determining affordability. If contributions may only be used to reduce cost sharing, they are counted for determining minimum value.

Employer contributions to an HRA can only count toward an employee’s required contribution if they are required under the terms of the plan or can otherwise be determined within a reasonable time before the employee must decide whether to enroll in the group health plan. Employees must be able to determine whether employer-sponsored coverage is affordable before they decide whether to enroll in the employer plan or seek coverage through the exchange. Finally, the preface clarifies that health insurers are not required to determine if employers are making contributions to an HRA or HSA and what limitations are placed on those contributions.

Wellness program incentives. Under the final rule wellness program incentives are treated as unearned for determining whether employer-sponsored coverage is affordable unless they relate to tobacco use, in which case they are treated as earned. That is to say that a determination of affordability is based on the employer contribution that would be charged to an employee who does not participate in the wellness program, unless the program relates to tobacco use, in which case affordability is based on the premium that would be charged to a non-tobacco user or to a tobacco user who successfully completes the wellness program. The rule applies whether wellness programs use discounts or surcharges and whether they are participatory or health-contingent.

Finally, the rule lists various forms of limited Medicaid, Tricare, or Veteran’s coverage that does not qualify as MEC.

The Shared Responsibility Requirement

While individuals who claim a hardship exemption from the shared responsibility requirement must usually apply for and obtain a certificate from their exchange recognizing their hardship, the final rule provides that hardship exemptions can be claimed on the tax return if published guidance from HHS and the IRS permit claiming the exemption on the tax return. The categories of hardship exemptions which currently fall into this category include:

exemptions for individuals whose gross income is below the tax filing threshold;

employed and related individuals whose combined cost of employer-sponsored coverage exceeds the required contribution percentage;

individuals who enrolled in a marketplace plan or CHIP before the close of the 2014 open enrollment period, were “in-line” at the time open enrollment closed, or enrolled in coverage outside the exchange effective on or before May 1, 2014, but had a gap in coverage before their coverage became effective;

Indians eligible for services through the Indian Health Service or an Indian health provider; and

as noted in the first post in this series, individuals who live in a state that has not expanded Medicaid, have household incomes below 138 percent of the poverty level.

The IRS published on November 21, 2014 a guidance listing the hardship exemptions that can be claimed on a tax return.

Enrollee’s Required Contribution

Independently, the IRS released also on November 21, 2014, a revenue procedure updating for 2016 the applicable percentage table used to determine what percentage of an enrollee’s modified adjusted gross income the enrollee must contribute to the cost of coverage, based on the lesser of the actual cost of coverage or the cost of the second-lowest-cost silver plan available to the individual, before premium tax credits become available. (See table below.)

The guidance also updates for 2016 the percentage of income used to determine whether an individual is eligible for an exemption from the shared responsibility payment because of the lack of affordable minimum essential coverage (8.13 percent) and the percentage of income (9.66 percent) that is used to determine whether employer coverage is affordable for purposes of determining eligibility for premium tax credits when employer coverage is unaffordable or inadequate.

Multi-State Plan Program

The Office of Personnel Management proposed rule sets forth changes to the multi-state plan (MSP) program based on the first year’s experience under the program. OPM republished its entire MSP rule with proposed changes embedded rather than calling out specific proposed changes. OPM also requests comments on a number of issues raised in the preface that are not reflected in specific proposed changes.

Current MSP status and expansion plans. Section 1334 of the Affordable Care Act created the MSP program to enhance competition and choice in the individual and small group markets. The ACA directs OPM to contract with private health insurance issuers to, after a phase-in period, offer at least two MSP options on each of the Exchanges in the States and the District of Columbia. In 2014, OPM contracted with one group of insurers to offer more than 150 MSP options in 31 States, including the District of Columbia. Approximately 371,000 individuals have enrolled in an MSP program to date.

For 2015, OPM has added a second group of insures and the MSP program will expand to five additional states for a total of 36 states. The MSP program will offer more than 200 plans on the exchanges for 2015.

‘Group of issuers’ and other definitions. OPM first requests comments on the definition of “group of issuers.” OPM may under the MSP program contract with a “group of issuers” affiliated by common ownership or control and the use of a nationally licensed service mark, or an affiliation of insures that is not an insurer but that owns a nationally licensed service mark. The national Blue Cross/Blue Shield (BCBS) organization is an obvious example. OPM is, however, contracting for 2014 with a group of cooperative plans that less obviously fit this definition. It is requesting comments as to whether alternative structures are possible that would allow insurers to join together as potential MSP applicants.

OPM proposes to add to its rule a definition of “Multi-State Plan option” as a discrete pairing of benefits and cost-sharing offered through the MSP program and remove its definition of “multi-state plan” to refer to a plan offered through the MSP program, as multi-state plan in fact is the name of the program, which OPM has registered as a trademark. OPM is also proposing to add a definition of state-level issuer to identify an MSP insurer offering coverage in a particular state.

Reconsidering the phased expansion requirement. OPM also proposes to modify its requirements for phased expansion, statewide coverage, and SHOP coverage. Under the original rule, insurers that contracted with the program had to agree to the phased expansion requirements of the rule. OPM has received pushback from insurers, however, regarding the challenges of expanding coverage both within and across state lines.

The ACA contemplates a phased expansion of the MSP program to cover all states in four years. Participation in the program by insurers, however, is voluntary, and depends on the cooperation of insurers. OPM intends to ensure that coverage is available expansively as soon as possible. While OPM is not proposing any changes in the regulation, it is requesting comment on the timeframes and other appropriate parameters for expansion and how it can increase competition in states where it is most lacking.

Under the original rule, insurers were allowed to enter the program offering less than statewide coverage but had to provide a plan for expanding coverage statewide. Although in many states the MSP program operates on a statewide basis, in some states achieving statewide coverage has proven difficult. OPM proposes to eliminate the requirement of a statewide coverage expansion plan, rather making this a subject of negotiation with plans. In negotiating contracts with plans, OPM will assess consumers’ need for coverage and ensure that proposed service areas are established without regard to racial, ethic, language, or health-status-related factors.

Should there be a SHOP coverage requirement? Under the final rule, MSP insurers must meet state requirements for SHOP participation but will meet MSP requirements if any insurer in an insurer group affiliated with an MSP insurer offers SHOP coverage. In fact, very few MSP insurers have offered SHOP coverage, and OPM requests comments as to when MSP insurers should be required to do so.

Increasing flexibility regarding benchmark plans. Under the current MSP rule, MSP insurers may offer a package of benefits substantially equal to the essential health benefits (EHB) benchmark plan in each state in which it operates or any EHB benchmark selected by OPM, but must apply either option in all states in which it operates. Proposed changes in the rule would give insurers more flexibility, allowing them to select benchmark plans on a state-by-state basis and to offer two or more MSP options in each state, one using the state benchmark plan and the other an OPM-selected benchmark. The OPM-selected benchmark plans are the three largest FEHB plan options: the BCBS Standard Option, the BCBS Basic Option, and the Government Employees Health Association Standard Option. OPM-selected plans must be supplemented with pediatric oral and vision coverage equivalent to the largest federal employee dental and vision plans.

OPM has noted confusion with respect to MSP formulary requirements and wide variation in FEHB program formulary structures. OPM will ensure that MSP insures comply with HHS formulary requirements for qualified health plans and are non-discriminatory. OPM seeks comments as to the feasibility of substituting a state’s EHB-benchmark plan formulary for the formulary of an OPM-selected benchmark plan where an insurer is using the OPM benchmark.

Defining habilitative services. Under the current rule, OPM uses state definitions of habilitative services where such a definition exists. Under the proposed modifications, OPM will apply a federal definition of habilitative services if HHS chooses to define the term. OPM will continue to review an MSP insurer’s package of benefits and benefit designs, including formularies, to ensure that they are nondiscriminatory and comply with regulatory requirements. OPM is proposing also that MSP insurers must comply with any standards for provider directories that HHS establishes for QHPs.

Other issues. The ACA allows OPM to collect user fees. It may begin collecting them as early as plan year 2015, but they will not exceed 0.2 percent of premiums. OPM will coordinate with the federally facilitated exchange in collecting fees.

OPM proposes a number of technical corrections with respect to the MSP application and contracting and compliance processes that do not seem substantive. One proposed revision would distinguish between a “nonrenewal of contract” with an entire MSP insurer group and “nonrenewal of participation,” which would only refer to nonrenewal of a state-level insurer. A compliance action could affect either, and a compliance action affecting either could be subject to reconsideration. Nonrenewal of either would require 90 days notice to enrollees.

MSP plans are supposed to offer at least one gold and silver level option in each state in which an MSP plan is available that excludes abortion coverage except in cases of rape or incest or where the life of the mother is endangered. Consumers have had a difficult time, however, identifying these plans. Abortion coverage is supposed to be disclosed through a plan’s summary of benefits and coverage. OPM proposes also requiring MSP insurers to disclose coverage or exclusion of abortion coverage before a consumer enrolls in MSP coverage and requests comments as to how best to do this.

Finally, OPM proposes to add a new section clarifying OPM’s discretion to share information with state regulatory authorities while complying with applicable privacy and security standards.