Buy Photo Wellmark headquarters. (Photo: Register file photo )Buy Photo

About 18,000 customers of Wellmark Blue Cross & Blue Shield will get the chance next month to sound off about a proposed rate increase, but the hearing will probably draw fewer people than previous ones.

The Iowa Insurance Division's Aug. 23 hearing only affects customers holding policies with proposed premium increases of more than 6.1 percent. Wellmark, which is the state's dominant health insurance carrier, has proposed lower rate increases than that for most of its customers. The higher proposed rates this time – of 11.9 percent to 14.5 percent – affect people who bought new individual policies that meet the 2014 rules of the federal Affordable Care Act. Most of Wellmark's customers have older policies, which don't meet all those requirements but face smaller premium increases.

State law requires the insurance division to hold public hearings when health insurers propose premium increases over 6.1 percent. Several times in recent years, Wellmark hearings have drawn crowds of customers angered when the company moved to impose large rate increases on the bulk of its policies. That is not happening this year. The customers affected by the higher premium increases represent only about 1 percent of Iowans holding Wellmark insurance.

Affected customers should be receiving notices from the company. The Wellmark hearing will be held at 10 a.m. Aug. 23. It will be based at the Mercy College of Health Sciences in downtown Des Moines. Customers also may participate via video link-ups at the Burlington Public Library, Iowa Central Community College in Fort Dodge, Iowa Western Community College in Council Bluffs, Kirkwood Community College in Cedar Rapids, North Iowa Community College in Mason City and the Spencer Public Library.

Consumers also may leave comments online at http://iainsuranceca.wordpress.com.

The Iowa Insurance Division will consider public comments and experts' analysis of the proposed rates, then decide whether to approve them.

Three other health insurers, CoOportunity Health, Coventry Health Care and Time Insurance, face similar hearings July 26.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1meZpCb