It’s a sad case of life not quite imitating art: In the hit 1990s television show “Beverly Hills, 90210,” Brenda Walsh received a clean bill of health after a breast cancer scare. Last week, the actress who played her, Shannen Doherty, revealed she had breast cancer and alleged that the cancer spread undetected when her managers failed to renew her health insurance policy.

Doherty, 44, is suing her manager, Tanner Mainstain Glynn & Johnson, TMZ first reported. She alleges that the firm ignored an invoice for the premium in 2014, and that she couldn’t re-enroll in coverage until 2015. In the suit, Doherty said she didn’t visit the doctor regularly while she was uninsured and thus her breast cancer wasn’t caught until it had become invasive, TMZ reported.

In an emailed statement, Randall Dean, an attorney for Tanner Mainstain, wished Doherty a full recovery but said, “The claim that Tanner Mainstain caused her to be uninsured, prevented her from seeking medical care, or somehow contributed to her cancer is patently false. Tanner Mainstain will aggressively defend all of Ms. Doherty’s claims in court.”

Whatever the circumstances, finding yourself suddenly uninsured is scary, whether you’re a Hollywood actress or an average Jane. Experts say Doherty’s celebrity might have worked against her in this case—if she didn’t handle her own correspondence and was indeed in danger of being dropped, she might have missed warnings from the carrier to that effect.

Insurance carriers generally offer patients a grace period before dropping them from their rosters. Under the Affordable Care Act—otherwise known as Obamacare—patients who have paid at least one month’s full premium for the year and who receive premium subsidies have a 90-day grace period for nonpayment of insurance premiums.

Doherty did not have Obamacare—she reportedly had coverage through SAG-AFTRA, the actors’ union. Yet her policy likely offered some grace period, which would have allowed her to maintain her coverage and pay her premium if the alleged lapse had come to her attention in time.

Workers with group health coverage through their employer typically won’t need to worry about losing their coverage for nonpayment, since employees’ share of the premium payment is deducted from their paychecks. But those on the individual insurance market—or those who lose their job-based coverage—should know their options if they find themselves uninsured:

Check out special enrollment periods

For 2016 coverage, Obamacare open enrollment runs from Nov. 1 2015 through Jan. 31, 2016. During this time, people with coverage through their state Obamacare marketplace can switch plans or enroll for the first time in a plan.

Those who want to enroll in coverage or change their plan outside this period must qualify for a special enrollment period. Eligibility criteria include major life changes such as marriage, the birth of a child, and moving.

Losing job-based insurance can also qualify you for a special enrollment period. Losses include if your employer stops offering coverage, if you leave your job by choice, get laid off or fired, or if you lose coverage through divorce.

On the other hand, losing coverage for nonpayment of premium will not qualify you for a special enrollment period, nor will voluntarily dropping coverage before the end of your policy’s plan year.

Consider a short-term policy

Brian W. Liechty, an independent insurance agent in Plymouth, Ind., doesn’t see many clients lose their coverage through nonpayment of premium. But if a client somehow becomes uninsured and doesn’t qualify for a special enrollment period, he always recommends a short-term policy.

Short-term health plans can generally be bought in one-month increments up to a maximum of 12 months. Short-term premiums are lower than those for major medical coverage: an average of $110 a month for individual coverage and $262 monthly for family coverage, versus $286 and $727, respectively, for major medical policies, according to eHealth, parent company of brokerage company eHealth.com.

These plans come with some big caveats. Unlike major medical plans—which since 2014 can no longer discriminate against people with pre-existing conditions—most short-term plans are still underwritten. That means that applicants can be denied for having chronic conditions such as Type II diabetes or cancer. (If these conditions are diagnosed when the policy is in effect, however, treatment costs will generally be covered for the duration of the policy.) Applicants on prescription drugs will usually face more scrutiny during the application process, and not all short-term plans offer drug benefits, said Nate Purpura, vice president of consumer affairs at eHealth.

Because of these coverage limitations, short-term insurance generally does not fulfill the Affordable Care Act provision that requires most Americans have health insurance. That means those who buy it will still face a penalty at tax time for being uninsured.

Despite these caveats, a short-term policy is better than no policy for those who find themselves in a squeeze. “It’s designed to be a stop-gap,” Liechty said.

Work with the doctor’s office

We’re used to negotiating at the used car lot or the garage sale, but not at the doctor’s office. Yet we should change our mentality, experts say. “I don’t know of any office that’s not willing to set up payment plans,” said Laura Palmer, a senior fellow at MGMA, the largest membership association for medical practice managers in the U.S.

Those who are uninsured should tell their doctor’s billing office upfront, either when they book the appointment or when they arrive at the office, Palmer said. Some offices offer “prompt-pay” discounts if patients pay at the time of service, and many will offer to stretch a big payment out over time.

Such payment arrangements aren’t just for the uninsured. As high-deductible plans become more common, many patients are responsible for paying thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket costs each year before their insurance coverage kicks in, and they can also benefit from making a deal at the doctor’s.

Bartering for doctor’s services might not be standard practice, but Palmer heard of a case where a patient bartered security monitoring for his rural orthopedist’s services. Someone short of funds with a skill that a doctor’s practice might need—such as IT, landscaping or marketing—could give it a try, Palmer said.

Those who receive a devastating diagnosis while uninsured should seek out the patient advocate at their hospital, Palmer said. That person will be aware of community resources, such as clinics where treatment is free or discounted.

Because the Affordable Care Act banned major medical carriers from discriminating on the basis of pre-existing conditions, a sick patient will be able to sign up for coverage during the next open enrollment period.

More from MarketWatch