Headquartered in Park City, Utah, DollarDiabetesClub.com is dedicated to helping people manage their diabetes. Diabetes is an expensive disease and at Dollar Diabetes Club, we want to be part of the healthcare cost solution by providing high-quality supplies at deeply discounted prices.

OBAMACARE sticker spawns Dollar Diabetes Club as individuals clamor for discounted diabetes supplies.

New online company cuts costs by 70%, set to help millions cope with high out-of-pocket expenses, cancelled insurance.

In response to the dramatic overhaul of health insurance in America and skyrocketing out-of-pocket cost trends, DollarDiabetesClub.com is reducing the price of blood glucose test strips by 70 percent for the 104.8 million with diabetes and pre-diabetes (2011 CDC National Diabetes fact sheet). According to a survey by HealthPocket Inc., the early inclination for those seeking lower premiums with Bronze Plans are higher out-of-pocket costs than their current individual and family health plans, costing on average, $6,019 per person.

Dollar Diabetes Club greatly reduces supply expenses for people affected by diabetes, offering expensive test strips that average $1 per strip (National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of Medicine) to $.23 - $.30 per strip. The Club includes additional testing supplies, such as lancets and a blood glucose meter, as well as shipping, free of charge, dramatically reducing the cost of blood glucose testing and making supplies more affordable to those who test randomly or who have not been able to afford testing at all.

A member of Dollar Diabetes Club pays $29.99 for a three-month test strip supply, which includes 100 test strips. A typical retail bundle for the same testing supplies cost on average $100 or more. Please see comparison chart.

"Diabetes is an expensive disease and at Dollar Diabetes Club, we want to be part of the healthcare cost solution by providing high-quality supplies at deeply discounted prices," said Aimee Greenholtz, president, Dollar Diabetes Club and type 1. "My diabetes supply costs have dramatically increased over the past 23 years and I needed to do something to buck this trend, which is keeping individuals from testing their blood sugar regularly -- a must for any person who wants to live healthfully and in control."

DollarDiabetesClub.com cuts out all costly marketing and packaging costs, complex distribution, as well as pricey spokespeople and sales representatives to provide a high-quality product to its members.

According to a study conducted by the American Diabetes Association, total costs of diagnosed diabetes have risen to $245 billion in 2012 from $174 billion in 2007. This figure represents a 41 percent increase over a five-year period and addresses the financial burden, health resources used and lost productivity associated with the disease in 2012.

According to the Joslin Diabetes Center, people who have diabetes should be testing their blood glucose regularly. Consistent blood glucose testing helps determine how well an individual is doing with their diabetes management program (meal planning, exercising and medication) to keep blood glucose as close to normal as possible. The results of the nationwide Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) show that the closer people keep their blood glucose to normal, the more likely they are to prevent diabetes complications like heart disease, blindness, amputation, and other problems.

Headquartered in Park City, Utah, Dollar Diabetes Club is dedicated to helping people manage their diabetes. The company provides high-quality blood glucose meters, guaranteed for life, and test strips at a fraction of the retail cost. For more information about Dollar Diabetes Club, please visit DollarDiabetesClub.com.

Media Contact

Karin Olsen

AMAZON Marketing Partners

310-497-0052

Karin(at)amazonmarketingpartners(dot)com