Land of Lincoln Health has admitted making a mistake when it notified members in January that it would drop University of Chicago's hospital and physicians from its insurance network as of March 1.

It was a costly error for some consumers. Some policyholders bought more expensive coverage from other insurance companies to keep seeing U. of C. doctors, according to a lawsuit filed in February against Land of Lincoln in Cook County Circuit Court.

Chicago-based Land of Lincoln, which touts it's a "member-focused, member-governed organization," refuses to take the former customers back, according to lawyer Clint Krislov, who filed the suit on behalf of two former policyholders. He accuses Land of Lincoln of exploiting the error to purge its membership of customers receiving treatment at one of Chicago's top academic medical centers, where services tend to be more expensive than other hospitals.

Land of Lincoln spokesman Dennis O'Sullivan declined comment on Krislov's allegation, saying the company doesn't talk about pending litigation.

The error, at a minimum, raises questions about the struggling insurer's operational controls. Land of Lincoln is a federally funded insurer created under the 2010 Affordable Care Act to provide competition in insurance exchanges where consumers who don't have employer-sponsored coverage can shop for health plans. The company, which had about 50,000 members at the end of last year, is trying to survive amid heavy financial losses in its first two years of business.

In court papers filed Friday seeking to dismiss the suit, Land of Lincoln acknowledged that employees didn't understand the termination provisions in its contracts with U. of C. Those contracts, in fact, renewed for 2016, the company said in court documents.

Land of Lincoln included in its filing an affidavit from Frank Mancuso, its vice president of network development, in which he said the U. of C. agreements automatically renew each year for an additional 12 months until termination by either party with 90 days written notice.

"Neither Lincoln nor the University of Chicago have provided each other with any written notice of termination," Mancuso's affidavit said.

Mancuso's affidavit conflicts with a statement U. of C. made to the Tribune in January. U. of C. said that Land of Lincoln notified it in December of its decision to remove the health system from its network on March 1. U. of C. also communicated the network change to its patients.

Land of Lincoln sent customers a letter dated Jan. 21, informing them that U. of C. would no longer be in the provider network. In the affidavit, Mancuso said that letter was sent out in error because it's his belief that Land of Lincoln's member services "did not know about or understand the termination provisions" in the U. of C. contracts. The affidavit provided no other details about how the mistake occurred and when it was caught.

In an interview, James Doty, the insurer's general counsel, said the letter was "sent out in haste" so members could find new coverage before open enrollment on the Illinois insurance exchange ended Jan. 31.

When the change in U. of C.'s network status became public in January, O'Sullivan told the Tribune the company "reviews and adjusts its networks based on market changes to ensure our ability to provide members with access to affordable health insurance." The statement and other public comments O'Sullivan made suggested that a dispute between Land of Lincoln and U. of C. over contract terms led to the network change.

Earlier this week, when the Tribune reported that U. of C. remained in the network, O'Sullivan didn't mention that the January communication to members was a mistake. He reiterated that the insurer's network is subject to change because negotiations are ongoing between providers and insurers.

The insurer's letter to consumers came after they already had bought or renewed coverage that had started Jan. 1. The letter warned that continuing to see U. of C. doctors and using U. of C. facilities would result in higher out-of-pocket costs after March 1. The company also informed customers that they still had until Jan. 31 to choose a different insurer that covers U. of C. and affiliated doctors.

Two members, Daniel Blumenthal and Michael Hartzmark, switched to different insurers, according to their lawsuit. They allege that Land of Lincoln deceived them by including U. of C. in its network when they bought their policies at the end of last year.

They are seeking compensation from the insurer because the new insurance they bought is more expensive than their Land of Lincoln policies. They want their fraud suit to become a class action covering other Land of Lincoln members.

U. of C. said it has "several hundred" patients covered by the insurer. It's not known how many policyholders switched insurance companies.

Land of Lincoln denies the fraud allegations and said in court papers that former policyholders have not suffered any harm. "Any damages they purportedly incurred were based on their own choice, not any fraud by Lincoln," the company said.

asachdev@tribpub.com

Twitter @ameetsachdev