Bob is a longtime member of the Florida sports media, having served as a reporter and copy editor for more than 30 years. His true sports passion, however, is the history of the various games, exhibited by his in-depth book reviews and hobby of collecting cards and other sports memorabilia.

Topps winds up production of its flagship baseball product with its 2014 Update set, and it’s a nice finish. Sharp photography, All-Star memories and traded players in new uniforms make for a satisfying product.

Some of the photography really pops. Card No. 203, for example, shows Cole Figueroa being doused by a bucket of Gatorade. The stream of liquid is frozen perfectly in the horizontal shot.

As usual, there are 330 cards to the base set, along with short-printed variations. A hobby box contains 36 packs, with 10 cards to a pack. That’s always good news for set builders.

Topps is promising one autograph or relic card per hobby box.

The hobby box I opened had 306 base cards, or slightly fewer than 93 percent. That’s a fantastic amount.

An additional card was a variation for the Indians’ Jason Giambi. The regular card has Cleveland’s designated hitter yelling and pumping his fist; the variation has him standing under the stands after taking some batting practice.

In addition to the base set, there were six red hot foil parallels, 17 golds, a black parallel of Drew Pomeranz numbered to 63 and a pink parallel of Justin Turner numbered to 50.

Here’s a quirk. How many packs have you ever opened that had two cards back-to-back with players with the first name “Collin”? One pack I opened had Collin Cowgill, followed by Collin McHugh. And, if you’re into similar names, the next card after the two Collin cards was that of Tyler Colvin. Go figure.

There were two Topps 75th anniversary card buybacks in the hobby box I sampled. The first was a 1978 card of Twins catcher Terry Bulling. The second one was much more exciting: a 1974 card of Pirates pitcher Steve Blass.

The hot card in the box was an All-Star Stitches event-worn workout jersey of the Mariners’ Robinson Cano. It was a dark, generous swatch of material.

Inserts in the Update series are a combination of new cards and the continuation of subsets begun in Series 1 and 2.

There were four World Series Heroes inserts, including David Ortiz, John Lackey, David Freese and Rickey Henderson. Each card commemorates a famous feat by each player depicted.

Power Players is a 25-card insert set, and they fall one in every six packs. The box I opened hit the average, as there were six.

Fond Farewells is a 15-card insert set that documents the swan songs of notable players. There were five in the box that I opened.

The Future Is Now subset continues into the Updates set, with 30 more cards that fall one in every four packs. This box hit the average again with nine cards; the 30 cards are broken into 10 individual players, who have three cards apiece.

Like Series 1 and 2, die-cut cards in the 1989 Topps design return. There are 50 of these cards in the Update set; I pulled five from the hobby box I opened.

Once again, the Update set brings a nice conclusion to the baseball season for set builders and devotees of Topps’ flagship product. Like spring training, the countdown begins for next year’s sets.