State troopers were investigating several cases of shattered windows along Interstate 10 Saturday that turned out not to be connected to the string of freeway shootings.

Troopers with the Arizona Department of Public Safety met with a motorist who reported a shattered car window while traveling on Interstate 10 near 83rd Avenue Saturday afternoon.

The damage was caused by road debris, DPS said.

At a news briefing early Saturday afternoon, a DPS spokesman said troopers had just wrapped up investigating two other reports of vehicle damage. One case was also attributed to road debris and in the other, damage was caused by a street sweeper.

[SPECIAL SECTION: Freeway shootings]

Up to now, investigators have confirmed 11 incidents in the last two weeks, mostly shootings and some projectiles.

DPS Director Col. Frank Milstead and Gov. Doug Ducey have been appealing to the public all week for help solving the freeway shootings case.

In addition to the tipline, a dedicated 24-hour crisis hotline has been activated for people who are anxious about the freeway shootings.

That hotline number is 1-800-203-2273.

[SHARE A TIP OR REPORT AN INCIDENT: Click/tap to call now from your mobile device]

Phoenix drivers have been unnerved since the shootings began Aug. 29, mostly along Interstate 10, a major route through the city. Many drivers have avoided freeways since then. Eight of the cars were hit with bullets and three with projectiles that could have been BBs or pellets. One girl's ear was cut by glass as a bullet shattered her window.

Authorities have appealed for help through social media, news conferences, TV interviews and freeway message boards, whose messages morphed from "report suspicious activity" to "shooting tips" to the more ominous "I-10 shooter tip line."

[INFOGRAPHIC: Freeway shootings by date]

[SLIDESHOW: AZ freeway shootings]

Many of the thousands of tips proved to be false leads. In Arizona, windshields are frequently cracked by loose rocks sent airborne by the tires of other vehicles.

Longtime residents still remember a string of random shootings that terrorized Phoenix a decade ago. Nearly 30 people were shot then, and eight killed, including a cyclist who was riding down the street and a man who was sleeping at a bus stop. Two men were eventually caught and convicted.

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.