More than 300 people come in from the cold for annual holiday meal

On a particularly cold and snowy Thanksgiving Day, more than 300 people packed into Boulder's First Presbyterian Church for its annual holiday dinner.

The event, which was held from 1 to 3 p.m., was put on by First Presbyterian to serve the homeless, the lonely, families on the edge, and those who have nowhere to go, according to an invitation put out by the church, located at 1820 15th St.

The Thanksgiving dinner, a staple at First Presbyterian for its parishioners and local attendees for the last 20 years, is one of the largest holiday feedings for the needy provided in Boulder.

"I've been doing this for the past two or three years," volunteer Michael Sweeney said Thursday. "I can't cook or anything, but I help put away tables and chairs and help out any way I can.

David Edwin-Ward, left, talks to Harold Smith during the annual Thanksgiving dinner at First Presbyterian Church in Boulder on Thursday. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer)

"I help out because I can and I think it's just a good thing to do around the holidays."

Most attendees this year were homeless women and men seeking shelter and warmth away from the day's cold weather.

Many, like Mike Erikson, a homeless man in Boulder who was attending the dinner for his first time, were eager to get inside. Like others waiting outside First Presbyterian's doors, Erikson was appreciative of the church's service.

"I'm currently homeless right now and pretty cold, so I'm hoping I can get inside right when the doors open," Erikson said. "This is my first year attending this service, but the amount of people waiting does seem pretty big.

Advertisement

"I think with it being so cold and how much it's been snowing all day, these guys just want to get inside, too."

While most of First Presbyterian's meal services offer food in a buffet arrangement, the Thanksgiving dinner is designed to bring those in attendance closer together in a family-style setting.

Located where the old basketball court previously was housed, attendees sat together at round tables and were served by volunteers acting as a wait staff, rather than the diners having to serve themselves.

"It's actually a lot of fun having this event here every year," said Mark Culver, a deacon at First Presbyterian. "Between all the guests and volunteers that show up on Thanksgiving, you tend to meet plenty of interesting people if you get to talking to them."

While the colder weather and snowy conditions led to a large number of attendees this year, the church also provided an increased amount of food and volunteers.

This year's dinner featured 32 turkeys, and the large meal was prepared and served by about 80 volunteers — 65 percent of which either work with or are considered friends of the church.

The church worked overtime in planning and preparing for the Thanksgiving event.

"We started cooking and carving the turkeys earlier this week, but the real preparation for all the work and volunteering started all the way back in mid-September," Culver said.

Along with the free Thanksgiving meal provided by First Presbyterian Church, holiday celebrations and meals also took place at the OUR Center in Longmont. That meal was provided by Old Chicago and served from 10:30 a.m. to 2 p.m.

While the day's event at First Presbyterian was meant to provide an amenity for those in need, it also served to highlight the growing problem of homelessness and hunger in the United States, one that continues to go relatively unnoticed by the public.

Attendees enjoy Thanksgiving dinner together at First Presbyterian Church in Boulder on Thursday afternoon. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer)

This year, when asked about the most important problem facing the United States today, only 3 percent of Americans responded that they believed poverty and homelessness were at the forefront, according to data from Statista.

Standing outside First Presbyterian on Thursday, a homeless man who wished only to be identified as Brian offered his thoughts on the day's service.

"I can't say I'm too happy with my circumstances right now — I am honestly just cold and hungry," he said. "I will say, though, that I do appreciate these kind of services. They sometimes make the situation bearable."