HERE’S A LOOK AT THE DAY AHEAD

OBAMA ADMINISTRATION: President Barack Obama attends a Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee events in the San Francisco Bay and Los Angeles areas. Secretary of State John Kerry participates in the 52nd Munich Security Conference in Germany. Defense Secretary Ash Carter is in Brussels for meetings with NATO defense ministers.

CONGRESS: The House meets at noon to consider H.R.3442, the “Debt Management and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 2015.” The Senate will proceed to a roll call vote on the motion to invoke cloture on the conference report to accompany H.R.644., the “Trade Facilitation and Trade Enforcement Act of 2015,” at 10:30 a.m. Federal Reserve Chairwoman Janet Yellen testifies to the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee on monetary policy at 10 a.m. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell testifies at a Senate Finance Committee hearing on the president’s FY2017 budget at 10 a.m. Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew testifies at 10 a.m. at a House Ways and Means Committee hearing on the FY2017 budget proposal for the Treasury Department. Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Gina McCarthy testifies at a House Agriculture Committee hearing on the impacts of the Environmental Protection Agency’s actions on the rural economy.

ELECTION 2016: Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Sen. Bernie Sanders face off in the PBS NewsHour Democratic Primary Debate from Milwaukee at 9 p.m. EST. Capital Journal will provide live analysis. Most GOP candidates are campaigning in South Carolina. Mr. Trump holds a rally in Baton Rouge, La., at 7 p.m. CST. There is a GOP candidate forum at Winthrop University starting at 6 p.m. in Rock Hill, S.C.

ECONOMIC INDICATORS: The Labor Department releases weekly jobless claims at 8:30 a.m.

ELECTION 2016

GOP RIVALS HIT NEW BATTLEGROUND: The Republican presidential campaign swept into South Carolina Wednesday, throwing the candidates onto fresh political territory and intensifying the rivalries—especially the one between Marco Rubio and Jeb Bush. For both Florida Republicans, the state is a promising venue for a surge, but the New Hampshire primary did little to settle the question of which one has the advantage in taking on businessman Donald Trump, who trounced the rest of the field in New Hampshire. Before they get to that showdown, the senator and former governor will first have to get past the disparate campaigns of Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, the Iowa caucus winner who draws evangelicals, and Ohio Gov. John Kasich, who came in second in New Hampshire with a centrist appeal. In South Carolina, the contest will play out in a state that is much more populous and conservative, and where mudslinging is as much a part of political culture as retail politicking is in New Hampshire. Janet Hook and Beth Reinhard report.

MEET THE MAN WHO HELPS TRUMP BE TRUMP: In a stairwell behind the stage as Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump spoke at a packed rally recently, campaign manager Corey R. Lewandowski lashed out at his New Hampshire state director. “My boss is working 20-hour days; you’re not,” Mr. Lewandowski said. “You’re not meeting any of your metrics with the primary three weeks away.” In the motorcade afterward, Mr. Lewandowski called a longtime aide supervising another state: “Fly here tonight and take over.” With that and other late moves, the 41-year-old campaign manager helped assure Mr. Trump’s decisive victory Tuesday in the nation’s first primary. It was a crucial win for the billionaire businessman after a disappointing second-place finish in Iowa, but it was a do-or-die moment for the relatively anonymous Mr. Lewandowski, who calls the state home and was prepared to resign if his boss lost the primary. Monica Langley reports.

QUESTIONS DOG DEMOCRATS AFTER N.H. PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY: Democrats headed south and west after Sen. Bernie Sanders’s resounding New Hampshire victory over Hillary Clinton, facing the twin questions of whether his appeal is broad enough to replicate his performance elsewhere—and whether her support is strong enough to reverse the tide. Lying at the crossroads of those two questions are the minority voters who have transformed the Democratic Party in the past few decades and hold the promise of sustained success in the future. Peter Nicholas and Siobhan Hughes report.

More on election 2016: Mr. Sanders raised $5.2 million in the 18 hours since the polls closed Tuesday night in New Hampshire, his campaign said … Mr. Trump faces a new kind of test as the presidential nominating contest moves to the South, where many of the blue-collar voters that have formed his base of support are also evangelical Christians open to appeals from social conservatives … Sen. Tim Scott said a standout performance by Sen. Marco Rubio in Saturday’s GOP presidential debate in Greenville, S.C. was critical… Chris Christie and Carly Fiorina suspended their bids for the White House … Aides to former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg eyed the solid victories Tuesday by Mr. Sanders and Mr. Trump as potential boosts to a Bloomberg candidacy … Interactive: A demographic profile of where candidates are finding support … Three of the top 10 most-viewed YouTube ads in January were tied to the 2016 campaigns.

VALERIE BAUERLEIN’S EARLY HIT: COVETED ENDORSEMENTS REMAIN UP FOR GRABS IN SOUTH CAROLINA

The endorsement game is in full swing ahead of next week’s GOP primary in South Carolina. But there are a couple of politicians whose support is coveted and unpledged, including Gov. Nikki Haley. Read Valerie Bauerlein’s full post in Washington Wire.

WSJ STORIES YOU SHOULDN’T MISS

CARBON-RULE STAY PUTS OBAMA ENVIRONMENTAL LEGACY ON THE LINE: The Supreme Court’s unexpected move this week to block a federal carbon-emissions rule was a significant blow to President Barack Obama’s environmental agenda, underscoring the unusual way in which that ambitious agenda is now in a state of suspended animation. Mr. Obama’s administration has pushed rules on everything from emissions to waterways to fracking. But the courts have begun to question whether it has exceeded its legal authority, and their final decisions will determine whether Mr. Obama’s environmental legacy will be monumental or more modest. The Supreme Court’s stay of the rule limiting carbon emissions by power plants—which will remain in place while courts consider more than 30 lawsuits—is the third instance since last fall that federal courts have halted major new environmental rules. Amy Harder and Brent Kendall report.

YELLEN SIGNALS CAUTION ON RATES: Federal Reserve Chairwoman Janet Yellen flagged risks to the economic outlook that could delay the central bank’s plans for raising short-term interest rates, in her semiannual testimony to Congress on U.S. monetary policy. In the first of two days of semiannual testimony before House and Senate committees, Ms. Yellen on Wednesday said falling stock prices and other financial-market turbulence could impede economic growth, as could stresses in China and other foreign economies. Further complicating matters for the Fed, she also pointed out that market expectations for consumer prices are sinking, a sign investors might be losing faith in the Fed’s ability to lift inflation to the 2% target it has undershot for more than three years. Jon Hilsenrath reports.

More on the economy: For Fed officials worried about limited options should the economy slow, the prospect of using subzero rates presents thorny challenges that could limit their effectiveness … Fed officials are unlikely to raise rates in March if growth outlook dims … A recap of Ms. Yellen’s testimony on Wednesday.

ALSO IN THE NEWS

Regulators in Washington and Brussels struck a deal advancing a central plank of post-financial-crisis efforts to coordinate on rules for derivatives, which played a central role in the 2008 meltdown.

After most health insurers racked up financial losses on Affordable Care Act plans in 2014, many companies’ results for last year worsened, creating heavy pressure to improve performance this year.

The Justice Department filed a lawsuit Wednesday against the city of Ferguson, Mo., seeking to force broad changes to the police department in the wake of the 2014 police shooting that sparked a national outcry over law-enforcement practices.

U.S. intelligence and law-enforcement officials are pressing Congress to continue seeking ways to deal with threats posed by encrypted communications, saying terrorists and criminals are using these tools to carry out a range of criminal behaviors.

The Senate voted unanimously to ratchet up sanctions on North Korea on Wednesday, less than a week after the country launched a long-range rocket that sparked fresh alarm about its nuclear program.

A U.S. District Judge challenged government lawyers in a hearing on MetLife Inc.’s push to overturn its designation as a “systemically important financial institution”—a tag created by the 2010 Dodd-Frank law that comes with strict federal oversight.

As diplomatic efforts to secure a cease-fire in Syria resume in Munich on Thursday, they are dogged by a fundamental disagreement: Which rebel groups fighting the government of President Bashar al-Assad to label terrorist organizations?

President Obama will meet with 10 Southeast Asian leaders in California next week to coordinate U.S. interests in region where China is the dominant power.

President Obama returned to Springfield, Ill., Wednesday to try to recapture some of the lost promise of his time in the White House, nine years after he announced his candidacy for president from the steps of the city’s Old State Capitol.

A senior Republican senator is blocking the Obama administration’s subsidized sale of as many as eight new F-16 jet fighters to Pakistan because of Islamabad’s relationship with a militant group known for targeting U.S.-trained security forces in neighboring Afghanistan.

Theranos Inc.’s main retail partner, Walgreens, threatened to terminate its relationship with the blood-testing company unless it quickly fixes the problems found by federal inspectors at a laboratory in California.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is sending ships from its standing maritime force to the Aegean sea, wading into the effort to stop the huge flow of migrants into Europe. NATO ministers approved a new deterrence model that will set the stage for the alliance to position troops on its borders for the first time since the Cold War.

Constitutional amendments French President François Hollande proposed in response to Paris terror attacks cleared a first hurdle in parliament Wednesday, but tepid support for his push to strip some terrorists of French nationality raised doubts over whether the changes will be adopted.

SEIB VIDEO: CAUCUSES COULD POSE CHALLENGE FOR HILLARY CLINTON

As candidates look toward future races, Hillary Clinton‘s campaign is bracing for tough challenges against Bernie Sanders in caucus states. WSJ’s Shelby Holliday explains why.

WHAT WE’RE READING AROUND THE WEB

As the dust settles from the New Hampshire primary, “one consequence could be to coax former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg to come off the sidelines” and run as an independent, writes Benjy Sarlin for NBC News. “The mayor sees a wider path if Trump or Senator Ted Cruz scores the GOP nomination, both of who appear well positioned after Tuesday. As for the Democrats, it’s not clear whether his thinking would be affected either way.”



Amid the scramble for millennial voters, “older voters, who will comprise about one quarter of the voting population in 2016, remain up for grabs and surprisingly have not been actively pursued by any candidate to date,” writes Bob Blancato for Forbes.



In the WSJ’s Think Tank, David Wessel suggests a series of steps the Fed could take to begin satisfying its congressional critics, including having chairwoman Janet Yellen testify four times a year rather than twice, and commissioning outside reviews of the ways its staff makes forecasts.

FEEDBACK: The Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter is The Wall Street Journal’s morning rundown of the biggest news stories and exclusive features from Washington on politics, policy, financial regulation, defense and more.

Send your tips, feedback and suggestions for recommended reading to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com.