When you're running for office, if you can find someone very popular to be close to, you do it.

Santa sneaked out of his workshop on Saturday and flew his sleigh to the Ted Cruz rally in Daphne.

In the atrium of the Daphne Civic Center, Jolly Old Saint Nicholas held up a Cruz sign and posed for photographs with revelers.

"Ted Cruz all the way," said the man in red suit. "Santa Claus believes in personal liberties as Ted Cruz does."

Santa Claus appeared as part of Cruz's visit that is part of a 12-city fly around with his family that wraps up on Dec. 23 in Oklahoma City.

The tour, appropriately titled the "Take off with Ted Cruz County Christmas Tour," was not without its holiday cheer.

Songs about Christmas blared on the PA in the auditorium amid taped pro-Cruz segments. A slide projected on a screen to the right of the stage showed four reindeer -- minus Rudolph with the red nose -- pulling an airplane across a map of the nation with a Cruz logo stamped on the tail fin.

And on Saturday night, the Cruz campaign is set to air a parody ad on "Saturday Night Live" that is Christmas-themed.

"Imagine the greatest Christmas stories told by the senator who once read 'Green Eggs and Ham' from the Senate floor," says a narrator in the ad, referring to Cruz's 21-hour-plus filibuster speech against the Affordable Care Act two years ago.

"'Twas the night before the shutdown and all through the House, not a bill was stirring, not even to fund a mouse," Cruz reads to his family in the ad.

In a press conference on Saturday, the conservative junior Texas U.S. Senator acknowledged the Christmas spirit and the presence of the big man from the North Pole.

"It's Christmas time," Cruz said. "What's Christmastime without Santa Claus? I've yet to meet a kid who didn't want to be with Santa Claus."

Sharing a close proximity to Santa is also a good look for a presidential candidate attempting to cast a wide net.

"When you're running for office, if you can find someone very popular to be close to, you do it," said U.S. Rep. Bradley Byrne (R-Fairhope), who attended the Cruz rally. "And he's pretty popular."

But the New York Times notes that it's not just milk and cookies that are luring Santa Claus to Cruz' rallies. Having Santa Claus show up in his red robe is just one more way to leverage data as part of a sophisticated Cruz 2016 political operation.

Visitors that pose for a photograph with Santa Claus are given a card by the Cruz campaign that directs them to a website to retrieve it. They have to submit their name, email address and phone number at the website to access the photograph.

Catherine Frazier, the Cruz campaign's national press secretary, said the campaign has had a Santa for each stop on the tour. But, she noted, it hasn't been easy finding them.

After all, most the Santas are booked solid the week before Christmas.