Topics: Children, Editor's Picks, Family, lockdown drill, lockdown drills, school shootings, schools, Life News

A week before Christmas my children’s school called. An automated voice said police were sweeping the Kirkwood High School campus. There had been a report of shots fired. If my children had not left home yet, they were to stay there. If they were en route, they were told to turn back.

My kids were on the brink of departure. Backpack slung over her shoulder, my daughter came into the kitchen. Hearing our conversation, my younger son emerged from the basement. The three of us stood in a circle and blinked.

“What do we do?” he asked.

“We wait,” I said.

We sat in the living room. The lights from the Christmas tree blinked, colorful tips marking the seconds as the wait dragged on. My son worried about a friend who had gone in early for a makeup test. My daughter browsed the Internet, refreshing the feed for our local news station. Putting on a show of calm, I pretended to grade papers.

To react strongly to the morning’s phone call, I reasoned, would only exacerbate their stress. Academic and social pressures in high school are real, especially as a student adjusts to a new city. Our family had relocated to Kirkwood, Mo., a suburb of St. Louis, just before the start of the fall semester. The last thing they needed was more uncertainty.

Not wanting to dismiss their worries, I sat nearby listening to what they said. My daughter talked about the policies at Kirkwood High School. “If there’s even the slightest possibility of danger, administrators call for a lockdown,” she said. “It’s probably a false alarm.”

My son agreed, “The rational response is to assume it’s a precaution.”

Kirkwood High School has seven buildings and nearly 70 doors. A college-style campus with 47 acres, it took police over an hour to clear. Another call arrived: No gunman had been found. Students should leave for school. Parents could expect an explanatory email shortly. I hugged them goodbye and sat at the computer, researching the price of bulletproof backpacks ($250 plus). When the email arrived, it said a shot-like sound had been made by a box of helium bulbs falling from a shelf in the chemistry lab.

When my daughter returned home she said one of her teachers had exited the gym to find herself surrounded by a SWAT team. Guns pointed at her chest, she was treated as a suspect before establishing herself as a teacher. “She’s lucky she didn’t get shot by mistake,” we said.

In 2012, 10 school shootings took place in the United States. The following January, eight more came in quick succession. With gun-control reform stalled in Congress, schools are increasing security. The result is tension. An entire generation of children submitted to warning systems like their great-grandparents during the Cold War. What the boogeyman was for these kids as toddlers, the school lockdown is for them now.

Counting only actual lockdowns, I’ve received three automated messages in two months. The first scare happened a few days before Thanksgiving. An anonymous caller phoned Yale security to report a gunman on campus. Our older son, who attends school there, had just landed at Lambert St. Louis Airport for his holiday visit home. He texted his international friends, who had stayed on campus, to see if they were OK. Barricaded in their dorm rooms, they said they were taking the warning seriously without getting too freaked out.

The second was the light-bulb incident. The third was actually precipitated by a local news station, KSDK St. Louis.

Apparently, the NBC affiliate had decided to conduct an investigation on school safety and sent an undercover reporter with a hidden camera to Kirkwood High, as well as four area elementary schools (KSDK has not responded to Salon’s request for comment). The elementary schools, housed in traditional buildings with fewer doors, had their entrances locked.

Not so at Kirkwood High, where the reporter’s investigation wreaked havoc. He entered the front of the building, passed several open classrooms on his way to the office, and signed in as a visitor. He left his name and phone number and asked to speak with security. When staff members told him he needed an appointment, he asked for a bathroom and was observed walking toward it before quickly turning down a hallway in the wrong direction.

The school soon placed an emergency call to parents that a suspicious man was roaming the high school. As a precaution, students would be locked and/or barricaded in their rooms.

The investigation was a victory for KSDK. The reporter had exposed Kirkwood High School’s vulnerability. Picking my children up during the day, I’d noticed open doors, students walking outside to go from one class to another. I’d been tempted to drive into the front parking lot and enter the front door, just as the reporter did. But security guards were always watching, the doors and the students, and signs posted on the barricades at the front parking lot instructed visitors to drive around back and use the rear entrance.

Obviously, a gunman desiring to hurt people would not obey security directives and I have to thank the reporter for exposing flaws in Kirkwood’s system. It turns out the security guards have been taking lunch together all year, thereby creating a reliable gap of unguarded time for intruders to enter.

Yet I also feel upset with KSDK’s investigation, because after the reporter went the wrong way to the restroom, he refused to answer his cellphone. School administrators rang him repeatedly. They listened to his voice mail, which identified him as a reporter for the local NBC news affiliate. Seeking to confirm his employment with KSDK, they called the station but were denied information. Administrators warned the news station that they were about to put the school on lockdown, thereby scaring hundreds of parents and students, yet the news station still refused to confirm their employee’s presence on campus.