Topics: 2014 elections, 2016 Elections, Contraception, Editor's Picks, Eric Cantor, GOP, Hobby Lobby, John Boehner, The Right, War on women, women, Business News, Politics News

Republicans know they have a problem with women. Mitt Romney knew early on that Obama’s huge lead among unmarried young women had to be cut down, so Romney started campaigning with Republican women and Ann Romney became one of his chief surrogates. “I LOVE YOU WOMENNNNNN,” Mrs. Romney belted out at the Republican National Convention. Despite the canny subtlety of these efforts, Romney lost the female vote by 11 points, and lost unmarried women by an astounding 36 points.

After Romney lost, the Republicans looked to make changes. “Much was written after the 2012 election regarding the Republican Party’s ‘women’ problem,” the Republican National Committee’s Growth and Opportunity Project observed. “The RNC must improve its efforts to include female voters.” Just last week, RNC chair Reince Priebus acknowledged that Republicans still have work to do on that front. “We basically have a single-women problem under 35-ish,” Priebus said. “It’s a demographic issue that we want to do better with.”

Republicans want to prove to women that they’re sensitive to their concerns. And what better way to show it than to line up behind a corporation pushing for the “religious freedom” to deny its employees contraceptive coverage? Republicans know how vitally important women voters are in national elections, and they know how politically troublesome contraceptive coverage can be for them. But they’re going back for another bite of the apple because they’re hidebound by ideology, and they really hate Obamacare.

As Hobby Lobby and Conestoga Wood Specialties went to the Supreme Court yesterday to argue for a religious exemption to Obamacare’s contraceptive coverage mandate, congressional Republicans fired off statements of support. “Religious freedom is not for some people under some circumstances; it is for one and all,” read a statement from John Boehner. “It’s time to restore our complete and unwavering support for religious freedom and that is why I stand with those arguing for their liberty before the court today,” said Eric Cantor. You’ll find a similarly worded statement from almost every high-profile Republican defending Hobby Lobby’s assertion of “religious liberty.”

While they say “religious liberty,” the heart of this matter is the conservative belief that ladies who have sex should buy their own sex drugs using their own sex money. There’s a moral component, they argue, given that contraceptives facilitate anything from wanton licentiousness to euthanasia to abortion. (None of that is true.) This notion that contraceptives cause abortions is the most interesting one, given that it is central to the case against the Affordable Care Act, even though it is complete garbage in the eyes of the medical community. The fact that contraceptives also may be medically necessary to treat certain reproductive disorders is too often left unmentioned.