Demoncrats: When the light in you is darkness



We seek greatness, goodness, excellence, hard work, usually wealth comes with that, not always. It's not what we seek, but it's what the result of our good work is – and prosperity for America. But that prosperity needs to be shared in a way that honors the talents and the strengths of the individuals that make up this great country.



The eye is the lamp of the body; so then if your eye is clear, your whole body will be full of light. But if your eye is bad, your whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light that is in you is darkness, how great is the darkness! (Matthew 6:22,23 NAS95)



By Dan Popp – Tax evading Congressman Charlie RangelThe demons are emerging from their pits, folks, and they're slithering toward the TV cameras.Cheatin' Charlie is not "familiar" with "the bible, anything like that." If he were, he would understand that "You Shall Not Steal" and "You Shall Not Covet" are two of the Ten Commandments, and that there is no exception for politicians. He would understand that "brothers and sisters" is not everyone. He would grasp the distinction between a citizen and a disciple. He would know that Jesus never advocated government aid. Never. And he would be "familiar" with the verses that say that those who add to God's words will be punished. Severely.Jesus and food stamps, indeed.Now let's hear another antichrist theocrat, Mary Landrieu, the US Senator infamous for her "Louisiana Purchase" – in which she sold her vote for Obamacare in exchange for more loot for her State. She intoned:Here we have another smarter-than-God-type who thinks she can fix the Fall , and make sure that wealth (but not too much wealth, and only by accident!) follows hard work "always.""Prosperity needs to be shared" is a little phrase that contains many layers of errors – language errors, logical errors, and misunderstandings of history, morality, economics and religion. First of all, prosperity doesn't "need" anything; it is a phenomenon, not a person or animal. This reminds me of the Napster-era rationalization, "Music wants to be free." Robbers always seem to know what inanimate things want and need.What Landrieu is saying, probably without understanding it, is that "Those who are prosperous need to share," though "need" here is a moral statement. It means, "should," or "ought." So properly phrased, her sermon would have been, "Those who are prosperous should share." Of course this is true, but it has nothing to do with government. The amount of money I make, and what I do with it, is none of your business, Ms. Landrieu. You can't "share" for me.Now, we know that prosperity comes from the precept of private property. In fact, it comes from nowhere else. If I can own something, I will likely spend time and resources to improve it, and this will benefit myself, my family and other people. It's government's job, Senator Landrieu, to protect every individual's property so that the society can thrive and prosper. Once you take away that protection, and take one person's property, you've crippled the prospects of prosperity for the whole country. As Arthur Young said, "Give a man the secure possession of a bleak rock and he will turn it into a garden; give him a nine years' lease of a garden, and he will convert it into a desert. ... The magic of property turns sand into gold."So you'll end up with no prosperity to share if you think government can share prosperity.In the Gospels, some of Jesus' most ominous warnings concern the sin of envy. Demoncrats, in their state religion, have made this vice into a virtue.Theis covetousness. When you long to take what someone else has earned, you're not dabbling with a little darknessyou areand that darkness isor extremely darkaccording to JesusSome barbarian will protest, Well, how are we going to help poor people if we can't use violence to seize wealth? Hmm, I don't know. Any voluntary solution we come up with will require faith, right? Did we forget that? The leftists have concocted a religion without faith; only force.The Lord used theterm again in Matthew 20. He was telling a parable about the unequal rewards in God's Kingdom, based on the earthly truth that a property owner may dispose of his property as he wishes – "unfair" as that may seem to a psyche stunted by greed. Christ ends this Parable of the Workers in the Vineyard with the words,(v.15) Literally,If, instead of rejoicing at someone's prosperity, you want to confiscate the fruits of his labor for your own morally superior purposes, Jesus says thatand that which you call light is really. You are in the greatest possible spiritual danger.Karl Marx hated Christianity. He is in hell today. Those who follow him, unless they turn around, will end up in the same place.© Dan Popp