AJ Kern (Photo: Submitted photo)

If you agree with President Obama’s fundamental transformation of America from a free republic, where historically “We the People” have a voice, toward socialist-styled globalism, you’re going to love his strong-armed use of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Unless, of course, it affects your neighborhood.

On July 16, HUD provided its overreaching final version of the Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing rule known as AFFH.

Claiming to further the purposes and policies of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, HUD will dangle federal dollars as an incentive to direct communities to “take significant actions to overcome historic patterns of segregation, achieve truly balanced and integrated living patterns, promote fair housing choice, and foster inclusive communities that are free from discrimination.”

In other words, communities must accept HUD’s brand of racial integration by building low-income housing in America’s neighborhoods following new stringent federal zoning requirements or lose eligibility for community development block grants — federal funding to which communities have become addicted.

Sound familiar? Think of the federal government’s carrot-and-stick approach offering No Child Left Behind waivers in exchange for adopting Common Core standards. Ask your friends in education how those standardized tests, intrusive surveys, and massive data collection are helping students?

Accompanying the side dish of diversity, HUD will provide complementary demographic data tables assisting bureaucrats in identifying jurisdictions and regions guilty of egregious violations of segregated housing patterns, which will be remedied by a federal template racial rezoning map, replacing locally controlled land use and zoning laws.

Hello Sartell!

No need for a citizen driven comprehensive plan or those pesky local land use planning boards.

And given that citizens are limited to five minutes of input during most city and county board meetings, taxpayers will hardly notice a difference until their property values drastically decline while taxes simultaneously increase to fund the infrastructure and bureaucracy necessary for compliance.

Ah yes! Utopia!

Who doesn’t dream of living in a community where the federal government dictates the size of property lots, heights of buildings, greens space designations, type of homes, where homes are built and who may live in them.

How could this happen you ask? Well, while you were paying attention to the U.S. Supreme Court decisions on Obamacare and same-sex marriage, a third decision granted the federal government the right to coerce neighborhoods to integrate based on racial quotas.

The 5-4 court ruling in Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs v. Inclusive Communities Project determined that housing policies that are not intentionally discriminatory can nonetheless be discriminatory because they have “disparate impacts” or adverse impacts on minorities, refugees and immigrants.

Recall the U.S. Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education in 1954. Government agencies forced desegregation by bussing students to assigned schools using racial quotas. Unquestionably a costly failure.

Regardless of past lessons, zoning and discrimination are apparently the same; social engineering intended to force diversity may actually reduce the availability of low-income housing and slow housing development in all neighborhoods.

Stanley Kurtz, author of “Spreading the Wealth: How Obama Is Robbing the Suburbs to Pay for the Cities,” wrote in National Review, “AFFH obligates any local jurisdiction that receives HUD funding to conduct a detailed analysis of its housing occupancy by race, ethnicity, national origin, English proficiency, and class. Grantees must identify factors (such as zoning laws, public-housing admissions criteria, and ‘lack of regional collaboration’) that account for any imbalance in living patterns.

“Localities must also list ‘community assets’ (such as quality schools, transportation hubs, parks, and jobs) and explain any disparities in access to such assets by race, ethnicity, national origin, English proficiency, class and more. Localities must then develop a plan to remedy these imbalances, subject to approval by HUD.”

Bottom line: Communities should reject even one single dollar from HUD.

Another bonus by forcing low-income housing into America’s suburbs is the affect it will have in shifting Republican-leaning neighborhoods into new Democrat voting regions.

Remember, the end justifies the means!

This is the opinion of AJ Kern, a politically engaged resident of Sauk Rapids. Her column is published the first Thursday of the month.

Read or Share this story: http://www.sctimes.com/story/opinion/2015/09/01/high-court-affirms-huds-ability-rezone-city/71524818/