Cuomo: Pro-life people have “no place in the state of New York”

posted at 7:31 pm on January 17, 2014 by Mary Katharine Ham

Forty-eight percent of Americans and all priests and nuns are no longer welcome in the Empire State, according to its governor. Delivering a monologue on Republicans with all the hyperbole of an MSNBC anchor and none of the charm, Cuomo offered this:

You have a schism within the Republican Party. … They’re searching to define their soul, that’s what’s going on. Is the Republican party in this state a moderate party or is it an extreme conservative party? That’s what they’re trying to figure out. It’s a mirror of what’s going on in Washington. The gridlock in Washington is less about Democrats and Republicans. It’s more about extreme Republicans versus moderate Republicans. … You’re seeing that play out in New York. … The Republican Party candidates are running against the SAFE Act — it was voted for by moderate Republicans who run the Senate! Their problem is not me and the Democrats; their problem is themselves. Who are they? Are they these extreme conservatives who are right-to-life, pro-assault-weapon, anti-gay? Is that who they are? Because if that’s who they are and they’re the extreme conservatives, they have no place in the state of New York, because that’s not who New Yorkers are. If they’re moderate Republicans like in the Senate right now, who control the Senate — moderate Republicans have a place in their state. George Pataki was governor of this state as a moderate Republican; but not what you’re hearing from them on the far right.”

He at least uses the liberal pejoratives for those who are pro-2nd Amendment and oppose gay marriage. “Right to life” he uses as if it’s offensive on its face. As Life News notes, he leans heavily on the President Barack tactic to simply declare everyone who disagrees with your positions in the slightest “extreme,” even if many of those people are your constituents. But how extreme is the pro-life position, even in a blue state like New York? Unlike, say, gay marriage, the polling on abortion restrictions, particularly second and third trimesters, regularly and overwhelmingly favors the more conservative position.

Cuomo spent much of 2013 trying to pass a Reproductive Health Act that moved the opposite direction of abortion legislation in states like Texas and North Carolina. He took from the Dr. Gosnell’s House of Horrors story that, hey, who shouldn’t be able to perform abortions, huh? The legislation, which was stuck into a broader Women’s Equality Act, stalled in the Senate because of its abortion provisions and under strong fire from the state’s bishops, who apparently are also no longer welcome in New York.

One 2013 poll, commissioned by the Chiaroscuro Foundation found, just as in the rest of the country, though many consider themselves pro-choice, they are very open to restrictions to abortion in the second and third trimesters and think abortions are already accessible enough in their state. A few of the questions lean on the prejudicial, but the bent of the electorate is clear: