Buy Photo Senate District 12 (Photo: Tribune Staff)Buy Photo





Sheridan Buck

Office sought: State Senate, District 12

Political party: Republican

Age: 53

Birthdate and place: April 9th, 1961, Tulsa, OK

Home: Great Falls

Occupation: Legal Aide, Great Falls City Attorney's Office (resigned spring of 2014).

Family: Husband: Lt Col (ret) Michael A. Buck, USAF/MTANG. Three children: Specialist Michael T. Buck, US Army (25); Caroline K. Buck (23); Midshipman Woodrow T. Buck, USMMA (20).

Professional experience:Education: Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree, Mississippi University for Women. Paid positions: Income Tax Preparation Specialist; Office Specialist and Legal Aide, Great Falls City Attorney's Office; Library Clerk, City of Great Falls; Elementary Teacher's Aide, Regular and Special Education Classrooms; Customer Service Representative, Chromcraft Corporation. Volunteer Positions: Big Bend/Fox Farm Fire Station Construction Steering Committee; CMR High School Partners Board; Montana ANG Family Readiness Board; "Civaires" Board; Montana ANG Fighter Wing Wartime Point of Contact; Officer Wives Club Board; Red Cross/Internal Medicine Assistant; Dance Teacher, USAF Morale, Welfare and Recreation Program; various leadership positions in Boy Scouts, Cub Scouts, and Brownies.

Military experience: None.

Political experience: 2014 Senate Seat 12 Race with endorsement from the NRA and the Montana Family Foundation; Republican Primary Candidate 2014 for Senate Seat 12; 1st Vice Chair and Congressional Committeewoman, Cascade County Republican Central Committee; Cascade Republican Women Group; 2-term Elected Precinct Captain; Election Judge and Poll Watcher; Campaign worker for PSC Travis Kavulla, City Commissioner Fred Burrows, Congressman Denny Rehberg , Congressman Steve Daines , the Jim Larson for County Commissioner Campaign and the Lola Galloway Campaign .

Campaign website: www.sheridanbucksenate12.com / FB: Sheridan Buck Senate 12 / Twitter@sheridan senate.

Why are you running as a Republican?

The Republican Party is the party of individual freedom and opportunity for all. It is the party of the Free Market, which has lifted billions of people from poverty. It obeys the Constitution and the rule of law, not the whims of currently popular figures. It supports a strong national defense as a deterrent to aggressors. It is opposed to ever bigger government, with its burdensome taxes and regulations, depressing economic growth and restricting freedom.

What is your position on tax credits for people who pay tuition for private schools?

Not all children flourish in public schools. Thirteen states created School Choice legislation in 2013. Our legislature voted 59-41 for a bill offering state income tax credits to anyone who pays a child's tuition for private school. Despite this clear majority, the bill was vetoed by Governor Bullock. Montana should help parents who need education options for their children. It would give Montana's parents a choice, and help Montana's students. Let's do the right thing.

Should the Legislature agree to expand the federal Medicaid program in Montana in 2015?

In 2013 our state legislature made the wise decision not to expand Medicaid in Montana. Though unpopular with ideologues, this decision was based on valid concerns about the growing costs to Montana after four years. It would also increase dependence of the state budget on dollars from our heavily indebted federal government, borrowed from countries like China. Finally, there are valid concerns about Medicaid's demonstrated ineffectiveness in providing quality healthcare to Montana's most vulnerable citizens.

Should the state more closely regulate fracking?

Fracking is a highly regulated method for responsible energy development; no additional regulation is needed. The EPA has found no cases of underground water contamination from fracking. Fracking fluid is 99.5% water and sand, plus safe additives. Companies consult engineers, geologists, biologists, and environmental experts. State, local, and federal agencies approve all fracking. Fracking takes just days, but wells can produce for 40 years, promoting Energy Independence and providing living wages for thousands of Montanans.

Should the state eliminate the death penalty and opt for life without parole?

It is certain that once executed, a murderer will never again kill. Consider the deterrent effect of executions, and that the sentence "Life Without Parole" could cost the state 3 times as much as an execution. The ACLU of Montana claims that Montana's death penalty is "cruel and unusual punishment". Only an unusual punishment would fit the crime of murder. Is an execution crueler than the act of murder? Ask the parents of the victims.

Should the state of Montana push to take control of federal land as the GOP platform states?

Federal control of public land subjects land users, sportsmen, cattlemen, and industries to unacceptable restrictions, economic depression, catastrophic wildfires, and declining land health. Such transfer of public lands is legal and economically feasible. It's been done in Utah, which will earmark five percent of revenue from public lands to go into the State School Fund, with 95 percent still going to the federal government. National parks, reservations, and wilderness areas will remain under federal management.

Do you support any changes to Montana's tax structure? If so, what?

Montana's state and local taxes are below the national average, but our tax structure discourages businesses from operating here. Of nine Rocky Mountain states, only Idaho has higher state income tax and corporate tax rates than Montana. Montana's capital gains taxes are the highest in the region, encouraging businesses to relocate before selling a company. This hampers economic growth and inhibits job creation. Lowering these tax rates would bring more good paying jobs to Montana.

Should the state actively support better cell phone reception and faster Internet service in Montana? If so, how?

Widespread failures of government sponsored networks across the country argue against state government involvement. Even with federal stimulus funding (now absent), the most successful projects are hundreds of millions in debt, despite new taxes on hardworking citizens. Private sector competition created the fast, affordable Internet and cell phone service we now enjoy, spurring rapid technological development without new taxes. Technology advances so rapidly that expensive, taxpayer funded infrastructures could be obsolete in a few years.

Mary Sheehy Moe

Office sought: Senator, Senate District 12

Political party: Democrat

Age: 64

Birthdate and place: Sept. 15, 1950, in Billings

Home: Senate District 12

Occupation: Volunteerism at the community and state levels.

Family: Husband, Duane; children, Ellen McKenzie; Molly Espino; and Paul Moe; and two grandchildren.

Professional experience: High school teacher, (1 parochial school in Lousiana and 3 Montana public schools), 1972–1990; faculty/department chair, Helena College of Technology, 1990-99; adjunct faculty for the University of Montana, 1997-99; Associate Dean and Dean/CEO, MSU-Great Falls, 1999-2008; Montana Deputy Commissioner of Two-Year Education, 2008-2010.

Military experience: None

Political experience: Aide to Senator Mike Mansfield, Summer 1974; Columbia Falls Local Government Study Commission, 1984-86; Montana Certification Standards and Practices Advisory Council, 1987-89; Montana Continuing Legal Education Commission, 1997 – Present; Lewis & Clark Library Board, 1993-99; MT State Workforce Investment Board, 2009-10; Great Falls Public Schools Board of Trustees, 2011-14*; Great Falls CVB Board, 2011-13; Mansfield Center Advisory Board to the City of Great Falls, 2011-present.

Campaign website: Mary Sheehy Moe for SD 12 – Democrat (Facebook).

Why are you running as a Democrat?

I gravitate toward people who are optimistic, deeply connected to the land, passionate about individual rights and individual potential, and dedicated to ensuring workers have the dignity of a living wage. That's why I'm a Democrat. I'm running because I believe I have the skills and experience to distinguish smoke from substance, to focus on real problems, and to craft solutions that work for Montana. Importantly, I live in the district I hope to represent.

What is your position on tax credits for people who pay tuition for private schools?

I've attended Catholic schools, but I oppose tuition tax credits and other initiatives that divert public funds to private education. They're not in the public interest and ultimately not in the private interest either, because with public funds must come some public regulation of this private choice. Although less direct than other private school funding initiatives, tuition tax credits are just a back-door way of using public funds for private education, which Montana's constitution prohibits.

Should the Legislature agree to expand the federal Medicaid program in Montana in 2015?

Absolutely. Failing to expand Medicaid in 2013 left 70,000 Montanans, most of them working poor, without affordable healthcare. That forced Montana hospitals to continue shifting the costs of uninsured care to the insured. That means insurance premiums must keep skyrocketing to cover those higher costs. And think what an infusion of $6 billion over 8 years would have meant to Montana's economy — 18,600 new jobs, $1.5 billion in business sales increases! Big mistake. Huge.

Should the state more closely regulate fracking?

Yes. Agriculture is Montana's #1 economic driver. Healthy aquifers are essential to farmers' and ranchers' prosperity. Those aquifers are threatened by the unregulated oil and gas development we now simplify as "fracking." Property rights, public services, and community capacity are also affected by the explosive, unregulated growth associated with this innovation. At a minimum, we should require the industry to meet its own recommended standards and those of more experienced states. Currently, we don't.

Should the state eliminate the death penalty and opt for life without parole?

Yes. Because the penalty of death is irreversible, courts must require appeals that cost taxpayers more than a life sentence would and re-create the ordeal for victims' families for decades. Montana jurists and prosecutors who have tried to guarantee justice tell us they just can't. Examples of unequal sentences for the equally guilty abound. Wrongful convictions happen. The inevitable, fatal "oops" cannot be justified when a reversible, less expensive, equally protective alternative exists.

Should the state of Montana push to take control of federal land as the GOP platform states?

We Montanans love our public lands. We use them extensively, not just for outdoor sports and recreation, but for grazing, mining, firewood, and many other special uses. We struggle fiscally to manage our state lands now. How could we possibly manage an additional 30 million acres with 1/230th of the taxpayers currently funding federal land management? We can't. Ultimately, these lands will be sold to the highest bidder and lost to us forever.

Do you support any changes to Montana's tax structure? If so, what?

I've always opposed the sales tax because it taxes equally people of unequal means. I agree with the tourism and agriculture industries' objections to legislative "raids" on taxes or fees created for specific uses within their industries. Since the "vo-techs" were integrated into the university system, our local vo-tech taxes have gone into the state's general fund. I'd like to see those funds earmarked for "early college" opportunities for children residing in those school districts.

Should the state actively support better cell phone reception and faster Internet service in Montana? If so, how?

Education and healthcare opportunities, business competitiveness, and economic development are all hampered by our inadequate connectivity. With our sparse population and vast land, improving our access will require the kinds of federal resources that brought Montana railroads, electricity and highways. That means politicians should stop thumbing their noses at our federal government and pursue a vision for Montana that goes beyond the next election. Inventorying what we have now would be a good start.

Read or Share this story: http://gftrib.com/1xEXb6V