Yes, you can take your gold teeth with you to the grave, as many funeral homes won’t remove them. (Photo: Mackensy Lunsford/mlunsford@citizen-times.com)

Today's batch of burning questions, my smart-aleck answers and the real deal:

Question: What happens to the gold teeth when a body is cremated?

My answer: In this case, it seems, you can take it with you, mainly because, well, ewwww.

Real answer: I'm not going to lie. I found this question strangely fascinating, mainly because I have a mouth full of gold-laden cavities. And yes, that's my mouth in the photo. Food writer Mackensy Lunsford really earned her paycheck that day.

Now, on to an answer.

"Most funeral homes won't remove gold teeth," said Carl Boldt, a funeral director with Asheville Area Alternative Funeral & Cremation Services. "The gold in someone's mouth is not worth as much as people think, and it's not worth the cost to hire an oral surgeon to remove it."

The funeral home tells clients if they want a loved one's gold teeth removed, the family needs to hire an oral surgeon to do it. Gold fillings are not a high-purity variety, so the value is limited.

Dale Groce, funeral director at Groce Funeral Home & Cremation Services in Asheville, said it is a subject that comes up on occasion.

"We have had families that request that they be removed, but we do not do that," Groce said. "Dentists have reported to us in every case that the qualify of the gold in a tooth is not worth the expense of removing it."

After cremation, Groce said, the remaining gold is essentially "indistinguishable" from the ashes "to such a point it cannot be found."

Other metals, such as those used in hip replacements or other orthopedic surgeries, can be removed by a magnet, Boldt said. His company contracts with a metal recycler to take those metals.

As gold is not magnetic, this technique doesn't work to remove what remains from the ashes.

Question: A letter in the Citizen-Times recently remarked that Ingles had decided to eliminate full-time employees to avoid paying benefits. Is that true?

My answer: I used to think self-checkouts were just the bee's knees, but now I'm just astounded at how long it takes some people to locate a barcode. Please, keep the employees.

Real answer: Ingles Chief Financial Officer Ron Freeman said the company's federal filings with the Securities & Exchange Commission probably answer the question best. The company is not eliminating full-time positions.

"Of our 23,000 employees, 62 percent work part time," he said, adding most do that by choice, as they are older folks, high school kids or others who can't work full time. "Their choice fits with the number of hours we operate in our stores."

"Our primary concern is making sure the store is staffed to serve our customers, and that results in a lot of people wanting part-time jobs," Freeman continued, noting the company strives to offer benefits and health insurance. "We're in full compliance with the provisions of the Affordable Care Act."

On another Ingles-related note, Freeman wants readers to know they are always welcome to ask store managers questions about their local Ingles and its operations, or if they have product or service concerns, they can call the Ingles customer service line at 828-669-2941, extensions 270 or 300.

Loading...

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1IVGgTe