Buy Photo Activist Kristen Aaquist speaks with those gathered at the Unitarian Universalist Fellowship of Northern Nevada in Reno on Saturday, Oct. 10, 2015. (Photo: Jason Bean/RGJ)Buy Photo

A lot can change in a year, just ask Kristen Aaquist, a transgender woman in transition and a Sparks city employee.

Aaquist is breaking ground as the first openly transgender woman to work for Sparks, but there is a major obstacle that is affecting her ability to fully transition: her health insurance plan. The city does not currently cover gender reassignment surgery as part of its employee health plan.

A recent decision by the city’s Group Healthcare Committee, however, may change that very soon. The committee, a panel of experts and city employees who help form city health care policy, voted to approve more inclusive coverage last Wednesday.

Their approval was the last step before the issue is presented to the Sparks City Council for a final vote. The issue will likely be on the agenda Oct. 26 or in mid-November at the latest.

When the committee announced their affirmative vote, it was an emotional moment for Aaquist.

“This was an absolutely wonderful thing to happen,” she said. “I was crying in the room.”

Last year, Aaquist requested insurance coverage for both hormone replacement therapy and gender-confirming surgery but was given some disappointing news.

She gave what she called a “nerve-wracking” presentation to the city’s Group Healthcare Committee where she explained the necessity of her request. She was later told that while hormones would officially be covered, her surgery would not be.

Hormones for transgender women repress physical male characteristics while boosting female ones, but Aaquist’s goals are to take her transition to the next level through surgery. Disappointed by the decision last year, she started thinking about how she could raise the funds herself.

Male to female gender reassignment surgery can cost between $21,000 and $50,000, a large amount to pay out of pocket. Female to male surgery can run an even higher cost, in the ballpark of $100,000. Potential complications from surgery, which would also be out of pocket, can cost even more.

Aaquist is a legal secretary and has been a city employee for 14 years. She considered taking on a second job but was hesitant to do so, as she wouldn’t be able to spend as much time with her two sons. The only other option would be to take out a loan.

Now 35 years old, Aaquist officially began to transition in the fall of 2013, when she began to come out to friends and family, and eventually work colleagues, as a woman. About that time, she also began to follow a blog kept by a transgender woman, where the blogger described her journey of realizing her desire to live life as a female.

“As I was reading it, all I could think was, ‘Oh my god, she’s telling my life story,’” Aaquist said.

Under the Affordable Care Act, the city of Sparks will sooner or later be required to cover gender reassignment surgeries because it receives federal dollars. If the Sparks City Council does not approve the insurance decision this fall, the city will eventually be required to offer the benefit or face legal repercussions.

On a national scale, coverage of gender reassignment procedures has been a challenge for many transgender individuals, according to Brock Maylath, president of Reno’s Transgender Allies Group. Antiquated language and a misunderstanding of the medical necessity of gender reassignment surgery still exists in many states. A general misconception is that such surgeries are cosmetic, when in fact they are considered by the medical community to be a necessary option for people who experience gender dysphoria. Gender dysphoria is a state of disconnection between the gender someone is assigned at birth and the one he or she connects with on an emotional and psychological level.

Transgender individuals are statistically more likely to experience discrimination, poverty, harassment and depression during their lifetimes, according to GLAAD, an organization that focuses on advancing equality for the LGBT community. As a result, suicide attempts in the transgender community are around a staggering 41 percent, compared to less than 5 percent of the general population.

“There is nothing experimental about these surgeries,” Maylath said. “There is no humane reason to deny coverage.”

A lack of coverage could also leave the city at risk for future lawsuits, but Maylath said that he hopes it doesn’t need to come to that.

“When somebody sues, everybody loses,” he said.

Discrimination against transgender people is not always widely acknowledged, due to the smaller percentage of the population that they make up. But Maylath said that even if the community is small, transgender men and women have medical needs that ought to be protected.

“Not covering gender-affirming therapies is the same as saying, ‘We don’t know anyone in our company who’s black, so we’re not going to cover sickle-cell anemia,’” Maylath said.

As for the future of coverage in Sparks, city officials hope to plan an educational session to brief the council members on the issue before they vote on it in a public meeting.

“In general terms, I support anything we can do as a city to be inclusive,” said Sparks Councilwoman Julia Ratti.

Earlier this year, the cities of Reno and Las Vegas have both opted to cover gender reassignment surgeries for transgender city employees. If Sparks City Council approves coverage, it’s likely that they will follow the plan adopted by Reno.

Sparks’ new healthcare plan with Renown and Hometown Health goes into effect Jan. 1. If the city approves gender reassignment surgery as a covered procedure, then that change will take place on Jan. 1 as well.

Regardless of the City Council’s decision, Aaquist plans to have her surgery in early February. She just hopes that her insurance plan will cover it. With no surgeons in Nevada who specialize in gender-reassignment surgery, Aaquist plans to travel to Pennsylvania for her procedure. Perhaps poetically, the doctor is located in a town called New Hope.

If coverage is approved, Aaquist believes that the decision will improve the lives of other future transgender employees that the city may hire.

“This is something down the road that’s really going to help people,” she said, “and it’s great to be a part of making that happen.”

Read or Share this story: http://on.rgj.com/1RChVpW