Topics: Clean Air Act, Climate Change, Climate deniers, deniers, Editor's Picks, emissions, EPA, Heartland Institute, The Right, Business News, Politics News

This post originally appeared on The BRAD BLOG

As we noted last night, the global warming deniers were sure to start firing on all carbon-emitting pistons this week in response to the Obama EPA’s landmark announcement todayof proposed new rules to decrease harmful, climate-destabilizing CO2 pollution from existing dirty power plants, as per the U.S. Supreme Court-mandated enforcement of the Clean Air Act.

The deniers haven’t disappointed.

The following quotes come from a press release sent out this morning from the fossil fuel industry-funded “Heartland Institute,” which pretends to offer science-based arguments in support of their “mission…to discover, develop, and promote free-market solutions to social and economic problems.”

In fact, the group serves as little more than a mouthpiece for Big Carbon and the modern Republican Party which, largely thanks to Citizens United in 2010, now eschews the use of actual science in the public sphere.

Despite their ironic “non-profit” status — enjoying government subsidies for promoting “free-market solutions” — the Heartland Institute is also little more than an arm of the Republican Party. In one of the responses to today’s announcement, the Heartland Institute President argues that “Republicans in the House and Senate are right to oppose EPA’s new global warming rules,” and “Voters will do well to remember who was on their side during the coming political battles.”

In another response, the “non-partisan” group says that challenging the Obama EPA’s proposed policy could be great for the GOP. “If done intelligently,” Heartland’s Science Director(!) Jay Lehr writes, the challenge “could cost [Obama’s] party the Senate in the November elections and dramatically increase the Republican majority in the House of Representatives – which will enable the Republicans to stymie any further legislative action by the president for the remainder of his term.”

Now that’s some good Science Directing! And some good non-partisanship! Of course, this is also the same group that purchased billboards comparing those who believe in science to “The Unabomber” and Charles Manson, so it’s not as though anybody would take these folks seriously, right? Wrong. They are consistently featured and quoted by theoretically legitimate mainstream media outlets in coverage of the pretend “global warming debate”.

Here then, in no particular order, are the top 7 most amusing responses from the Heartland Institute’s “experts”, as released this morning in response to today’s EPA announcement:

“This is Obamacare for the environment: guaranteed to raise costs, reduce choices, and destroy an existing industry. By the time EPA is finished, millions of Americans will be freezing in the dark.” – Joseph Bast, President, The Heartland Institute

Well, Republicans were completely wrong about the Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”), and now, wisely, are quickly abandoning their attacks on it in advance of the 2014 election, so why not double-down and call conservative, flexible, market-based, state-controlled regulations to curb emissions “Obamacare for the environment”?! Sure. That should work!

As to “Americans freezing in the dark”, thanks to the EPA, we’ll keep that in mind next time we hear how climate scientists are “alarmists” for producing peer-reviewed, independently verifiable science.

“It could be the greatest miscalculation of his presidency if, in fact, cooler minds in the opposition can mount a sensible campaign to educate the public as to why he is wrong and how the economic impacts will be absolutely disastrous in the immediate future. If done intelligently, this draconian action by the president could cost his party the Senate in the November elections and dramatically increase the Republican majority in the House of Representatives – which will enable the Republicans to stymie any further legislative action by the president for the remainder of his term.” – Jay Lehr, Science Director, The Heartland Institute

Who knew “Science Directing” was so similar to Political Consulting?! Oh, that’s right. The folks who claim that climate science is “junk science” and that is has been “politicized” do so all the time. For profit.