Law (Photo: zeleno, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

When you see or hear people talking about laws, what perspective do you take? Do you stand back and assume they are talking about others and not about you or anyone you know? Have you ever wondered how those who make our laws look at themselves and the laws they create?

I suggest their mindset is often one of superiority and standoffishness. They make the laws for others. Not that they won’t or don’t obey them, they just create them for people who might break them or for the people who might be protected by them.

I am a criminal defense investigator, hired by defendants who can afford it or by the state for those who cannot. And, the latter category is where emphasis needs to be placed, in my opinion.

Individuals who commit crimes often do so because they feel the need to acquire or protect something, something they cannot afford to buy or replace. Many of the defendants I work for are unemployed or on Social Security Disability of some sort. They have lower standards of living and behavior. From their prospective, the law only applies to those who get caught.

Although I have no statistics, I know most of the individuals I work for — and they are individuals — have problems making a living for one reason or another. They can afford less. So, when one of them is found guilty of a misdemeanor crime, what do the courts do? Fine them. Charge them room and board for being held in jail. Take away their driver’s license. Order them to pay restitution. How?

I suggest it would improve the lives of these already downtrodden people if somehow the courts and Iowa legislators could look at these cases from the standpoint of the defendants. How does making them pay money they already don’t have and taking away their right to drive help them? If we could somehow better these defendants instead of pushing them farther down into the cellar, wouldn’t that help all of us?

If you don’t have a criminal record, you probably don’t know how difficult it is to get a decent job or even find a place to rent sometimes because you made a mistake. Is there any way we could encourage these people instead of further demeaning them?

I’m not saying we should applaud them for committing crimes, but an attitude adjustment from both sides of the coin would help. There are billions of people in the world who have made mistakes in their lives. If we ever find just one who has not, we will need to add another chapter to the Bible.

Of course there are exceptions. Some people just don’t get it and never will. But if our laws were written so judges could help rebuild a few of these people instead of adding to their burden, wouldn’t it be better?

T.W. Person (Photo: Special to the Register)

T.W. PERSON is a licensed private investigator and Air Force veteran of the Cold War. He has authored two novels, "Criminal Witness" and "Where the Cold Dark Waters Flow" based on his experiences. Contact: milopowellpi@aol.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/210ceW0