Photo

Prophets of Doom: Some authors so thoroughly dominate their genre that rivals may want to invoke the Sherman Antitrust Act. Malcolm Gladwell, for instance, is the king of pithily titled, sociologically inflected narrative nonfiction with a vaguely entrepreneurial self-help feel; his “Outliers” has spent 208 weeks on the paperback nonfiction list and is currently No. 7 on the monthly business list. So it seems almost cheeky that the Wharton School professor Adam Grant has settled, for his latest addition to the field, on the pithy title “Originals.” Grant’s book, which debuts at No. 2 on the hardcover nonfiction list — and comes with a front-cover endorsement from Gladwell — overlaps with “Outliers” in substance as well as style: Both propose to explain why some people rise above their peers to change the world. (Gladwell emphasizes practice; Grant, passion and nonconformity.) Readers of the Book Review may be particularly interested in one study Grant cites, in which a psychologist gave subjects an actual New York Times book review, modified to make it either extremely positive or extremely negative, then asked them to rate the critic’s intelligence. “Which version makes the reviewer sound smarter?” Grant asks. “People rated the critical reviewer as 14 percent more intelligent, and having 16 percent greater literary expertise, than the complimentary reviewer. People think an amateur can appreciate art, but it takes a professional to critique it.” Or, as the original researcher put it, “Prophets of doom and gloom appear wise and insightful, while positive statements are seen as having a naïve ‘Pollyanna’ quality.”

Color Theory: A year ago, the monthly games and activities list was dominated by books about the world-building computer game Minecraft. Now the same list is composed entirely of adult coloring books, from the top-ranked “Harry Potter Coloring Book” — which is, according to the publisher, “for all ages” — to “Color Me Calm” at No. 10. What accounts for the sudden faddish interest in coloring inside the lines? And since when has coloring been an adult activity? (For that matter, am I the only one who thinks a truly “adult” coloring book should feature a little nudity? Though preferably — please, God — not involving Harry Potter.) In New York magazine last month, the science writer Jordan Gaines Lewis, who is finishing her doctorate in neuroscience, grappled with some of those questions as she explained why she likes the books. “What is the psychological draw of a task that feels creative,” she asked, “but doesn’t actually involve creating anything new?” Coloring, she wrote, lets us incorporate “a little bit of creativity” in our lives while giving us control over simple decisions and reminding us that productivity can be overrated. “It’s a lot like play, in other words,” she added, “something that most of us could use more of.”