WASHINGTON — Newly elected Republican Carlos Curbelo speaks softly and with a rare tone of moderation, a striking departure from the loud bickering that has divided the just concluded do-little Congress.

The Cuban American from Kendall — who will be sworn into office on Tuesday along with the rest of the 114th session of Congress — says he is not coming to Washington to cast 50 symbolic votes against Obamacare or to clash with Democrats. Intent on getting things done, Curbelo promises to seek common ground on tax reform, immigration and health care.

Yet when President Barack Obama last month opened a new relationship with Cuba, ending five decades of confrontation, Curbelo called it an affront to Congress. "We have a duty to do everything we can to block the initiative announced by the president," Curbelo said in an interview.

The clash over Cuba exemplifies a wide range of political conflicts that could undermine attempts to find consensus in the two-year session that starts Tuesday. Curbelo nonetheless hopes to show "that we can get past our differences and our bickering and actually have a product that the American people can be proud of by the time this next session of Congress reaches its conclusion."

Curbelo, 34, reflects a rising generation of lawmakers — including Democratic Rep. Patrick Murphy, 31, of Jupiter, the youngest member of Congress — who are looking for compromises to break the deadlock on major issues.

Curbelo, fresh from the Miami-Dade County School Board, thinks common ground could be found on some issues such as higher education to help students get a good return on their investment and on tax reform.

"One of the main reasons two-thirds of the American people still feel the country is on the wrong track is that the economic recovery hasn't reached a lot of low and middle-income families," he said. "I think tax reform will really help spur broad economic growth and maybe even bring back some of those jobs that have departed."

But the focus at the start of the session, aside from money matters, will be on immigration and Cuba, as the Republican-run Congress considers ways to reverse Obama's recent initiatives.

Curbelo, who was born in Miami to Cuban exiles, calls immigration reform "a must. It's a shame it's been so politicized so early."

He says he would have voted for the sweeping immigration reform bill that the Senate passed last session but House Republican leaders refused to consider. That bill would have allowed as many as 11 million foreign residents nationwide and an estimated 632,000 in Florida to remain in this country legally without fear of deportation — more than double the number covered by Obama's executive action in November.

Many Republicans hope to block Obama's emerging immigration rules, which will offer temporary legal status to the parents of U.S. citizens and to foreign residents who were brought to this country as children.

Some Republicans also hope to deny funding to carry out Obama's new rules on Cuba, which will ease travel restrictions and allow more money and commerce to flow across the Florida Straits.

Republicans, emboldened by their majority in the Senate as well as the House, may still try to undo Obamacare. But Curbelo shrugs off such attempts, noting that Obama would veto a repeal bill.

"What's more important is to focus on the areas where even the president has recognized that the law is flawed and codify those changes," he said. "Once President Obama is gone (from office), maybe then we can substitute it with a full health-care reform law. But it's not going to happen in the next two years, so why put on the circus?"

Congressional sessions customarily begin with upbeat vows to work together across party lines and take care of the people's business. In recent years, they quickly degenerated into partisan posturing and rebukes, and the last session was vilified as the least productive in modern times.

But hope springs anew on opening day, and Curbelo expects a more constructive engagement.

"I'm just anxious to get started," he said. "It's been a long two months of anticipation and a lot of learning. Now I want to get into the game."

Wgibson@tribune.com, 202-824-8256