The Agenda How small-business issues are shaping politics and policy.

Todd Hawkins is a Virginia home builder who insists that the big plans he has for his business are not so big that they will put him in the path of the Affordable Care Act. That, anyway, is what he told You’re the Boss readers when he commented on a recent post about determining whether a company is subject to the law’s employer mandate. “I can promise we won’t go over 49 employees, so A.C.A. will affect employment, at least by one company,” he wrote. “Mine.”

But Mr. Hawkins told a different story when I contacted him a few days later to talk about his comment. “Next year,” he said, if he and his partner’s new idea works out, “that’s when we’ll run into the A.C.A.” He has 21 employees now.

Mr. Hawkins and his partner, Jonathan Fishbeck, met after they had both been hit hard by the recession. Mr. Hawkins had been laid off from his job as a salesman, he said, after it had become clear that most of his customers were going under. Mr. Fishbeck was a builder on borrowed time as clients started canceling their contracts. The two became friendly, and Mr. Hawkins urged Mr. Fishbeck to change his company’s name, suggesting BuilderFish. And soon, though Mr. Hawkins knew nothing about construction, they joined forces.

Since 2010, they have been building luxury homes in Washington’s Virginia suburbs. Besides those 21 employees, the company makes use of perhaps 100 or more subcontractors that Mr. Hawkins calls “teammates.” (Lawyers warn that businesses like BuilderFish that rely on subcontractors ought to tread carefully: They could find themselves subject to the mandate — and liable for penalties, even retroactively — should the Internal Revenue Service conclude that the subcontractors are actually misclassified employees. “We are very conscious of the trouble we could get in,” Mr. Hawkins said. “We’ve never done anything without our lawyer’s advice on that.”)

“We have been thinking about and dealing with the Affordable Care Act since we first heard about it,” said Mr. Hawkins, who added that he and his partner have wanted to offer insurance “from Day 1. We’ve wanted to insure ourselves.” But when they’ve looked at the math — first late last year and then again early this year — and repriced a completed project with and without health insurance, they concluded they could not absorb the overhead. “We’re already premium priced,” Mr. Hawkins said.

Instead, the company gives employees a lump sum they can use to purchase insurance if they so choose. (Mr. Hawkins would not elaborate on any of the calculations they’ve made to inform their thinking so far on offering health insurance — he said that nobody at the company could remember the exact figures.) But this arrangement may not last.

Mr. Hawkins and Mr. Fishbeck aim to transform BuilderFish from a company that, in addition to designing and building large houses and estates, manages every aspect of the finished property for the new homeowners. “You’ll have one BuilderFish rep that takes care of everything,” he said, from landscaping and maintenance to hiring household staff. The company has made a considerable investment in developing computer software to help manage the operation.

But without health insurance, he said, “you can’t attract the best employees. People are scared to take a chance if they don’t have medical.” For now, though, his advisers have told him to wait. “They say, ‘Nothing has changed, don’t do anything. Let others feel the pain while it works itself out.’ ”

But he continued: “We are big believers in spending money to make money. So when we get to the point where it will hold back our success, we’ll have to do it. At the end of the day, we’re going to have to shimmy out on that branch, but in the meantime we’re going to try to make do with less than 49 employees.”

Mr. Hawkins also said that this conversation had prompted his partner to take a fresh look at offering health insurance now. “We’re re-examining as a result of your email, so that’s a good thing if we CAN actually afford,” he wrote in an email.

All of which raises a question: If Mr. Hawkins knew that his company might be ready to expand beyond 50 employees as soon as next year and if he was willing to reconsider offering health insurance before then, what moved him to leave such a definitive comment on our post? He said it was an expression of his frustration with just how complex the Affordable Care Act is and how the resulting confusion has paralyzed his company.

“It’s typical government,” said Mr. Hawkins, who claims libertarian leanings but not any particular animosity toward President Obama. “They’re making it more convoluted by the day. It’s hard to understand.

“My time is at a premium. I get mad when I am spending effort and brain cells trying to understand something and I’m going backwards. My progress at best has been like a treadmill. I’m making good time and not getting anywhere. I’m educated, and I can figure most things out. I can’t figure this out.

“And it makes me feel dumb. And it keeps me from doing what I want to do, which is hire more people and offer them medical — to take care of them, so they’re not worried about that.”

Mr. Hawkins promised to keep us informed. When he does, we’ll update his story. And if you have questions about how the Affordable Care Act will affect how your business offers group health insurance, please send an email to robb.mandelbaum@nytimes.com.