Advertisement - story continues below

One of the leading conservative voices in the nation suggested Speaker of the House John Boehner (R-Ohio) helped pass the so-called “CRomnibus” bill through the lower chamber last week because the National Security Agency (NSA) has some information that could ruin his career.

The bill, which was passed by the House last week and by the Senate on Saturday, fully funds not only the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), but also President Obama’s executive action on immigration.

In response, Matt Drudge, who runs The Drudge Report, tweeted out the following, suggesting that the NSA must have some “dirt” on the Speaker:

Advertisement – story continues below

Obama got EVERYTHING. NSA dirt on Boehner must be incredible. Chicago wins. pic.twitter.com/Pl4HW9qGtb — MATT DRUDGE (@DRUDGE) December 12, 2014

This is how some people reacted to Drudge’s tweet:

Advertisement – story continues below

@DRUDGE they are all part of the same team really — StephanieWeier (@bizcaptain) December 12, 2014

@CraigR3521 @DRUDGE exactly.. NSA data on Boehner, and USSC Justice Roberts, too. We are no longer free in this nation.. DC RULES! @cspanwj — still an individual (@CSPANJNKY) December 12, 2014

In 2010, The New York Post investigated an alleged affair between Boehner and lobbyist Lisbeth Lyons of the American Printing Assocation (APA) Lyons told a blogger at the time:

Advertisement – story continues below

“As you can imagine, I was stunned by such a question, I found it to be highly insulting, particularly as a female political professional, as well as unfounded. Beyond that, I have no further comment on the matter.”

Michael Steel, a spokesman for Boehner, told The Huffington Post at the time on the matter: “It is deeply disappointing that even a scandal-mongering rag like the NY Post prints bulls–t.”

It is also alleged that Boehner has a bout with alcoholism; several Republicans and conservatives refused to discuss the matter with Salon.com, a liberal publication, in January 2013.

H/T WND

Photo: Talk Radio News Service (Flickr)