Dan Parker, the great nephew to Butch Cassidy and David Logan. The two go up each year for the Hole in the Wall Tour. ( Courtesy Photo / Estes Park Trail-Gazette )

The historic picture of the famous gang. (Courtesy Photo / Estes Park Trail-Gazette)

Among the many photographs of Estes Park visitors dressed in Victorian and Western costumes that line the walls of the shop Real West Old Time Portraits on Elkhorn Avenue, is a large picture of "The Wild Bunch,"a.k.a. The Hole-in-the-Wall gang. The picture is too old to have been photographed by the shop's owners, David and Joanne Logan. The large formal portrait is there because of its family significance. One of the five infamous outlaws in the large formal portrait is "Kid Curry," David Logan's cousin. "Kid Curry" was the alias of Harvey Andrew Logan. He is the one standing in the rear on the right with his hand on the shoulder of Butch Cassidy.

Harvey Logan was born in 1867 and he and his brothers Hank, Lonny and Johnny were raised on a farm in Tama County, Iowa. They read dime store novels about Jesse James, and the adventures of the outlaw ignited their imaginations. The brothers eventually left the farm to become cowboys. They ended up in Landusky, Montana. Harvey ultimately became a rustler, gunman, bank and train robber, and was known to be one of the "wildest" of Butch Cassidy's outlaw gang, the Wild Bunch.

Advertisement

Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid fled the country for Bolivia, and no one is certain what became of them. The evidence for Logan's fate is much clearer: most historians believe that after escaping from a Knoxville prison in June of 1903, he fled to Colorado, where it is believed he was wounded by pursuers and shot himself dead. The pistol he used to shoot himself after declaring "I may as well end it here," is on display at The Museum of Western Colorado in Grand Junction with the notation "The pistol that Kid Curry used to kill himself."

The Phillips County Museum in Montana has an exhibit of "Our native outlaw celebrity, "Kid Curry." In 1894 he began his outlaw career here when he killed 'Pike' Landusky over a feud in a shootout with deputy sheriff Pike Landusky. In the following years, Kid Curry committed several more crimes in Phillips County, including a train robbery west of Wagner in 1901. Authentic artifacts from the period highlight the story of the outlaw and his gang, the Wild Bunch. David and Joanne Logan recently enjoyed their visit to the museum when they were invited to be guests.

When asked if he is proud that "Kid Curry" is part of his family tree, David says "Heck yes. It beats having a politician in the family!'