Topics: Books, Common Core, Editor's Picks, Education, excerpts, Parenting, testing, Innovation News, News

The Complexity of Adult Responses

All too often, in a political landscape where good teachers are stars and heroes, and bad teachers are villains (“Waiting for Superman” is one vivid example of the zeitgeist), we tend to think that nice teachers encourage curiosity, and the mean, derelict ones do not. However, the range of adult responses when a child is in the presence of intriguing or alluring objects cannot be boiled down to friendly or unfriendly.

Tessa van Schijndel and her colleagues (2010) brought preschool children to an interactive science museum to participate in two different exhibits, one involving rolling cylinders down a ramp, and the other in which the child sits on a chair that spins, holding blocks of varying weights to find out what factors influence the speed of the spin. As children went through these two exhibits, a coach used one of three styles to interact with them: a minimal but encouraging response; a kind of scaffolding in which the coach elaborated what the child did or said; and an explanatory style in which the coach offered the child information about the inner workings of the experience (why the cylinders rolled at different rates, and why the weight of the block interacts with where the child held her arms while spinning).

How actively each child explored the exhibit depended on what the coach said to her. Children explored the rolling cylinder exhibit much more thoroughly when the coach simply smiled and nodded, and said little. The children who heard explanations from the coaches were the least likely to try out different things with the cylinders. A somewhat different picture emerged when it came to the spinning-chair exhibit. Children investigated the blocks and their own gestures (holding their arms close to the torso, or spreading them out like wings) with more gusto when the coach scaffolded the child’s behavior, making small suggestions for further experimentation or otherwise leading the child to slightly more complex interactions. Though the two exhibits seemed to call for slightly different behavior from the adults, explanation never seemed like the best way to get children to investigate.

Studies show that one adult can influence a single child’s expression of curiosity. But a lot of the time children are not alone in a room with one adult. Often they are one of many children, and a lot is going on. Certainly this is the case in day care centers, where there may be one adult for every seven children, or schools, where there is often one adult for every twenty-three children. Are children influenced by an adult when things are noisier, messier, and more interpersonally diluted? Interested in finding out whether the adult’s smiles or frowns would affect children’s curiosity in a classroom setting, my student Hilary Hackmann and I built our own curiosity box based on the one used by Henderson and Moore (1980).

The box had eighteen little drawers in it, and in each drawer was a small, novel object. We placed the box in kindergarten and third-grade classrooms and watched to see who came up to it, how many drawers each child opened, and how long the child spent examining the objects inside the drawers. Though we had shared the common assumption that children tended to be less inquisitive about the environment as they get older, our data provided a different picture. We found that, on the whole, the nine-year-old children were as curious as the five- and six-year-old children. Just as many third graders as kindergarteners came up to the box, opened the drawers, and examined the objects. However, not all classrooms invited the same levels of curiosity. In some rooms, many children approached the box, and did so quickly, taking their time to examine several objects. Upon walking into their classroom and seeing the odd box, children said things like, “What is that?” “Whoa, where did that come from?” “It says OK to touch, so I’m going to touch it” (in response to a small sign on it that said “OK to touch”). In other rooms, regardless of grade, few children investigated the box.

This suggests that the classroom environment is as important an ingredient in a child’s curiosity as his or her age. But what is it in a classroom that serves to encourage or discourage investigation? We found that there was a direct link between how much the teacher smiled and talked in an encouraging manner and the level of curiosity the children in the room expressed. Teacher, rather than grade, explained the difference between the classrooms where children examined the box and classrooms where it was left relatively untouched. We found a clear link between the number of smiles and encouraging words the teacher said about the box, and the level of curiosity the children expressed. Teachers in classrooms where we saw lots of box examination said things like, “What do you have there? “Wow, I think you really like that thing. That’s cool. Look at that.” On the other hand, in the classrooms where we saw relatively little box exploration, teachers said things like, “Rachel, turn your body around and do your work” (when Rachel had turned to look at the box), or “I saw some of you up there by the box, and you owe me Friday’s English.”

Smiling and encouraging children to explore are two of the ways teachers influence children’s curiosity. But as we know from a vast array of research, including some I have already described, adults influence children in other ways as well. Children watch adults react to objects and events, they listen to what adults say to other people, and they watch what adults do. Imagine a child who has two teachers. One asks questions, not only to the child, but to others as well, or even to herself. She looks things up in books. She looks out the window with interest; she watches as her students make things, or play with one another. Now imagine this child in the room just down the hall. This teacher rarely studies the children while they are playing. She knows a lot of answers but seems uninterested in things she doesn’t know about. She is eager to steer the group away from topics she knows little about. She does not inquire about the children’s experiences beyond school. She is warm, friendly, and energetic, eager for her students to learn what she has planned for them, but rarely shows an appetite for what she doesn’t know. Would a child’s own curiosity be influenced differently by these two teachers? Might not a teacher’s expression of curiosity provide an invitation or a prohibition?

In order to answer that question, my student Madelyn Labella and I designed a study in which eight- and nine-year-olds were brought into a lab, one at a time, to do a science activity (Engel 2011). When the child came into the room, materials were set out on a table, and a worksheet lay nearby. Madelyn explained that she and the child were going to do a fun and interesting activity and then fill out the worksheet that went with it. Madelyn modeled her behavior on the prototype of a friendly, knowledgeable, and warm science teacher. As the child embarked on the activity, Madelyn explained various concepts, gave gentle guidance, and made friendly conversation. The activity, called “bouncing raisins,” required the child to mix baking soda, vinegar, and water and then drop raisins into the mixture. In this mixture, little bubbles form on the raisin and the raisin eventually rises to the surface. As the activity unfolded, Madelyn directed the child’s attention to the instructions on the worksheet and helped him or her fill out the questions at the bottom of the sheet, making the format of the session closely comparable to a common school science activity.

As they neared the end of the activity, Madelyn did one of two things. For half the children she said something like, “You know what? I wonder what would happen if we dropped one of these (picking up a Skittle from the table) in the liquid instead of a raisin?” With the other half of the children, instead of picking up a Skittle and dropping it in, she simply cleaned the work area up a little, commenting as she did it, “I’m just going to tidy up a bit. I’ll put these materials over here.” In other words, some of the children saw the adult/teacher show interest in exploring further and deviating from the script, while others did not. Then Madelyn left the room, claiming that she had to get some materials for the next activity and that she would be back in a few moments. As she left, she said, “Feel free to do whatever you want while you are waiting for me. You can use the materials more, or draw with these crayons, or just wait. Whatever you want to do is fine.” Then she walked out. The camera, which had been on for the whole time, remained on so that we could watch to see what the children did when left alone.

Children who had seen Madelyn deviate from the task to satisfy her own curiosity were much more likely to play with the materials. They dropped raisins, Skittles, or one of the other items into the liquid. They stirred it, added other liquids, and peered into the beaker to see what was happening.

But children who had seen her tidy up instead tended do very little while they waited. They’d stand with their hands in their pockets, look up at the ceiling, or gaze away into space. Some of them fidgeted (one spent a fair amount of time fidgeting with the zipper on his jeans). But overall they showed little interest in the materials they had used with Madelyn, and little inclination to do more with those materials. Watching the tapes of all the children, one can see a pattern that fleshes out the statistical results.

Children who had seen Madelyn do something unexpected and off-script, who had seen her display a little burst of curiosity (albeit a fairly tame “burst”), connected to the materials, and the activity, with more engagement and interest. In an experiment like this, even if someone other than Madelyn had interacted with the children, it would be impossible for the experimenter to be blind to the condition. One cannot intentionally express or suppress curiosity without knowing it. Worried that something about Madelyn’s behavior other than the manipulation was signaling to the children whether they should or shouldn’t focus on the materials in her absence, we asked outside coders to rate thin slices of the tapes. There were no differences between her behavior in the curiosity condition and the tidy-up condition, providing us with additional certainty that when an adult expresses curiosity, it affects children.

It seems clear that adults have a variety of ways of signaling to children that they can or can’t, should or shouldn’t explore objects. And those signals affect children. But it’s not just what an adult expresses to children about their behavior that matters. After all, when children and adults are together, not everything the grown-ups do is in response to what the children are doing. Parents and teachers are not always gearing their behavior directly toward the children they are with. They are to a great degree just being themselves. They lift lids, tinker, look things up, watch things carefully, and ask questions. Or they don’t. In fact, many adults do not express much curiosity in their everyday lives. There are plenty of adults who rarely want to find out about something new, or probe beneath the surface. Why wouldn’t this have an impact on children?