Landmark legislation giving students who are in the country illegally in-state tuition was the only major accomplishment of the Legislature’s lame-duck session, which ends today.



The session — the two-month period between the November election and the January start to a new term — is normally a period of harried efforts to get major bills and pet projects passed before lawmakers leave town. Not so this year, partly because nearly all legislators won reelection and are returning for a new term.



Besides the in-state tuition bill, called the Dream Act, lawmakers voted for a measure studying new ways for students to pay for college and approved the usual slew of incremental changes to criminal and state mandates — things like modifying Megan’s Law to require sex offenders to help pay for their own monitoring, or requiring that builders install fire sprinklers in new homes.



They also approved a resolution scuttling Governor Christie’s controversial remake of the state’s civil service system.



But the list of measures that failed to clear both chambers is long. Lawmakers punted on same-sex marriage legislation, preferring, for the time being, to rely on a court decision giving gay couples the right to marry. They failed to agree on a plan to pay for the state’s open-space preservation programs, leaving two rival proposals to wither on the vine. And they didn’t resolve their differences on a broad plan to cut the cost of local government by encouraging towns to share services with their neighbors.



That shared-services bill will be a top priority for Senate President Stephen Sweeney, D-Gloucester, when the new session begins on Tuesday. The measure would create a commission to examine which services — like police coverage or garbage collection — could be shared by neighboring municipalities and how much money those mergers would likely save. The panel’s recommendations would be put to a vote in the affected towns. If voters say no, the state would reduce aid to the town by the amount the consolidation was expected to save.



It passed the Senate, 25-9, in November 2012 and has support from Christie, but Assembly Speaker Sheila Oliver has not put it to a vote. She says that she has concerns about how the measure would affect the civil service system.



Lame-duck sessions are typically periods of frenzied activity, with voting sessions that sometimes extend into early morning hours.



But no all-night votes were expected this year. Nearly all members of the Legislature won re­election in November, so they had little need to push through their pet projects and personal priorities. Measures that don’t pass the Legislature by the end of the session on Monday will need to be reintroduced and go through the legislative process again — a time-consuming inconvenience for bill sponsors, but not a prohibitive requirement.



“I didn’t have any expectation that there was going to be the typical lame-duck flurry of activity here because there really wasn’t much change of personnel,” said Patrick Murray, director of the Monmouth University Polling Institute. “The fact that this happened was not a surprise.”



The Legislature’s biggest achievement in the last two months was its passage of the Dream Act, which allows students who graduate from a New Jersey high school but are not living here legally to qualify for in-state tuition.



Chris Donnelly, a spokesman for the Senate president, said Sweeney was proud of that measure and was happy another tuition-related bill of his — which creates a panel to study new ways of allowing students to pay their tuition — also passed.



In the Assembly, a spokesman for Oliver, D-Essex, cited the resolution blocking Christie’s civil service changes and the revisions to Megan’s Law as some of the biggest accomplishments of the last two months.



“So-called lame-duck sessions are really meant for unfinished business, and that was the goal of this session,” said the spokesman, Tom Hester.



Another major issue of the lame-duck session, same-sex marriage, did not result in any new law. A state court ruling in September made same-sex marriages legal in New Jersey, but marriage supporters say they eventually want that right enshrined in statute to guard against a future court overturning the current ruling. Advocates disagreed, though, on what sort of religious exemption the law should include. Sen. Ray Lesniak, D-Union, said last month that he planned to take up the issue again once the new legislative session begins.



Legislation financing the state’s long-standing, but broken, open-space program also won’t make it out of the Legislature before the session ends.



Throughout the lame-duck session, two competing bills — one in the Assembly and one in the Senate — have jockeyed for legislative support. Neither is expected to win final approval on Monday.



The Assembly bill calls for a $200 million one-time bond issue. The Senate bill would amend the state constitution and provide as much as $200 million annually for 30 years by diverting a portion of the state sales tax. Either measure would have to win support from voters before it could go into effect.



The Assembly bill, which won approval in that house last month, 64-13, is now stuck in the Senate Environment and Energy Committee. The Senate-approved bill is before the Assembly Budget Committee. Neither committee will meet today.



Jeff Tittel, director of the Sierra Club, which backs the Assembly bill, said a similar effort to put the Senate bill before the full Assembly has failed twice before. He said he expected nothing to happen today.



“Both bills will die, and we will end up starting from Square One,” he said. Ultimately, he said, the inability of Democrats in the two chambers to compromise has blocked both measures. “Unless there is compromise, we are going to have one of the most successful programs in history run out of money.”



A successor bill to the sweeping reform of New Jersey’s corporate incentive programs, known as Economic Opportunity Act II, was dead long before the lame-duck session was.



Lesniak, the bill’s sponsor, sought to implement a number of economic stimulus measures, among them $200 million to stoke the creation of affordable housing and incentives to help the repurposing of hospital buildings for other uses.



Yet the package’s progress came unstuck because of a $40 million fund to promote television and movie productions and digital media work in the state. Lesniak withdrew the bill in mid-December, about a month after it was introduced. He cited Christie’s opposition, mainly to the media fund, which he had vigorously opposed in the past.



The bill followed the enactment in September of the first Economic Opportunity Act, which streamlined the state’s five main corporate incentive programs into two, making it easier for smaller businesses to get tax credits, instead of the large corporations that have benefited in the past, and focusing more on stimulating growth in certain geographic and industry sectors.



Lesniak said he would divide the measures in the second opportunity act and introduce separate bills early in the next legislative session.



“I think I bit off more than I can chew,” he said. “I tried to do too much in too short a time.”



Email: linhorst@northjersey.com and morley@northjersey.com