Swanson, at International Space Station since March, took command in May

Steve Swanson is coming back to Earth.

Swanson, 53, is completing his third mission to the International Space Station — but the first in which the University of Colorado graduate stayed there for an extended period and served as its commander. He is scheduled to return to Earth on Wednesday evening.

Unlike Swanson's previous return trips — enjoyed in space shuttles making smooth landings on a NASA runway in Florida — this homecoming, along with two crewmates, will be made in a parachute-equipped Soyuz TMA spacecraft, landing on the flat steppe of Kazakhstan in central Asia.

He, and fellow Expedition 40 crew members Alexander Skvortsov and Oleg Artemyev, are scheduled to undock from the space station at 5:02 p.m EDT Wednesday and touch down on Earth about three and a half hours later.

Swanson, who graduated from CU in 1983 with a bachelor's degree in engineering physics, was unavailable for comment in the closing days of his mission. But fellow CU graduate and former astronaut Jim Voss, a Boulder resident, has a good idea what his colleague has been going through and faces in the days and weeks ahead.

Voss flew in space five times on board the space shuttle and the ISS. And, while participating in ISS Expedition 2, he was in space 167 days and conducted an eight-hour, 56-minute space walk — still the longest on record.

"It's one of those things that you do and experience, and it's in your memory, but it does seem almost surreal some of the time that you are living and working there, floating around, able to move very heavy things really easily," said Voss, who is semi-retired now but teaches at CU as a scholar in residence.

Advertisement

"Sometimes, it seems like a dream rather than something that really happened. But, I talk about it in class, and that helps refresh memories, so they haven't faded as quickly as they might have otherwise."

One cosmonaut interviewed for a NASA video described the Soyuz module landings in Kazakhstan as "not soft," and actually likened it to a collision between a truck and a small car. The NASA website states that the module, 15 minutes before landing, travels about 755 feet per second, but just before landing it will have slowed to 5 feet per second.

Steve Swanson

The module is equipped with shock absorbers under the occupants' seats, and it also has two sets of three small engines on the bottom of the vehicle which fire one second before touchdown, slowing it to soften its landing.

"It's a tougher re-entry (than space shuttle landings) because they experience higher de-acceleration and higher g-forces, since they come back in the capsule," Voss said. The g-force on the three men in the module will briefly reach as high as 4 g, or four times the normal gravitational pull people feel on Earth.

"They will feel more pressure on their bodies as they return," Voss said. "Steve, I think, is probably very well prepared for this from his training in Russia to get him ready for this, and we have great confidence in the hardware the Russians build and I'm sure Steve has confidence it will get him back safely to Earth."

In an interview with CU communication employees before he left, Swanson had said, "I know this landing will be much more wild and exciting than a shuttle landing. It is going to be a very different experience, and I'm looking forward to it."

Swanson, who launched from Kazakhstan for the space station March 25 and docked there March 27, had packed several CU mementos, including a T-shirt, a flag and a small piece of sandstone from the school's engineering center that was engraved with a picture of Ralphie the Buffalo and an image of the International Space Station.

He will face a lengthy rehabilitation program once he is back down to get his strength back, but Voss expects Swanson, a Steamboat Springs native, will be back in Boulder before long.

"We're all looking forward to Steve coming back," Voss said. "We hope to get him out here to talk to our students and get his perspective, since it will be fresh in his mind as soon as he is allowed to get away from Houston."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Charlie Brennan at 303-473-1327 or brennanc@dailycamera.com.