That wasn’t the baton DeAngelo Williams passed to Le’Veon Bell in the Steelers locker room Monday, but a towel. Bell, sweating profusely as he talked to reporters after a workout, needed it.

“Appreciate it, D-Will,” Bell told him.

It just as easily could have been ceremonial, the AFC’s current leading rusher passing the towel as baton to the AFC rushing champ a year ago.

Bell, the Steelers’ All-Pro halfback, completed his two-game NFL suspension for his 2014 marijuana convictions and will rejoin his teammates in practice this week before playing Sunday at St. Louis against the Rams. The Steelers have a roster exemption for him until 4 p.m. Wednesday, when they must remove another player to make room for him. That player could be second-year halfback/wide receiver Dri Archer, who did not play at all on offense in the 43-18 victory against San Francisco after playing only three snaps on offense in the opener.

But with Williams and Bell, offensive coordinator Todd Haley has a luxury of riches at halfback. Williams, a 10-year veteran, is the NFL’s second-leading rusher with 204 yards after two games.

“DeAngelo played great, but that didn’t surprise me at all,” Bell said. “I’ve been watching him since I was growing up. He did everything plus more than I expected. He did his thing, and I’m just glad to come in and help him out a little bit.”

Bell led the AFC with 1,361 yards rushing in his second season and added 83 pass receptions for another 854 yards in 2014. He rarely came off the field last season, which is one reason his veteran backup, LeGarrette Blount, walked out on the team at Tennessee and was cut the next day.

Williams said he will have no problem stepping aside to let Bell do his thing.

“I’m telling you this right now, Le’Veon is going to rewrite the rushing record here,” Williams said. “I’m telling you right now, and I’m not putting any pressure on the guy. I know what he can do. And you know what I’m going to do? I’m going to watch him.

“I’m just an old guy trying to find his way.”

Bell said he is willing to share time with Williams, 32, who rushed for 1,515 yards and 18 touchdowns with Carolina in 2008 and signed with the Steelers after the Panthers released him this year.

“He obviously showed in the first two games he can come in and the offense doesn’t slow down at all,” Bell said. “And obviously, last year what I did, we’re both excited. We both do different things, we’re different style of runners. They’ll use us both, I’m pretty sure.”

Under new NFL rules, Bell was permitted to work out at the Steelers facility and attend all their meetings while suspended, but was not permitted on the practice field, even to watch. He said staying around and staying abreast helped him keep pace with what they are doing.

“I think it was a good thing, obviously not to be gone for two whole weeks. I’ll still be caught up on everything so when I get thrown back in there I’m not lost and have to catch up on things. … I’m just glad to be back on the field.”

Bell said the coaches can divvy up playing time however they see fit, and it will be no problem with either him or Williams.

“However coaches use us. I’m a guy who wants to win, he’s a guy who wants to win. However we’re able to help this team win games is all that matters to me. Neither of us are selfish guys.”

The Steelers offense ranked second in the NFL last season with 411.1 yards per game, and Bell believes they can do even more, as they did Sunday by scoring 43 points.

“The offense didn’t surprise me at all,” he said of their performance without him through two games. “I expect us to be out there and put up crazy numbers. I know what type of playmakers we have. I know our guys up front do a heck of a job blocking and I know we’ve got the best quarterback in the league, the best receiver in the league. It doesn’t surprise me at all.”

The rest of Bell’s teammates welcomed him back, as well.

“I know he’s been working out hard, he’s been involved, he’s anxious to get back on the field and we’ll welcome him back with open arms,” tight end Heath Miller said.

The Steelers offense will get another boost in two more weeks when wide receiver Martavis Bryant, suspended for four games by the NFL for multiple positive drug tests, returns.

Ed Bouchette: ebouchette@post-gazette.com and Twitter @EdBouchette.