EL PASO, TX -- Three borderland hospitals, including University Medical Center, will face a 1 percent Medicare payment penalty in 2015 for having high rates of avoidable mistakes.



Officials with University Medical Center say that will cost them about $350,000.



According to Kaiser Health News and the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, more than 700 hospitals across the county will be penalized for their hospital-acquired condition rates.



In addition to UMC, the El Paso Specialty Hospital and Memorial Medical Center in Las Cruces will be penalized.



The Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, calls for the payment reductions for hospitals that have the highest rates of HACs.



According to the government report, "Medicare ranked hospitals on a score of 1 to 10, with 10 being the worst, for three types of HACs. One is central-line associated bloodstream infections, or CLABSIs. The second is catheter associated urinary tract infections, or CAUTIs. The final one, Serious Complications, is based on eight types of injuries, including blood clots, bed sores and falls."



Hospitals that received a score of seven or higher are assessed the penalty.

University Medical Center received the worst score possible with 10s in every category.



UMC's quality manager Javier Gonzales said patients shouldn't worry about the scores. He said only 18 patients out of 33,598 experienced serious complications.



"It's less than 1 percent," said Gonzales. "We are committed to providing great patient care."



Joe Garcia is the hospital's chief nursing officer and said UMC is a teaching hospital that treats low-income patients and that contributes to some of the hospitals acquired conditions.



"Because they're uninsured or under insured you have to keep in mind they wait because they can't afford healthcare. So they wait and they wait until they're sicker."



Gonzales added that UMC has already taken steps to make sure they're not penalized in the future.



"We started a dashboard with all the complications and all the conditions we have here and we're picking up data and we'll be monitoring our performance and processing it through our patient safety councilors."

Other hospitals in the borderland that are being penalized include El Paso Specialty Hospital and Memorial Medical Center in Las Cruces.



El Paso Specialty Hospital received a nine for serious complications and an overall score of nine.



MMC received a score of nine for serious complications, a three for central-line infections and a nine for catheter-related infections, resulting in an overall score of 7.05.



A representative from MMC told KFOX14, "we are very dedicated to the effective prevention of hospital acquired conditions. As part of a Hospital Engagement Network (HEN) established by CMS's Partnership for Patients since 2012, our hospital has undertaken initiatives to reduce infections and improve patient safety. We are pleased that our most recent data shows improvement in many areas of hospital acquired conditions. Quality improvement is a continuous process and we remain vigilant."



El Paso Specialty Hospital could not be reached for comment.