At the first Democratic debate last week, the presidential contenders spoke to the party’s growing liberal base by taking on the NRA, honoring immigrants, outbidding each other on paid leave and college costs and making the case for building on Obamacare.

But on no issue — except maybe the fate of Edward Snowden — did they seem more out of touch with their base, and much of America, than marijuana.

DEMOCRATICS KICKED OFF THEIR FIRST 2016 DEBATE

Hillary Clinton refused to go beyond allowing Colorado, Oregon and Washington to play out their experimental phase of pot legalization. Even Bernie Sanders, who seems as if he’d be as comfortable passing a joint in a lava-lamp lit room as he is in front of a crowd of 30,000, only reluctantly went as far to say he’d vote for legalization in Nevada, one of five states that will decide in 2016 whether or not to make pot legal.

Clinton’s stand is essentially a “states’ rights” case for letting legalization creep along.

This iffy doctrine has been used for progressive causes in the past. But it’s especially unfortunate to hear the right’s favorite excuse for racial inequality invoked by the left when it comes to The New Jim Crow, one of the most vexing civil rights issues of our times.

POT ISN'T ALL THAT BAD: STUDY

Unequal enforcement of drug laws has help ensnare African-American men in our criminal justice system in far greater numbers than whites. Even though blacks use marijuana at about the same rate as white people, they’re arrested for the offense four or more times more frequently.

I’m not suggesting that Clinton or Sanders should come out for national legalization now. There is a place for states to make their own decisions on this. But leading Democrats should definitively call on Congress to decriminalize the drug — to remove it from Schedule 1 of the U.S. Controlled Substances Act, where dangerous narcotics are regulated.

That is how we will ensure the next President doesn’t casually decide to reverse all the progress that’s been made on this issue.

Oddly and luckily for Democrats, no major Republican candidate (sorry, Rand Paul doesn’t count) has been savvy enough to get ahead of them on decriminalization yet — despite it being a classic “get big government out of my glass pipe” issue.

Chris Christie has vowed to single-handedly go Kool-Aid on Colorado’s burgeoning pot industry, though he has less of a chance of becoming President than a giant sack of weed.

Carly Fiorina used a question about pot legalization to conflate the drug’s use with her step-daughter’s battles with prescription medication, alcohol and bulimia.

“We are misleading young people when we tell them that marijuana is just like having beer,” she said. “It’s not.”

She’s right. It’s less dangerous than alcohol. That isn’t to say pot use is entirely consequence free. For decades, I smoked almost daily and found it to be a crutch that left me emotionally stunted. I’m glad I’m done with it and wouldn’t recommend it to anyone who loved it as much as I did.

But it did not lead to harder drugs. And the only crime it led to was me stealing horrible live Phish tracks I’d never listen to sober via Napster.

CHECK OUT OUR NEW APP: GET THE DAILY NEWS ON ANDROID OR IOS

The only convincing arguments against pot legalization are made by those arguing for full decriminalization of all narcotics. These proponents of full withdrawal from the drug war, including “The Wire” creator David Simon, fear that once middle-class white bros like me get legal pot, we’ll forget about the millions of minority families being destroyed by the full scope of our unequally enforced drug laws.

The point is that we’re past the point where the status quo is acceptable. The public wants action. And we should not miss this opportunity while national crime rates remain at generational lows.

To ensure that we’re taking on the larger drug war, national pot decriminalization that allows for state legalization could be tied to a small sin tax that could fund drug treatment.

This is the kind of drug experimentation that Democrats should be encouraging. And they should do it quickly, before an unconventional politician on the right with nothing to lose — say, Donald Trump — decides to drag this issue to their side.

Sattler, a writer, tweets @lolgop.