Topics: Broken Windows, Editor's Picks, Ferguson, Gentrification, Life stories, Race, st. louis, Life News

Until a year ago we lived in south St. Louis on what might be called with some understatement a rough street. Pennsylvania Avenue is one of the high-crime “state” streets that lie a few miles south of downtown, a hot spot with an enhanced police presence where whites (and some African-Americans) tend to steer clear, even when slumming.

The presence of a seemingly middle-class white couple on our street was more than a mere oddity. Many nights my pickup was followed home by a suspicious police officer, his curiosity piqued by the sight of a middle-aged white guy cruising through the Gravois Park neighborhood. It was assumed any whites in that area were there for one purpose only – and it wasn’t to visit grandma. Down block after boarded-up block of red brick homes the patrol car tailed our pickup, creeping down our back alley before coming to rest behind our house, the spotlight trained on the wife and me as we carried our box of half-eaten Chicago-style to the house, trying to act casual, just a typical couple home from dinner. Nothing to see here!

We totally got the cops’ skepticism. The buildings on our block were a mix of brick, turn-of-the-century, four-flat worker houses and single-family homes, most owned by absentee slumlords. On our block alone lingered the blackened shells of five burned-out buildings. As in most poor areas, the locals were highly transient, their average residency being about six months. Families moved in, quickly fell behind on their rent, and slipped away under the cover of darkness, on to the next rental unit.

Before I moved in, my wife had tried various means to improve the quality of life of our block. She and a neighbor started a block newsletter, but this died after an issue or two due to lack of interest. She attended neighborhood association meetings, but these meetings proved more frustrating than helpful.

Among the many things I had to get used to when I moved in with my wife to our home on Pennsylvania Ave. were the frequent eruptions of gunfire, which often commenced shortly after dinnertime and continued sporadically until early morning. Our initial response to the gunfire was to call 9-1-1. “Shots fired on the 3600 block of Nebraska” became a familiar echo in our home.

These phone calls were the exception.

A case-hardened social worker with the Department of Family Services, my wife opposed calling police on the neighbors (gunshots, domestic violence proved exceptions), preferring to personally address antisocial behavior. Often she would throw on her clothes and march outside at 2 a.m. and ask a street full of teens or twenty-somethings to turn down their car stereo. I would follow anxiously outside to make sure she was safe, whining that such confrontations were too dangerous. Sometimes the street kids obliged, other times they called her a “white bitch” and told her it was “their street.” The idea seemed to be if we weren’t willing to adapt to their late-night street culture, we should sell our home and move elsewhere. The middle-class suburbs, perhaps. That option was pretty much a non-starter. Even if we wanted to, selling the house could take years, and, besides, there were other residents on the street, who, like us, had to get up early for work, but were too afraid to confront the noisemakers. We were speaking for these people, too. The silent minority.

My wife’s personal touch would even extend to drug dealers. Without warning, she would sometimes walk past an SUV in which a drug deal was obviously going down and shout “Not on our street!”, no doubt startling buyer and seller with her brashness. Again I begged her to refrain. It all seemed like an excellent way to get a bullet in the face.

Our block slowly became more livable once the midnight street parties moved indoors or to other streets. But drug dealing continued to be a major problem. Even if you called the cops, as the various “How to Rid your Street of Drug Dealers” stories advised, the drug deal was often wrapped up, the participants long gone, by time the cops arrived.

The stories also warned that getting rid of dealers was about an easy as getting rid of cockroaches in a New York City apartment. It was going to take some strategic thinking. It would require serious risks. But after a year of living on Pennsylvania and witnessing my wife’s example, I was ready to take some risks. And I had a plan.

I had read somewhere about the Broken Windows Theory of policing, and it sounded tailor-made for our situation. The theory, in short, held that disorder and crime go hand in hand, so you begin by tackling the disorder. So if a city, a neighborhood, perhaps even one resident on a block, adopted zero tolerance for small crimes — like kids smoking weed in front of their apartment building, a common enough occurrence on our block — the effect would be a reduction in more serious crimes, like drug peddling. Practically speaking, if word got out on the block that “someone” was calling the cops over every little joint, every open container, the drug pushers would find more hospitable streets. It seemed worth a try.

My wife gave her blessing. It was settled. From then on, whenever I saw one of my neighbors or their friends using drugs — even smoking weed — on their stoop or in their car I would immediately call the cops.

***

One of our neighbors, a young African-American kid in his late teens or early twenties, spent most days and nights hanging out on his stoop smoking weed with his buddies. We’d warned him about getting high on his grandfather’s stoop. His reply, in effect, was that it was his yard, so he could do what he pleased. We (somewhat lamely) explained that what he was doing was a crime and it sent a signal to drug dealers that such crimes, and illegal drugs in particular, were tolerated on our street. He shook his head and laughed.