Topics: Andrew Bird, Are You Serious, Gun Control, Music, Entertainment News

Despite going through conservatory and getting a degree in violin performance, Andrew Bird has always felt like an outsider in the world of classical music. Yet, as alternative acts were blooming around him in 1990s Chicago, he quickly realized he also didn’t belong in the world of confessional music that emphasized emotion over technical songcraft. Rather than give up, Bird built property on this seeming no-man’s land — a career based on his trademark violin, whistling and witty lyrics.

With those career hallmarks in place, Bird is setting out now on his new record, “Are You Serious,” to deliver a sound that is more consciously polished and produced. Along the way, he’s finding that he has a bit more in common with the confessional cadre than he once thought — and that he’s more worried about democracy and guns than ever before.

This is a very strange time to be an American and to consider what democracy means with the election progressing, and I wondered if you had found any understanding of that for yourself.

I am searching for understanding. It’s interesting; I was just looking at Salon last night, and there was an article that used the words I’d been searching for about Donald Trump, using the word “strongman” and “authoritarian,” and that’s what I’d been thinking. Like, wow, this is maybe one of the greatest risks to our democracy we’ve encountered. And that’s all — who knows what’s gonna happen? And I’m hearing from my friends, “Oh, if he gets elected, I’m leaving the country.” I always have a problem with that one. Well, good for you. Save your own skin. Leave us all to deal with it. These are the things that are going through my mind.

I read that you’re donating profits from your concert ticket sales to enrich gun control, and I was wondering specifically what organizations you’re working with and how they’re going about their efforts.

It’s Everytown For Gun Safety, which is — I’m pretty impressed by them. They’ve got a really sensible message, which is kind of a voice that’s needed, ’cause everything’s so super-polarized on the issue. They’re trying really hard to speak to the gun owners out there and not coming out with any threats to take away their guns or anything. Which is always the way I think. That kind of sensible voice is not always very popular, or, some would say, not always very effective. I just gotta believe that common sense can prevail sometimes.

So we’re doing these [donations] through the concerts and then we’re working on a video based on my song called “Pulaski at Night,” which is about Chicago. Not written specifically about gun violence, but, as is the case with a lot of my songs, could be taken in many different ways. We’re hoping that some of the imagery — it’s gonna be shot in Chicago — and we’re working on some concepts that will hopefully draw attention to the issue.

What do you think it will take to get us to a place where we have gun-related equilibrium? Or at least, we’re not constantly having mass shootings?

Personally, I think it comes down to alienation and also kind of a warrior sensibility in our culture. It pervades a lot of aspects of American life, the need to project strength and control. Guns are very symbolic for Americans, I guess. ‘Cause what are they, other than these things that shoot these projectiles? They’re mechanical devices that throw something very fast through the air. I try to think of it in those terms. It’s just this thing that does this thing; why is it such an obsession? And it comes down to symbolism and control. Security and strength, and all these things Americans seem to be pretty fixated on.

I think that the mass shootings — most of them, I don’t know the statistics — but school shootings, that comes down to an amplified version of what we all probably went through in junior high and high school. Just taken to the extreme. When I was in sixth grade, I went through all sorts of vengeance scenarios to get back at the kids who were beating the crap out of me every day. None of them involved guns. The availability of guns certainly is a part of that. But I think the root cause is more about alienation and some of our social structures and institutional education — it’s just too easy for a kid to get lost. There’s more and more of us on the planet every day; there’s more and more molecules rubbing against others, creating more friction and more scrapes out there. So it’s just reaching a fever pitch. But certainly it is epidemic, more in America than other places. We gotta look at the way we have our whole society structured, really.

Did you go into making “Are You Serious” with any sort of goal or mission for yourself?

The previous couple of records were very scrappy by design. They were not very produced. I wanted them to be honest and just people in a room making music, and I wanted the sound to be natural, unproduced. This one, I wanted to embrace production for good rather than evil and really try to nail something. I wanted the process to be more rigorous than it’s been in the past, and that involved reaching out to people and trusting more people around me. I really wanted to make a less whimsical, more visceral, grab-you-in-the-gut kind of record. I have all these grand schemes before I make a record. Usually, it’s the antidote to whatever I’d done before. But I think in — I don’t know how many records, ten, thirteen, it’s arguable —I’ve never gone for it like this.

On the single, “Left Handed Kisses,” hearing you and Fiona Apple singing together seems like it unlocks things in both of you that I don’t usually hear in your music. How did that collaboration come about? Was it just done in a couple takes or did it take longer?