Ronald Goldfarb (Photo: ~FILE PHOTO)

While the political process concerning the selection of the person who will fill the seat held by the late Justice Antonin Scalia goes on, the business of the Supreme Court continues. Since the start of the October 2015 term, 82 cases have been granted review, consolidated into 70 arguments. Consolidation avoids the need for separate briefs to be filed and oral arguments held to resolve identical or closely related issues in multiple jurisdictions. The court’s session begins on the first Monday in October each year and ends on June 30. We will begin with a look at some of the cases that have already been decided and those that are still pending.

Some cases are likely to never come to the attention of the general public while others will make the headlines all around the country, and some, around the world. In the former category, this year has cases dealing with the setting of electrical rates, the Hobbs Act (robbery or extortion in interstate commerce), and technical aspects of patent and copyright law. These cases are very important to the parties and provide clarity to laws whose interpretation has varied around the country. Among the topics that will draw public interest are affirmative action in college admissions, abortion rights as they relate to the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), public employee unions, arbitration clauses in contracts, and capital punishment; those are the ones we will discuss in the next few columns. Some have been argued and decided and others await decision.

The topic of capital punishment has been before the court many times over the years and there were a half-dozen accepted for review this year. Kansas v. Carr involved three cases arising out of two murder cases (the two Carr brothers were charged in the so-called “Wichita Massacre” case) and the main issue involved how courts should charge juries about what level of evidence defendants must introduce to mitigate the likelihood of the death penalty being imposed. In an 8-1 decision written by Justice Scalia, his last majority decision, the court held that an error in instructions did not make the process fundamentally unfair. Perhaps the most surprising aspect of the decision is that it was joined in by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer, two critics of the death penalty in general. The unusual alignment of justices, with only Justice Sonia Sotomayor dissenting, also gives lie to the idea that on certain controversial issues there is always a split along ideological lines. In another 8-1 decision (Justice Samuel Alito dissenting), the court found that a procedure allowing a judge (rather than the jury) to do the final fact finding in determining whether or not to impose the death penalty violated the Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial. Again, a consensus of liberal and conservative justices came together to interpret and apply the Constitution to a real-world situation.

Next time we’ll look at some of the other issues facing the court this term.

Ronald Goldfarb is a professor in the Business, Accounting and Legal Studies Department at Middlesex County College. The material in this column does not purport to be legal, business, financial or other advice, and no attorney-client relationship is formed. If there is a topic you would like to see covered in “Everyday Law,” please email Goldfarb at rgoldfarb@middlesexcc.edu.

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search “MyCentralJersey” in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1U5WAZJ