On Wednesday at the O'Charley's restaurant in town a local server picked up a shift and a homegrown NFL player picked up the tab. But it wasn't just his generosity that left his server speechless.

"Hi my name's Tailor I'll be taking care of you today."

That's how Tailor Thorne greets everyone of her guests at the table.

But little did she know that on that Wednesday her guest would be taking care of her.

"It's crazy to think that it actually happened to me."

Thorne came to find out she was serving Detroit Lions defensive tackle and Panama City Native Khyri Thornton and a group of his friends and family.

"I just cut up with them just had a good time. I didn't know who he was, I don't watch football," she admitted.

When she cashed him out she discovered another surprise, in ink, at the bottom of her receipt.

"It just blew me away."

Thornton's bill came to $304.94 but he left a tip amounting to $250, well above the general 20 percent for good service.

"I'm trying to say thank you and I just started crying again and I was just like thank you so much for you know what you did and it just it was a blessing in disguise and I just, I can't say thank you enough."

That very morning, Thorne and her husband had said a prayer.

"On the way to work I just kind of simply said a little prayer and I was like, 'God if it’s your will let it be done. And whatever happens, happens for a reason,'” she prayed.

Thorne needs surgery, and as soon as possible, but her insurance company just dropped her because she makes too much money for the coverage.

That's why Thornton's tip isn't just generous.

It's exactly what she needs.

"Exact amount," she said, meaning $250 is exactly what she had needed to cover her pre-operation appointment in Gainesville, buying her some time and money to find new coverage.

"You don't know me from saving grace and you leave that much," she said in awe. "It was obviously laid on his heart to do it I think he definitely got way more fans that he did before."

"I got happy for her you know," her husband Ronnie Robinson said. "I was like, 'you do a lot of good things for people so you know it's about time you got blessed.'"

Robinson said he felt that many people who make it big claim other cities, and he respected the fact that Thornton hasn't forgotten where he came from.

"Much respect," he said.

Thorne says if she could see Thornton again, she would say thank you over and over.

"He really doesn't understand how much of a blessing he was how just how thankful not only me but my family," she said.

Thorne said this Easter has taken on a special meaning and she definitely had a testimony for church.

"You just gotta be stay strong in your faith and He'll definitely show up and show out."

As she's learning, He just might show up as a defensive tackle.

.