Topics: Books, California, Editor's Picks, Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan, News

Tricky Dick

In early 1946, in Orange County, an area that would become a hotbed of right-wing activism, a group of businessmen launched a search for a charismatic candidate who would represent their interests in Congress. The manager of a local Bank of America branch suggested Richard Nixon, a lawyer and Navy veteran. Hoover and his son Herbert Jr. traveled to Pasadena to meet this promising young man and urge him to run for the House of Representatives. Nixon would always remember the meeting fondly and revere the former president for his role in jump-starting his career.

Nixon won his first campaign by ousting Congressman Jerry Voorhis, the idealistic Social Gospeler and former Socialist who, as a supporter of striking lettuce workers, had been menaced by angry vigilantes in front of an El Centro hotel in 1934. Nixon painted Voorhis as a stooge of labor unions and the Soviet Union. He repeatedly denounced him for his supposed alliance with the Political Action Committee of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) and its “communist principles.” It did not matter to Nixon that Voorhis had written a tough Communist registration law in 1940, or that the CIO Political Action Committee had actually refused to endorse Voorhis. “Mr. Nixon had to win. Nothing else would do at all,” Voorhis wrote later.

Nixon admitted privately that he misrepresented his opponent’s beliefs, but he made no apologies for doing so. “Of course, I knew that Jerry Voorhis wasn’t a Communist,” he told one of Voorhis’s aides. But political candidates, he said, needed to play rough sometimes. “The important thing is to win,” he explained. “You’re just being naïve.” Nixon enjoyed support from the same California business interests that helped defeat Upton Sinclair in 1934. Oil companies, movie studios, and agribusiness conglomerates were among his biggest backers. Grower Robert Di Giorgio contributed to Nixon’s earliest campaigns, while Philip Bancroft and a friend formed “Farmers for Nixon” to help funnel agribusiness money to him.

The Los Angeles Times, a longtime enemy of California liberals and radicals, championed Nixon’s career from the beginning. The Times’s political editor, Kyle Palmer, believed that he saw the potential for national greatness in the Orange County native. Nixon understood that portraying Democrats as dupes and traitors could help put the Republicans back in power.

Once in office, Congressman Nixon served on the House Un-American Activities Committee, where he played a major role in the exposure of an actual Communist spy. Alger Hiss, the one-time nemesis of the growers at the Agricultural Adjustment Administration, was investigated by the committee and ultimately convicted of perjury for denying that he had been part of an underground Communist group in the 1930s. Journalist Whittaker Chambers swore that Hiss had been a spy as well as a secret Red. Much later, documents from the former Soviet Union confirmed that Hiss had indeed passed information to the Communists while working in various government agencies, including the State Department.

The conviction of Hiss, a New Dealer known for his public support of farmworkers in the 1930s and international institutions in the 1940s, gave conservatives ammunition for their charge that the New Deal was, at its core, a Communist project.

Opponents of Hiss from his days at the AAA were thrilled by news of his conviction. “Time has caught up with our enemies,” chortled one cotton grower to another. Herbert Hoover felt vindicated. “At last the stream of treason that existed in our Government has been exposed in a fashion that all may believe,” he wrote Nixon. After the Hiss case, conservatives recognized Nixon as “AMERICA’S GREATEST ENEMY OF COMMUNISM,” according to a flyer advertising one of his speeches.

Nixon continued to battle against real and imagined Communists and their alleged liberal enablers when he ran for a U.S. Senate seat in 1950. In a television commercial for his race against Congresswoman Helen Gahagan Douglas, he promised voters that he would “represent you and your interests in Washington and not the half-baked theories of left-wing intellectuals at pinko cocktail parties.” He labeled Douglas the “pink lady”; she called him “Tricky Dick.”

Douglas had no idea how tricky Nixon could be. Years later, in 1962, the California attorney general seized General Van Deman’s secret files in San Diego, saying they had been used “by unauthorized persons for political purposes.” Democrats charged that the unauthorized persons worked for Nixon, and their purposes had been to smear Voorhis in 1946 and Douglas in 1950. These charges were never proven, but left-liberal California Democrats continued to view him as a reckless and sinister Red-baiter.

As Nixon rose from senator to vice president, he fulfilled the dreams of Hoover and other business conservatives who had chosen him back in 1946. When Vice President Nixon won reelection in 1956, Hoover congratulated him and expressed his sense of personal satisfaction. “Ever since our interview in Pasadena years ago when I added my urging that you should run for Congress,” he wrote Nixon in a private letter, “I have grown stronger and stronger in my belief in your immense value to the American people. And they have now shown their full acceptance of that view.”

Hoover also grew stronger in his belief that the Democratic Party tolerated and even nurtured treasonous ideas. In 1960, as GOP presidential nominee Nixon prepared for a debate against John F. Kennedy, Hoover wrote Nixon that Kennedy’s goals were “evil.” To left-liberals, Kennedy’s policies of tax cuts, increased spending on defense, and indifference (at the time) to civil rights seemed to put him at the center or even slightly to the right on the political spectrum. But to Hoover, Kennedy’s agenda was nothing more than “socialism disguised as a ‘welfare state.’ ”

Nixon’s top aides, who followed him to the White House, learned their craft in California’s culture of frenzied Red-baiting. Murray Chotiner, a protégé of Clem Whitaker and known for his mantra of “attack, attack, attack, and never defend,” served as Nixon’s consultant or manager for most of his campaigns from 1946 through 1972. His fellow UCLA graduates John Ehrlichman and Bob Haldeman—the latter the grandson of a founder of the anti-Red group Better America Federation—worked on Nixon’s unsuccessful 1960 run for the presidency and later became his chief advisers when he won the White House eight years later.

Along with his virulent anticommunism, Nixon’s attention to the politics of image marked him as a California product. With its weak party system, fondness for Hollywood glitz, and rootless, diverse residents, the state helped nurture a style of campaigning that emphasized appearance over substance. “What they’ve got isn’t a party,” a Democratic official told Theodore White in 1956. “It’s a star system, it’s a studio lot. They don’t run candidates—they produce them, like movie heroes.” Nixon was one of the first politicians to “embrace the new tools of political artistry” and “foster our current image-obsessed political culture,” as historian David Greenberg has said. Nixon and his public relations staff created an image of the candidate as a “populist everyman” and helped to unite the wealthy with the disaffected middle classes in a broad, successful coalition.