American Shalane Flanagan places second in Memorial Day 10k

It didn't take long for Mamitu Daska to disappear from sight.

The Ethiopian bolted to the lead near the start of the women's professional race on Monday at the Bolder Boulder and she never looked back.

Daska recorded the second-fastest time in event history, crossing the line in 32 minutes, 21.63 seconds to win for the fourth time. She finished 43.48 seconds ahead of second-place Shalane Flanagan of the United States.

"We started fast," Daska said through an interpreter. "I was trying to run the record, but it's too hot and the timing was not good for the race, so that's why I wasn't able to get the (record) time."

Daska's time was just eight seconds behind the 32:13 that Delillah Asiago ran in 1995. Daska also owns the third-fastest time, at 32:28 in 2010. In fact, she has posted four of the nine fastest times in event history.

In addition, she joins five-time winner Rosa Mota as the only women to win this event at least four times. Daska also won in 2009, 2010 and 2012. She was second in 2011.

"To be here (five) times I'm very happy and to be able to win this I'm very happy, too," said Daska, who was unable to run last year because of a conflict with another race.

Daska set the pace very early on Monday, leaving Flanagan and the rest of the field in her rearview mirror.

"I think she knew my weakness and that is I don't live at altitude and I just finished (the Boston Marathon) a month ago," said Flanagan, who competed in her first Bolder Boulder. "I think she knew I probably didn't have the adaptation to altitude, so I was a little cautious, even though that felt really fast for me.

"I didn't want to hand it to her, but tried to keep her within distance to see if maybe she kind of faltered and misjudged herself."

Daska never faltered, but it wasn't an easy race for her.

"Because it was sunny and I was alone, I was tired," she said. "Around the 8k, I had some pain (in my side), but I was able to finish the race."

Although she was comfortably in the lead, Daska said she would have welcomed another competitor by her side.

"No, I was not afraid (of them)," she said. "If they came (up), I would be happy. We could go together."

About halfway through, Flanagan knew she was running for second place.

"There was a point when she was definitely pulling away from me and I wasn't closing the gap," she said. "At that point, the competitor in me, it's hard to let that go, but I was worried about the team aspect and I was wanting to safely hold second for my team."

Flanagan was born in Boulder and lived the first handful of years of her life here. She has seen both of her parents compete in the event. Her mother, Cheryl, placed third in 1980.

After being in Folsom Field for several Bolder Boulders and Colorado football games over the years, Flanagan was thrilled to experience it as a competitor.

"I got chills, big time," she said. "It's very rare that I get chills in a race for the right reason — not for dehydration. It was truly because of the energy of the crowd. I got it in Boston and I got it here.

"This stadium is ridiculous. I've been here for a football game and I'd actually much rather come in here for this reason."

Led by Daska, Ethiopia won the International Team Challenge for the sixth year in a row. Kenya was second, led by third-place finisher Risper Gesabwa.

The United States Red team, featuring Flanagan, fourth-place Deena Kastor and 16th-place Sarah Hall, was third. It was the fifth consecutive top-three finish for the USA.

Contact BuffZone.com Writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.