Venezuela Declares 5-Day Weekends Due to Electricity Shortage

An interesting survey out of Harvard published on Monday reveals that, for the first time, a majority of adults between ages 18 and 29 do not support capitalism.

The Harvard University survey, which polled young adults between ages 18 and 29, found that 51 percent of respondents do not support capitalism. Just 42 percent said they support it. It isn't clear that the young people in the poll would prefer some alternative system, though. Just 33 percent said they supported socialism. The survey had a margin of error of 2.4 percentage points. The results of the survey are difficult to interpret, pollsters noted. Capitalism can mean different things to different people, and the newest generation of voters is frustrated with the status quo, broadly speaking. All the same, that a majority of respondents in Harvard University's survey of young adults said they do not support capitalism suggests that today's youngest voters are more focused on the flaws of free markets.

That support for socialism will grow given time. The left has patiently been demonizing capitalism for decades, which is why the youth of today focus on the perceived shortcomings of free markets.

It would be interesting if the left focused its analysis on socialism -- especially as it is practiced in Venezuela.

Washington Post:

In a desperate attempt to save electricity, drought-stricken Venezuela has introduced a new concept to the workplace calendar: the five-day weekend. President Nicolás Maduro has decided to furlough the country's public employees — who account for a third of the labor force — for the bulk of the week, so they can sit through rolling blackouts at home rather than in the office. “The public sector will work Monday and Tuesday, while we go through these critical and extreme weeks," he said on his weekly presidential broadcast. This assumes that Venezuela's rainy season will comply with that timetable and rescue the country's crippled hydroelectric plants. Primary schools also will close on Fridays. Blackouts lasting at least four hours have been imposed across much of the country, leaving shopping malls in the dark and scarce food supplies at restaurants and markets at risk of spoiling. Within a few hours of his announcement on Tuesday night, Maduro got a troubling glimpse of what happens when his emergency rationing measures go on a little too long. Venezuelans riot. During an outage in the state of Zulia that lasted more than 12 hours, angry residents torched a bus, looted stores and attacked the headquarters of the government power company Corpoelec, according to Venezuela's El Nacional. It wasn't immediately clear why the blackout went on for so long. There were reports of rioting and looting overnight Tuesday in at least three other Venezuelan states and several dozen arrests.

This is socialism at its best: trying to share scarcity and failing miserably. The country is close to a total implosion because the huge Guri Dam that supplies 60% of electricity for the country is barely operating due to the El Nino-caused drought. Venezuela is sitting on an ocean of oil but long ago decided to invest in hydroelectric power instead.

But lack of maintenance of its infrastructure and the drought have combined to produce a critical situation that may actually plunge the country into darkness in a few weeks unless the rains come.