It has been almost a year since Mary Klinefelter had blood drawn for her annual physical.

Finally, her insurance is paying.

Klinefelter, first featured in the Aug. 28 column, had written to "What's Your Problem?" out of frustration after Golden Rule Insurance Co. repeatedly rejected claims for the bloodwork, leaving her with a $1,497.65 bill.

The Orland Park resident sought help from the Illinois Department of Insurance and the newspaper, prompting Golden Rule to revisit her claims.

In the weeks that followed, the insurance company covered bits and pieces of the bloodwork, reducing the amount she owed by hundreds of dollars. On Friday, Golden Rule emailed the Problem Solver to say it had decided to cover everything.

Golden Rule spokeswoman Ellen Laden said Klinefelter had chosen a health plan that did not generally cover outpatient services, except those specific preventive care services that followed the guidelines and recommendations of the Affordable Care Act.

"We shared this information with Mrs. Klinefelter when she called to ask if the blood work ordered by her doctor in connection with a preventive care examination would be covered," Laden wrote. "We also advised her to visit the http://www.healthcare.gov website for a listing of the type of services, including laboratory tests, which would be considered eligible to be paid at 100 percent."

Laden said a portion of the claims from Klinefelter's bloodwork were not considered preventive care under the ACA and were not eligible for coverage under her health plan.

"However, in order to resolve this matter after several reviews, we are reprocessing Mrs. Klinefelter's claims and paying 100% of the re-priced charges for the remaining laboratory fees," Laden said. "We are pleased that this is now resolved and have again provided Mrs. Klinefelter with contact information if she has any questions."

Klinefelter was floored.

"Oh, my gosh, wow," she said. "Thanks for the good news."

The news has also been good for Elisabeth Grzywa and her son Aaron, whose home-based services were not being paid because of a "system glitch."

Aaron had been receiving the services through the Home and Community Based Waiver Program. When the autistic teen turned 19 in January, he had to switch from the state's All Kids insurance program to adult Medicaid.

The switch did not go smoothly, and soon, all the bills from Aaron's providers were rejected by Medicaid.

When the Problem Solver inquired about the case in August, the Illinois Department of Human Services looked into the case. It determined that the Downers Grove teenager had two simultaneous, active cases in the system, one for his care before turning 19 and another for after his 19th birthday.

Before the glitch was discovered, unpaid bills from Aaron's providers had grown to about $8,600. Without immediate payment, the providers said they would halt Aaron's services.

Everything seemed to be straightened out when the Problem Solver wrote about the case Aug. 31. At the time, the state promised to pay the outstanding bills. Grzywa said Friday that those bills did, in fact, get paid.

"I had my quarterly meeting with my agencies yesterday," she said. "It's working now."

Grzywa said Aaron's services were not interrupted.

"We are good to go," she said.

facebook.com/chitribproblem

Twitter @wyp_tribune