ATLANTA, Sept. 26, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- Peach State Health Plan (Peach State) announced today that it has received approval from the Georgia Department of Insurance and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to participate in the Georgia Health Insurance Marketplace, where it will offer a line of products branded as "Ambetter from Peach State Health Plan."

"Participating in Georgia's health insurance marketplace is a natural progression to expand upon the affordable health solutions Peach State has offered to low-income individuals in Georgia," said Patrick Healy, president and CEO of Peach State. "Our marketplace offerings will be under the product name Ambetter, a name that exemplifies our commitment to providing access to quality, integrated healthcare for individuals, while helping transform the communities in which they live, work and raise families."

Ambetter health insurance plans are designed to deliver high quality, locally-based healthcare services to its members. With outreach programs focused on preventative care, members achieve healthier outcomes. Ambetter partners with Georgia-based health care providers and utilizes medical management and call center staff based in Georgia, contributing to the local economy.

With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, health insurance marketplaces, or health exchanges, will offer consumers a place to shop, compare and select an affordable health plan. Consumers can compare and purchase Ambetter products during the initial Open Enrollment period beginning October 1, 2013, through March 31, 2014, at www.ambetterhealth.com.

Peach State has been providing healthcare services to Medicaid members in Georgia since 2006.

About Peach State Health Plan

Peach State Health Plan (Peach State) is a Care Management Organization that serves the Medicaid and PeachCare for Kids® population in partnership with Georgia Families. Peach State is a wholly owned subsidiary of Centene Corporation, a leading multi-line healthcare enterprise offering both core Medicaid and specialty services. Information regarding Peach State is available via the Internet at www.pshp.com.

SOURCE Peach State Health Plan