Polly Munkberg of State College embraced Obamacare. The affection didn't last.

The 58-year-old had bought her own individual coverage for 30 years. During that time, she was afraid to talk to her doctor about the diabetes and breast cancer that run her family, fearing it would get into her medical records and prevent her from finding coverage if she ever wanted to switch health plans.



Obamacare remedied that by barring insurers from rejecting people because of pre-existing conditions and from charging them substantially more. But that has turned out to be the only thing Munkberg likes about Obamacare.

The year before the launch of Obamacare coverage in 2014, she paid $377 per month for what she calls a "top-of-the-line" Blue Cross-Blue Shield plan. Her deductible was only $750. In 2014, her premium rose to $417 per month and her deductible rose to $1,200. In 2015, her monthly premium rose to $501.

In late 2015, the most similar offering she could find on the exchange cost $700 per month and, because of the level of cost sharing, she deemed it "catastrophic coverage, not insurance," she says.

Taxing the advice of advocates and Obama, she shopped around. Munkberg selected a plan from UPMC with a $534 monthly premium, a $3,250 deductible and 80-20 cost sharing. She considers it "a fairly decent policy."

But she's far from happy with her situation. Munkberg and her husband travel a lot. One of the things she liked about her old Blues coverage was that it offered a national network, meaning she didn't have to worry about high out-of-network costs if she ever got sick while traveling. Now she worries.

But her biggest disappointment involves preventive care, billed as being "free" under Obamacare. Munkberg has good health. But before Obamacare, she says, her doctor would run an assortment of tests during her annual checkup, with the tests sometimes turning up something worthy of attention. The tests would be covered by her insurance. Now, she says, her preventive visit covers only basic tests, and she has to pay extra for the range of tests she received in the past.

"I basically feel deceived and disappointed," she says.

Asked what should be done about it, Munkberg says, "The working poor deserve help. I needed a program where I don't have to be fearful of telling my doctor my family history. There is a need, but maybe it's time to quit giving so much money to the insurance companies and CEOs and shareholders for running this program. Maybe it would be much more cost effective to have a government program like Medicare."