Corporate acquirers have been feasting on tiny companies. Associated Press/Matthew Mead

Corporate acquirers anxious for growth are looking to small companies as a way to offset the hum-drum pace of the economy, which could mean more competition for private equity firms at the lower end of the market.

More than 70% of the acquisitions made by the 25 most active corporate acquirers in the first half–an industry-diverse list that includes insurer Arthur J. Gallagher & Co., technology giant Google and real estate brokerage Realogy Holdings–were deals valued at less than $50 million, according to data from research firm Sutton Place Strategies LLC. Combined, those 25 companies did 99 such deals.

Conversely, among those top 25 most active acquirers, there were six deals valued at more than $1 billion in the first half.

Sutton Place founder Nadim Malik said during the first half mergers and acquisitions overall increased 17%, but within the smaller segment–deals with enterprise values of between $5 million and $50 million–it was up 25%.

“Large companies, whether they are mature or growing, need to supplement their growth organically with acquisitions, which may mean smaller deals than they have historically looked at,” said Mr. Malik.

Normally, the interest of corporate acquirers is welcome news for private equity firms, which often look to such entities to provide potential exit opportunities. But in this segment of the market, these companies may only serve as further competition.

Some private equity firms mine the smaller end of the market for companies in fragmented industries that can be built up through further acquisitions. More private equity firms also may be looking at the space as ample liquidity in the marketplace has served to juice up deal prices upstream.

Mr. Malik said activity at the smallest end of the market will continue apace.

“You don’t hear a lot of economic forecasts predicting that the economy is heating up,” he said. “Corporate buyers are still going to need to look for acquisitions to grow.”

Health care in particular may be a sector that continues to see significant activity, given the changes underway as a result of the Affordable Care Act, said Mr. Malik.

“Anytime there is a shift or transition in an industry because of regulations, there is an opportunity for firms that understand it to acquire and for others to get out of it,” he said.

Write to Hillary Canada at hillary.canada@wsj.com