New rules for employers mandated in the federal health-care law could make it more expensive for Chandler to hire temporary workers, such as recreation-class leaders.

The city is seeking a new contract with a staffing agency to hire temporary employees and handle their payroll.

While bids are being accepted, it is expected to cost more than past contracts, said Kristy Garcia, a procurement officer for Chandler.

“Our budgets and what we’re used to paying, it’s going to be a shock, I think,” she said.

The city’s current contract for these staffing services is up for renewal. The contractor, Devau Human Resources, asked for an increase due to projected costs related to the Affordable Care Act, said Mark Eynatten, director of Chandler’s Community Services Department.

“Since it was eligible for rebid, we put it back on the street,” he said.

The terms of the contract Chandler is seeking would require the company to handle all parts of the hiring process of temporary or seasonal employees, Garcia said.

Currently, Chandler employees often interview, select and place temporary workers, Garcia said. The contractor then handles the payroll.

The new contract asks the company to take full control of the process so it is clear that the temp agency is the employer and not the city, Garcia said.

“They don’t want, I guess, liability or that misinterpretation of who the employer is and who would have to pay benefits,” she said.

Under the Affordable Care Act, employers may be fined if they do not provide insurance to employees who work 30 or more hours per week. This requirement can include seasonal employees who work full time. Some temporary employees work 40-hour weeks for Chandler, Garcia said.

With this additional work being required, and the potential higher cost per employee due to the health-care requirements, Garcia said she expects the cost to the city to increase.

Temporary hires typically work in the city’s Community Services Department — lifeguards or recreation-class leaders, for example — but also handle administrative support or clerical positions, Garcia said.

The Community Services Department relies heavily on these temporary workers, but has finite funds allocated, Eynatten said.

“If the cost of those positions are higher than what we currently are, that means we just have less money and means we’ve got the ability to hire less people,” he said. “As that comes in, we’re going to have to take a long, hard look at how do we still meet the demand for service and the staff we need with the dollars we have available.”

No decisions will be made until the bid amounts come in, he said.

The city’s bid documents state that it is the contractor’s responsibility to provide any required benefits, and that the company may not directly bill those costs to the city.

The company determines the wages of temporary workers, but the city has the opportunity to approve the rate.

The city will accept bids for this staffing contract until Wednesday, Jan. 22.