KALAMAZOO, MI -- Kalamazoo-area residents who tried and failed over the weekend to purchase health insurance through the federal health insurance exchange now have until midnight Sunday, Feb. 22, to finish the process.

The federal government set a deadline of midnight Feb. 15 for Americans obtain health insurance for 2015 or potentially face a fine. However, some last-minute consumers were thwarted by computer glitches or hours-long waits on helplines over the weekend, said Amy Terry, spokeswoman for Enroll Kalamazoo County, a coalition of local organizations including Bronson Healthcare, Borgess Health, United Way and the Kalamazoo County Health and Community Services, among other institutions.

"I was triaging a lot of phone calls over the weekend" from people frustrated in their attempts to enroll online at www.healthcare.gov, Terry said.

Early Monday, the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services said it would extended the deadline by a week those who attest that they tried to enroll, but could not.

Terry said the last-minute surge in interest was evident throughout last week. "We had a huge spike in phone calls and emails," said Terry, who works for Bronson Healthcare.

That includes a "wonderful turnout" last week for a Feb. 11 enrollment workshop in Portage. So many showed up for one-on-one help that some had to meet with enrollment counselors the next day, Terry said.

Aat this point, it appears 2015 Obamacare signups locally should well exceed the 2014 numbers, Terry said.

Last year, 5,277 Kalamazoo County residents signed up for Obamacare through the federal exchange during the open enrollment period, Terry said. This year, the open enrollment period was shorter, but 5,928 had signed up by mid-January, a 12 percent increase with another month of enrollment to go, Terry said.

In addition, the mid-January report showed that enrollments were up 18 percent in Van Buren County and by 16 percent in Calhoun County, she said.

Also growing is enrollment in Healthy Michigan, the state's Medicaid expansion program. As of Feb. 9, Kalamazoo County had 12,624 enrollees in the plan; Van Buren, 4,469,a and Calhoun County, 8,519.

"We're going to see those numbers continue to increase," Terry said. "A third of the people we saw (Feb. 11) were eligible for Healthy Michigan," which suggests many people who qualify have yet to enroll.

Because Healthy Michigan has different eligibility rules than the traditional Medicaid system, people who have been denied Medicaid coverage in the past may be able to obtain it now.

The income limits for Healthy Michigan are $16,105 for a single person, $21,707 for a two-person household, and $32,913 for a four-person household.

Healthy Michigan does not charge premiums for clients with an income below the federal poverty guidelines. Others will be charged a premium calculated at 2 percent of their income, which equates to about $25 a month for a single person earning $15,000.

While some new enrollees had insurance before, a national study by Enroll America estimates the percentage of uninsured Kalamazoo County residents ages 18 to 64 has dropped from 18 percent in 2013 to 11 percent in 2014. That equates to about 10,000 adults who were newly insured in 2014.

Terry said that Kalamazoo-area residents needing help obtaining insurance can call her at 269-341-6104 or email her at terrya@bronsonhg.org.

Julie Mack is a reporter for Kalamazoo Gazette. Email her at jmack1@mlive.com, call her at 269-350-0277 or follow her on Twitter @kzjuliemack.