Wellness Incentives Encourage Participation and Engagement

Every wellness program should be designed and measured to produce a return on investment.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has made it even more compelling for companies to initiate wellness programs for their employees. In November 2012, the Department of Health and Human Services issued guidance on important parts of the ACA about employment-based wellness programs, which followed the final wellness program regulations under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) published in 2006.

Barbara Flitch, vice president of Leverage Health Solutions, a health care consulting company, reports that, according to the 2014 Towers Watson/National Business Group on Health (NBGH) Employer Survey on Purchasing Value in Heath Care, the vast majority of companies surveyed (almost 95 percent) offer subsidized health care benefits for employees, but this is expected to be reduced in 2015 and beyond as health care costs continue to escalate and private exchanges become more feasible for employees to buy their own health insurance. While 75 percent of companies have updated their health care strategy or are in the process of doing so, only 25 percent of the respondents expressed confidence that they will offer employee health coverage in 10 years.

Phil Dell, vice president of health strategies at Razr Marketing, explains that there are two types of wellness programs: participatory and health contingent. A participatory wellness program does not make the reward based on an individual’s satisfying a health requirement; examples are gym and smoking cessation program memberships. A health-contingent wellness program conditions the reward on an "individual satisfying a standard that is related to a health factor." For health-contingent programs, the 2006 regulations state that the total reward must be limited to no more than 20 percent of the total cost of employee coverage, but the proposed rules allow for 30 percent--and even as much as 50 percent for tobacco prevention programs.

Using the Right Incentives

There are many definitions of wellness programs, from simple to comprehensive, but most have weak participation and engagement. This is due to a number of factors that include poor program design, unattainable objectives, and poor communications, but a big factor is that the proper incentives are not being used.

This article originally appeared in the September 2014 issue of Occupational Health & Safety.