Sponsorship helps to bring youth sports leagues with low fees

In order to provide programs for residents through the Cañon City Metropolitan Recreation and Parks District, it takes sponsors, said Program Director Kyle Horne.

The Credit Union of Colorado, which sponsored a couple of youth sports leagues for the past three years, recently stepped up to the plate to take over the sponsorship of the Minor/Major Baseball League. On Friday, Horne thanked the Credit Union of Colorado for its support of the programs in the district.

"Their organization is really dedicated toward helping youth programs in the community where they have their credit unions," Horne said. "In all, they've donated $2,700 to our youth programs this year, and that is just a tremendous help. Because of that donation, we're actually able to keep our fees lower. It's an essential thing that we have sponsors, especially (when) it really does keep our fees low."

Horne said they could not be happier than to partner with Credit Union of Colorado.

"We appreciate all their support," he said. "This is the third year we've worked with the Credit Union of Colorado. By far, this is the biggest scale we've ever worked with them."

Credit Union of Colorado Branch Manager Kevin Rivard said they were happy to help the district.

"We were really excited when we heard about this opportunity coming open this year," he said. "We have supported (the district) since 2011. We did the World Cup Soccer for youth and the fifth and sixth tackle leagues. When this came open, we were really excited to partner with the Rec. District."

Advertisement

Horne said the district has named four leagues after the credit union, which are Credit Union of Colorado World Cup Soccer League in the spring, Credit Union of Colorado Minor Baseball League in the summer, Credit Union of Colorado Major Baseball League and in the fall and Credit Union of Colorado Fifth/Sixth Tackle League, which is part of the Gary "Bubba" DiOrio League.

Horne said they look at the Credit Union of Colorado "as a partner," rather than "just a sponsor."

"It's because of local businesses like Credit Union of Colorado that the Recreation District is able to offer a lot of the programs that we have, and at the price we have," Horne said. "If you compare our prices with other places in Colorado, our prices are as cheap, or cheaper, than any place else. We know in economic times, we need to offer a lot of bang for our buck. Without our local businesses helping us out, we would not be able to keep those fees very low. It is essential we have the support of those businesses."