More options: Share, Mark as favorite

The US unemployment rate, currently sitting at 5.1%, has fallen by half since its 2009 peak. But how impressive is that decline given what’s happened to labor force participation? It’s at 62.4% today versus 66% in November 2007. If the LFPR were still at 66%, the jobless rate would be double.

Of course, the LFPR has been trending lower throughout the 2000s. So you can’t just blame the bad recession, weak recovery, or Obamacare for the decline.

So what is causing the decline? How much is due to structural factors and how much to cyclical factors (or cyclical factors that have turned structural)? Capital Economics is the latest to take a crack at dissecting the decline:

— The decline in the participation rate is almost entirely due to structural factors and there is little prospect of a rebound in the next few years. The downward trend in the participation rate actually began as far back as 2000, driven by the aging of the population, rising disability and the upward trend in post-secondary education enrollment. — Between 2000 and 2014, the participation rate fell by 4.5% points, from 67.1% to 62.6%. The aging of the population accounted for a 1.8% point decline in the participation rate, the increase in the in-education rate for 16 to 20 year olds also reduced the participation rate by 1.8% points, while the increase in the in-education rate for 21 to 25 year olds reduced it by an additional 0.6% points. Finally, the increase in the disability rate accounts for 1.2% points of the decline in the participation rate. All of these are long-term structural trends that began well before the 2008/2009 recession. — The post-recession cyclical impact on the participation rate appears to be a muted 0.6% points. Furthermore, since none of that cyclical decline has been reversed in recent years, even as the unemployment rate has slumped and the job openings rate has jumped to a record high, it is possible that what began as a cyclical dip is also now a permanent effect. — We are wary of making exact predictions of how the participation rate will evolve. Historically, structural trends have often faded without warning, while new structural shifts have come out of the blue as well. The aging of the population will continue to exert downward pressure on the participation rate for at least the next few years. But the drag from rising disability already appears to have waned and the upward trend in education enrollment could fade at any time. Nevertheless, it seems safe to say that over the next few years the participation rate is more likely to fall than rise. — The upshot is that, with the unemployment rate very close to 5%, the labour market really is very close to full employment. Admittedly, the still elevated rate of involuntary part-time workers indicates that there is some slack left. Beyond that, however, there are not hordes of disillusioned job seekers just waiting to flood back into the labour force once conditions improve. If we are right, then expect hourly wage growth to accelerate sharply next year.

Along similar lines, the Atlanta Fed has a new blog post that concludes:

In other words, only a very small part of the growth in nonparticipants has come from those marginal workers who are most likely to reenter the labor force. So the first fear—that this declining labor force growth is producing a false sense of security in a relatively strong labor market—appears unfounded.

And Goldman Sachs in a recent note: