An abbreviated history of Joe Biden and pancakes, in honor of #NationalPancakeDay

Vice-President Joe Biden has held his job for 6 years, 1 month and 12 days. It is a period of time long enough that I’m convinced you can Google “Joe Biden [random noun]” and have at least a 50-50 shot of finding a humorous mix of news and satire: anecdotes, gems from The Onion, memes, and perhaps the occasional quote.

In honor of IHOP’s National Pancake Day this Tuesday, March 3, 2015, I present to you An Abbreviated History of Joe Biden and Pancakes.

—

Google result: 151,000 results in 0.5 seconds.

Biden tries selling Obamacare to a Canadian

Our first link result is a Facebook post from Butterfield’s Pancake House & Restaurant in Scottdale, Ariz.

Biden visited the establishment in late February last year to try “selling Obamacare to customers, including a young woman sitting outside the restaurant,” KTVK reported. Red Alert continued:

“Everybody young signs up for health care,” Biden told the young lady. “It’s affordable, you can get subsidies to do it, and it’s in your interest. And if you don’t even want to do it for yourself, do it for your parents. Give ‘em peace of mind.”

The problem was, Biden was barking up the wrong tree, inadvertently trying to sell the new healthcare to a Canadian visitor named Jackie.

“I just didn’t know if I should say, ‘I’m sorry, [I’m] Canadian, don’t know if I can help you out,” she told the news camera after Biden moved on.

Navigate to 1:30 of the video below:

‘Guess those pancakes didn’t soak up the tequila’

Our next stop on the search page is an Onion classic from campaign season, 2012, when Biden had to pause in the middle of a debate with Republican vice-presidential nominee Paul Ryan.

” ‘Hurrrrck, hurrrck, huhhhgluahh!’ retched the doubled-over Biden, who dazedly wiped his mouth and eyes with a leather sleeve before regaining his composure. ‘Phew! Sorry, folks, just needed to shoot that out of the system. Guess those pancakes didn’t soak up the tequila as well as I thought.‘ “

‘The Painter of Pancakes’

Biden has received the pancake treatment from Dan Lacey, “The Painter Of Pancakes.” The artist is known to take “political figures and put pancakes on their heads,” he told The Huffington Post in a 2013 interview, and he said this of his inspiration for the “gimmick:”

” … there was a fellow in Japan who trained his pet bunny rabbit named Oolong to balance food items on his head. One of the things he balanced were dorayaki, Japanese pancakes that hold bean paste. The image of this rabbit balancing the pancake became an Internet meme for I don’t know what you’re talking about.People would say, I don’t have a response so here is a rabbit balancing a pancake on its head.”

‘Is this a jeep? That’s a pancake! Damn!’

If ever there was a political figure who didn’t need the Bad Lip Reading treatment, it’s the VP. But he got it anyway.