Adriana “Andi” Karaboutis was at Dell for almost five years before joining Biogen in 2014. Lindsay Rosenberg

If Dell’s $67 billion deal to buy EMC goes like the 14 other acquisitions Dell has done in the past four years, CIOs can expect thoughtful yet quick decisions on product rationalization, says Adriana Karaboutis, former CIO of Dell and now executive vice president of technology at Biogen Inc. Ms. Karaboutis, who was at Dell for almost five years before joining Biogen in 2014, was involved in several acquisitions. For example, when Dell in 2011 bought security-as-a-service company SecureWorks Inc. it decided to keep the existing product roadmap in place so as not to disrupt customers, she noted. Dell also left the IT organization at SecureWorks largely in place, she said. “It was the right thing for that acquisition,” she said. Ms. Karaboutis talked by e-mail about the cultural approach to integration from Michael Dell and his senior leadership team.

“Dell’s culture is fast-paced yet focused and very customer-centric. While many companies say it’s all about the customer, Dell has strong listening mechanisms: social, surveys, studies, focus groups…but also good old-fashioned methods, too. Michael and his leadership team, and beyond, travel the world talking in small settings with CIOs and tech buyers.

“The team is committed to being the best end-to-end technology solutions company in the world. Dell acquired over two dozen companies during [its] history and all of these were targeted to contribute to that vision – especially acquisitions in recent years. During these acquisitions, and something I believe we will also see with EMC, Michael and his team will assess what customers need and want, what [products] should be preserved within EMC (don’t fix or change what isn’t broken) and what should change in the combined company. While I don’t know the culture of EMC, I believe Dell’s strong culture of customer-centricity, startup mindset and speed will be at the backbone of the integration.

“My personal opinion is that the deal is very positive. This will now be a company with world-class compute and storage technology – critical needs for any business.”

Subscribe to The Morning Download