Donald Trump is just the latest U.S. politician to be publicly spanked by a religious leader.

Recent history is rife with examples of preachers telling politicians to back off — or to practice what they preach — when they believe the state is intruding on church territory.

And when Pope Francis declared Trump's controversial proposal to build a wall along the Mexican border "not Christian," he was following in the footsteps of some other outspoken pontiffs.

Play Facebook

Twitter

Google Plus

Embed Pope on Trump's Wall Proposal: 'This Man Is Not Christian' 0:46 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

Here are some other examples:

President Barack Obama

Shortly after he was first elected in 2008, Cardinal Francis George — then the Archbishop of Chicago — sent Obama a letter warning him about the bishops' concerns over religious freedom and his views on abortion. The Catholic Church remains adamantly opposed to abortion.

Then in 2012, all 181 U.S. Bishops condemned the Affordable Care Act over the requirement that health insurers should provide contraception free of charge. The Catholic Church is also against contraception.

But last year the bishops backed Obama's gun control proposals.

President George W. Bush

During a 2004 meeting at the Vatican with Pope John Paul II, Bush was forced to sit and listen as the pontiff read a statement condemning the Iraq War and the abuse of prisoners by U.S. soldiers at Abu Ghraib prison.

Bush, however, was awestruck not chastened.

Said Bush: "For those of you who have ever met him, you know, I'm telling you the truth when I tell you, being in his presence is an awesome experience."

President Bill Clinton

The Polish pontiff dropped a bomb on Clinton as well. After a face-to-face meeting in 1993, John Paul made it clear he opposed Clinton's stance on abortion.

"The inalienable dignity of every human being and the rights which flow from that dignity -- including the right to life and the defense of life -- as well as the well-being and full human development of individuals and peoples, are at the heart of the church's message and action in the world," he said while Clinton looked on.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York

In 2011, a consultant to the Vatican's highest court publicly called for Cuomo to be denied holy communion because he lives with his girlfriend Sandra Lee. Cuomo's marriage to Kerry Kennedy ended in a bitter divorce in 2003.

Rudy Giuliani

The twice-divorced former New York mayor, a Republican who married his third wife in a civil ceremony, got grief from other Catholics — but not from The Church itself — when he took holy communion in 2008 during Pope Benedict's mass at St. Patrick's Cathedral.

John Kerry

When the now Secretary of State was a Massachusetts senator running for president in 2004, several bishops — including Boston's Sean O'Malley — urged that he be denied communion for supporting abortion rights.

Sen. John McCain

While running for president in 2007, the Arizona Republican was taken to the woodshed by Jewish and Muslim leaders for saying that he would prefer a Christian president and that the Constitution established America as a "Christian nation."

"It is a very dangerous and mistaken thing to say," said Rabbi Perry Berkowitz of the American Jewish Heritage Organization. "America is not a Christian nation. It is a multiethnic, multifaith, and multicultural nation, and that is its glory."

"That kind of attitude goes against the American tradition of religious pluralism and inclusion," chimed-in Ibrahim Hooper of the Council on American-Islamic Relations.