Nursing home sales in Westchester and Rockland County are part of a larger health care trend that is reshaping elder care amid pressure from aging baby boomers

Buy Photo The Summit Park Hospital and Nursing Care CenterPomona Sale pending for: $36 million (includes hospital)Beds: 321 (nursing home) 41 (dementia unit) 57 (hospital)Employees: 500Prompting the sale: Rockland county has borrowed tens of millions of dollars to offset losses at its hospital and nursing home over the years. Background: The pending sale puts Rockland on a list of more than 20 counties in New York that are in the process of exiting the nursing home business.Potential buyers: Summit Park Acquisition Group (Photo: Ricky Flores/The Journal News)Buy Photo Story Highlights Valhalla and Yonkers nursing homes selling separately for $47 million

500 health care jobs tied to proposed sales

Rockland County's $36 million sale of Summit Park Hospital and Nursing Care Center part of trend

Nearly 600 nursing home beds impacted by changes at the three facilities

The agonizing decision to move a loved one into a nursing home is about to get even more challenging as there will soon be fewer choices of facilities — especially for people with limited incomes — in the Lower Hudson Valley

Two nursing homes in Valhalla and Yonkers — on the market for a total $47 million — are good examples of the fallout in an industry being squeezed by new government reforms that seek to rein in costs and eliminate wasteful spending.

The Hebrew Hospital Home of Westchester plans to sell its senior-living residences in Valhalla for $24.3 million. A similar deal is unfolding about 15 miles southwest in Yonkers, where St. John's Riverside Hospital is finalizing the $22.7 million sale of the Michael Malotz Skilled Nursing Facility. The two nonprofit facilities have a combined 280 beds and employ 500.

Dennis Keane, chief financial officer at St. John's Riverside, said the pending sales will likely result in layoffs and uncertainty for families that want to keep relatives nearby.

Dennis Keane, chief financial officer of St. John’s Riverside Hospital (Photo: submitted)

"The days of business as usual are over," he said. "What we're seeing is a movement now toward providing a more integrated model of care, and in the case of nursing homes there is a strong emphasis to move to home health care."

Faced with daunting financial pressures, the two nursing homes had a clear choice: buckle under the weight of mounting losses or sell to larger players. They are not alone:

•Rockland is finalizing a deal to sell county-owned Summit Park Hospital and its 321-bed nursing home, for $36 million.

•Across New York, the number of county-owned nursing homes shrunk from 41 to 23.

•Of the 23, at least six are currently pursuing sales.

These nursing homes all have — or had — a large percentage of patients covered by Medicaid, the federal-state program that pays health-care costs for people with limited incomes, about $32,000 for a family of four. New regulations taking effect this year are designed to spread the poorest and sickest patients — and the cost of their care — across nursing homes.

Those regulations are part of a series of reforms in 2015 overhauling the way nursing homes — which serve patients of all ages and all types of disabilities — are reimbursed by Medicaid. Instead of charging a fee for each service, which critics say gives health-care providers and facilities an incentive to perform unnecessary and costly medical procedures, the program will adopt a managed-care model similar to private insurance. Medicare, the program for people age 65 and above, is also shifting away from fee-for-service.

Also in the mix, invigorated public and private investing in preventive and home health-care innovations to help keep people in their own homes longer.

The goal is to reduce overall health-care spending before an aging population breaks an already strained network. Fear of growing demand looms large as the 75 million Americans born between 1946 and 1964 — the baby boomers now ages 51 to 69 — enter the ranks of the most expensive health care demographic.

Buy Photo The Hebrew Hospital Home of Westchester ValhallaOn the market for: $24.3 millionBeds: 160Employees: 270Prompting the sale: Heavy operating losses Background: The residences are part of the Hebrew Hospital Home group of nonprofits, which includes a home health-care operation in Valhalla. Court records show the group stated its failing nursing home drained money from its profitable health care models.Potential buyers: White Plains Center for Nursing Care in White Plains and the Dumont Center for Rehabilitation and Nursing Care in New Rochelle (Photo: Ricky Flores/The Journal News)

Significant savings are expected to come from overhauling how Medicaid reimburses nursing homes:

•In the past, the state managed Medicaid and set reimbursement rates based on a fee-for-service model.

•Private agencies will now manage the program within the nursing home industry. The Medicaid managed care model started in the late 1990s, but the privatization movement really built momentum following the federal Affordable Care Act in 2010, which pressured private health insurers to better control cost.

• All long-term care patients in New York will transition to the managed-care model this year.

In an attempt to reduce spending, state and federal regulators plan to eliminate billions of Medicaid dollars currently flowing to nursing homes over the next three years. New incentive programs are also shifting some of those taxpayer dollars to high-performing nursing homes that meet new cost-cutting and quality goals under the Medicaid reforms.

Critics say the reforms fail to address fundamental flaws in the quality of nursing-home care.

Richard Mollot, executive director of the New York-based Long Term Care Community Coalition, said companies buying up distressed nursing homes have financial incentives to cut staff and further diminish quality of care, especially for the poorest and sickest people.

"How can we be sure the patients' care isn't being sacrificed while we're trying to improve efficiency?" he asked.

Taxpayers spent $10.8 billion on nursing home care in New York in 2013, primarily through Medicaid and Medicare, according to Mollot's group. Eight out of 10 dollars spent on nursing home care came from public funds.

Amid this upheaval, William McDonald, an accountant and partner at EFP Rotenberg, based in Rochester, has looked at the feasibility of the business models at 70 privately owned and five county-owned nursing homes in New York, including Summit Park in Rockland.

McDonald assessed the industry's transformation: "I don't think people will fall through the cracks, but you've got to make some changes to make it work."

Buy Photo Michael Malotz Skilled Nursing PavilionYonkers On the market for: $22.7 millionBeds: 120Employees: 226Prompting the sale: Daunting financial pressures Background: The high percentage of Medicaid residents played a role, mainly because the government reimbursement falls short of covering the cost of caring for these patients.Potential buyers: Principals at the Sprain Brook Manor Rehab nursing facility in Scarsdale (Photo: Ricky Flores/The Journal News)

Sacrificing care for efficiency?

Against that backdrop of understaffing and fiscal losses, dealmakers raced against deadlines as lawmakers redefined how Medicaid reimburses nursing homes to care for tens of thousands of New Yorkers.

The new Medicaid managed-care requirements took effect in February for nursing homes in New York City and April 1 in Westchester, Nassau and Suffolk counties. The rest of the state, including Rockland and Putnam counties, makes the change in July.

Before courting buyers, some nursing homes with large numbers of Medicaid patients sought ways to attract more high-paying residents and reduce operating costs. Those that have avoided putting facilities up for sale often forged partnerships, or invested in facility expansions and upgrades to stay competitive.

Keane, the CFO for St. John's Riverside Hospital in Yonkers, said the high percentage of Medicaid residents at the Michael Malotz nursing home played a role in its fiscal demise, mainly because the government reimbursement falls short of covering the cost of caring for patients.

Nearly 70 percent of residents at Michael Malotz are covered by Medicaid. About 20 percent are covered by Medicare. The remainder carry commercial health insurance or pay the cost themselves.

Keane said the nonprofit hospital would have to spend millions of dollars to keep its nursing home open. One scenario he gave involved constructing a larger facility to make room for more residents paying the higher rates.

"The sale of Michal Malotz is a difficult one for us and letting go in many situations is never an easy decision, but on a strategic level we knew it was the right one," he said.

Hebrew Hospital Home officials did not respond to inquiries about the pending sale.

When a nursing home is sold, the state Health Department typically requires new owners to extend the stay of existing residents indefinitely.

The potential purchasers of Michael Malotz home are principals at the Sprain Brook Manor Rehab nursing facility in Scarsdale. They did not return requests for comment on the sale, which is being reviewed by the state Health Department.

Hebrew Hospital Home of Westchester's potential buyers also could not be reached for comment. That group has interests in other regional nursing homes, including the White Plains Center for Nursing Care and the Dumont Center for Rehabilitation and Nursing Care in New Rochelle. The Dumont Center had the most health department citations — five within the 2011 to 2015 period — of the facilities involved in pending sales.

Meanwhile, several county-owned nursing homes in New York have recently invested tens of millions of dollars in expansion or renovation projects to attract more high-paying residents to offset the cost of caring for Medicaid patients. The goal is to compete with larger for-profit players in the marketplace.

Last year, for example, Schenectady County spent $44 million on a new government-run nursing home in the working-class city next to Albany.

Compare that approach to Rockland County's pending $36 million hospital and nursing home sale, which puts Rockland on a list of more than 20 counties in New York that are in the process of exiting the nursing home business.

McDonald, the accountant whose firm worked on a feasibility study of Rockland County's nursing home and hospital, described nursing home sales as one piece in a health-care puzzle being taken apart and put back together.

"It's about trying to get the whole continuum of care better," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1bGDCVQ