L ike other hospital operators, Tenet Healthcare has enjoyed higher admission volumes from paying patients since millions of uninsured Americans gained insurance coverage last year under the Affordable Care Act.

The Dallas-based firm operates the third-largest for-profit hospital chain in the U.S., afterHCA Holdings ( HCA ) andCommunity Health Systems ( CYH ), with 80 hospitals and 216 outpatient centers in its fold.

Tenet also owns six health plans and a fast-growing subsidiary, Conifer Health Solutions, which provides business process services in the health care sector.

Tenet 's ( THC ) same-hospital adjusted admissions, which include outpatient volume, grew nearly 6% in the first quarter vs. the prior year, to 343,658. Paying admissions rose 6.2%, while surgeries increased 7.1% and emergency visits 7.2%. Charity and uninsured admissions fell 13.9% to 10,787.

"Clearly Tenet and other hospital companies have benefited from the rollout of health reform, both from Medicaid expansion and the public exchanges," said A.J. Rice, an analyst with UBS.

In the last four quarters, Tenet's adjusted admissions growth rate has been second only to industry giant HCA, says Brian Wright, analyst with Sterne Agee CRT. And in the most recent first quarter, the two were "neck and neck."

Outpatient Advantages

Tenet is poised to become a major player in outpatient facilities, which are gaining favor with patients and insurers for their convenience and lower fixed costs.

A joint venture will combine the short-stay surgery and imaging center assets of Tenet and United Surgical Partners International, or USPI, into the largest provider of ambulatory surgery in the U.S.

USPI backers will contribute 202 ambulatory surgery centers and 16 surgery hospitals. Tenet will hand over 44 ambulatory surgery centers and 20 imaging centers, and pay $425 million in cash to the USPI shareholders to align valuations of their contributed assets.

Tenet will initially own 50.1%, while USPI investors -- led by private equity firm Welsh, Carson, Anderson & Stowe -- will own the remaining 49.9%. The deal, expected to close in the third quarter, provides Tenet with a pathway to full ownership over the next five years.

"It is a very smart deal (for Tenet)," said Sheryl Skolnick, a Mizuho Securities USA analyst. "Given that Tenet still has significant debt and leverage, it couldn't afford to buy the whole thing right now."

In a separate agreement with Welsh Carson, Tenet will acquire Aspen Healthcare, which operates nine private hospitals and clinics in the U.K.

Tenet's debt grew substantially when it acquired Nashville-based Vanguard Health Systems in 2013 in a deal valued at $4.3 billion.

But the merger was game-changing. Tenet got 28 acute-care hospitals in several markets, including Detroit, Phoenix, Chicago, San Antonio and other parts of Texas, and parts of Massachusetts. Two surgery centers in Orange County, Calif., also were included.

"The company has changed dramatically," Wright said. "It's not even close to the company that it was 10 years ago."

Ten years ago, Tenet was still mired in lawsuits over Medicare billings and other legal issues. In 2006, it agreed to pay the U.S. government $900 million for alleged unlawful and excessive billing to Medicare and other federal health care programs.

By that time, Tenet had started focusing more on quality of care and outcomes, Skolnick says. She says that the strategy started "paying off" in 2007.

Lacking the free cash flow to invest heavily in hospitals or further acquisitions to compete head to head with HCA, Tenet has found a less expensive way through partnerships, Skolnick says.

Among others earlier, Tenet recently agreed to a joint venture partnership in five North Texas hospitals with Baylor Scott & White Health, a not-for-profit health care system.

In a conference call in early May, Tenet CEO Trevor Fetter said that the Baylor Scott venture is the latest example of how Tenet can enhance its market presence "without the risk and capital required for full-fledged acquisitions."

Meanwhile, Tenet intends to exit markets where it doesn't see potential to develop the needed scale to be a viable competitor. For example, Tenet is looking to sell hospitals in Georgia and North Carolina.

On June 1, Tenet announced a deal to sell Saint Louis University Hospital back to the university, with the transaction likely closing in Q3. Tenet bought the St. Louis, Mo., hospital from SLU in 1998.

Tenet said that, in connection with the transaction, it anticipates recognizing a pretax, noncash impairment charge of approximately $150 million to $160 million ($95 million to $100 million after-tax) in Q2.

Subsidies At Supreme Court

Gains from the USPI venture could offset potential losses in the event that the U.S. Supreme Court rules in favor of plaintiffs challenging the legality of government subsidies to enrollees in state health exchanges. A ruling in the controversial case, King v. Burwell, is expected late this month.

"The Supreme Court could throw a wrench in the public exchanges," Rice said.

Rice estimates that Tenet gets about 3% of its operating income from the exchanges, but he expects the percentage to grow over the next few years. "If you take that away, you take away some avenue of their growth," he said.

Nearly 60% of Tenet's patient revenue in Q1 came from managed care, while 21.8% came from Medicare and 9.2% from Medicaid.

The Affordable Care Act, or ObamaCare, included a provision to expand Medicaid, but the two states where Tenet has its largest presence, Texas and Florida, have not expanded it.

Medicaid admissions at Tenet facilities in six states that did expand Medicaid grew 9.6% in Q1 vs. a year earlier, while uninsured plus charity admissions fell 49.8%.

"The more important factor (for Tenet) was the increase in managed care volumes from exchange coverage," Skolnick said. "Tenet is making money on those patients. People on those exchanges are buying from managed care plans. Even in Florida and Texas, there are significant numbers of people who got covered."

Tenet said that roughly one-third of its volume growth in Q1 was related to newly insured patients. The rest were from what Fetter termed "targeted investments in service line development and quality improvements."

Tenet's Q1 adjusted earnings before interest, depreciation and amortization jumped 37% over last year to $529 million. Earnings per share from continuing operations came in at 67 cents on a diluted basis, after a loss of 12 cents a share a year earlier.

The company gave a wide-ranging forecast for 2015 EPS, which excluded pending deals: $1.32-$2.40 on revenue of $17.4-$17.7 billion, vs. last year's $16.6 billion.

Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expect 2015 EPS of $2.17 and revenue of $17.8 billion.

While the use of hospital services has increased, expect cutbacks in Medicare reimbursements starting in 2017 and 2018, Skolnick says. "So it's not a free ride."

And Tenet's legal wrangles with the federal government aren't over. Four Tenet hospitals in Georgia and South Carolina became the target of a Justice Department probe earlier this year into alleged past kickbacks to obstetric clinics for patient referrals.

The federal investigation also is looking into alleged referral kickbacks made by hospital chain Health Management Associates, acquired by Community Health Systems in 2014.