Well, this has been a total whirlwind. On Monday we reported that a bunch of weird truckers were planning to block D.C. traffic all through this weekend and then arrest members of Congress who they believe “violated the constitution” by supporting fuel efficiency standards and Obamacare. They were definitely sure that at least 3,000 truckers were going to show up. On Wednesday, we reported that Earl Conlon, one of the event’s organizers, said the whole thing was totally a hoax and they totally were just trying to “stir the feather” of the media to gain attention for their cause. Later that day, Zeeda Andrews, another organizer said that it was still going on and that Conlon was totally not a part of it anyway, so there.

Anyway, only about 30 trucks showed up, and they’ve already been warned by police not to block traffic, and the whole thing is kind of a no-go. And that is exactly what I was going to write about until OH MY GOD I STARTED LOOKING UP MISS ZEEDA ANDREWS. Way more interesting than some sad, poorly organized protest. Here she is talking to Greta Van Susteren about the protest:

First of all. First of all. She thinks President Obama is literally Osama bin Laden. Like, they are actually the exact same person. Media Matters found a comment she left on YouTube explaining this theory:

The fact that these soldiers were set up to die in a no return operation is obvious they had knowledge that Obama didn’t want leaked. This is the Seals that killed Osama Bin Laden. I don’t believe this story. He is alive call me crazy but, Osama Bin Laden is our President Obama do your research. The CIA has been preparing for this since he was a boy. They have same height, bone structure, hands and ears both are left handed the Osama face was created by Hollywood. The fox is in the hen house.

Do your research! Ha!

Ok, so they keep referring to her as a “country singer.” I gave her the benefit of the doubt on this when I wrote about it on Monday, because, hey, I don’t know all the country singers. However, the only record I can find of her actually being a country singer is this one song she made for Infowars.com. Which involves a video of the World Trade Center blowing up.

Oh, and this picture of her hanging out with a microphone, circa 1980, from her Facebook:

Ok, I sing Patsy Cline in the shower today too, but I don’t think I’d go on TV and refer to myself as a country singer.

Anyway, Zeeda also has a particularly strange, racist and anti-Catholic, weird conspiracy theorist taste in memes, from what I can tell. Although, to give her credit, it seems like she thinks everyone is a part of the New World Order, not just Liberals.

(The caption for this one says that the reason for this is because he is secretly not an American. I assume she thinks that if a non-American gives a speech in front of an American flag, they will turn into dust or something.)



I don’t even know what to think about that last one. The main reason I’m posting all this, however, is not just to make fun of a strange woman with a big mouth– it is because I think it is important for all of us to know exactly who the people that support this Tea Party bullshit are. These are not like, normal, honest, hardworking Americans with legitimate gripes against the government. These are people who think Obama and Osama Bin Laden are literally the same people. Or that the Vatican is literally Satan. Or that they are a famous country music singer. They are not rational people.

The fact that they are being presented as such is problematic, because it gives them credibility when they have none. Word on the street is that Ted Cruz and Michele Bachmann are planning to meet with Andrews and friends, which I think says a lot about them as well. I’m sorry, but how is it that we live in a time where someone who legitimately thinks the President is a dead terrorist gets to go and hang out with elected officials? How can this be?

I give up.