Accelerating Care Delivery

With health support hotlines consistently reaching 30-minute hold times per call, countless hours are wasted every day by patients who simply want to schedule an appointment or get a fast answer to a health concern. For providers, HealthBot can help determine if a patient’s condition needs escalation to a nurse, physician, emergency room visit, or specialty practice. Patients can also send photos or videos of their condition to help with a virtual diagnosis. All messages are secure, encrypted, and HIPAA compliant so a patient’s private information remains protected.

A Big Solution for Pharmacies

According to the Washington Post, nearly 60% of all Americans now take some form of prescription drug with 15% now taking five or more drugs. HealthBot is especially useful for large pharmaceutical companies and retail drug chains looking to assist patients in ways that deliver a better experience for the patient while curbing an organization’s costs.

As an example, a patient could order a prescription refill directly through the chat application and instantly receive confirmation to pick up the prescription at 6 p.m. along with a map to their nearest pharmacy, all without ever placing a phone call. Bot-based functions can also include questions about specific drug interactions or common side-effects.

Insurance Coverage, Pain-free

Navigating the complexities of an insurance plan can be hugely challenging for customers, particularly for newer ones brought on by the Affordable Care Act. Trying to understand which procedures are covered by an insurance plan and in what amount can take multiple calls and rounds of phone tag with the insurance provider. HealthBot solves this challenge by automating answers to common questions related to claims, coverage, or premiums.

Customers can also leverage HealthBot to determine the cost of a procedure and the associated billing code or get tips on maximizing their coverage benefits. They can also inquire about an outstanding balance or get clarification as to why a claim was denied. They can even inquire about supplemental coverage through Medicare or Medicaid or locate a list of eligible Primary Care Physicians (PCPs), again without making a single phone call.

Pricing & Availability