By of the

Construction of a proposed 5-acre solar energy farm at Mitchell International Airport would not be a good investment for the county or the airport, a consultant concludes in a report to the Milwaukee County Board.

The cost of building an array of solar panels needed to generate one megawatt of power is estimated at $6 million, the report says.

Although using that much solar power would reduce airport electricity purchases from We Energies by $80,000 a year, it could take as long as 75 years to pay back or recover the county's initial investment, according to the consultant's report.

The report suggests a smaller publicly owned solar array might be financially feasible if enough grant funds are available to significantly reduce costs.

There are four locations close to the airport's primary electrical service at the terminal that could be used for a solar array, according to the report by Harris Miller Miller & Hanson Inc. of Burlington, Mass.

Another option available to the county is leasing land or rooftops to a private company that would erect solar panels and sell the power to the airport.

Since there is no state law specifically authorizing such power purchase agreements, any contract is vulnerable to legal challenge, the report says.

County officials could consider calling We Energies. The utility has expressed interest in participating in a one megawatt, or larger, solar energy project at Mitchell, the consultant says in the report. One megawatt of power is equal to the electrical demand of 150 homes in Wisconsin.

We Energies is studying the possible installation of a solar array at the airport capable of generating two megawatts of power, a spokeswoman said Friday. The project might be included in the utility's next rate request to the state Public Service Commission.

Supervisor Marina Dimitrijevic proposed the publicly owned 5-acre solar farm as one way to reduce Mitchell's utility costs and make the airport energy self-sufficient. The consultant was selected for the feasibility study because it helped the Federal Aviation Administration write its guidebook on solar energy developments at airports.

In May, the consultant concluded there were a dozen open spaces large enough for a broad array of sun-tracking panels that would not interfere with aviation or traffic control.

The four best locations and project designs identified in the latest report are: solar panels at employee parking lots north and west of the terminal, an array of solar panels on land south of the main airport entrance, a solar array on land north of the main airport entrance, and solar panels on top of the existing main parking garage.

But this is as far as county staff and the consultant will carry the study unless the County Board authorizes further analysis of one or more of the options, said Stevan Keith, leader of environmental services in the Milwaukee County Department of Administrative Services.

Dimitrijevic said she would ask the board in October to engage the consultant for one more step down the path toward a solar farm at Mitchell.

Milwaukee County has installed solar panels on six buildings, including an admissions booth at the zoo and a wall at the Milwaukee Public Museum.