BEGIN TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: The smartest thing to do is distrust anything coming out of this Regime. There's something out there that they're pushing, and it can be really complicated, if you listen to the wrong people about it, and that's called "net neutrality."

It's something that is totally mis-titled. There's nothing "neutral" about net neutrality, what the Regime wants to do. But here's the thing. I'm telling you, you don't even need to know what it's about. All you need to know is who is behind it, and that alone should disqualify your support. It's the same people that had given us Obamacare and the same way they did it: They lied through their teeth, misrepresented it, ran a con game.

They're still running the con. Here's the thing. You remember the movie The Sting? I remember that movie. I liked that movie, and one of the reasons I liked the movie is because I figured it out before it happened. It's one of the few times in a novel or a book or a movie that I actually was ahead of the plot and figured it out. Normally I read a novel, a mystery novel and wait for things to be revealed. I don't try to figure them out.

The Sting, for some reason, it all came to me. So when the final sting happened, I had already suspected that's what was gonna happen. So I wasn't as shocked as the rest of the audience was. There's one thing I remember about that movie. I think it was the Newman character, Henry Gondorff, said the key to the con is that it's never over. You never let the person you conned know he's been conned. Never. The con goes on.

Well, that's what's happening here. They run a giant con game on the population of this country with Obamacare, and they are continuing to run the con. They are not giving it up. They are not gonna admit they've been had. They are not gonna admit they've been exposed. They are gonna continue to operate on the belief that got them here, and that is that you're too stupid to figure this out.

And that you still love and respect the office of the presidency enough that you will believe what your president is telling you about this, that he didn't know about it, that he's angry about it, that what Gruber's saying didn't happen, that Gruber had no power. He was a simple advisor, he had no influence, and their process was wide open and transparent and everybody knew everything about it.

They're running a con game, and they're demanding you deny it. You never admit the con, because that would then -- in the case of a politician -- damage any future cons that you want to run. I'm telling you, net neutrality is the next con game they're running. The question you need to ask yourself is: Do you want the people...? You may not like Comcast and you may not like AT&T and you may not like Time Warner.

You may not like them, but do you want the people who gave you Obamacare running your Internet service? Do you want them in charge of what you can get and when you can get it and how much it's gonna cost you? Are you gonna believe anything they tell you about net neutrality, given what you know? That's how people need to be dealing with this. This is what frustrates me. Here we have a teachable moment.

This is indisputable and inarguable what happened. As such, Obama should have forever forfeited any credibility or believability. Obama is now fully exposed as nothing more, in common parlance, as a lying con man. He ought not ever get away with it again, not after something this big that is this damaging and this costly to this many people. And they're coming at us again.

I don't care what it is. Global warming or climate change or whatever gonna call it -- immigration, amnesty, or net neutrality -- the fact is they have forfeited any credibility and believability on any of this. Anybody paying attention ought to be suspicious of everything they say about what they intend to do, how they intend to do it, and what its intended benefits are. Because they are lying through their teeth.

BREAK TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: Here's Richard in Jackson, Michigan. I'm glad you waited. I'm glad to have you on the program. Hi.

CALLER: Hello, Rush.

RUSH: Hey!

CALLER: Mega dittos. I've been listening since you were on TV.

RUSH: Well, I appreciate that. That was 1992. That's many, many moons ago.

CALLER: It's been a while, yeah. Yeah. You were talking about the government wanting to do the net neutrality and take over the Internet.

RUSH: That's exactly the way to put it. The government wants to take over the Internet just like they want to take over every other utility and monopolize it, and they want to make it fair for everybody, isn't it a beautiful thing? Fair and equal for everyone, like everything is fair and equal for everyone now. Yeah. What are your thoughts on that, Richard?

CALLER: My thought was that their equalization will be the same way that they equalized education, which is the lowest common denominator. So whosever Internet was the slowest, everybody else will slow down to that.

RUSH: No, no. The same objective exists in net neutrality as exists in Obamacare. What's the objective in Obamacare? To wipe out private sector insurance, ultimately. You partner with 'em first, you butter 'em up, and eventually the government becomes single payer. That's where you go. Net neutrality, we know who these people are. Forget the title, forget net neutrality. The objective here is for Obama, the Democrats, the government to run the Internet. Now, if that's what you want, if you think the government should run the Internet, and if you think the government creates and causes innovation to happen, why, then, have at it, folks.

BREAK TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: Net neutrality is about an accurate a title as the Affordable Care Act is a title for Obamacare. There's nothing neutral about net neutrality. Totally misnamed.