More health insurance products available to small business in '15

Tips on open enrollment, products for 2015 • Meet with your health insurance agent. Know if you are considered a large or small employer with 50 qualified full-time equivalents.



• ACA has brought about many changes in terms of compliance. Small groups, in particular, need to ensure they are compliant with new regulations and requirements.



• Explore new medical plan options for coverage. They include defined contribution with private exchanges, self-funding, shared or level funding, and narrow network plans that offer lower cost but limited provider choices.



• Promote wellness and healthier lifestyles in the workforce. Health insurance is expensive because of chronic diseases, many of which are either preventable or manageable with preventive care and regular treatments.



• Pay close attention to debate in Congress over changes to the Affordable Care Act. There may be changes that impact small companies, including modifying the definition of full-time employers from the current 30 hours to something higher.



Source: Interviews with Health Alliance Plan and Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan

Small businesses with fewer than 50 employees have more health insurance product choices for the 2015 plan year during this year's renewal season than they did last year, but the amount of plans is fewer than in past years.



The price increases are variable. The average is under 10 percent for renewables, but the range is from no increase to about 25 percent. For newer Obamacare-compliant plans, the increase could be 20 percent to 60 percent over the predecessor plans.



The current options are still reduced since the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was approved in 2010, several metro Detroit insurance executives said.



For Southeast Michigan, the majority of small companies are renewing their existing health benefit policies for 2015 at single-digit rate increases, say insurance executives at Health Alliance Plan and Priority Health.



But some are paying significantly higher rates, depending on the makeup of their workforce, insurance executives and agents told Crain's.



Last year, President Barack Obama deferred to state insurance commissioners whether to allow health insurers to extend plans that wer not Obamacare-compliant through 2015. Under Obamacare, health plans must include a minimum of 10 essential health benefits and comply with other affordability requirements.



Michigan's health insurers were allowed to extend plans, and many of them have allowed small businesses to continue their plans with price increases that reflect historical trends.



However, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan decided not to extend non-Obamacare-compliant health plan choices for 2015, forcing many clients to decide whether to purchase a more expensive ACA-compliant plan with the Blues or go elsewhere.



Blue Cross officials said they don't have an average premium rate that small businesses would pay because of the large number of plan options. Detroit-based Blue Cross is offering 53 different small-group plans with eight of those offered on the Small Business Options Plan exchange.

Increasing cost-sharing

Health insurance agents tell Crain's they are quoting ACA-compliant plans for various insurers to small businesses that are 20 percent to 60 percent higher than their previous plans.



Cameron Kennedy, president of Troy-based Cambridge Consulting Group, said Cambridge's small-business clients are paying increases for Obamacare-compliant policies that range from a 10 percent cut in premiums to more than a 90 percent rate increase. He agreed most fall in the 20 percent to 60 percent rate increase range.



"There were many factors that drove the increase, and each employer may have been impacted differently," Kennedy said. "Rating factor changes, mandated benefits, taxes and fees, and plan design mapping all played a role in the increases."





Choosing to renew

John Dunn, Blue Cross vice president for middle and small group business, said as of Sept. 30, more than 60 percent of Blue Cross small-business customers had already decided to stay with the state's largest insurer and migrate to an Obamacare-compliant plan.



Companies with Dec. 1 plan start date have to decide in the next few days, and those with a Jan. 1 plan start have until mid-December to decide on a plan.



"We are seeing some move to self-insured offering, and some are still considering it," said Kirk Roy, Blue Cross vice president for health reform. "We also are offering a defined contribution on our private exchange, Glidepath."



HealthPlus of Michigan also decided to phase out its noncompliant ACA small-business policies, said Bryan Cole, HealthPlus director of product development.



Most small employers renewed with HealthPlus, said Bridget Hollingsworth, HealthPlus manager of enrolled accounts. "Maybe a third have to decide what to do for 2015," she said.





Avoiding 'sticker shock'

Some small employers are looking at private exchanges or self-insured or partially self-insured plans, which offers reinsurance, or stop-loss, above a specified dollar amount, Selinsky said.



HAP and Priority Health use the Royal Oak-based iSelect Custom Benefit Store private exchange.



"Those employers having to go to another plan or a different carrier are seeing rates most times in the higher double digits," Selinsky said. "If you choose a high-deductible plan, there is not as big a sticker shock."



Kennedy said some of his small-business clients also will be looking more closely at private exchanges. They like predetermined employer costs, increased employee plan flexibility and lower administrative costs, he said.



Next year, for larger businesses with 100 or more full-time employees, the Affordable Care Act will impose financial penalties on companies that do not offer at least 70 percent of their workforce health insurance. The fine is $2,000 for every employee, minus the first 80 employees.



In 2016, companies with 50 to 99 full-time employees must offer coverage or face the fines, and the required minimum for coverage will rise to 95 percent of a company workforce.



Small businesses with fewer than 50 employees are exempt from coverage requirements under the law, which defines a full-time employee as someone working at least 30 hours a week.



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene