Topics: adam baldwin, Al Sharpton, Bill de Blasio, Conservatives, Dana Loesch, eric garner, Eric Holder, Erick Erickson, George Pataki, Joe Walsh, michael brown, Michelle Malkin, NYPD, police officers, Rudy Giuliani, News, Politics News

Conservatives seized on the shooting deaths of two New York City police officers on Saturday to attack President Obama, Mayor Bill de Blasio, and other figures who have spoken out on the fraught relationship between police and minority communities, with some going so far as to blame them for the killings of the two officers.

The two officers, Wenjian Liu and Rafael Ramos, were shot at point-blank range in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood of Brooklyn on Saturday afternoon. The suspect, Ismaaiyl Brinsley, then killed himself. Brinsley, who had threatened to kill police officers on social media in response to the police killings of Eric Garner and Michael Brown, had traveled to New York from Baltimore, where authorities believe he also shot his ex-girlfriend.

Merely by voicing concerns about police treatment of black men like Garner and Brown, many conservatives asserted, figures like Obama, de Blasio, and Attorney General Eric Holder encouraged vigilantism against law enforcement. Appearing on “Fox News Sunday” this morning, former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani said, “They have created an atmosphere of severe, strong, anti-police hatred in certain communities. For that, they should be ashamed of themselves.”

Similar sentiments could be found throughout the conservative Twittersphere, where former New York Gov. George Pataki, who says he’s considering a 2016 run for president, called the shootings a “predictable outcome” of “anti-cop rhetoric”:

Sickened by these barbaric acts, which sadly are a predictable outcome of divisive anti-cop rhetoric of #ericholder & #mayordeblasio. #NYPD — George E. Pataki (@GovernorPataki) December 21, 2014

RedState.com editor Erick Erickson, meanwhile, worked in a favorite right-wing jab at the president:

Way to fundamentally transform America, Mr President. — Erick Erickson (@EWErickson) December 21, 2014

Some conservatives, including actor Adam Baldwin, called for de Blasio — who poignantly spoke of having to warn his biracial son about avoiding police suspicion — to resign: