Young entrepreneurs are bringing their business ideas to life with the help of both the provincial government and Hamilton's Small Business Enterprise Centre.

Summer Company, an eight- to 12-week program, provides hands-on business training and mentoring to young people who want to turn their talents into profitable businesses.

Queens Park funds the program, but training and administration is handled locally.

Mentors teach these young entrepreneurs sales, marketing, invoicing, bookkeeping, customer relationships, management and more.

To qualify, candidates must be between 15 and 29 and willing to dedicate at least 35 hours a week to their business venture.

They must be full-time students, returning to school in the fall. Most importantly, their visions for small businesses must be achievable in a two- to three-month span.

Candidates must submit a completed business plan and take part in an interview with program administrators before qualifying.

Those accepted are given up to $1,500 to help with start-up costs, and an additional grant of the same value upon successful completion.

This year, 24 students were accepted from Hamilton – 920 across the province.

For more information, go to www.ontario.ca/business-and-economy/summer-company-guidelines-2013 or call the small business enterprise centre at 905-540-6400.

Here are a few local companies that have started with the help of the program:

SOCIAL MEDIA SOLUTIONS

Owner: Michael Scott, 22

Number of Employees: 1

Date of Launch: May 15

Description: Social Media Solutions is a social media management company designed for small businesses in the Hamilton area. Scott's business allows companies to fine-tune their online marketing strategy. Scott sees social media as playing an increasingly prominent role. He manages Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Reddit, LinkedIn and other social media platforms. Consultation services are also available.

Contact information:

Phone: 519-616-5024

Email: mike@SMSHamilton.ca

Website: SMSHamilton.ca

Location: 51 Dalewood Crescent

FERNS ARE GREEN

Owner: Fern Lodge, 16

Number of Employees: 1

Date of Launch: July 1

Description: Ferns are Green is a custom jewellery and photography company. Lodge makes unique, eco-friendly jewellery that is fully customizable. She uses recycled materials and found objects and allows her customers to participate in the creative process. Her jewellery includes rings, bracelets, necklace pendants, earrings and much more. Her photography includes, but is not limited to, family portraits, events and scenic views. She currently sells her merchandise at festivals and on her website.

Contact information:

Phone: 289-442-7703

Email: ferns.are.green@gmail.com

Website: fernsaregreen.wix.com/fern

FRESH N'DELISH LOCAL BERRIES

Owner: Allyssa Lobbezoo, 19

Number of Employees: 1

Date of Launch: June 25

Description: Fresh n' Delish Local Berries provides locally grown fresh produce to the Hamilton and Ancaster region at an affordable price. Lobbezoo is in charge of picking the fruit, selling it, as well as managing all the administrative aspects. She currently sells strawberries, raspberries, blueberries and jams at her stand, on Governors Road. She hopes to expand her business to include cherries, peaches and corn.

Contact information:

Phone: 226-802-9116

Email: allyssalobbezoo@gmail.com

Location: 2068 Governors Road

CLEAR CONSCIENCE

Owner: Virginia Paul, 28

Number of Employees: 1

Date of Launch: July 1

Description: Clear Conscience is a service that helps people turn their cluttered spaces into beautiful homes. Paul wants to help her clients determine what they should keep, sell, donate or discard. Paul will clean the area and make sure any furniture and/or belongings are properly stored. She also offers advice about how people can maintain an organized and livable environment. Her goal is to "transform cluttered places into beautiful spaces."

Contact information:

Phone: 905-407-2118

Email: info@clearconscience.ca

UPLAND ROOFING

Owner: Derek Benjamins, 23

Number of Employees: 1

Date of Launch: June 1t

Description: With seven years experience, Derek Benjamins has taken his knowledge of roofing and turned it into a viable enterprise. Upland Roofing is one of Hamilton's newest companies to enter the market. The focus is on lower labour costs and increased work efficiency. Benjamins does most of his work on single detached homes. He wants to build a reputation with homeowners that is centred on his high-quality of work and competitive prices. Benjamins guarantees to get the job done right the first time.

Contact information:

Phone: 519-771-0073

Email: info@uplaondroofing.ca

Website: www.uplandroofing.ca

Location: 113 Tutela Heights Road, Brantford