It was more a formality than a surprise, but Avalanche general manager Joe Sakic Saturday confirmed that Patrick Roy will be back as coach next season.

On the recent final road trip of the season, the Avalanche had said Sakic wouldn’t comment on season-ending issues — or anything else — until an availability in connection with the Saturday afternoon game against Anaheim. It was expected all along that Sakic would say Roy would remain on the job, and that’s what happened.

“Yes, he will,” Sakic said. “We’re in this thing together.”

The Avalanche was 39-38-4 heading into the game against the Ducks, and will miss the NHL playoffs for the second consecutive season. In the three seasons with Sakic as GM and Roy as coach, Colorado was 130-91-24 as of Saturday morning.

“We’re all learning,” Sakic said. “He’s got the passion, he’s a winner, he wants to win. The players know exactly what he wants … You don’t always look at the coach. For us right now, we have to look and see if the players are going to buy into what it takes to win.”

Sakic went on to express his disappointment with the Avalanche season and the team’s performance and said all aspects would be discussed internally. Asked if team president Josh Kroenke, the son of owner Stan Kroenke, had signed off on Roy’s return, Sakic said: “That’s my decision. Josh is on board with all that.”

Roy has two years left on his contract.

The Avalanche went into the Anaheim game with five consecutive losses.

“Ten days ago or 10 games ago we were in a great position to make a run for a playoff spot (in) a two-team race,” Sakic said of the competition with the Minnesota Wild for the second Western Conference wild-card spot. He added he was “very disappointed to see how the team reacted. In many games down the stretch, you didn’t see that emotion that you needed in the playoffs. The entire year, I thought we left a lot of points on the table with just blown leads in the third period, not managing the games very well. …

“We have to look at our core right now — the entire team, actually, but the core’s a big part of learning how to win. We have to take a couple weeks off to reflect and discuss and figure out if these guys want to learn how, what it takes to win and show in on the ice by playing the right way.”

But wasn’t he talking about things usually tied back to the coach?

“True,” he said. “But, no, I’ve had conversations with Patrick. We know we have to try different things next year. For me, it’s not the coaching staff. I’ve had enough conversations with different people. We all have to be better. I have to be better. Obviously the coaches have to be better and the players have to be better. We all have to look in the mirror and figure out why it happened like this.

“At the end of the day, I know by watching our hockey club, it was unacceptable to see from the start of the year, to the middle of the year, to the end of the year, blowing games by being undisciplined out there, turning the puck over a lot. We weren’t a very good possession team, but a lot of that had to do with what we were doing, not what the other team was doing. We really helped the other teams gain momentum and we didn’t do a good enough job. That’s something we have to look at.”

The Avalanche lost eight games — six in regulation and two in overtime — when leading after two periods.

“To see us blow points in the third period, that’s why we’re here and out of the playoffs,” Sakic said.

He noted that the Avalanche bounced back from a bad start to get back into playoff contention, but the late performance “was unacceptable.”

Sakic said of the Avalanche “core”: They need to take responsibility in doing the right things on the ice. They do the right things off the ice. We have a great group, but on the ice, especially when the game’s on the line in the third period … we have great team speed and we have to play more north-south instead iof just trying to make something happen when it’s not there. I always say that’s respecting the game, respecting the puck and the situation they’re in.”

Asked if anyone was untouchable, Sakic shrugged and said: “Wayne Gretzky got traded … We’re going to look at all different options on how to get better.”

On whether the Avalanche will be aggressive in free agency after July 1, something Roy has brought up, Sakic said, “That’s something where we have to look and see what’s there in free agency. It won’t be anything where we’re looking to sign an older for a long-term deal. Obviously, we’d like to add to our (defense). Next year, we’re going to be young, too. (Nikita) Zadorov and (Chris) Bigras are going to be here next year, and they’re only going to be 21. We still have room and we know we will have to be patient when it comes to the back end. We’re not going to look for the quick fix, but will have to explore options via trade or whatever avenue to improve the club.”

Sakic said the regression hasn’t shaken his confidence.

“We have a plan,” Sakic said. “This isn’t a quick fix. Obviously, we still have to be patient with some of our younger players, some of our younger ‘D.’ … We’re confident that we can turn things around.”

On the personnel front, Sakic said he had been impressed with the play of forwards Mikkel Boedker and Shawn Matthias, both late-season acquisitions who can be unrestricted free agents on July 1.

“If it works out, we’d love to keep both of them,” Sakic said.

He also confirmed that Nathan MacKinnon, who missed the final 10 games with a knee injury, wasn’t seriously injured and wouldn’t require surgery.

“I think the knee was a little worse than what everybody predicted or thought initially,” Sakic said. “But if he gets healthy, he’ll go to the World Championships (to play for Canada).”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei