letters logo (Photo: provided)

Foster parents provide shelter to our most vulnerable children and take on all their expenses during a very difficult time in their lives. Foster parents’ responsibilities are numerous, and their tasks aren’t easy. We consider them heroes because they play a critical role in ensuring the well-being of children in the foster care system. A letter to the editor in the Visalia Times-Delta on April 3 by Linda Doty posed the question: “How do foster parents spend funding?”

Foster parents receive funds on a monthly basis when a child is placed in their home. These funds go toward the various expenses of feeding, clothing, sheltering, and generally caring for the foster child. Additionally, foster parents are responsible for transporting children to and from school, any number of different appointments, and visits with their biological families.

Campaigns that solicit donations for foster children (such as clothes, toys, and books) are essential because the funds that foster parents receive are very limited. While the funds do help foster parents pay for the cost of caring for and sheltering foster children, most foster parents note where money falls short: it does not allow for anything extra, such as a comfort blanket, extracurricular activities, or entertainment. For this reason, your generous donations of clothing are always welcome by agencies and organizations collecting for foster children.

If you would like to become a licensed foster family home, we will provide training and ongoing financial assistance and support services to help you provide a safe, supportive, and stable family environment for our foster children. For more information about foster care, call 559-623-0581.

John Mauro, L.C.S.W.

Deputy Director, Child Welfare Service for Tulare County Health and Human Services

HELP ERADICATE UNDERAGE DRINKING

This April is Alcohol Awareness Month. Founded and sponsored by the National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence, Inc. (NCADD) since 1987, this year’s theme is: “For the Health of It: Early Education on Alcoholism and Addiction.”

No other substance is more widely used and abused by America’s youth than alcohol, making alcoholism and alcohol-related problems the number one public health problem in the United States. Addressing this issue requires a sustained and cooperative effort between parents, schools, colleges, community leaders and our youth. The widespread prevalence of underage drinking and the negative consequences it creates remain a stubborn and destructive problem despite decades of efforts to combat it.

Yet, there are four areas that have proven to be effective in the prevention of this problem:

•Curtailing the availability of alcohol to underage populations;

•Consistent enforcement of existing laws and regulations regarding alcohol purchase;

•Changing cultural misconceptions and behaviors about alcohol use through education; and

•Expanded access to treatment and recovery support for adolescents and their families.

Studies reveal that alcohol consumption by adolescents results in brain damage — possibly permanent — and impairs intellectual development. Reducing underage drinking is critical to securing a healthy future for America’s youth and in a society that continually promotes alcohol and drug use at every level, the need to provide education on the dangers of alcohol and/or drug abuse and its effects on our children has never been greater.

It’s our kids we’re talking about.

Kelley Nunes, Executive Director

NCADD Tulare County, Inc.

Read or Share this story: http://vtd-tar.co/1yk2qxT