(TRUNEWS) Roger Stone, Donald Trump’s former chief political advisor and close friend, wrote in the Daily Caller earlier this month that Ted and Heidi Cruz brag about being the first “Bush marriage.” Could there be more to this eluded Bush-Cruz connection?

Neil Bush, the son of President George H. W. Bush, who defrauded U.S. taxpayers out of $1.5 billion dollars in the savings and loan scam, and later peddled influence for the Chinese government, (who plied him with Chinese prostitutes) has formally endorsed Senator Ted Cruz for president. You can’t make this stuff up.

This endorsement says much. Since the other, more politically involved Bush men have a distinct dislike for Mr. Cruz, I suppose Neil Bush is better than no Bush. Let’s look at the wonderful memories that Neil Bush has left us with. First there is is that little banking charade he steered us into back in 1985.

Back in 1981, Neil Bush was director of Silverado Savings and Loan in Denver, Colorado. Neil was very generous, lending millions to pals Kenneth Good and William Walters. The $250 million in loans went into default, S.S. & L. went bankrupt and had to be seized by the Feds. Neil Bush walked away with a cool $100,000 personal loan which he never paid back. Documents released by the Office of Thrift Supervision detailed the conflict of interest charges against Neil. Federal regulators described him as “unqualified, and untrained” to be a director of a financial institution.

It seems Neil miscalculated just how much he knew about directing a mega financial institution like Silverado Savings and Loan. By the summer of 1990, the cost of bailing out the savings and loan industry would cost at least $500 billion! Neil’s Silverado adventure cost U.S. taxpayers $1.5 billion.

Neil actually got fraudulent loans they knew would fail, use the money to short the stock and crash the bank and collect millions according to CIA cut-out and Bush family associate Al Martin in his seminal work The Conspirators: The Secrets of an Iran-Contra Insider.

Oh, and let’s not forget his lies to the press immediately after John Hinckley Jr. allegedly shot Ronald Reagan. At first he and his wife admitted to knowing the Hinckley family, that they donated a lot of money to the Bush endeavors … yet the next day he recanted and claimed he actually didn’t know them, and wasn’t even sure if they donated any money! In fact John Hinckley Sr. give heavily to George Bush Sr., in 1964, 1966, 1970 and 1980 and Neil and his wife were scheduled to dine with John Hinckley Jr.’s older brother the very night Jr. allegedly shot Reagan.

This is the same Neil Bush who was sent Asian prostitutes by the Chinese conglomerate that was using Neil to peddle influence to the U.S. government for a multi-billion dollar Semi-conductor deal, according to his own deposition.

The Bush-Cruz connection is clear. Ted was George W.’s brain when he ran for president. A top policy adviser, Ted maneuvered for Solicitor General in Bush World but settled for a plum at the Federal Trade Commission. Ted’s a Bush man with deep ties to the political and financial establishment. Ted and wife Heidi brag about being the first “Bush marriage” – they met as Bush staffers. Cruz was an adviser on legal affairs while Heidi was an adviser on economic policy and eventually director for the Western Hemisphere on the National Security Council under Condoleezza Rice. Condi helped give us the phony war in Iraq. Heidi then went to the Bush U.S. Trade Representative as a top deputy to U.S. Trade Rep. Robert Zoellick, who wired Heidi’s membership in the Council on Foreign Relations and job at Goldman Sachs. The bailed-out bank then loaned Cruz $1 million secretly to finance his Senate race. Crux would also borrow an undisclosed $1 million loan from Citicorp.

Cruz has become quite adroit at saying one thing while his history shows him doing the other. Rather than the outsider he claims to be, Ted Cruz is the ultimate insider, former top Bush 41 policy aide and globalist, Ivy Leaguer, and establishment insider. There is no better example of this than Calgary Ted’s actions surrounding the big Wall Street banks and their secret funding of his political ascension. Oil and Gas Millions fund this guy Cruz has been gorging at the table of the ultimate insider of all insiders – Goldman Sachs and Citibank. His TPP support is the proof in the pudding.

Cruz and his establishment puppet masters are engaged in an aggressive strategy against Trump. The false narrative of course being that Cruz is the outsider while Trump is the insider. Nothing could be farther from the truth. In its most simplistic terms – the power elite have no leverage over Trump – nothing. Cruz, on the other hand, is the establishment’s quisling, spawned by the Bushes and controlled by Wall Street, who became a strident “outsider” only four years ago.