The jury returned with a verdict Tuesday afternoon in the case of a Bartlesville teen accused of plotting to kill students, teachers and police officers at the high school last year.

The jury began deliberating a little before 1 p.m.

It took jurors nearly three hours to come to the verdict. Their decision was to find Chavez guilty on a lesser charge.

Chavez was charged with planning/attempting/ conspiring to perform a violent act. The jury found him guilty of planning to perform an act of violence, along with a recommended sentence of 30 months in prison and a $5,000 fine, but he was found not guilty of conspiring with anyone else to execute the shooting plot.



The prosecution only called four witnesses, but they said it's clear that Sammie Chavez was planning a mass shooting at Bartlesville High School.

Prosecutors say Sammie Chavez told classmates at Bartlesville high school, last December, of his plan to carry out a Columbine-style attack.

Tuesday, prosecutors showed jurors several letters written by Chavez that, they say, show his fascination with mass murder. Among the quotes from the letter, "those who deserve to die will be killed. Those who don't yet know our cause, will be forced to witness it."

Chavez also wrote, "I should do what I've been planning for so long...and show all of these insolent people what their actions can cause."

Chavez took the stand in his own defense and said those letters were not meant to be serious, that he was venting his anger at the world. He also said he suffers from anxiety and depression.

He said his statements to a former student about how to carry out a Columbine-style attack was a joke.

Prosecutors showed jurors a 22 caliber rifle that was found at his house.

Chavez said he had no plans to use it.

The jury determined that Chavez did not actually conspire with others to carry out a violent attack, but that he did plan an attack.

Chavez's attorney told us he's not a dangerous person.

The district attorney said cases like this are hard to prove.

Chavez's mother told us after the verdict that she is thrilled with the result. She said she was prepared for him to be spend at least five years in prison.

9/23/2013 Related Story: Jury Trial Underway In Bartlesville School Shooting Plot