Topics: colin quinn, Editor's Picks, howard stern, Language, Swearing, Tina Fey, Entertainment News

During an appearance on Howard Stern’s radio show earlier this week, Tina Fey was asked about an incident that allegedly inspired a “30 Rock” episode titled “The C Word.”

“Did you confront a staffer at ‘Saturday Night Live’ after somebody…they called you a ‘cunt’, is that correct? That’s the worst thing you can call a woman, I think,” Stern posited.

“Yeah, which is by the way what I called a lady in London the other night,” Fey admitted, before revealing that it was Colin Quinn who called her the name, and whom she has since forgiven.

Stern’s statement, however, does raise the question of whether “cunt” is, in fact, the worst insult one can levy at a woman. Is it a misogynistic term, or just a harsh one? What word, if any, could be worse?

***

In a chapter of his book “When Truth Gives Out” titled “Epithets and Attitudes,” philosopher Mark Richard explores the concept of slurs. Richard offers a working definition of a slur as a word that possesses a neutral counterpart, but whose use signals a value judgment on the part of the user. “A slur directed towards African Americans means,” he writes, “to a first, rough approximation, something like black and despicable because of it.” The notion of slur-dom is a separate one from vulgarity. On “asshole,” Richard writes:

It would be an interesting exercise, no doubt, to try to spell out the meaning(s) of this word without using invective…Both ‘asshole’ and slurs are devices used to display contempt for people in virtue of their possessing certain properties. The difference between the terms is that there is nothing intrinsically misrepresenting about the reaction voiced by ‘asshole’: the way assholes behave merits contempt. To represent an asshole as an asshole is to represent things as they are.

A slur, by contrast, is a misrepresentation in that it editorializes incorrectly, attaching value judgments to qualities that are inherently neutral — race, gender or sexuality.

“Slut” is such a word. Women, of course, ought to be free to make decisions about their sex lives that are the healthiest and most comfortable for them without fear of being stigmatized. “Slut” implies that choices that ought to be driven by personal preference and personal preference alone are somehow indicative of a woman’s intelligence, confidence or self-worth. Women who don’t adhere to arbitrary and often extreme standards of sexual behavior are also fully capable of being confident, intelligent and deeply moral. The suggestion otherwise is demeaning to all women, even those who choose to abide by such standards.

The difference between “slut” and a mere vulgarity like “cunt” — a term that is gendered, to be sure, but whose very definition most certainly merits contempt — is that the former attempts to degrade a whole segment of the population, while the latter only attempts to degrade a particular individual. Only the former is necessarily sexist, and only the former is a slur. Slurs are, of course, inherently false. They are lies. Men and women who use the term “slut” as a weapon reveal, it turns out, very little about their targets, and a great deal about themselves.

***

In February of 2012, a Georgetown Law student named Sandra Fluke testified to Congress regarding Conscience Clause exceptions to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Her testimony focused entirely on the experiences of friends and acquaintances, most of whom utilized birth control for non-contraceptive purposes. Still, it inspired shock jock Rush Limbaugh to dedicate a segment to Fluke, calling her both a “slut” and a “prostitute.” Blatant contradiction of the two insults aside, the segment provoked national ire, even eliciting a reassuring phone call from President Obama. Strident opponent of slut-shaming Joe Scarborough — literally shaking with anger, he was, at the disgusting attempts of “women’s rights ladies” to label Monica Lewinsky a slut — remained unmoved.

I commend the president for not just calling people who are called terrible names by conservative pundits but when liberal pundits have called women terrible names in the past — like Sarah Palin, for instance — I appreciated the president after Bill Maher called Sarah Palin some horrible, horrible names, him picking up — oh wait, he didn’t do that.

Scarborough repeated the claim ad nauseam even after guest Mark Halperin countered that Obama refused a sizable PAC donation from Maher after the incident.

Scarborough seemed pretty self-satisfied after pointing out the imagined hypocrisy, but I actually find the difference between the events quite significant. Limbaugh was employing slurs in their quintessential fashion — implying that having an opinion on a particular issue reveals something about a woman’s personal sexual history, further implying that something is enough to discredit that opinion, and thus attempting to shame an entire class of people out of participation in political discourse.

Maher, on the other hand, was leveling a critique, however crudely formed, at an already active and influential contributor to that discourse, branding her a “cunt” not solely because she is a woman, but because he found her contributions wanting at best. (Also, because she happens to be a woman.) Crying misogyny is, to a certain extent, a cop-out, an excuse not to have to answer for one’s cuntiness. Which allows one to contribute to the discourse, certainly, but prevents someone like Palin from being a full participant in it.