Peter Cownie (Photo: Special to the Register)

A rose to state Rep. Peter Cownie, R-West Des Moines, for bucking his party and attempting to fix Iowa's nonsensical law on medical cannabis oil. His bill would authorize the manufacture and distribution of cannabidiol, an extract of marijuana. Iowans with severe epilepsy can now legally possess the oil. But patients and their families, contingent on approval from the state, must travel elsewhere to get it, pay for it out of pocket and potentially break federal laws transporting it home. Leaders in the Republican-led House of Representatives have opposed loosening Iowa's medical marijuana laws.

The Register's editorial board has criticized the free-for-all, random approach of public policy toward medicinal marijuana in this country and the lack of federal oversight. We've also called for removing barriers to research exploring the risks and benefits of cannabidiol. Meanwhile, Iowa should clarify its law toward cannabis oil to avoid potentially making criminals out of families trying to seek relief from a debilitating illness.

A rose to Ankeny public schools for banning homemade and store-bought treats from Valentine’s Day celebrations due to students’ food allergies and the stigma that would likely result from some children not being able to afford store-bought snacks. Also, a thistle to that very same school district for saying treats will still be allowed as long as they are purchased through the school district at prices that seem highly unlikely to appeal to cash-strapped families: Two dozen cookies are $16.80; two dozen Rice Krispie bars are $24; and $18 buys two dozen packets of baby carrots. At those prices, the school district’s budget director should be sending valentines to all of the students.

The Ankeny school district has banned all homemade and store-bought treats from classroom parties and other district's have altered traditions in an effort to spare potential hurt feelings. (Photo: AP)

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Tj5J0X