The Brooklyn Hospital Center will have a new leader, some 10 months after its former president and chief executive announced he was resigning to join a private-equity firm.

In November, Gary Terrinoni will succeed Dr. Richard Becker, who stepped down in March. Dr. Becker earned $1.5 million at the hospital in 2013. Mr. Terrinoni currently is executive vice president of administration and chief financial officer of the Kennedy Health System, a Voorhees, N.J.-based three-hospital network.

His new job in Brooklyn represents a return to New York. Prior to joining Kennedy, Mr. Terrinoni held those same titles at Richmond University Medical Center on Staten Island, where he worked from 2007 to 2011. A certified public accountant, Mr. Terrinoni received his undergraduate and M.B.A. degrees from Loyola University Maryland.

"I've been in health care for a long time, and chose at an early age to be on the nonprofit side," he said. "A lot of this is about mission—this is how I was raised—and giving back to the community."

Brooklyn Hospital's board, he said, "wants to maintain and enhance the hospital's future viability," and he will make that his priority.

Mr. Terrinoni, 59, started in health care from the audit side but considers himself someone with a financial base who is "pretty good at operations and strategy."

That skill base was important at RUMC, where he helped put a turnaround into place. He sees his new role at Brooklyn Hospital as a way to "help the organization move forward."

Asked why he's leaving a three-hospital system for a single facility, Mr. Terrinoni said he's had a variety of experiences at large systems, as well as at academic medical centers such as Johns Hopkins and community hospitals such as RUMC.

"It's really not so much about the size, it's about the processes. There is some uniqueness to a community hospital, but it's a nuance," he said. "Perhaps because I've had such a range of experiences, it's a bit of 'been there, done that.' "

Dr. Becker, his predecessor, was a proponent of allowing private equity to flow more freely in New York, as it does in New Jersey. Mr. Terrinoni agreed that access to capital is essential to the survival of New York hospitals.

"You need the financial resources to do what you need to do strategically—invest in the physical plant and programs—and my goal is to generate the capital," he said. "My goal is to make the organization profitable."

The new CEO is looking forward to relocating nearer to his son and daughter-in-law, who live in Greenwich Village. "I've rented an apartment—in Dumbo, I think it's called?" he said.

Mr. Terrinoni is the second new leader of a Brooklyn hospital to be announced in recent weeks. Maimonides Medical Center said last month that Kenneth Gibbs, who was named chairman of the board of trustees in May 2014, would succeed longtime President and CEO Pamela Brier after she retires early next year.

In July, Interfaith Medical Center announced it had retained Philadelphia-based Diversified Search, an executive-search firm, to find a replacement for Chief Executive Steven Korf, who has led the hospital since March 2014, as the hospital emerged from bankruptcy.

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments