Charlton Heston in 1973′s “Soylent Green.” Everett Collection

Welcome to BitBeat, your daily dose of crypto-current events, written by Paul Vigna and Michael J. Casey.

Bitcoin Latest Price: $619.97, up 0.3% (via CoinDesk)

Crossing Our Desk:

- Let’s get this straight up front: Soylent is not people. They even say so on their website. Soylent also is not a nutritional supplement. Soylent is an actual food product and the company that makes it, a California startup, is now accepting bitcoin.

Soylent started off as an experiment in healthy eating by founder Rob Rhinehart. He wrote on his blog about this powdered drink he’d created, that combined all the essential ingredients of food. The post went viral, and he found himself flooded with people interested in his drink. So he did what any entrepreneurial minded Millennial would do: He started a crowdfunding drive.

He named his concoction “Soylent,” a self-consciously ironic reference to the 1973 sci-fi movie “Soylent Green,” a dystopian tale of a world gone wrong in which the beleaguered population is fed a product called Soylent Green – which, Charlton Heston discovers, is made of ground-up human beings.

This real-world Soylent “is not made of humans,” Anastassia Laskey, the company’s vice president of marketing, said with a laugh. “There’s no soy in it, either.” It’s not a nutritional supplement, either, she said. It’s been approved by the FDA as a food (if you’re interested to know what’s in it, everything is on the company’s website).

Soylent is a classic example of a collaborative-economy enterprise, and from the beginning, its customers have been asking for a way to buy it using bitcoins. The company took its product onto the online marketplace Shopify in May, and was immediately looking for a way to integrate bitcoin into its payments options. That became feasible with Shopify’s new agreement with CoinBase for processing bitcoin transactions.

Selling a product that’s named after a fictional product that’s made out of people has been a challenge for Ms. Laskey, but the name has some benefits, she said. “It’s a conversation-starter.” (Paul Vigna)

- We mentioned yesterday the auction of bitcoins.com, the domain name owned by the bankrupt Mt. Gox. If you’re interested in following its progress, the folks over at Heritage Auctions sent us the webpage of the auction. The auction is slated for July 24, but you can preview the auction now, and apparently, submit a bid. The current bid is $240,000. The auction page had 20,000 hits as of this morning, according to Heritage. (Paul Vigna)

- There’s a friendly (we assume) competition between the islands of Man and Jersey in the British Channel to become the home office of the digital revolution. In Jersey, they’ve got a whole crypto chamber of commerce going, and last week, the island announced the launch of a bitcoin hedge fund domiciled on the island. Now, Man is striking back.

A new startup called Crypto Next has launched from a quay in Man. The firm is building what it describes as a turn-key product for merchants to accept bitcoin payments, including bank accounts and white-label currency exchange platforms. The fact that the system is located in Man means that it’s subject to Man’s regulations, which may be a sight more amiable to cryptocurrencies than other locales.

As part of its launch, Crypto Next is issuing 5 million Crypto Next coins through a crowd sale on its website, which began today. They’ve sold about 1% of them so far. (Paul Vigna)

- Grooveshark, an online music-streaming service, announced that it is now accepting bitcoin for payments. The site, which operates as a sort of search engine for music, allowing users to search for and play streaming music.

The service is using Stripe, a payments processor that itself announced a few months ago it would start offering bitcoin as a payments option. (Paul Vigna)

Contacts: paul.vigna@wsj.com, @paulvigna / michael.casey@wsj.com, @mikejcasey