'It ups your whole game as a teacher'

Katie David, one of Boulder Valley's 1154 National Board Certified teachers, helps Angevine Middle School students with their work on Friday. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

Colorado school districts with the most National Board certified teachers Boulder Valley School District: 154 teachers Denver Pubic Schools: 131 teachers Cherry Creek School District: 117 teachers Colorado Springs School District 11: 52 teachers Douglas County School District: 50 teachers

Ingrid Parker, a Boulder Valley instrumental music teacher, recently completed a master's degree and was looking for her next challenge.

She found it in the National Board certification program, spending a year evaluating her teaching, putting together a comprehensive portfolio and taking tests in her content area. She was successful, earning certification to make her one of 21 Boulder Valley teachers certified in 2013.

"I want to be the best teacher I can," she said. "The reflective process was really useful. I really analyzed the assessments, what they tell me about my students, so I can teach better. This really took my teaching to the next level."

The Boulder Valley School District, for the second year, leads the state in the number of National Board certified teachers with 154. Statewide, 75 teachers earned the certification in 2013, for a total of 839.

In Boulder Valley, National Board certification facilitator Virginia Schick said the district provides both support for candidates and 5 percent salary increase for those who earn certification. For candidates, Schick leads a once-a-month class and pairs them with teacher mentors who are already certified.

"It's about about 400 hours worth of work," she said. "It really gives you the opportunity to do your own intensive professional development. It ups your whole game as a teacher."

The National Board program is compared to passing boards for an architect or a doctor. Teachers have three years to complete a portfolio and pass six timed tests in their subject areas. The portfolio includes video of them teaching a lesson and documentation of their teaching accomplishments. One of the main goals is to help teachers move from thinking about creating a single good lesson to developing lessons that build on their students' knowledge and understanding.

"It really is the top of our field for teachers to get the certification," Schick said.

Katie David, an art teacher at Lafayette's Angevine Middle School, said the district's support was one reason she decided to go for certification.

"They give you a lot of incentive," she said.

While she described the process as "a ton of work," she said it also revealed the holes in her teaching curriculum.

"I know the standards and curriculum far better than I did before," she said.

Heather Peter, a language arts teacher at Broomfield High School, said the certification program helped her evaluate her lessons on what's purposeful and what's only filler.

"Every time I plan something now, I look at if I'm hitting the standards," she said. "I spend a lot of time after a lesson reflecting on what went well and what I need to change. It's all about how it impacts students."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com