Marchers making their way down Broadway during the Brides’ March. Peter J. Smith for The Wall Street Journal

Hundreds of advocates protesting domestic violence, including many women wearing white wedding gowns, took part in an annual Brides’ March through upper Manhattan and the south Bronx Friday.

The event–in its fourteenth year–honors Gladys Ricart, whose ex-boyfriend was convicted of killing her in 1999 on her wedding day and other victims of abuse. Marches also take place in Florida, Milwaukee, Newburgh, N.Y., and the Dominican Republic, organizers said.

The New York City walk, which stepped off from Fort Washington Heights Presbyterian Church at 10:30 a.m., followed an invocation ceremony featuring speeches from organizers, abuse survivors and elected leaders.

”When I had the vision to have this brides walk, I didn’t know what it was going to turn into–I just knew that I had to do it,” said Josie Ashton, 40, of Miami, who started the march in 2001 after learning in horror of Ms. Ricart’s case while studying criminal justice.

“It’s been 15 years since Gladys was murdered, today, and it’s been 14 years since we’ve been doing this walk; it’s like she never left us,” she added.

New York City Council Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito, several otehr council members and the Commissioner of the Mayor’s Office to Combat Domestic Violence, Rosemonde Pierre-Louis, attended this year’s event.

Marchers sit inside Fort Washington Presbyterian Church Friday. Peter J. Smith for The Wall Street Journal

“It [the march] really is a visual representation of something that continues to affect and impact many of our communities,” Ms. Mark-Viverito told reporters. “We’ve seen an unfortunate rise in incidents of domestic violence, and that’s something that we’ve got to just continue to raise awareness of.”

The speaker said she had supported the event for many years and pointed to $6 million in discretionary funding dedicated to fighting domestic violence in the council budget this year.

Ms. Mark-Viverito told those gathered that although she is not a sports fan–and could not even recall Ray Rice’s name--the controversy generated by the NFL player’s recorded instance of domestic violence highlighted “the problem we have.”

“You would hear people say ‘that’s a private matter… he shouldn’t be punished for that,’” she said. “That’s why we continue to repeat these cycles.”

The seven-mile march took participants under clear blue skies through Washington Heights and parts of the south Bronx before it is set to end mid-afternoon in East Harlem. At its outset along Broadway, attendees chanted slogans and held signs aloft calling for an end to domestic violence, while others played tambourines.

Olga Pravatta, 55, of Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, who works for healthcare workers union S.E.I.U. 1199, was among those who had donned a wedding dress. “It’s a beautiful way to get attention,” she said. “It doesn’t matter where you live, almost everyone knows someone who’s a victim of domestic violence.”

Mari da Silva, of Yonkers, said she attended wearing a white gown because of a history of domestic violence in her family. “It’s a serious issue,” she said, “and we want to give voice to women who have died.”