LITTLE ROCK — As he did in the first health-care speech of his administration in January, Gov. Asa Hutchinson last week stated a position on the private option that occupies a middle ground between maintaining the status quo and abandoning the program.

In a speech Wednesday to two health-care panels, Hutchinson said he is open to keeping some form of Medicaid expansion if the federal government grants the state increased flexibility in shaping the expansion to suit its needs.

His comments were reminiscent of his Jan. 22 speech on health care at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, in which he first proposed continuing the program through 2016 and creating a legislative task force to look for a new model to replace it after that.

Hutchinson said in his UAMS speech that he wanted to “close this chapter and start a new one,” but also that he wanted to “ensure health care services for vulnerable populations currently covered by the private option.” He reiterated those points Wednesday.

“I think he has to take that approach of changing this, because of at least the idea of what the voters (want),” said Rep. Kelley Linck, R-Flippin, chairman of the House Public Health, Welfare and Labor Committee.

Several candidates who campaigned against the private option won primary and general-election races last year, in some cases defeating legislators who voted for the program. Linck said many lawmakers believe voters sent a message in the election — but he said abandoning the program, which has used federal Medicaid money to subsidize private health insurance for more than 200,000 low-income Arkansans, may not be a good option either.

“I think the basics of the program are pretty good, and it sounds like the governor may be agreeing — and maybe some more of the Legislature is agreeing — the base of this idea is perhaps better than we thought,” he said. “We can tweak it going forward and maybe keep the base of the idea.”

Sen. Bryan King, R-Green Forest, a staunch opponent of the private option, said he was “disappointed” that the governor said nothing about winding down the program.

“He’s totally ignoring what the people said this last November election. Clearly, people got beat because they expanded Obamacare,” he said.

King said Hutchinson is considering the impact of the program on the state budget, but he said there is a bigger picture to consider.

“We’re just putting paying for this on our kids and grandkids and those not born yet,” he said. “The federal government is cutting back on the military, on highways, and the governor wants to sign even more people up. Looking at it (only) from a state perspective is shortsighted and wrong.”

Hutchinson last week named seven ideas for modifying the program that he said would provide incentives for people to work, strengthen employer-based insurance, promote healthy behavior and responsibility and control costs. Arkansas will begin paying 5 percent of the cost of the program in 2017 and will be paying 10 percent by 2020.

Most of Hutchinson’s ideas would require waivers from the federal government. He told reporters Thursday it is too soon to start those discussions now.

“I really think the next step is for the legislative task force to come up with their own set of recommendations. Hopefully it will be inclusive of mine, maybe add or subtract from that, but they need to indicate the support or the direction they want to go,” he said.

The governor said that “probably the most unique” of his proposals is to assign people who fall below a certain percentage of the federal poverty level to traditional Medicaid. Theoretically, the change would create an incentive to work.

“Beyond that, everything I suggested has had waivers in various states, so I don’t expect (federal approval) being the big lift. What I proposed is doable,” he said.

Some legislators are not convinced that everything in the governor’s plan is doable, or desirable.

King said there is no reason to believe the federal government would allow the state to change the private option to include a work requirement.

“The Obama administration multiple times has already rejected that. I don’t know where he thinks that’s going to happen,” he said.

Hutchinson said in an interview Friday his proposal would not, technically, be a work requirement.

“I was careful in using a percentage of the federal poverty level as a proxy for work,” he said. “I don’t think they would grant a waiver to say, ‘If you’re working, you’re going to be on private option, and if not you’re working, you’re going to be on traditional Medicaid,’ but I think you can do it as a percentage of the federal poverty level.”

Some legislators have questioned the governor’s proposal to eliminate coverage for non-emergency medical transportation. Sen. Joyce Elliott, D-Little Rock, said the coverage helps low-income people “engage in preventive care, as opposed to waiting till something is an emergency,” which she said should be a cost-saver in the long run.

Hutchinson has said eliminating the coverage would discourage unnecessary hospital visits.

Senate President Pro Tem Jonathan Dismang, R-Beebe, one of the architects of the private option, said he appreciates the governor’s ideas and is open to considering all of them, including moving some people to traditional Medicaid, which he said would allow for “a comparison between the two models” and could be useful in teaching people who have never had insurance how to use the medical system.

Dismang also acknowledged another goal of the governor’s plan: winning over private-option opponents.

“I think we could all reasonably assume that the governor has had conversations with folks that have traditionally been opposed to any form of expansion, and I would imagine that his direction has been somewhat tailored to try to help ease some of those concerns,” he said.