Racing Beat Dave Kallmann offers news, notes and perspective on the wide world of auto racing SHARE

By of the

Daytona Beach, Fla. -- Paul Menard took Saturday off, and Matt Kenseth turned more laps than anyone in the final practice before Sunday's 58th Daytona 500 at Daytona International Speedway.

Menard, an Eau Claire native, said Friday his car was decent during those sessions. The engine in his Chevrolet overheated in his Can-Am Duel qualifying race Thursday night, but it was scheduled to be replaced anyway. Menard is scheduled to line up 37th Sunday, but as drivers drop back for changing into backup cars or other reasons, he'll take the green flag in a better position than that.

Kenseth, a two-time Daytona 500 winner from Cambridge, is among those who will drop back. A crash in the Duel wiped out the car with which he had qualified second-fastest and would would have started alongside Chase Elliott on the front row.

Of the 25 drivers who practiced Saturday, Kenseth turned 30 laps, the most laps of anyone, and ranked 21st-best, more than a second off the pace of Dale Earnhardt Jr., the fastest.

Here's what Kenseth said in a brief interview after practice:

Q. Today . . . any better, any worse? The same as yesterday?

A. It’s hard to say. It’s hard to say honestly. The weather is quite a bit different, the wind is different. I don’t know. It felt like we were more competitive yesterday. Today we just did all single-car stuff, never ran with any other cars, so it’s hard to compare.

Q. Do you approach the race any different from there? Does it matter?

A. I don’t know. I’d much rather be in the front. I think there’s going to be some cars that hang in the back in the beginning, hoping there’s a wreck and they’re not in it and then start racing after that. I don’t know. You’ve got to think about it and go from there. Maybe do that for a run or two, but typically when everybody’s trying to be careful is the time you should try to make your way to the front. That’s the time to do it. When everybody’s trying to get to the front, that’s a great time to already be in the front. You’ve got to play it by ear. I don’t like being in the back.

Q. The first car seemed to be really, really, unusually good. Any reason to think this one won’t be the same?

A. We didn’t get in a ton of different situations with our 500 car. We were up toward the front. We were first or second. We did get shuffled back, and I couldn’t get recovered the way I wanted to. But it did seem like obviously I did qualify well and did have good speed. It’s honestly hard to tell what you have here until you get in the race tomorrow and get toward the front, and then you can kind of tell.

Q. You mentioned not being in a lot of positions the other night. Maybe this is a stretch, but is there some benefit to having to have to work traffic early in the race, to learn?

A. Nah, not really. You’re so far in the back and the draft is so big that until you get up to the top seven or eight rows you can hardly ever run wide open anyways. It’s just whether you can pick a place to go or not. I wanted to learn a little more Thursday and hopfully still have that car, but the track’s going to be totally different, so we haven’t really practiced in big groups for the race.