iStock Photo

KATHLEEN POTEMPA: The benefits of a team-based approach to health-care education have been evident for many years. As far back as the early 1970s, the Institute of Medicine gathered more than 100 leaders from medicine, nursing, pharmacy, dentistry and allied health professions to encourage interrelationships in their educational programs.

Progress in so-called inter-professional education was steady, but slow. Too slow. Now, at last, that’s changing, and health-care educators and providers should do everything we can to encourage it.

After all, such collaboration in education is what the World Health Organization has called a “key step in moving health systems from fragmentation to a position of strength.” It’s why a dental student’s definition of “treatment” was completely transformed when he was diagnosed with cancer and struggled with health-care providers who “spoke at me instead of with me,” and rarely with each other.

So, what has changed? Health care has become more complex and more expensive. To be efficient and effective, every care provider must be able to work to their fullest skills and abilities. This means greater collaboration and no duplication of effort. Collaboration requires that each profession understands, respects, and fully utilizes the knowledge, skills, and abilities of other professions. It requires that health-care teams work seamlessly together and communicate clearly to patients, families, and each other. Collaboration became hardwired into health care with the Affordable Care Act in 2010, with its focus on accountability in patient outcomes and effective utilization of resources—including team-based care.

Students who learn in communities of practice are a step ahead for work in collaborative, accountable care. Schools must deal with logistical challenges to interweave curricula, but obstacles can be overcome with, for example, web-based clinical team simulations—and the will to do so. Facilitating the sharing of processes and views among health science students creates trust, and the understanding that each profession’s contribution is equally important.

Funding has followed for interprofessional education and fellowships. In 2016, early-career nurse scientists are being tapped for the first time to train alongside MDs in the prestigious National Clinician Scholars program. Similarly, the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs is joining in the effort for research and training to find new solutions to invigorate health services.

The real promise of inter-professionalism awaits its full implementation as a strategy for better health care. All the health professions are important for better access to care, quality, and safety. If patients so clearly benefit from the interaction of a team in their care, just think about the potential for health systems in national policy.

That’s why continued innovations and investment in the areas of inter-professional health education and collaborative practice are so important. By necessity, we’ll see how far the revolution can go to break open practice silos and the learning environments that feed them. This can only be good news for patient outcomes and the health systems that produce them.

Kathleen Potempa is the dean of the University of Michigan School of Nursing.

Read the latest Health Care Report.