Topics: anti-lgbtq, anti-trans discrimination, housing discrimination, lgbtq rights, religious exemptions, sex discrimination, Title IX, Trans rights, transgender people, Politics News

Earlier this year, George Fox University, a Quaker school in Oregon, asked the Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights for a religious exemption from Title IX so that it could refuse a transgender student’s request to to live in the men’s residence hall instead of the female dormitory he was housed in. The student, a 20-year-old psychology major named Jayce, filed his Title IX complaint in April. The department granted the school an exemption in May. What’s happened since is revealing of the laws (and religious exemptions) that leave trans people vulnerable to discrimination, even when it is nominally banned and schools claim to be acting in good faith.

This month, George Fox implemented new regulations regarding housing for trans students. According the the policy, “Common residence halls are single-sex, defined anatomically.” This means that students like Jayce, who began his transition more than a year ago but has not undergone transition-related surgeries, can still be denied equal access to housing. Jayce told the New York Times that he is interested in surgery, but can’t afford it right now. This is a pretty common issue, particularly because insurance does not often cover transition-related care. (As Zack Ford at ThinkProgress recently noted, George Fox’s student insurance policy does not cover such care.) The policy is equally discriminatory towards trans students who do not want to undergo transition-related surgeries, and believe — like the World Health Organization and the World Professional Association for Transgender Health — that surgery should not be a prerequisite for recognition.

But despite claims that it is just neutrally applying a housing policy, George Fox doesn’t require the same anatomical scrutiny of all of its students, just out trans students. This is true across the culture. Anatomy — particularly genitalia — only becomes a topic for discussion when it comes to trans people trying to access basic facilities, like public restrooms and housing that corresponds to their gender identity. A spokesperson for the school told the Times that, “For 123 years, our housing policy has been to house students by their anatomy,” but it’s unlikely that administrators have spent the last century doing spot checks to get visual confirmation on a student’s genitalia before handing them the keys to their dorm.