Demand for medical occupations in area expected to rise

Photo: Creatas RF Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 One of the top 10 occupations in highest demand is physical therapist, with a median salary of $76,310. One of the top 10 occupations in highest demand is physical therapist, with a median salary of $76,310. Photo: Creatas RF Demand for medical occupations in area expected to rise 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Houston's population explosion, along with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, the presence of the Texas Medical Center, a large cohort of aging baby boomers, and an aging workforce are impacting growth as well as demand for more people in health care.

Depending on the job, annual salaries for health care occupations vary, from about $25,000 to more than $110,000, as do educational requirements, from a high school diploma to a doctorate degree.

But all of these in-demand occupations have one or two things in common: There are more openings than candidates to fill them, and demand is to projected to grow by at least 12 percent through 2020 (about average, according to Bureau of Labor Statistics forecasts).

Of the top 10 occupations in highest demand in 2012, six were in the health care field, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. These included (with salaries reflecting national averages):

Pharmacist: Median annual salary $111,570,

Physical therapist: Median annual salary $76,310,

Speech pathologist: Median annual salary $66,920,

Registered nurse: median annual salary $64,690,

Administrative assistant: In hospitals, medical offices and governmental agencies - median annual salary $34,660,

Medical receptionist: In every industry, though health care, physicians, hospitals and nursing homes dominate the profession - $25,240.

Betty Young, PhD and president of Houston Community College Coleman College for Health Sciences, said there are many and varied opportunities in Houston's health care industry.

"It's an extremely positive current and future picture for those electing to go into the health care field," she said. "During the recent recession, we never saw a downturn in the health care industry, and the ACA is changing the landscape. Just the other day, 10 million more Americans had signed up for services, and more trained professionals are needed to provide services. Think about one physician and how many people support that one professional's care of one patient."

"Most jobs in health care now require certification, licensure or registry, some kind of credential, so training is critical," she said.

Alexander Okwonna, San Jacinto College dean of natural sciences and health sciences, agreed.

"We're seeing many great opportunities for students seeking to help people while earning a good living in a steady job," he said, "and projected demand shows continued growth in the health care field. We're also seeing changes in some of the demand. As an example, more patients are being seen by nurse practitioners. Pharmacies are opening urgent-care clinics, staffed by nurse practitioners, so nursing is an exploding field."

"Other areas showing high demand are pharmacies," Okwonna said. "Pharmacy techs will continue to be in demand. Health information management also is growing, thanks to the mandated transition to electronic medical records, and receptionists, administrative assistants and medical assistants also are in demand, staffing more physicians' offices and assisting leadership in health care institutions."

Okwonna said San Jacinto College is working on a new program with The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston that reflects the growing demand for trained medical professionals.

"UTMB is looking to begin a physical therapy assistant-to-doctorate of physical therapy program, and we'll be providing a pipeline of students into that program," he said. "We're excited about offering students the opportunity to go from an associate degree directly to earning their doctorate, which is now required of all new physical therapists."

In north Harris County, Lone Star College System is experiencing similar demand for trained health care professionals.

"Our programs are geared so that our students can earn the necessary certification in a few months, a year or two years, so they can get started in their new careers. This allow them to go further in their fields," said Bill Drees, PhD, dean of instruction, health and human services at Lone Star College - North Harris."

He said he would give the following advice to anyone who is considering going into health care.

"Know what you're getting into," he said. "Find resources to help you make this decision. Talk to program directors at the college, the medical assistant at your physician's office or someone you know in the field. Ask about the field, and try to find a mentor already in the field."

Further details

For information about HCC Coleman College, go to coleman.hccs.edu. For San Jacinto College, visit www.sanjac.edu. For more about Lone Star College - North Harris, visit the site www.lonestar.edu.