Charleston Souther races onto the field in celebration after defeating The Citadel 33-20 Saturday, Sept. 26, 2015 at Johnson Hagood Stadium. Paul Zoeller/Staff

Jamey Chadwell gathered his gleeful football team in the middle of the Johnson Hagood Stadium field Saturday night for a post-game prayer following a 33-20 victory over The Citadel. He was interrupted by a giggly shout.

“Give him the broom!” a player said.

With that, the Charleston Southern head coach found his new favorite household tool and made three broad stokes. One for each of the relatively glorious wins over the Bulldogs the last three seasons.

“Sweep! Sweep! Sweep!” the players yelled in unison.

Chadwell thanked the Lord, then ripped The Citadel for its cool interest in continuing the series beyond this season — on Charleston Southern’s home-and-home terms, that is.

“There’s probably not a chance that we’re ever going to play again as long as I’m here, maybe while he (Citadel head coach Mike Houston) is here,” Chadwell said.

The 38-year-old coach was just getting warmed up.

“We feel disrespected by them,” Chadwell said. “I’m not saying their coach, or maybe their team, but there are a lot of people that maybe look down on us for maybe what we stand for because of our facilities.”

And: “If we’re going to play them, it’s going to be home-and-home. We win more games here than they do, so it’s like a home game for us.”

Safe to say that Chadwell’s approach to series diplomacy might at least temporarily hamper negotiations to schedule another game or two.

But let us embrace bitterness, bad blood and brooms, critical elements to any good rivalry. A terrific game Saturday night begs for more action between the two Lowcountry programs.

The sooner, the crazier.

Blue Crew vs. cadets

The crowd of 11,998 was the largest at The Citadel since Nov. 16, 2013. It isn’t South Carolina-Clemson, or Georgia-Florida. But it is Charleston’s largest outdoor football cocktail party and good, (mostly) clean fun on the field.

It was an often exciting night of “Blue Crew” T-shirts and bare-chested male students sporting coordinated body paint on one side, the famed corps of cadets and Citadel band on the other.

Every third down was a loud contrast of noise and different shades of blue. It was a game of big momentum swings, but nothing changed the direction of the notion that a dormant rivalry is just plain wrong.

As Charleston Southern quarterback Austin Brown broke through the Citadel line for a 5-yard gain, the cheer from a few thousand Charleston Southern fans echoed throughout the stadium.

Only to be immediately answered by the roar of Citadel cadets, fans and significant others. They liked the way Brown’s helmet flew up in the air after a wallop applied by linebacker Tevin Floyd and defensive end Joe Crochet.

Bring out the broom

If only the Charleston Southern band had the money to travel a few miles off campus.

If only The Citadel started a Cowbells for Cadets drive.

But these are nit-picks easily corrected with a few loyal sponsors.

Sadly, with no games scheduled beyond 2015, there is plenty of time to tweak.

The Citadel should compromise, realizing that playing at Charleston Southern creates a week of valuable buzz.

Charleston Southern should come around to considering a 2-for-1 or 3-for-2 series arrangement titling toward Johnson Hagood Stadium, because this rivalry has been as good for the Bucs as anything in its football history.

The broom, for instance.

It didn’t find its way to the Charleston Southern sideline until the Bucs took a 33-20 lead with 3:54 left on Mike Holloway’s 73-yard touchdown run and a 2-point conversion.

“It was in the locker room,” Chadwell said. “I wasn’t cocky. After we broke that long run, I said, ‘Go get it, I think we’re good.’”

Logic says Chadwell, 21-8 at Charleston Southern, is such a good coach, he won’t be around much longer. But wouldn’t Citadel fans love to give him the broom treatment three or four wins down the line?

Ah, sweet bitterness, the best reason why smart people at both schools must make a Buccaneers-Bulldogs football game bloom as annually as azaleas.

Follow Gene Sapakoff on Twitter @sapakoff