A U.S. House committee on Tuesday approved Rep. Kevin Yoder’s amendment to withhold Homeland Security funds from cities and counties that don’t strictly enforce federal immigration laws.

Yoder, a Republican representing Kansas’ eastern 3rd District, introduced the amendment to target so-called “sanctuary cities” which, conservatives argue, allow undocumented immigrants to skirt deportation.

“Congress must take a strong stand against sanctuary cities that support illegal immigration by giving aid and comfort to violent felons,” Yoder said Tuesday.

The House Appropriations Committee, which Yoder is a member of, voted 28-21 to adopt Yoder’s amendment to an annual appropriations bill for the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.

Heated rhetoric over sanctuary cities has spawned in recent weeks from the July 1 slaying of Kathryn Steinle, 32, in San Francisco. The man accused of killing her, Francisco Sanchez, has been deported several times and has a list of felony convictions.

“The heartbreaking tragedy in San Francisco was preventable and we must do everything we can to ensure that it never happens again,” Yoder said.

According to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, the law enforcement agency had requested that Sanchez remain in custody while he awaited processing by ICE but he was instead released April 15. Conservatives, including several presidential contenders, have called on Justice Department officials to pressure cities and counties to more strictly enforce immigration laws in the wake of Steinle’s death.

Yoder’s amendment mirrors that of a Senate amendment put forth by Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark.

Yoder’s office said Tuesday there are about 300 cities and counties in the U.S. that act as a sanctuary to some extent, citing a recent report by the anti-immigration Center for Immigration Studies. Among those counties listed is Shawnee County, though county counselor Rich Eckert said Tuesday that the county isn’t a sanctuary.

“We are following federal case law. I don’t know how we got on the list,” Eckert said.

In June 2014, the Shawnee County Department of Corrections announced it would no longer honor ICE requests for a detainer, a request to hold someone indefinitely, without first receiving a warrant or show of probable cause.

“We want to cooperate with all of the law enforcement agencies, but we have to have probable cause,” Maj. Timothy Phelps, deputy director of administrative and investigative services for the Shawnee County DOC, said at the time. “We have to respond to the way the law has shifted.”

A few months before the county’s decision, a federal judge in Oregon ruled that a county had violated the rights of an individual by complying with an ICE detainer.

Yoder’s amendment and its Senate counterpart are likely to garner plenty of support from the all-Republican Kansas congressional delegation. Asked at a town hall Saturday for his opinion on sanctuary cities, Sen. Jerry Moran said he thinks they are illegal.

Rep. Tim Huelskamp of western Kansas said on Twitter last week that man accused of killing Steinle “was in San Francisco because it was a sanctuary city. That’s where she was gunned down.” The tea party Republican also said President Barack Obama “doesn’t support sanctuary cities; only a sanctuary nation.”

Rep. Lynn Jenkins also supports a crackdown on sanctuary cities and counties, telling WIBW-TV on Monday that sanctuary policies are “dangerous” and “in clear violation of existing immigration laws.”

Yoder’s amendment still has a long road to passage as the Homeland Security funding bill makes its way through the full House and Senate before landing on the desk of the president, likely an opponent of the idea.

But Yoder said Tuesday local governments that shelter undocumented immigrants should run the risk of losing federal financial support.

“Cities that refuse to comply with immigration officials and release dangerous criminals back into our communities put innocent American lives at risk,” Yoder said. “If these cities wish to continue to subvert the law they will do so without the support of American taxpayers.”

In addition to Shawnee County, the Center for Immigration Studies identifies five other Kansas counties that act as sanctuaries: Finney County, Sedgwick County, Harvey County, Butler County and Johnson County, which Yoder represents.