Employers who have traditionally provided health coverage to their workers are struggling to rein in the cost, so they can keep offering health benefits that enable them to attract and retain employees.

Meanwhile, employers who don’t offer health plans — but may soon be required to under the Affordable Care Act — are looking at whether it will be less expensive to pay the ACA’s $2,000 per-worker penalty than to offer health benefits.



While the ACA requires employers with 50 or more full-time workers to offer coverage to their full-timers or pay a penalty, that so-called “employer mandate” is being phased in.



Employers with 50 to 99 full workers don’t need to start providing coverage until 2016. Those with 100 or more have to provide health benefits to least 70 percent of their full-timers in 2015. In 2016, all employers with more than 50 workers will have to offer coverage to 95 percent of their full-timers.



Attorney Joan Neri with the employee benefits and executive compensation practice at Drinker Biddle & Reath in Florham Park said her clients already provide health coverage, and are exploring ways to cut costs.



For example, some of her clients offer health coverage to part-time employees. The ACA does not require employers to cover part-timers, and “Some employers are looking at whether they should continue to provide coverage to their part-timers.” But she said employers are reluctant to reduce benefits to part-timers: “They don’t want to lose the good part-time employees they have.”



Neri said employers also are considering reducing the coverage they provide to employee spouses who are employed by another employer. The employer might propose providing secondary or backup coverage to the spouses, who would get primary coverage from their own employer’s health plan.



But that option also poses some risk, Neri said. “Does the employer who has always covered spouses really want to turn around and say to the employees: ‘We’re not going to cover spouses anymore’?”



By providing secondary coverage to that working spouse, the employer “is making it more palatable,” Neri said. “They’re not doing away with spousal coverage entirely, but saying ‘If your spouse is working and has an available plan with their employer, the spouse should enroll in that plan as their primary coverage.’”



Neri said several of her clients are looking into “private exchanges” that offer a new way for employers to offer coverage while still getting some control over their health care spending.

Click here to subscribe to the NJBIZ e-newsletters



Offered by insurers and benefits consultants, private exchanges enable employers to offer a wide menu of health plans and give workers a set amount of money to spend; employees that want richer benefits can then pay for them out-of-pocket.



Neri said that, while her clients are exploring cost cutting strategies, dropping their health plan altogether isn’t among them: “They want to keep the talent they have and they want to have a reputation for treating their employees well.”



The ACA poses a difficult challenge for many employers — whether they have always offered health plans or are trying to decide whether to offer coverage for the first time to comply with the ACA, experts said.



For example, many employers traditionally have offered health plans whose premiums were too steep for the company’s low-wage workers to afford. Under the ACA, the employer must offer a plan that’s “affordable,” meaning workers can’t be asked to contribute more than 9.5 percent of their annual salary to cover themselves under the plan.



In addition to being affordable, the plan has to cover 60 percent of the medical expenses. If the plan doesn’t meet those two requirements, and the employee goes to HealthCare.gov and buys a government-subsidized plan, the employer can be hit with a $3,000 penalty per employee.

Anthony Rainone, a partner in the employment law practice at Brach Eichler, said employers are looking into providing coverage that meets the ACA’s affordability rules. He said employers have to deal with the fact that “Under Obamacare, they have to make sure that the employee’s cost for a single person plan is no more than 9.5 percent of their income.” He said bare bones coverage then becomes the floor, and employees can pay extra to get more extensive benefits.



He said one strategy employers are using is “to look at their lowest paid employee, figure out what 9.5 percent of that employee’s wages are and then set that as the employee contribution amount.”



Rainone said none of his clients is dropping its health plan, and he said “I don’t see mass droves of employers dropping coverage.”



Vaughan M. Reale, executive vice president of employee benefits at CBIZ, said employers in low-wage industries, like restaurants and hospitality, are finding that health plans deemed affordable under the ACA may still be so expensive that low-wage workers don’t enroll.



He said if a restaurant offers a plan that requires the wait staff to pay 9.5 percent of their income toward health care, those workers may decide they just can’t afford it.



“You have a lot of lower-paid employees who are not going to spend 9.5 percent of their income on health insurance,” Reale said.



He said he is advising employers to figure out which of their employees are eligible for Medicaid, and then help them enroll. “And for all of your other low-income employees, offer then the least expensive plan that you can.”



Experts said that, rather than paying 9.5 percent of their wages for health insurance, low wage workers are more likely to pay the ACA penalty that the law imposes on individuals who don’t have health coverage.



In 2015, the penalty is the higher of either 2 percent of your annual household income or $325 per person for the year ($162.50 per child under 18), up to a maximum penalty per family of $975.



One option for employers is offering so called “skinny plans” that provide “minimum essential coverage” but don’t fully comply with the ACA. By offering a skinny plan, the employer avoids the $2,000 per-worker penalty, and the workers also avoid their penalty under the individual mandate.

Skinny plans typically may provide preventive care and office visits; some offer limited hospital care. But experts said since skinny plans typically aren’t fully compliant with the ACA, if the employee goes to HealthCare.gov and gets subsidized coverage, the employer may have to pay a $3,000 per worker penalty.



Health insurance broker David Oscar at Altigro said he is working with several employers that have not offered health coverage in the past, and figure it will be less expensive to pay the penalty than to offer coverage.



One of his clients is a manufacturing company with 75 full-time workers. This employer won’t have to provide coverage until 2016, but is already planning to pay the penalty rather than offer coverage. Oscar said this employer plans to pay the $2,000 per employee per year, which is imposed on all full-timers, minus the first 30. That’s $2,000 times 45 workers, or $90,000 a year. Oscar pointed out that’s far less than the cost of providing health insurance to its 75 workers, which would be at least $400 a month, or $360,000. Oscar said this client “has already built it into his budget” to pay the penalty in 2016.



Steven Paragone, employee benefits specialist at Northeastern Benefit Services in Princeton, said he is working with several new clients that don’t offer coverage and now must figure out how to comply with the ACA. Meanwhile, he’s continuing his traditional work: helping his current clients find affordable health plans so they can keep their workers covered.



Paragone said health insurers on average are seeking 10 to 15 percent premium increases for 2015. “That number is the beginning point of the negotiations, and we look to get it down to single digits,” he said. “You know there is some wiggle room in there.”

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

Festo Didactic opens high-tech training lab for manufacturing industry in N.J.

Fox calls for transportation investment, trust fund replenishment at Newark event

State plans Parkway ramps tied to Sayreville project