Republicans are eager to rumble with the White House over sanctions on Iran, but they may have trouble getting President Barack Obama’s Democratic critics to go along.

A day after Obama vowed to veto any bill that could jeopardize nuclear talks with Tehran, Republicans were working on two pieces of legislation that could move in conjunction with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s address to Congress on Feb. 11. But it quickly became clear that Republicans have a problem: Senate Democrats who might not like Obama’s policies on Iran but may not be ready to override their president, especially after the forceful arguments he made in the State of the Union.

Story Continued Below

In interviews Wednesday, several Democrats who had supported a previous version of Iran legislation sponsored by Sen. Mark Kirk (R-Ill.) said they are reconsidering their positions. Meanwhile, a previous version of an Iran bill offered by Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.) did not have any Democratic co-sponsors.

Last week, at the Senate Democratic retreat in Baltimore, Obama forcefully made a case against further Iran legislation. He did the same thing Tuesday night in front of millions of Americans, saying he would veto any sanctions legislation because it would “all but guarantee that diplomacy fails.”

Obama’s words appear to be sinking in.

“I’m considering very seriously the very cogent points that he’s made in favor of delaying any congressional action,” said Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.). “I’m talking to colleagues on both sides of the aisle. And I think they are thinking, and rethinking, their positions in light of the points that the president and his team are making to us.”

Asked if he’s spoken directly to Obama about Iran, Blumenthal said: “The president and his staff are in touch with all of us.”

Sen. Mark Warner (D-Va.) said he is actively weighing the president’s position against Warner’s own belief that Congress needs to keep pressure on Iran. Even the hawkish Sen. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.), who said Wednesday that the administration’s comments sound “like talking points straight from Tehran,” was noncommittal on whether he would again co-sponsor Iranian sanctions legislation that he once led. “I have no idea yet,” Menendez said.

The issue, said Sen. Chuck Schumer of New York, is one of timing. While Democrats and Republicans alike want to be tough on Iran, the president’s party is more open to giving Obama some breathing room.

“There’s overwhelming support to toughen up the sanctions,” said Schumer, a member of Democratic leadership who co-sponsored sanctions legislation last year. “The question is when. At times in the past the president asked for a little time, until March. That’s something people are looking at.”

Kirk’s bill would impose new sanctions if diplomatic talks fall apart or Iran violates an interim deal. Corker’s would allow Congress an up-or-down vote to reject or approve any final deal between the U.S. and its allies and Iran. Sources familiar with the process in both chambers said Republicans have made no final decision on which bill will provide the base for the legislation. Another option is merging versions of the two bills, though Corker doubted that would happen. The House is also working on new sanctions legislation.

A decision is expected in the near future, with a vote perhaps as early as February, given the support Iran legislation enjoys from Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) and House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio).

On the GOP bill to approve the Keystone XL oil pipeline, Obama swiftly came out with a veto threat because it was clear not enough Democrats in Congress would vote to override him. That’s not the case for Iran: Sixty senators publicly supported sanctions legislation in the last Congress, but it was widely believed that more Democrats would have voted for the bill if it had come to the floor.

Senate Minority Whip Dick Durbin (D-Ill.) said the vote would be a nail-biter if it were held today. But he expects enough Democrats to have Obama’s back to reject an override, whether on tightening sanctions or requiring congressional approval for a nuclear deal.

“If I had to be pushed, I’d guess there’s at least 34 that would say: ‘This is premature, we should wait,’” Durbin said in an interview. “If there’s anything that we would do that would jeopardize the negotiations, I think many Democrats would oppose it.”

Republicans think Democrats are bluffing and will be unable to oppose hardline legislation on Iran, whatever form it takes. But they acknowledge that it’s a tricky calculus to get to 67 votes when the president is leaning so hard on Democrats to hold the line, which might require legislation quite different from what’s been proposed so far.

“At some point, we’re going to get to the magic 67 and be able to override this veto,” said Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Texas). “We’re in the process of figuring out what that would look like to command the broadest possible support in the Senate. And then we’ll have that debate with the president.”

Of course, the GOP may have further problems getting to 67 thanks to defections from Sens. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) and Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.), who have stayed away from new sanctions legislation.

White House chief of staff on Iran sanctions debate

“While negotiations are going on, I worry that we will fracture our coalition,” Flake said of Western nations that have coordinated on Iran negotiations and sanctions. “I want to keep that coalition together.”

Secretary of State John Kerry aims to have a framework for a deal by March, so the race is on in the Senate to beat him to the punch. The Banking Committee postponed its vote on the Kirk bill this week but will move swiftly next week with a hearing Tuesday, a classified briefing from the administration on Jan. 28 and a committee vote Jan. 29, Chairman Richard Shelby (R-Ala.) said. Corker is also ramping up activity — he held a hearing on Iran on Wednesday and is moving toward developing a new draft bill.

“What we’re talking about is two tracks,” Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) said. “One is the sanctions and the other is the congressional approval.”

What legislation moves though Congress, he added, “depends on a number of Democrats. There are a number of Democrats that are in agreement about the ratification. There’s others that are very much opposed to the sanctions because the president said he would veto them for sure.”

Keystone and Iran sanctions, a hardline Homeland Security funding bill that attacks Obama’s immigration policies, and legislation that tweaks Obamacare’s definition of the 40-hour work week: That’s a lot of veto threats for the GOP Congress’ preliminary agenda. At the same time, Republicans are trying to give Obama expanded negotiating authority on trade deals and work with him on cybersecurity legislation.

It’s a tricky balance that illustrates what Washington is in for during the next two years.

“We’re kind of trying to slot things so that we’re doing thing … that the president would actually sign,” said Sen. John Thune of South Dakota, the No. 3 GOP leader, citing cybersecurity and trade as two areas of agreement. “And this [Iran bill] will be obviously be more controversial.”

Manu Raju contributed to this report.