Associated Press

The lead investigator into last summer’s Quebec rail disaster said he believes the Canadian government’s plan to beef up standards for new railcars used to ship dangerous goods doesn’t go far enough.

Don Ross, senior investigator with the Transportation Safety of Board of Canada, said the plan — unveiled this month — would bring tank cars up to safety standards adopted in 2011 by the Association of American Railroads. But the Lac-Megantic derailment, and subsequent rail accidents in Alabama, North Dakota and New Brunswick, suggest further measures are required, he said.

The AAR is already moving toward a more-stringent standard for railcars used to carry dangerous goods, and Mr. Ross said his agency believes the Canadian government needs to do likewise.

“What we are recommending is much more akin to what the industry is proposing,” Mr. Ross told Canada Real Time Thursday, after the TSB issued three separate recommendations — dealing with railcars, route analysis and compulsory emergency-response plans — aimed at boosting rail safety given the rapid increase in the amount of crude oil carried on North America’s tracks.

The TSB is also calling on Canada to “immediately” phase out older rail cars, like the ones used by Montreal, Maine & Atlantic Railway Ltd. to carry crude oil from North Dakota’s Bakken region to a refinery in New Brunswick.

“The emphasis needs to be on ensuring the tankers transporting dangerous goods provide enough protection,” Mr. Ross said.

Canadian Transport Minister Lisa Raitt has instructed her officials “to review the recommendations on an urgent basis,” her spokeswoman said Thursday.

Mr. Ross’s investigation into the Lac-Megantic derailment continues, and he spoke to Canada Real Time about developments to date. The following is an edited transcript of the conversation:

WSJ: Would better-equipped cars, as the TSB is recommending, have reduced the damage done at Lac-Megantic?

Mr. Ross: Certainly, cars with additional safety features — full head shields, head jackets, thermally protected — would have helped.

WSJ: What have tests shown about the characteristics of the Bakken crude involved in the Lac-Megantic derailment?

Mr. Ross: We’ve analyzed some of the data … and issued a safety advisory in September saying shippers need to make sure these dangerous goods are properly described when they are in transit. The crude in Lac-Megantic was labelled as level 3 when it should have been the [more-flammable] level 2. We haven’t finished all the analysis with that oil. We have had people coming forward asking if we’ve checked for this element and that one. So there’s a whole spectrum of things we are looking at and that work is not complete.

WSJ: But so far, is there anything that has raised eyebrows about that Bakken crude? And what do you think accounts for the explosive nature?

Mr. Ross: Not at this point. It’s described as a light sweet crude and our testing so far is consistent so far with that type of terminology. As far as sulphur levels and so on, we are looking at that. I have heard the suggestion about gassy crude. But there is no accepted industry method for testing for gassy crude. That’s the challenge. We were surprised by the enormity of the fire in Lac-Megantic. And we are trying to answer those questions, to determine whether there was something different.

WSJ: Should the goods have been shipped in a pressurized tank car?

Mr. Ross: If there is something new on the market — and I am not saying there is — then you have to make sure you have good testing and a good understanding of what that product is, and what are the associated risks. When you have those answers, then you can say what type of packaging is required to make sure it is transported safely.

–Russell Gold contributed to this article

Paul Vieira