The U.S. House is on vacation. The Senate will be done for the year today. We are getting close to the end of the legislative year in Congress.

Here's the latest Michigan Delegation, your look at news from Michigan's elected officials in the House and Senate, as well as the campaigns for those seats:

Senate passes budget compromise: The big news this week is that the Senate passed a bipartisan and bicameral budget deal and both Sens. Carl Levin and Debbie Stabenow supported the plan.

The Michigan Democrats were two of 64 Senators who voted for the legislation, which included nine Republicans and two independents. There were 36 senators who voted no.

The bill was formed by a committee headed by Republican Rep. Paul Ryan and Democratic Sen. Patty Murray, which was formed as part of the agreement to reopen the government this year.

“Government shutdowns create uncertainty for businesses and families, hurt our economy, and drive up our deficit," Stabenow, who was on the budget committee that worked on the deal, said in a statement. "This bipartisan budget agreement, while far from perfect, averts another government shutdown for two years and rolls back reckless, across-the-board cuts in innovation, research, education, and defense."

Levin said in statement that he supported the legislation "because of the modest positive changes it makes from the status quo, and in the hope that this is the first step toward a more comprehensive and more balanced deficit-reduction agreement to replace the rest of sequestration."

The bill will erase $65 billion in across-the-board cuts set for January and early 2015 on domestic and defense programs, leaving about $140 billion in reductions in place. On the other side of the budget ledger, it projects savings totaling $85 billion over the coming decade, enough to show a deficit reduction of about $23 billion over the 10-year period.

Land would have voted no: If she were in the Senate, Terri Lynn Land would have voted against the bill.

"It was encouraging to see lawmakers in Washington working together on our nation's fiscal mess," Land, Michigan's former Secretary of State, said in a statement to MLive.

But Land opposed part of the budget deal, which will cut military retiree pensions. Under the budget, working-age retirees will see their pensions increase at a slower rate. Instead of going at the rate of inflation, they will increase the rate of inflation minus 1 percentage point, according to Politico.

"I would have supported the plan if it had more spending reductions across the board without putting our veterans on the line," Land said in the statement. "As Michigan Secretary of State, I found ways to do more with less; we were able to deliver more services, at a higher quality, and more efficiently than before. The Federal Government should do the same."

Peters voted for the legislation in the House last week.

"Lie of the Year" In the past week, Republicans have attacked the White House and Democrats over Poltifact's "lie of the year."

Politifact, operated by Tampa Bay Times, last week gave its "lie of the year" to President Barack Obama for what he said in November about the Affordable Care Act: "If you like your health care plan, you can keep it."

Republicans have extended the "lie of the year" to other Democrats across the country, including Gary Peters and Mark Schauer, who is running for governor. Both men were in Congress in 2010 and voted for the Affordable Care Act.

In 2009, as the health care law was being debated in Congress, Peters said something similar to what Obama said this year. According to a Aug. 20, 2009 Detroit Free Press article, Peters said at an event in Southfield: "If you're covered and you like your insurance, you can keep it," he said.

Last month, Land asked Peters to apologize for the statement.

The President was responding to criticism about the ACA when the website was down and thousands of people could not enroll in new plans.

During this time, Peters was one of 39 Democrats, and the only one from Michigan, who voted for a bill introduced by U.S. Rep. Fred Upton, R-St Joseph, called "Keep Your Health Plan Act." It would allow insurance companies to offer existing plans to current customers for an additional year, even if those plans did not meet the standards of the Affordable Care Act.

In a statement, Peters Campaign Manager Julie Petrick said "Gary is frustrated by the roll-out of the Affordable Care Act and that's why he is focused on fixing the law so it works for Michigan families."

Agema and Abortion Rider: Democrats have attacked Republicans and Terri Lynn Land on two issues this week: anti-gay comments made by Republican National Committeeman Dave Agema and a bill passed by the Michigan Legislature prohibiting insurers from paying for abortions.

According to the law, the only way insurance could pay for an abortion would be if a woman had purchased coverage through a separate rider. Opponents have called it "rape insurance" because a woman would not know in advance if she would need an abortion in the case of rape or incest.

"I find the term the Democrats are using offensive," Land said in a statement. "Rape is an awful crime and should not be politicized like that. I am a supporter of life."

However it is unclear if Land supports the law that was passed. Peters has condemned the law.

This month, Agema said in a speech that homosexuals want free medical care because they are dying young from AIDS. Agema has said the comments were taken out of context by the Herald Palladium, which first reported the story, but the Southwest Michigan newspaper published audio from the meeting.

Several Republicans, including Gov. Rick Snyder, House Speaker Jase Bolger and Senate Majority Leader Randy Richardville, have condemned Agema's comments.

Land said she does not support discrimination, but would not condemn Agema or elaborate further or have an interview with the Grand Rapids Press.

In a statement Thursday, the Land campaign spokeswoman said: "Terri was very clear that she doesn’t support discrimination of any kind" and said Democrats are using the issue as a way to deflect attention from problems with the Affordable Care Act.

Also this week:

Actress Glenn Close held a press conference with Debbie Stabenow on Wednesday to support the Excellence in Mental Health bill. The bill, cosponsored by Republican Sen Roy Blunt, would launch a pilot program to allow Medicaid to help cover mental health care at community centers. “It is critical that people come out and talk about mental illness to reduce the stigma surrounding those living with mental illness," Close said, according to a statement from Stabenow's office.



DNC Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz was in Metro Detroit on Tuesday for a gathering on LGBT issues. “We’re very focused on Michigan,” said Wasserman Schultz, MLive Detroit's Khalil AlHajal reported. “We have at least three House seats that are competitive here. Obviously the gubernatorial race is very competitive… The United States Senate race is competitive. So we are going to be organizing, vocalizing and focusing on Michigan as a prime, central address to make sure that people elect Democrats all across the state.” Democratic candidates for Senate, Gary Peters and Governor, Mark Schauer, were also there.

The Associated Press contributed to this report

Fritz Klug is a news buzz reporter for MLive. Contact him at fklug@mlive.com or 269-370-0584. Follow him on Twitter, Facebook, Google+ or App.net.