When President Obama arrived in Oklahoma City on Wednesday night, a vulgar sight awaited him: about 10 demonstrators across the street from Obama’s downtown hotel waving Confederate battle flags as the presidential motorcade pulled up.

Such a greeting of the nation’s first black president would have been appalling under any circumstance. It was all the more repugnant because of what it followed — the flag’s importance to the accused killer in last month’s South Carolina church massacre — and by what it preceded: Obama’s visit to a prison on Thursday to showcase the problem with sentencing policies that have filled the nation’s prisons with nonviolent offenders who are disproportionately African American.

People wave Confederate flags outside the hotel that President Barack Obama is staying the night, on Wednesday, July 15, 2015, in Oklahoma City. (AP)

“[P]eople of colour are more likely to be stopped, frisked, questioned, charged, detained,” he told the NAACP this week. “African Americans are more likely to be arrested. They are more likely to be sentenced to more time for the same crime.” With one in 35 black men behind bars (versus one in 214 white men), “around one in nine African American kids has a parent in prison.”

Oklahoma was just the latest reminder of how little progress has been made in what was naively greeted with Obama’s election nearly seven years ago as “post-racial America.” In May, Obama joined Twitter — and was met by a flood of racist tweets. In June, a gunman killed nine people at Charleston’s Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church. The suspect had allegedly posed with the Confederate battle flag and posted a racist manifesto online.

This month, just as South Carolina was finally taking down the Confederate battle flag, Republicans in Congress proposed protecting the flag on federal lands, and protesters greeted Obama with the flag in Tennessee as well as in Oklahoma. Meantime, Donald Trump’s popularity among Republicans has surged since he began his campaign of racially-charged rhetoric on immigration.





An honor guard from the South Carolina Highway patrol removes the Confederate battle flag from the Capitol grounds in Columbia, S.C.

Following an endless stream of police violence against unarmed black men, it’s enough to drive one to despair. The gloom comes through in a deeply pessimistic new book, “Between the World and Me,” in which the Atlantic’s Ta-Nehisi Coates holds out little hope for white Americans, who deceive themselves by living an idyllic “dream” of prosperity made possible by structural racism. “The plunder of black life was drilled into this country in its infancy and reinforced across its history, so that plunder has become . . . a default setting to which, likely to the end of our days, we must invariably return,” he writes.

Of white Americans, he advises: “[D]o not pin your struggle on their conversion. The Dreamers will have to learn to struggle themselves, to understand that the field for their Dream, the stage where they have painted themselves white, is the deathbed of us all.”

But the recent ugliness has also coincided with a change in Obama’s public approach to race. Obama had been shy about race for much of his presidency, and when he did speak, as The Washington Post’s Janell Ross noted this week, he would often “lecture black America about its behaviour.” Now, she wrote, Obama may sound “something like the black president some white Americans across the political spectrum feared (or hoped for).”

U.S. President Barack Obama receives applause from Kelly Bryant as she introduces him to speak about the Affordable Care Act during a visit to Taylor Stratton Elementary School in Nashville

I’m one of those white Americans who had hoped for it. It’s not Obama’s job to end racism, and he is probably in a no-win position on race (as illustrated by his “If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon” Martin remark) but I’m buoyed to have the president speaking as loudly as the haters.

In a June 22 podcast with comedian Marc Maron, he said ending racism is “not just a matter of it not being polite to say ‘nigger’ in public.” On Tuesday before the NAACP, he spoke of the “legacy of hundreds of years of slavery and segregation, and structural inequalities that compounded over generations.” In between, on June 26, came his eulogy in South Carolina — perhaps the best rhetoric of his presidency, but also a call for action over words. “Every time something like this happens, somebody says we have to have a conversation about race,” he said. “We don’t need more talk.”

What we need, for one thing, is the sentencing reforms he spoke about this week. As more nonviolent drug offenders (often black) have been put away, the United States now has 5 percent of the world’s population but 25 percent of its prisoners. The issue has Republican support, which raises the possibility of rare late-term legislative achievement.

State of the Union address: President Obama's speech







8 show all State of the Union address: President Obama's speech













1/8 State of the Union U.S. President Barack Obama shakes hands with Speaker of the House John Boehner (R) as Vice President Joe Biden looks on at the end of President Obama's State of the Union address to a joint session of the U.S. Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington

2/8 State of the Union US President Barack Obama departs following his State of the Union address on Capitol Hill in Washington

3/8 State of the Union Barack Obama delivers the State of the Union address to Congress Getty Images

4/8 State of the Union U.S. President Barack Obama blows a kiss to his wife, first lady Michelle Obama who was sitting in the gallery, at the end of his State of the Union address to a joint session of the U.S. Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington

5/8 State of the Union US First Lady Michelle Obama looks at guest Rebekah Erler as President Barack Obama mentions her and her family during the State of the Union address at the US Capitol in Washington

6/8 State of the Union Alan Gross (C), recently freed after being held in Cuba since 2009, pumps his fist after being recognized by U.S. President Barack Obama during the State of the Union speech in the House chamber of the U.S. Capitol in Washington

7/8 State of the Union U.S. lawmakers pay tribute to the victims of the Paris attacks by holding up pencils during U.S. President Barack Obama's State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington

8/8 State of the Union U.S. President Barack Obama arrives to deliver his State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington

Nobody thinks such a law will erase racism. But, as Obama said this week, “If we keep taking steps toward a more perfect union, and close the gaps between who we are and who we want to be, America will move forward.”

It’s the perfect response to the Confederate flag wavers.

Copyright: The Washington Post