I’m sick and tired of the village of Boulder and its intolerance and political incorrectness, its refusal to recognize and honor diversity and its lack of compassion for human beings and animals.

For example, until 2000 it was perfectly OK in Boulder for people in the company of a dog or cat to say they “owned” the animal. Can you believe it? Some Boulder people even bragged about it.

“I own that dog!” they would say. “He is mine. I own him.”

That kind of insensitive thinking ended, fortunately, when the city council spent hours and hours in debate and passed an ordinance in which people with pets officially became “guardians” of the animals.

That term more accurately reflects the tough job of raising a dog or cat — finding the right school, encouraging them to play a musical instrument, guiding them into a full and useful life and, of course, overlooking that peculiar way dogs have of saying hello to their friends.

And Boulder no longer allows people — and if this isn’t a meddling government, then I don’t know what is — to ride a bicycle while naked or run naked in an actual race with only a pumpkin on their head as they did for years.

And then there’s the downright abysmal treatment intolerant Boulder has given to the gay, lesbian and transgender community.

Oh sure, this year the village hosts its 4th annual Transgender Awareness Week (Nov. 13-21) with lots of community events, including a seminar entitled “Transgender Inclusion in Policy and Practice: Examining Sports.”

The celebration will also feature a host of speakers, including one on the topic, “Obamacare, Discrimination and Transgender Coloradans.” (As we all know, when gay, lesbian or transgender people tried to navigate the Obamacare website, they had trouble creating accounts, were unable to log in to the site and received confusing and indecipherable error messages.)

Boulder’s Transgender Awareness Week also will have a “Trans and Genderqueer support group,” a Gender Identity Center candlelight vigil for Transgender Day of Remembrance and many other events.

But none of that matters, obviously, in light of the almost incredible lack of tolerance and good taste shown by organizers of the famous Bolder Boulder 10K race with their race slogan, “Sea Level is for Sissies.”

From the Daily Camera: “Out Boulder, an LGBTQ group, has launched an online petition seeking to pressure organizers of the Bolder Boulder to drop their slogan … because they say the word ‘sissies’ is derogatory.”

The petition says, “The word is used to (demean) traits problematic and stereotypically associated with women … traits all genders have but are not valued because they are associated with women. All genders express emotions and they should be embraced when they do.”

Race director Cliff Bosley says the slogan, in place for some six years, will remain. He explained that it and other race slogans, such as “Altitude Adjustment” and “Run With Altitude,” refer to the elevation of Boulder and are not meant to offend anyone.

Right.

And I suppose a guy like me, who leaves his putts ridiculously short on the golf course, is just supposed to overlook the jeering, laughing and golf-buddy questioning such as, “So, did your parents have any sons?”

Contact Rich Tosches at richtosches@gmail.com.