The “economic terrorism” imposed on the world by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is back before a federal court in Washington with an attorney seeking a court instruction on the proper way to serve OPEC with notice of the lawsuit.

OPEC already has responded to the legal action that was filed several years ago. But it argues it doesn’t need to pay attention to the claims because it cannot properly be given notice.

Bunk, responds attorney Larry Klayman of Freedom Watch, who brought the case alleging OPEC members, such as Saudi Arabia and Iran, engaged in “illegal price fixing” in the U.S. in violation of antitrust laws.

WND reported the case alleges OPEC participated in conspiracy, price-fixing, hampering distribution and limiting production.

Klayman said he had served the organization, as documented by its response, through a personally delivered notice to Frederick Luger, intake officer for OPEC in Vienna, who was given a copy of the summons and complaint.

While a federal appeals court confirmed that was not sufficient, it did say there were ways to accomplish the service so the case could move forward and sent it back to the district court for such action.

Klayman this week submitted a response to OPEC’s latest arguments, contending there is no way to provide service of the lawsuit.

In a filing with the federal court, Klayman explained: “This court must not, respectfully, place the laws of Austria and other foreign policy considerations above the laws of the United States. An absurd restriction on service of process under Austrian law does not take precedent over the entirety of U.S. antitrust law. For this reason, declining to provide a means of service of process would be an abuse of discretion as it would in effect nullify U.S. antitrust law for a specific defendant, one that has engaged in price-fixing and illegal activities for too long.”

He said that as long as the defendant “does business within the United States, it is bound to obey the laws of the United States and it is the duty of this court to ensure that defendant does just that.”

“OPEC’s location outside of the United States does not shield it from liability for its illegal activities,” Klayman wrote. “It is well established that U.S. antitrust laws allow for extraterritorial application and provide for the right to exercise jurisdiction over foreign conduct that affects the United States.”

He noted OPEC’s latest claim “that it cannot be served under any circumstances.”

That’s no more than an attempt, Klayman said, “to inoculate itself from and effectively thumb its nose at U.S. antitrust law.”

He noted the appeals court decision had said service is possible, even if the process does not comply with Austrian law.

“Plaintiff ultimately wants no more than to simply serve defendant’s United States counsel, which will prejudice no party. Defendant can present any other legal defense when they respond to the served complaint, such as by way of motion to dismiss or for summary judgment. However, at this stage of the litigation this court must simply consider the issue of service of process.”

The original complaint argued that without OPEC’s anti-competitive agreement, more oil would be in production, and the result would be lower prices.

“Even when OPEC members produce to the full extent of their capacity, they produce far less oil than they would were they operating in a competitive market, because they artificially restrict their production capacity as part of their price-fixing scheme,” the complaint alleged.

“The … nature of OPEC’s price-fixing conduct is further confirmed by its course of dealing with non-members. OPEC has met with these non-members and has secured their agreement to limit production and has thereby increased the price of gasoline and other petroleum products over competitive levels,” the complaint said..

Klayman previously brought legal action against Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez and Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad on behalf of torture victims, advancing the case against Iran to the point of obtaining a default judgment.

Klayman also won a nearly $2 million unpaid judgment against Cuban interests in 1996 over the shooting down of an airplane.

He also recently obtained a court ruling that the National Security Agency’s spy-on-Americans programs likely violate the Constitution. And he’s suing President Obama over his amnesty plans.

The claim against OPEC alleges that “as a form of economic terrorism,” OPEC’s actions “are designed to severely harm the economics or strategic interests of the United States and Western Europe in particular.”

“The illegal conduct of the defendant, and its constituent members and co-conspirators, is thus intended at this time to also influence the American presidential and congressional elections of 2012 by destabilizing the economy to further their pro Islamic and communist agendas,” the complaint said.