Earlier this week, a friend of mine told me that if Republican Ted Cruz became president of the United States, she’d have to move to Canada. In case you haven’t heard, the conservative Senator from Texas recently decided to make a run for the highest office in the country. When he made his announcement, Cruz said, “I believe in the power of millions of courageous conservatives rising up to re-ignite the promise of America.” He also talked to his audience about repealing the Affordable Care Act and getting rid of the IRS.

But while his run for president may give liberal Americans thoughts of emigrating, it’s possible his candidacy will turn out to be a good thing for Democrats in 2016.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Ted Cruz]

Primary voters are a tricky bunch, especially the ones in the early states where caucuses can play an important role. Primaries tend to draw out the most committed and idealistic party voters. For Republicans, that means voters on the far right. For Democrats, it’s voters on the far left. This is even more true in states that utilize the caucus system, which requires voters to show up at a specific time and place and generally hang out for a while. Those who don’t care that much about a candidate, position or election outcome usually have a habit of not participating in the early contests.

What all that means is that the primary election process is tailor made for the type of voter Cruz is likely to attract – the one most passionate about issues and candidates on the far right. The senator, perhaps most famous for shutting down the government in 2013 because of his opposition to the Affordable Care Act, has a following among arch conservatives. Indeed, the Times characterized him as “a truth-telling hero to many conservatives and evangelical Americans.”

Maybe he doesn’t have a credible chance of winning the nomination. Maybe he does. But he will certainly drag the rest of his party's candidates to the right in the process of trying to find out. Heading to the right will give other Republican candidates the greatest chance to neutralize Cruz's appeal among a large block of primary voters.

Anyone who can move their party away from the middle is already a boon for potential opponents, but the potential for a relatively uneventful Democratic primary makes Cruz a further blessing for Democrats. Likely candidate Hillary Clinton and her potential challenger Martin O’Malley are both fairly mainstream, and at this point, it doesn’t look like there will be Cruz-type candidate on the left to challenge their liberal credentials. The situation could change substantially if a candidate like Sen. Elizabeth Warren from Massachusetts were to jump into the mix, but so far that looks unlikely.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

If the situation remains unchanged, the Democratic contenders won’t face the same pressure to cater to the far side of their party. They will largely be able to hew to primary campaign positions that will serve them well during a general election. The eventual Republican nominee, on the other hand, will not have such an advantage. Thanks to Cruz, the Republican nominee will have to make a quick retreat back to the middle after spending a lengthy period of time talking about his most conservative positions. And that could be enough to give the Democratic candidate an advantage once the primaries are over.