FIRST OF TWO PARTS: The Affordable Care Act continues in its second year to change medical treatment at every level. One of the most sweeping yet least publicized changes is new insurance coverage for substance abuse treatment.

FIRST OF TWO PARTS: The Affordable Care Act continues in its second year to change medical treatment at every level. One of the most sweeping yet least publicized changes is new insurance coverage for substance abuse treatment.

For the first time, millions of people can now seek treatment for a range of drug and alcohol abuse problems. And much of that care may soon take place in a doctor’s office rather than a separate substance abuse treatment center.

Routine physicals may soon include questions about frequency or extent of drug and alcohol use. As a result, conditions considered less than severe addiction may be identified and treated with a variety of approaches, some currently in use, some not yet developed.

The emphasis is on early intervention, an effort to identify and help people struggling with drugs or alcohol before the problem becomes debilitating. Early intervention is also an effort to reduce health care costs.

“The stage has been set for real transformation,” said A. Thomas McLellan, board chairman of the Treatment Research Institute in Philadelphia. “Nobody knows the way this is going to happen, but it is going to happen.”

For decades addiction treatment has been separate from primary medical care. Those with the worst symptoms were often sent to rehabilitation facilities. That separation created a social stigma surrounding the disease. For substance abuse treatment to expand at the primary care level, experts say, that perspective will have to change.

Screening for substance abuse problems will have to become part of primary health care. And a variety of substance abuse disorders, all far less than severe addiction, need to be addressed like other chronic disease with better diagnosis and tailored treatment regimens.

The first signs of change are only now beginning to emerge.

Dramatic change

Substance abuse treatment has historically reached only a fraction of the people with problems.

About 90 percent of people who could be diagnosed with a substance use disorder do not receive treatment in any given year. In 2013, an estimated 20.2 million Americans who could benefit from treatment received no care, according to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health. About 2.5 million people got help at a specialty treatment facility.

Financial constraints — cost of care, lack of adequate insurance — are the most common reasons people say they cannot obtain care. In a national survey from 2010 to 2013, more than 45 percent of people who could not get treatment said money was the problem.

Under the Affordable Care Act, all health insurance plans are required to cover substance abuse treatment as one of 10 “essential health benefits” specified in the law. This elevates substance abuse services to the same level as pediatric care, cancer treatment and childbirth.

Along with new coverage, the law’s provisions also are expected to transform the approach to care. As an essential health benefit, drug and alcohol abuse should now be approached as a disease with the same protocols of screening, detection and preventative care as heart disease or diabetes.

McLellan at the Treatment Research Institute in Philadelphia said, in dealing with diabetes, “Doctors are paid and trained to recognize the early signs. It’s been very effective. That’s never been the case with substance abuse. The only thing that’s been covered is care for those with the most complex condition: addiction.”

Since taking effect in January, the Affordable Care Act has provided insurance to many people who previously lacked coverage. Estimates for the first year range from 8 million to 11 million. Enrollment for the coming year is now underway.

And the Commonweath Group, a private foundation that funds health care research, estimates that 60 percent of the newly insured have used their benefits.

But so far not that many people have used the new coverage for substance abuse treatment at rehabilitation centers. Rick Harwood is director of research and program applications at the National Association of State Alcohol and Drug Abuse Directors, a not-for-profit science and education organization devoted to improve substance abuse treatment programs. When it comes to the expected increase in people seeking substance abuse treatment, Harwood said it’s still “really early days.”

In Massachusetts, Maine and Vermont, significant increases in substance abuse treatment did not materialize until two to nine years after health care reform took effect. Harwood studied patient populations after those states adopted measures similar to the Affordable Care Act.

Primary care providers generally have not yet adopted standards for identifying substance use problems and referring people for care. “We’re just not getting enough people identified to go to treatment,” Harwood said.

When significant numbers of new people do seek treatment, they may find a shortage of options. Treatment centers geared toward treating severe forms of substance abuse are often full.

The Affordable Care Act, however, also emphasizes detection and treatment of milder forms of substance abuse through primary care doctors. Those treatment protocols are taking shape and apply to a much larger population who may not realize help is available.

The number of people with milder forms of substance use disorders — sometimes called “medically harmful substance use” — runs as high as 40 million, according to federal estimates. People in this “pre-addiction” category represent an estimated 20 percent of existing patients in most primary care clinics.

Examples might include:

— An adolescent with asthma who smokes marijuana.

— A pregnant woman who continues to drink alcohol.

— A person with chronic pain who misuses prescription painkillers.

— A diabetic who drinks alcohol and complicates treatment for diabetes.

— A patient who uses illicit drugs that counteract prescription medicine.

These types of substance use problems do not require time in a separate treatment center. With the Affordable Care Act’s new coverage, people can receive help from their doctor.

Robert Morrison is executive director of the National Association of State Alcohol and Drug Abuse Directors. He said the Affordable Care Act’s emphasis on helping people with substance use problems before they become debilitating is “something we haven’t had in a generation.”

That shift to early detection and treatment will take time.

Early intervention

Detecting and treating substance abuse disorders before they become more severe forms of addiction is just one example of the Affordable Care Act’s central goals of improving health and reducing costs.

Early intervention will take place at the primary care level. And that will require more doctors who can screen and treat people with a wide range of drug and alcohol problems as part of overall care.

For a person seeing his or her doctor, early intervention will start with more questions during routine physicals or appointments. Doctors might ask about the frequency or amount of alcohol consumed and any illicit drug use. And the doctor may pay more attention to whether patients rely on a substance for social interaction or to get to sleep.

Those identified as having a substance use disorder may be prescribed medication to help with cravings and referred to a counselor with experience treating drug or alcohol problems.

Early intervention and treatment is expected to prevent some patients from needing more intensive addiction treatment later. Physical health can be improved, too, by limiting the effects of continued substance abuse on other diseases that commonly accompany addiction, including HIV, hepatitis C, cancer and heart disease.

Studies have shown that combining primary care with behavioral health — treatments for conditions such as depression and addiction — can improve results and save money.

For example, a three-year study at Johns Hopkins in Maryland tracked whether extra medical training in substance abuse treatment could reduce health care costs. The study compared health care costs for two groups of Medicaid enrollees with a history of substance abuse. One group saw nurses trained to screen for substance abuse and facilitate treatment. The other group saw nurses who did not have the training.

The study found cost savings in the first year. Patients of nurses who received intervention training saw costs decrease by $122 per member per month. The comparison group saw costs increase by $165 per member per month. The first-year savings represented a return on investment of $3.65 for every $1 spent on intervention training.

However, savings were erased over the final two years of the study. Peter Fagan, director of research at Johns Hopkins HealthCare, said exorbitant medical costs for just one or two patients could have been a factor.

In a similar study, CareOregon in Portland, Ore., tracked potential cost savings after primary care staff received training on how to manage a variety of behavioral health issues, including substance abuse. Over three years, the return on investment was $12.21 for every $1 spent on training.

“Good medicine is ultimately going to be good economics,” Fagan said.

With more training for doctors and nurses already working in primary care, the emphasis on early intervention is starting to show up in medical school curriculums.

Previously, new doctors learned very little about addiction, said Abigail Woodworth, vice president for strategy and public affairs at the Treatment Research Institute. “That’s really astonishing, considering there are more people struggling with substance abuse issues than cancer.”

One example is an online program developed by MedU, with help from the Treatment Research Institute, Betty Ford Center and American Society of Addiction Medicine. MedU supplies educational materials to 90 percent of the medical schools in North America. The program uses virtual patient case studies that combine substance use disorders with common primary care issues.

A health care system focused on early detection of substance use disorders will also drive development of new diagnostic tools. Among them could be new tests that check for a predisposition to substance abuse.

Research at the University of North Carolina Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies has identified changes in immune system molecules in the brain caused by binge drinking among adolescents. Center director Dr. Fulton Crews said the work could lead to ways to identify young people who are “much more vulnerable for alcoholism.”

Integrated care

More screening and attention at the primary care level would be a major shift in how substance abuse has been treated for decades.

The Affordable Care Act’s emphasis on early intervention will require more teamwork between primary care doctors and specialists. “Integrated care,” as it is called, combines whole health skills of general practitioners with specialized substance abuse treatment techniques from counselors.

The standard substance abuse treatment model is “12-step facilitation therapy,” based on the approach pioneered by Alcoholics Anonymous. The steps outline actions to recover from addiction, beginning with admission of the problem. The steps require an examination of past behavior, an effort to correct past mistakes and continued commitment to helping others recover from the same problem. Estimated success rates vary wildly, from lows of 5 percent to 10 percent achieving abstinence to a high of 33 percent maintaining sobriety in AA for more than a decade.

An integrated care model would have doctors and nurses screening for substance use disorders and involving counselors in the care of the patient at the first sign of a problem. Rather than just sending a patient to a specialty treatment facility separate from other medical care, doctors and counselors would coordinate the care for the patient throughout the recovery process.

One program that closely focuses on that coordination of care has demonstrated long-term abstinence rates of nearly 90 percent. The Human Intervention Motivation Study coordinates the early identification, assessment, treatment and recertification of commercial airline pilots with alcohol or drug problems.

Integrated care with that level of coordination is not the norm when it comes to substance abuse. Instead, substance abuse treatment has been segregated in separate facilities and by social or legal concerns.

“Historically, I think the stigma of both mental health and substance abuse has been so strong, and then rationalized by privacy laws,” Fagan said. “Even in a day-to-day primary care setting, it has been very difficult to get access to behavioral health records, especially substance abuse records.”

Moving toward more integrated care can happen in several ways and with different levels of coordination.

One small step is more communication about a patient shared between a primary care doctor and a behavioral health specialist, even if records and treatment are managed separately.

A middle step toward integrated care might involve primary care doctors and behavioral health specialists working together in the same office.

The biggest step would involve combined health records and a truly unified care plan. This places counselors, social workers or psychologists alongside physicians — all with immediate access to each other’s work — in day-to-day care of patients. A patient found to have a drug or alcohol problem could get the right help immediately and have their case managed by the team over time.

Research has shown that currently only 40 percent of Medicaid recipients with substance use disorders have any type of follow-up medical care. Only 8 percent return for specialized care.

Darren Urada is principal investigator for Integrated Substance Abuse Programs at the University of California, Los Angeles, which has studied integrated treatment of substance abuse at the primary care level. He said early intervention and an integrated approach to substance abuse treatment “can save money and improve the health of people who are at risk, or help people who have mild or moderate problems.”

Integrated care promoted by the Affordable Care Act also is still in its early days. Barriers built into the old system include high numbers of at-risk patients, a shortage of behavioral health specialists and old rules regarding insurance coverage.

California’s Medicaid system, for example, will not reimburse providers for physical and mental health services rendered on the same day. At least 19 other states have the same rule.

“The ideal is you want to do that on the same day, but if (the clinics) want to be paid for both services, in theory, they’d have to say, ‘come back tomorrow,’ ” Urada said. “It’s a problem.”

Change in motion

The Affordable Care Act has set in motion undeniable forces for change in substance abuse treatment.

More people now have insurance. Substance use disorders far less severe than addiction are now covered.

And there is an emphasis on early intervention at the primary care level, spotting and treating problems as soon as possible.

New payment models for medical providers will be one of the biggest factors in changing the system. Doctors will now be paid based on patient health — on outcomes — rather than volume of services.

“Historically, we’ve had mostly a fee-for-service model. The more people you have in there, the more treatment you give, the more money you make,” Urada said. The Affordable Care Act wants to reduce health care costs, Urada said, which means “if we want to bend the cost curve, then we need to align the incentive so it is for people to get better, as opposed to get more treatment.”

A payment model based on patient outcomes will reward doctors for treating the early stages of substance use disorder before the onset of full-blown addiction.

No one knows the exact shape a new system will take. But the future of substance abuse treatment should soon be emerging at the family doctor’s office, with more conversation, a few questions and help for people struggling with drugs or alcohol.

Dr. George Gilbert is a family practitioner specializing in addiction medicine in Peoria. His office already offers some forms of integrated care as envisioned by the Affordable Care Act. For him, treating substance abuse problems is about overall wellness in life.

“Within health care,” Gilbert said, “my hope is all of us will see our role in identifying and intervening and educating about addiction recovery. Wellness is anything I can do to have better health, ideally the best health I can have, other than just medication, other than surgery. … Addiction recovery isn’t just about ‘thou shalt not.’ It’s about ‘what can we do?’ What do we do to enjoy our day? How do we play? How do we have recreation without falling into relapse?”

Substance use disorders

All forms of chemical dependence are now known as “substance use disorders.” Within that broad term are varying degrees of severity. When it comes to a diagnosis, which disorder someone may have is based on evidence of impaired control, social impairment, risky use and pharmacological criteria. New coverage under the Affordable Care Act likely will include these latest diagnostic terms along with older labels such as “addiction” as more people seek treatment for problems with drugs and alcohol.

» Medically harmful substance use: This category includes potentially dangerous use of drugs or alcohol, often as it may affect another condition. Examples include a pregnant woman drinking alcohol or teen with asthma smoking marijuana. This level of substance use disorder goes largely untreated today.

» Impaired control: Substances are used in larger amounts or over a longer time than intended, with a persistent desire to use the substance or unsuccessful efforts to cut down on use.

» Social impairment: A great deal of time is spent obtaining and using substances, as well as recovering from the effects. Continued use results in failure to fulfill obligations at school, work or home, with other activities reduced or discontinued because of substance use.

» Risky use: Substance use continues in situations when it is physically dangerous or in spite of knowledge of recurrent physical or psychological problems related to use.

» Pharmacological criteria: Tolerance develops, requiring more of the substance to be used to achieve the desired effect. Continued use leads to physical withdrawal symptoms when substance use is halted.

» Addiction: Characterized by uncontrollable compulsive behavior that results in sometimes life-threatening withdrawal symptoms if substance use is discontinued. This level of substance abuse has long been considered the most serious.

SECOND OF TWO PARTS: The Affordable Care Act encourages an integrated approach to addiction recovery

Matt Buedel can be reached at 686-3154 or mbuedel@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @JournoBuedel.