TAMPA — A Tampa investment firm has purchased one of the last pieces of vacant land on Harbour Island, a parcel that developers have been eyeing for an apartment tower.

It wasn’t clear what Forge Capital Partners plans to do with the land, because its executives couldn’t be reached for comment in recent days. However, the name of the business entity it used to purchase the land, Harbour Island Residential LLC, seems suggestive.

Forge Capital Partners is a real estate investment company that owns shopping centers around Florida and the Southeast, sometimes investing with Tampa-based DeBartolo Development. Forge Capital and DeBartolo also were among a group that bought the old Trump Tower Tampa site along the Hillsborough River in downtown Tampa two years ago.

A deed recorded in Hillsborough County on Dec. 18 shows that Forge Capital’s entity, Harbour Island Residential, bought a little less than an acre on Harbour Island for about $2.9 million. The land is just east of The Plaza Harbour Island condominium. The seller was an entity called Knights Harbour LLC, which is controlled by Tampa’s Sierra family.

Some Harbour Island residents have been watching for signs of development on the property, a bit nervous that any major project there would bring more traffic to the area. Their curiosity was piqued last month when a real estate broker for the Eshenbaugh Land Co. said an unnamed apartment developer had a contract on the land. The developer was planning a 22-story building with about 230 apartment units.

At that height, it would be a bit taller than the luxury Plaza condo tower next door.

It wasn’t clear this week if Forge Capital Partners is the apartment developer mentioned by the real estate broker or if it has other plans for the property. While Forge Capital couldn’t be reached, a member of the Sierra family that sold the land, Sebring Sierra, declined comment.

Gail Bernucca, president of The Plaza’s condo association board, said she’s not sure what say her condo board will have in the property’s development, if any.

“It would be nice if it were a park,” Bernucca said. “But you can’t stop city hall. It’s the market that will decide what’s going to go there.”

If Forge Capital does, in fact, plan an apartment building there it would be another in a line of luxury apartment projects in or around downtown Tampa. Luxury apartments under construction or planned for the downtown area include the Residences at the Riverwalk near the Straz Center, The Martin on Meridian Avenue, SkyHouse Channelside in the Channel District and Circle Bayshore on Bayshore Boulevard.

msasso@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7865

Twitter: @msasso