“But I think that maybe it’s just some of the other things he’s been involved with that people in our area” — Mr. Thompson stopped, shaking his head in unspoken reference to various social issues.

For Mr. Obama, pondering his legacy and hearing how it is debated in the contest for his successor, the dearth of credit is plainly vexing. “We avoided a Great Depression,” he interjected during an onstage interview last month in Austin, Tex., adding sardonically, “Thanks, Obama.”

Photo

Few people here are thanking him for their recovery, despite benefits from the administration’s $800 billion stimulus package — Mr. Obama came here in August 2009 to personally announce one grant — and from the rescues of the auto and financial industries.

“He gets very, very little credit, and I think that’s too bad because we got quite a bit of help,” said Dick Moore, Elkhart’s mayor the past eight years, a Democrat who lost election to a third term in November. “I don’t know what we would have done without it.”

Instead, it is Mr. Trump who is making the impression. The New York billionaire routinely attacks Carrier Corporation since it announced in February that it would close two Indiana factories and shift about 2,000 heating and air-conditioning jobs to Mexico. Recently a high school basketball game west of here drew national attention after students hoisted Trump signs and taunted “Build that wall!” at fans from the rival, heavily Latino school.

Many workers remain discouraged. Around Elkhart, “People still don’t feel like they’re doing well,” said Mike Perez, a director at Faith Mission, which provides meals for the poor and shelter for about 150 who are homeless. Many earn less than before the recession, he said. “There still isn’t a sense that everything’s O.K.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In 2008 Mr. Obama won Indiana, the first Democratic presidential candidate to do so since 1964. In 2012 he did not even contest the state. Among those who opposed him was Mr. Neufeldt. Now 69, he holds four part-time jobs, but boasts that a daughter and three sons-in-law again have good jobs in Elkhart’s boom-and-bust recreational vehicle industry where he worked 32 years. His problem with the president is over abortion.

Brian A. Howey, publisher of the Howey Politics Indiana newsletter and once a reporter in Elkhart, sounded stumped, even allowing for the state’s conservatism: “I’m a lifelong Hoosier. I’m just amazed that not only do people not appreciate what happened in ’09, but there’s a lot of hostility toward Obama. I think part of it is racial and a lot of it is political.”

“This state stood to lose 150,000 auto jobs if Chrysler and G.M. had liquidated,” Mr. Howey added. “We would have had a bona fide depression here.”

Senator Joe Donnelly, a Democrat who represented this area in the House until his election to the Senate in 2012, likewise praised the administration’s auto and financial rescues for averting disaster. “President Obama had about half the people on his own team telling him to let Chrysler go,” he recalled.

Now, Mr. Donnelly noted, Chrysler plants employ more than 5,000 people to the south in Kokomo, up from 100 at their nadir, and 7,000 statewide. Yet autoworkers are more apt to complain about the president’s gun proposals than to acknowledge the auto turnaround.

While Indiana’s presidential primaries are relatively late in the race — May 3 — and polls are lacking, Mr. Howey predicted that Mr. Trump would do well.

Photo

Nearly half of Elkhart County’s jobs are in manufacturing, a higher proportion than in all but 13 of the 3,140 counties nationwide, according to Jerry Conover, director of the Indiana Business Research Center at Indiana University. With so many skilled factory workers, he said, local wages are above national averages though education levels are relatively modest.

For 2014, economic growth was up 48 percent from 2001, double the nation’s growth rate. Yet the area’s reliance on a narrow range of manufacturing, mostly R.V.-related, makes it “quite vulnerable,” Mr. Conover said. Locals’ awareness of that possibility explains some of their economic insecurity.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Obama sought to help the county diversify, with $39 million from the stimulus money to develop electric trucks at a former R.V. factory. But the effort fizzled, the owners sold the plant and now it is back to making R.V.s exclusively. (Mr. Neufeldt, still a believer in Mr. Obama’s push for green jobs, again wears green wristbands to signify that cause.)

Additional stimulus money went to improve the municipal airport and local highways, buy law enforcement equipment, remove lead and weatherize buildings — purposes that did not create many jobs but helped avoid layoffs, said Kyle Hannon, the president of the Greater Elkhart Chamber of Commerce.

“We knew we would be back,” Mr. Hannon said, reflecting locals’ sense of their resilience and self-sufficiency, regardless of government’s hand.

Now, with unemployment so low, local leaders say the challenge is finding workers who can pass employers’ drug tests.

“Everybody is back to work,” Mr. Neufeldt said recently, driving past once-closed plants lining county roads, their lots full of employees’ vehicles and, in many, newly manufactured R.V.s.

Mark Dobson, the president of the Economic Development Corporation of Elkhart County, said his group was using social media to advertise widely that Elkhart offers “head-of-household opportunities” — industrial jobs that pay perhaps $75,000, enough for a single wage earner to sustain a family.

“Anytime we see a mention of a plant closure and some significant number of people who have been laid off” — like from Carrier — “we’re making sure they know there are jobs in Elkhart County,” Mr. Dobson said.

Busy employers also are turning to Faith Mission, the homeless shelter. Dan Browning, its programming director, said he gets dozens of calls monthly — the previous day a boat maker sought 75 workers — and no longer deals with companies that will not pay more than minimum wage.

“Now the employers are desperate,” he said. “Before it was the workers who were desperate.”