News from Piscataway, Plainfield, Princeton, Readington and Central Jersey.

Each year, a group of students from The Wardlaw-Hartridge School in Edison participates in the Safety Ambassadors program. The safety ambassadors develop lesson plans and teach second-graders about four important safety topics: How to Prevent Falls, Pedestrian Safety, Safety In and Around Cars and Proper Use of Helmets in Wheeled Sports. This year’s Wardlaw-Hartridge Safety Ambassadors are, pictured with Dawn Francavilla, director of Student Life: Brooke Sutton of Westfield, Cameron Cabrera of Carteret, Uditi Nichani of Scotch Plains, John Pohopin of Princeton, Neema Liverpool of Plainfield, Lauren Yates of Piscataway, Claude Djan of Scotch Plains and Nick D'Amore of Scotch Plains. The W-H Safety Ambassador teams made two presentations to the second grade classes. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY THE WARDLAW-HARTRIDGE SCHOOL) Story Highlights Roman Jewelers to host meet and greet with "Olaf" the snowman from the movie "Frozen" on Sunday.

Provident Bank is hosting its "Committed to Share" sweepstakes through March 21.

"Internet Essentials," free computer classes, will be held at Plainfield High School.

Readington Community Theatre seeking four directors for their fall production of "California Suite."

CENTRAL JERSEY

Meet and greet with 'Olaf' this Sunday

Roman Jewelers will host a meet and greet with "Olaf" the snowman from the animated movie "Frozen" for children of all ages.

The free event will run from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. on Sunday (March 15) at the Bridgewater store location at 500 Commons Way and from 2 to 5 p.m. at the store's Flemington location at 39 State Route 12.

Roman Jewelers is sponsoring the event as a fun way to entertain and meet members of the community.

The community will be able to take pictures with the character, and Roman Jewelers is asking that you post them at hashtag #romanjewelersmeetolaf.

CENTRAL JERSEY

Sweepstakes held through March 21

This winter, Provident Bank is offering New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania residents a chance to win big and support their favorite charities, too.

The bank is hosting its "Committed to Share" sweepstakes through March 21, to give a financial boost to consumers and charities alike. Participants can enter for a chance to win one of three top cash prizes with a matching donation to a charity.

In addition, one winner will be selected each day at random to receive a $100 Provident Mastercard® Gift Card for themselves and a $100 donation to a charity of their choice.

The fifth week's local daily winners (February 27 to March 5) and charities are:

• Paul Migut of South River — NJ Sharing Network

• Monica Szczecina of Manville — Samaritan Homeless Interim Program

• Donna Milonnet of Fanwood — Fanwood Rescue Squad.

Three top prizes will be awarded on April 25, including a grand prize of $5,000 cash and a $5,000 donation to a charity; a first place prize of $2,500 cash and a $2,500 donation to a charity; and a second place prize of $1,000 cash and a $1,000 donation to a charity. Overall, Provident will award more than $28,000 in prizes to winners and their charities.

"We at Provident always welcome the opportunity to support and give back to the communities in which we live and work," said Chris Martin, president and CEO of Provident, in a prepared statement. "We are excited to expand the 'Committed to Share' sweepstakes to include local residents and participate in our new communities in a meaningful way."

The public may enter the sweepstakes at any of Provident's branches or online at www.ProvidentNJ.com or www.ProvidentPA.com.

Visit www.Facebook.com/ProvidentNJ and www.Twitter.com/ProvidentNJ to join the conversations.

PISCATAWAY

Computer classes offered at libraries

The Piscataway Public Library is offering the following computer classes:

e-Reader Help will be given from 7 to 9 p.m. on March 18 and 25 at the J. W. Westergard Library at 20 Murray Ave. Drop by and have one of the library's e-Reader experts help you get started with downloadable books. You must bring e-Reader and power cord.

Excel for Data Analysis, will be held in the MiY Lab at the J.F. Kennedy Library at 500 Hoes Lane. The course will be held from 10:30 a.m. to noon on March 25.

For more information on the above classes, or to register, stop by Kennedy or Westergard Library's Information Desks, or call the Kennedy Library at 732-463-1633, ext. 6, or Westergard Library at 732-752-1166, ext. 6.

PLAINFIELD

Free computer classes at school

"Internet Essentials," free computer classes, will be held at Plainfield High School.

"Intro to Computers" will be conducted Monday (March 16) and March 24. "Intro to the Internet" will be conducted on Tuesday (March 17) and March 25. "Keeping Children Safe on the Internet" will be conducted on Wednesday (March 18) and March 26. "Essential Email Skills" will be conducted on Thursday (March 19) and March 30. "Basic Microsoft Word Skills" will be conducted on March 23 and March 31.

All programs run from 6 to 9 p.m. and will be held in Room 144 of Plainfield High School, 950 Park Ave. Space is limited. To sign up, contact United Way at 908-353-7171, ext. 137 or 100 or email info@uwguc.org.

The programs are powered by Comcast NBC Universal, Internet Essentials from Comcast and presented by United Way of Greater Union County and Union County College.

PRINCETON

Siekerka elected to Board of Directors

Junior Achievement of New Jersey (JANJ) announced that Michele Siekerka, president of the New Jersey Business & Industry Association, has been elected to its State Board of Directors.

"We are pleased to have Michele join our Board of Directors and bring her extensive background of business and law. Her leadership in the business community will help Junior Achievement ensure future success." said Catherine Milone, president of Junior Achievement of New Jersey, in a prepared statement.

"I am honored to join the Junior Achievement State Board of Directors," said Siekerka, in the statement. "I look forward to serving with this very distinguished Board and to continuing NJBIA's close relationship with Junior Achievement as we strive to ensure students will be ready to succeed in the work place."

Siekerka became the 11th president of the NJBIA in October 2014. She came to NJBIA from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection where she served as of Deputy Commissioner.

Prior to serving as Deputy she served as Assistant Commissioner for Water Resource Management. In that position, Siekerka was a principal player in Governor Christie's charge in "Rebuilding New Jersey" in the wake of Superstorm Sandy. She was responsible for coordinating funding, outreach and resources for the rebuilding of impacted environmental infrastructure.

Siekerka's background includes serving as the President and CEO of the Mercer Regional Chamber of Commerce, Senior Legal Counsel and Vice President of Human Resources with the Automobile Association of America and as a partner in a Mercer County law firm. She also served on Governor Chris Christie's Red Tape Review Group.

A Robbinsville resident, Siekerka earned a bachelor's degree in political science and German from Rutgers University and a JD from Temple University School of Law.

For more information about Junior Achievement of New Jersey, visit www.janj.org. Follow them on Twitter at https://twitter.com/jaofnj and like them on Facebook at www.facebook.com/JuniorAchievementNJ..

The New Jersey Business & Industry Association provides information, services and advocacy to its member companies in order to build a more prosperous New Jersey. Its members, as a group, employ more than one million people.

PRINCETON

Bike and farm tour are being held today

NJ bike tours is conducting its first-ever Princeton Pi Day celebration bike and farm tour from Kopp's Cycles in Princeton to Terhune Orchards and back Saturday (March 14).

All profits go to the Garden State Community Kitchen (www.thegardenstatecommunitykitchen.org/).

Participants will ride their bikes where Einstein rode his bike — from his home to his best friend's house, from his bike shop to the farm, noting the most famous homes along the way. At Terhune Orchards meet the head farmer, get a tour of their farm and get free birthday pie. Farm fresh soup and drinks will also be served.

The event starts at 11 a.m. at Kopp's Cycles on Spring St. and is 9.86 miles round trip (pi x pi or 3.14 x 3.14). Sign up at www.njbiketours.com. Limited to 30 participants.

Future 2015 NJ bike tours charity events include the New Jersey Covered Bridge event celebrating Sourland Cycles grand opening in Hopewell on April 11, and the 2nd annual Blue Moon Acres Farm Roll in Pennington on May 30. Both with farm-to-table celebrations.

The newest bike tour company in New Jersey, NJ bike tours promotes a community of healthy living through cycling and local farming advocacy. Founder Jake Herway is sharing the joy of his European upbringing of cycling, farm fresh eating, history and culture that is all available in New Jersey.

NJ bike tours is based out of Princeton and also offers private, customized day tours that range from beginner, intermediate and advanced routes. In addition to farm to table tours where you can meet farmers and chefs alike, NJ bike tours also provides private tours focused on photography, nature, wine, history and of course cycling fitness and training with local expert guides.

Anyone interested in NJ bike tours charity events or private day tours can sign up on NJ bike tours' website.

READINGTON

Directors are sought for 'California Suite'

Readington Community Theatre is seeking four directors for their fall production of "California Suite," a comedy in two acts by Neil Simon.

The play is divided into four scenes and each director will cast and direct one of the scenes, with different actors in each scene.

The play will be presented Nov. 19 to 22. Auditions will be held in May and rehearsals will start in September.

The show will be presented at the Polish American Club Theatre in the Whitehouse Station section of the township. If you wish to be considered, email your resume to rc-theatre@comcast.net. Include shows which you have directed and any theatrical training or schooling you have completed. In order to be considered, prior director experience is necessary. Actors may submit headshots and resumes to this email address as well. Or send resumes to RCT, PO Box 502, Whitehouse Station NJ 08889. Exact audition dates will be sent to all when directors have been selected.

For more about RCT, visit www.rctnj.org or call 908-507-6133 or 908-534-1557.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1GzyT2j