I pestered Braden Baker, manager of the ArkAnglers Fly Shop in Buena Vista, several times before I decided to fish the Hayden Meadows section of the Arkansas River.

Originally, I called the shop to check out access to a few obscure, small streams, but that was before the monsoon rains intervened on the Front Range and the Upper Arkansas River Valley.

My more ambitious plan of an overnighter and two days of fishing quickly downsized into what would necessarily be a long one-day trip. But that was OK with me because I'd never fished the Hayden Meadows area before, and new water is always a thrill no matter how much time you have to fish it.

Hayden Meadows is an eight-mile-long section of the Arkansas River just south of Leadville. It's included in the 102-mile-long stretch of the Arkansas River that was designated Gold Medal Trout Water by the Colorado Parks and Wildlife Commission earlier this year.

More than 65 percent of those 102 miles of river are open to the public via federal and state-owned land and numerous state-controlled fishing leases and easements. Special regulations for the Hayden Meadows stretch includes an "artificial flies and lures only" restriction and a limit of one trout 12 inches in length or less.

Advertisement

The ArkAngler website says that since Hayden Meadows is located upstream of the confluence with Lake Creek, it is "spared the impact of the native and imported water that is released throughout the summer from Twin Lakes. As a result, peak flows on this section of the river are typically only about a third of what we see in Salida and the native runoff is relatively short-lived." I couldn't help being intrigued by the words "native runoff" and the implication of a stream governed by a more natural hydrology.

Ed Engle, Great Outdoors

I made one more quick call to Braden to check out the latest fishing conditions, which resulted in a reassuring endorsement: "It's running clear at about 250 cubic feet per second, which is about as good as it gets. The fishing turns on around 10 in the morning, but remember our current weather cycle includes thunderstorms in the afternoon."

It was a done deal. I told him I'd give it a try the next day. "I don't think you'll be disappointed," said Braden.

I was on the road early the next morning with a goal of getting to the river by about 9 a.m. It wasn't exactly encouraging when I drove through scattered thundershowers, some of which were moderate to heavy, in South Park. Just before Trout Creek Pass, I hit a particularly strong cell and started thinking bad thoughts such as, "Braden said the morning was supposed to be sunny. Those young fly shop whippersnappers are all the same."

Then I drove over the pass and down into the Arkansas River Valley where the clouds literally parted and it turned to mostly sunny skies, and suddenly I'm thinking that Braden is a genius.

I made it to the Hayden Meadows parking area a little before 10 a.m. and took a short walk to see what the river looked like before I geared up. It was clear and running a little heavier than I had imagined, but it would fish just fine.

On the way back to my truck, I ran into another fisherman taking the same walk. I asked if he knew anything about this section of river, and he said no because he'd never fished there before. He asked if I knew anything about it, and I told him it was my first time, too.

We decided to join forces in the kind of loose alliance that anglers sometimes forge on unknown waters. We would stay within sight of each other, and if one of us hooked up the other would ask what fly he used. That "other" fisherman that day was Randy Bartlett, who had a veterinary practice in Longmont for 30 years before he retired to Kansas. By chance, we knew a lot of people in common.

But allow me to cut to the chase. We headed downstream until we encountered a section of the river that looked promising. I would describe it as a meandering meadow stream, although a bit wider and deeper than many I've fished. It looked custom-made for a hopper-dropper rig.

I decided to go a little farther downstream and rigged a size 12 Schroeder parachute hopper fly pattern with a beadhead gold-ribbed hare's ear dropper. The water along a grassy stream bank on the outside of a bend was the obvious place to begin fishing. Within two or three casts, a small fish bumped the grasshopper fly, but didn't take it.

After that, I fished my way back upstream to Randy, making sure to cover the less obvious, shallower riffles and the drop-offs on the inside of the bends. I didn't get a single strike. Randy said his luck was running about the same as mine.

Eventually, I moved farther upstream to a larger flat and managed to catch and release a couple of small brown trout. A little later, I saw a few fish rising to a smorgasbord of insects that never developed into any kind of definable hatch. Randy had switched over to fishing nymph imitations and worked his way downstream, where he landed three or four nice-sized trout on a size 18 flashback pheasant tail nymph. He said he'd caught them on the edges of the deeper holes.

It wasn't a fast and furious day of fishing, but that's the way I like my first day on new water. I caught a few trout, knew that I could learn a lot more from this stretch of the Arkansas River, and I was certain that I'd be back.

Check EdEngleFlyFishing.com to see Engle's blog, "The Lone Angler Journal."