Flowers are placed outside Kincoppal-Rose Bay School in Sydney for Sister Philomene Tiernan who was a victim in the Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 crash. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

Australians are mourning the loss of loved ones who were on board Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 when it was shot down over Ukraine. Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott has spoken of his own shock and anger at the downing of the plane, saying his own daughters recently took the same flight above eastern Ukraine. The following are profiles of some of the victims of the tragedy.

Wayne and Theresa Baker

The Bakers were both long-time workers in Australia’s Northern Territory government. Mrs. Baker, 53, had recently retired and decided to celebrate with a six-week holiday in Europe with her 55-year-old husband. The couple, who had two sons in their 20s, had been anticipating a stopover in Kuala Lumpur before arriving home, family members said.

Emma Bell

Emma Bell was a teacher in her 20s who had only just moved to the outback Northern Territory from her home in Lithgow, west of Sydney. Ms. Bell had accepted a job at Maningrida College, which offers schooling to mostly Aboriginal children in the beautiful but rugged Arnhem Land area, made famous in the “Crocodile Dundee” movies. Ms. Bell had been an outstanding educator who won great respect among indigenous people, Territory Chief Minister Adam Giles said in a statement. “She involved all parents and students in her classroom learning activities and was energetically learning the local language with her students and parents,” he said.

Michael and Carol Clancy

Michael and Carol Clancy were retired special-needs teachers from Albion Park, south of Sydney, who continued work with community groups and disabled children. Aged 57 and 64, the couple had been due to attend a birthday party with friends. “It’s going to be a very somber affair,” said Mr. Clancy’s former school principal and friend Jim Cooper, speaking to Australian media. The pair had been on holiday in the Netherlands, Germany, France and Norway, said Carol Clancy’s daughter Jane Malcolm. “They were excited about leaving a couple of weeks ago,” she said.

Francesca and Liam Davison

Liam Davison, 57, was an award-winning author whose first novel, “The Velodrome,” was shortlisted for the 1987 Vogel Literary Award. His second novel won an award in 1993 and he taught creative writing to college students. His wife, Francesca Davison, 54, known as Frankie, was a high-school teacher at elite Toorak College, in the Melbourne suburb of Mount Eliza, where she taught English and humanities for almost three decades. “Our heartfelt sympathy goes out to their children Milly and Sam and family. We are devastated by the news of this tragedy,” Toorak College Principal Helen Carmody said in an email to current and former students.

Liliane Derden

Mother to two daughters and from Australia’s capital, Canberra, Liliane Derden was 50 and worked for the government’s National Health and Medical Research Council.

Marco Grippeling

Marco Grippeling, 48, was an experienced security consultant who had moved to Australia from the Netherlands. He and his wife, Angela, had been visiting friends and family, but Mrs. Grippeling decided to travel home on an earlier flight, leaving her husband of three years with relatives for a few more days.

Roger and Jill Guard

Dr. Roger Guard, 68, a pathologist, and his wife, who was also a doctor, were heading home to Australia after attending a medical conference in Europe. The Guards, who were from the city of Toowoomba in Queensland, were also taking time out for a holiday. “We have lost some absolutely brilliant people,” said Toowoomba Hospital Foundation Chief Executive Peter Rookas. Mr. Guard was the senior pathologist at the hospital and performed autopsies on the victims of devastating flash floods that tore through the city in January 2011, killing four people.

Howard and Susan Horder

The Horders, both 63, were retirees from Queensland state’s Sunshine Coast, a magnet for holidaymakers and older Australians. Mr. Horder had worked in the insurance industry before retiring four years ago. The couple had three adult sons, one of whom was working in London. The pair had been keen travelers and visited Ireland and London on their latest journey, stopping to see their son. Before getting on Flight 17 in the Netherlands, they had attended a concert by Dutch violinist André Rieu in Maastricht. Mr. Horder’s brother, Glenn, said Howard made dark jokes predeparture about travelling on Malaysia Airlines following the loss in March of Flight 370, saying he had only paid one way. “That’s the sort of person he was, quite the comedian,” Glenn Horder told the Brisbane Times newspaper. “And they are not coming back. They are not coming back.”

Why Keong (Gary) Lee and Mona Chen Sim Lee

The Lees, who immigrated to Australia from Malaysia in the mid 1970s, were returning home to Melbourne from a six-week holiday in Europe. Mr. Lee, 60, a prominent businessman in Melbourne before retiring two years ago, had aimed to spend another week visiting family in Johor Bahru, Malaysia, while his wife returned home to see their two daughters. Mr. Lee’s brother, Wai Hong, told the Malay Mail that the he hasn’t yet been able to tell his aging mother of Gary’s death. “I just don’t know how to tell her that her son and daughter-in-law are no longer alive,” he said. “It is difficult for me to accept that my brother and sister-in-law were on the plane and that I can never see them again.”

Edel Mahady

Irish-born Edel Mahady, 50, was a school registrar who had made Australia home for the past 20 years after arriving as a newlywed. She was returning to Perth from Ireland, where she traveled regularly to see her elderly mother. Her husband and two children released a statement describing her as “an Irish version of a tiger mother.” “She was innovative, persistent and a champion of those who were struggling,” they said. “Edel dealt with prince or pauper the same. She respected hard work, integrity and regarded failure as an opportunity to do better next time.” Mrs. Mahady worked at the Good Shepherd Catholic School in Perth and was also a fitness instructor. Her family said she would have been heartbroken at the devastation her death had left behind. “She would not want anyone to waste time on hating those who did this. Rather, she would be expecting us to ‘suck it up’ and make sure we looked after those who need it and to live fully.”

Gerry and Mary Menke

The Menkes lived in the small fishing and tourism town of Mallacoota, in the far east of Victoria state. Surrounded by a protected forest reserve, the small hamlet is remote and hard-hit by unemployment. Mrs. Menke had run a local hairdressing salon, while Mr. Menke was a diver for lucrative abalone shellfish, prized for their flesh in Asia and a vital source of income in their hometown. The couple had made a yearly winter journey from the frigid ocean at home to soak up the sun in Europe. Mr. Menke was originally from the Netherlands and his wife was from New Zealand. “Mallacoota’s not a very big place so it’ll be a great loss for that community,” said Jeanette Seignior from Business and Tourism East Gippsland.

Nick Norris, Mo Maslin, Evie Maslin and Otis Maslin

Nick Norris, 68, was traveling with three of his grandchildren, aged 12, 10 and 8 years. Their parents, Rin and Anthony Maslin, had decided to remain in Amsterdam for several more days and send their children home with their grandfather for the start of a new school term. Mr. Norris, a keen sailor and businessman who had worked as an educator with Australian Aboriginal children, left behind a wife and four children. Yachting friends said he had crewed for his wife Lindy on their boat, helping lay out course markers for regattas. “I couldn’t believe it. I love my dad extraordinarily and they were amazing kids,” his 24-year-old son Brack told Australian media.

Jack O’Brien

Mr. O’Brien, 25, was on his way home from a seven-week holiday in Europe. His family released a statement through Australia’s foreign ministry, expressing their grief. “The life of our beloved son and brother, Jack, has been ended so suddenly,” the family said. “We are devastated at his loss, as are Jack’s extended family and friends.”

Victor Oreshkin

Mr. Oreshkin, who was in his 30s, was returning home to Sydney from a five-week holiday in Germany and Lithuania. His parents, of Russian background, had been waiting at the airport when they learned of their son’s death. “He was really loved by everyone, so it was a big shock for all of us,” said Pastor Alex Minchenko, from the Slavic Evangelical Pentecostal Church, where Mr. Oreshkin was involved in the ministry. On June 10, Mr. Oreshkin posted a Facebook message full of excitement about his coming trip. “Only 7 days before I leave for overseas,” he wrote. Photographs showed him patting an Australian wallaby and posing beside a mining truck. Earlier this year he informed friends within the church of a guest speaker from Ukraine at a coming youth conference, with the message “draw near to God and He will draw near to you.”

Albert and Maree Rizk

The Rizks, who were in their 50s and from Sunbury, northwest of Melbourne, had been on a monthlong holiday to Europe and had tried unsuccessfully to change their flight. Mr. Rizk, a real-estate agent, had phoned his two children Vanessa, 22, and James, 21, the night before to talk over travel plans. The couple were well-known in their community through their involvement in local Australian-rules football. Mr. Rizk had helped out on the committee for his son’s club, the Sunbury Lions, while his wife worked in the game-day canteen. The Rizks were related to an Australian family who lost their son and daughter-in-law in the crash of vanished Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 in March.

Arjen and Yvonne Ryder

The Ryders were from the coastal town of Albany in Western Australia. Mr. Ryder, 54, worked for the government as a senior researcher in agriculture, focusing on soil salinity and helping rehabilitate farmlands in the state. Friends said Mr. Ryder would often work into the night in farming areas, using the light of truck headlights to see. His wife was a local teacher. The couple, who had three grown children, were returning from visiting relatives in the Netherlands. Mr. Ryder had been about to receive an award for 30 years of service as a senior technical officer, close colleague Ruhi Ferdowsian told the PerthNow website. “He was healthy, very active, sporty. He loved canoeing, he loved sailing,” Mr. Ferdowsian said.

Helena Sidelik

Helena Sidelik moved to the Australian beachside haven of Burleigh four years ago and worked for a personal-training company. Friends described the 56 year old as a bon vivant with a “smiling and infectious personality.” She had been traveling home from a friend’s wedding and a three-week holiday in Greece. “May your spirit and soul live on within every one of us that you touched, may you be blessed to soar high above the clouds and smile down on us with double scotch and water and may you rest in peace for eternity,” said a statement from her colleagues.

Elaine Teoh and Emiel Mahler

Elaine Teoh was a Malaysian national who lived in Melbourne, where she completed studies in commerce and finance in 2008 and later worked in the finance industry. She was travelling with her partner Emiel Mahler, 27, a Dutch citizen. The pair had been due to attend a wedding in Kuala Lumpur before heading home to Australia. “They were both beloved members of our close IG community,” said Tamas Szabo, the head of IG Asia Pacific, where Ms. Teoh was a finance supervisor.

Sister Philomene Tiernan

A Catholic nun from Sydney’s eastern suburbs, Sister Philomene was praised by friends as a “wonderfully kind, wise and compassionate woman”. Sister Philomene, nicknamed Phil by friends, worked at an exclusive private girl’s school. She had been attending a retreat in Joigny, France. “Her character was quite an immediate sensitivity to people and who they were, so there’s been a wave of grief,” said close friend of 30 years, Father Tony Doherty, speaking to Australian radio. “I think the first thing that you were struck with was her gentleness and her courtesy.”

Hans van den Hende, Shaliza Zain Dewa, Piers van den Hende, Marnix van den Hende and Margaux van den Hende

The van den Hende family were all permanent Australian residents and moved to Australia from Kuala Lumpur seven years ago, when Hans, who was also a Dutch national, got a job at Securency, which develops polymer bank notes for Australia’s central bank. Ms. Dewa, a 45-year-old Malaysian national, had previously lived in Australia as a teenager, boarding as an international student at a school in central Melbourne, the city where the couple later made their home. Their children were 15, 12 and 8, and attended a local school on the western fringes of the city. All three children shared Australia’s obsession with sports.