By the thousands, people told Cruz the law had improved their lives. | M.Scott Mahaskey/POLITICO Cruz gets pushback in Facebook poll

Sen. Ted Cruz has unintentionally generated lots of Facebook love for Obamacare.

The Texas Republican recently did his own little poll about Obamacare on Facebook, asking whether the health law has improved people’s lives. By the thousands, people told him it had.

Story Continued Below

“Quick poll: Obamacare was signed into law four years ago yesterday. Are you better off now than you were then? Comment with YES or NO!,” says the poll he put up on March 24.

( WATCH: Open Mike with political 'data scientist' Alex Lundry)

The post has generated more than 55,700 comments — and they probably weren’t what Cruz, who staged that memorable overnight filibuster-like rant against the law on the Senate floor last summer, was expecting.

They said things like: “Not only am I better off, but I have friends that are better off.”

Or, “Yes I have MS and I lost my job I wouldn’t be able to get any other insurance because of my pre existing condition thank you President Obama.”

And, “This nation is better off for helping folks avoid the devastation that poor health can bring. Thank you, ACA!”

( QUIZ: Do you know Ted Cruz?)

In the most recent 100 comments, just two appeared more negative than positive. And many bash Cruz for his role in shutting down the government over Obamacare.

“Impeach Ted Cruz! He caused the shutdown that hurt this country badly!” one says.

But Cruz spokeswoman Catherine Frazier noted Wednesday that most of the negative responses came days after the question went up. She pointed to two liberal websites—Liberals Unite and DemocraticUnderground.com—that linked to the post and encouraged people to comment.

( Also on POLITICO: Ted Cruz closes in on lucrative book deal)

“This was clearly a manufactured, concerted effort from people on the left making comments days after the original post was put up,” she said. “Probably a better use of their time would be encouraging the administration to build an Obamcare website that actually works.”