Charles Upham, father of award-winning actress Misty Upham, who has been missing since last Sunday, says he fears she may have committed suicide.

Charles describes his daughter's behavior as "erratic" following a change in medication she was taking. "She told me and her mom that we didn't have to worry about her any more," he told The Hollywood Reporter. "I thought it sounded suicidal myself, so I called the police. She's always been a suicidal person."

On the other hand, there may be reason for hope: In the latest posting to Misty's Facebook page, Charles writes that the family has been "chasing down leads" and has heard of "possible sightings in Seattle." He asks those in the area to search "the wooded areas near the Muckleshoot Casino."

"Remember," he adds, "law enforcement is not looking for her."

This last statement clarifies earlier information reported by ICTMN. Although the Washington police confirmed that she has been reported as missing, she does not meet the criteria that would trigger a search. Commander Steve Stocker told TVGuide.com that the person's disappearance must be "unexplainable, involuntary or suspicious."

RELATED: Actress Misty Upham Missing; Last Seen on Muckleshoot Reservation in WA

Stocker said that "Our officers responded to her apartment where she lives with her parents on Sunday for a suicidal call. ... When our officers got there, she had already packed up some belongings and left the apartment, so the officers were not able to contact or find her." Stocker added that this was the fourth such visit to the residence where Upham lives with her parents since leaving Los Angeles.

An unnamed source told People.com that Upham had been struggling in L.A.: "She was doing everything she could to make it, but there were times she couldn't even make her own rent."

Charles Upham told The Hollywood Reporter that his daughter was getting "a lot of work," in Washington, but she lacked the "medical team" she had come to depend on in L.A.

In a statement that contradicts his others, the distraught father added that "I think that she is either in a place where she cant' get help—maybe she fell down and broke her leg and something, or she got in with the wrong crowd. ... I don't think she would have taken her own life. I don't want to think she is dead."

Clearly, Charles and those who know Misty are both fearing the worst and hoping for the best. He requests that anyone with information contact him by e-mail at CharlesUpham@gmail.com or text message at 714-499-5960.

Misty, Blackfeet, won acclaim for her performace in Frozen River (2008) and was most recently seen on the big screen in Jimmy P. (2013) and August: Osage County (2013). Her next high-profile film is the forthcoming Cake, starring Jennifer Aniston and Anna Kendrick.