Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

Plex DeAngelo, 13-year-old eighth-grader at Boulder's Southern Hills Middle School

Plex DeAngelo is an extremely gifted art student, and also has a deep appreciation for animals. She continues to take art to a higher level by sharing her knowledge. She is one of six advanced art students who are combined with an Art 1 class. Recently, the advanced students were asked to connect art and science through drawing. Plex brought one of her chickens into the art class to draw. She also shared her chicken with all her classmates by leading a drawing session outside. She also has been a guest student artist on occasion for the sixth-grade exploratory class. Last year, Plex was the only seventh-grader to receive a Scholastic Art Award at Southern Hills, receiving a silver key award for a 3D sculpture.

What do you like about art?

I get to express my feelings.

What kind of art do you like best?

I enjoy working on ceramics and mostly pencil for sketching. When I draw, I usually draw a fox or a dragon. I draw mostly animals. Their anatomy is more interesting, and I feel closer to nature.

Do you have a favorite piece that you've done?

Last year, I was working with pen and ink. I drew this bird, a robotic crow, and painted it with metallic watercolors. It was really cool and interesting. I've used it to enter in to contests.

What advice do you have for younger students?

Advertisement

If they think that they messed up on something, they're probably wrong. No one is ever satisfied with what they do. Just keep trying to make it better.

Do you have pets?

I have 21 chickens, two cats and ducks. They're happy chickens. We have different breeds, but we have the most of the Silver Spangled Hamburg. We just got the three ducks. Ducks are messy and smelly and annoying, but duck eggs are really good.

What do you like about school?

I love school. I do really well in math and science, so those are subjects I really like.

What are you not looking forward to about the school year?

National History Day. My brain doesn't work with history. I might fail it miserably.

Do you play any sports?

Volleyball. I like volleyball a lot. It's fun.

What do you like to do for fun?

I go outside and play with the animals and draw.

What's your dream job?

Brain surgery. I like taking things apart.