Yesterday Carla Howell, the political director for the Libertarian Party made a public statement (see below for full statement) on the Democratic-Republican passage of the Continuing Appropriations Act of 2014 (PDF). Howell states, "Elected Democrats and Republicans are incurable. They cannot be lobbied or begged to do the right thing. Only by voting for their opposition candidates — who are firmly committed to dramatically and immediately cutting federal government spending — will anything change."

CSPAN

Howell cites the sentiments of a large number of Americans. A new poll out this week shows over a third of Americans feel the debt limit should not have been raised. The same poll found 46% of Americans blame Republicans for the deadlock in Washington over the government shutdown and debt limit and 37% say the Obama administration is more to blame.

In an article yesterday it was revealed by Adrian Wyllie, a 2014 Libertarian Florida gubernatorial candidate, that, "It is now crystal clear to me that Fix The Debt has a single purpose, it has nothing to do with actually fixing the debt. Their purpose is to give political cover to Congress for their fiscal transgressions against the American people; and to encourage political leaders, community leaders, and business leaders to drink the Kool Aid and disseminate the propaganda."

Libertarians are capitalizing on the discord in our nation as Democrats and Republicans put on a show for Americans acting as if they are different, however both parties regularly vote for a larger, more intrusive government. Each year federal and state legislatures are in office, Americans are taxed more and lose more freedom regardless of which major party is in control. Most arguments between Congressional members are whether to slow the growth of government, not to keep it at its present levels or even reduce it, and the growth continues. The federal government continues to invade the privacy of Americans while ignoring the protections offered by the U.S. Constitution. Each member of Congress takes an Oath of Office to defend and protect the U.S. Constitution, however libertarians are saying most members of Congress regularly violate their oath.

While Barack Obama publicly opposed the interventionist foreign policy and domestic privacy policies of the Bush administration, once president, he continued and has even ramped up those same policies. Bush greatly expanded the financial obligations of the U.S. government with his vast Medicare expansion and Obama is doing the same with ObamaCare. The similarities in the two older parties has created mistrust and many Americans are seeking third parties that are more in line with their personal values. Many people do not realize they hold libertarian leanings as they do not spend time thinking deeply about the issues. There is a unique 30 second test called the World's Smallest Political Quiz which helps participants see where they stand politically. Often many are surprised to be in the libertarian quadrant of the quiz.

The chair of the Libertarian Party of Florida said in a recent interview with the Digital Journal, "We have this amazing luxury of having a message that works for everyone. We are fiscally conservative and socially liberal. We are exactly what this nation needs. The Libertarian Party of Florida continues to see tremendous growth and there are no signs of slowing down. The Libertarian Party of Florida just formed a committee aimed at strategizing a series of events to encourage disenfranchised Florida voters from all parties, to switch their registration to become a member of the Libertarian Party of Florida, in time to be able to take part in the statewide primary elections as a Libertarian."

Carla Howell's statement in full: