Buy Photo State Sen. Dave Hansen, D-Green Bay, is the author of a bill that would put a nonpartisan commission in charge of redistricting. (Photo: Peter Frank/Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

The next national census is only five years away.

Ever since the last one, the Press-Gazette Media editorial board has been calling for a change in the way legislative and congressional boundaries are drawn in Wisconsin.

But there's been no urgency among those in power in Madison. Plus, well, the next census was nine years away. Then eight. Seven. …

The next census is now five years away, and still nothing has been done.

A group of Democrats that includes state Sen. Dave Hansen, D-Green Bay, is trying to change that on the state level. They were in Green Bay last week to bring attention to Senate Bill 58 and Assembly Bill 328, which call for a nonpartisan approach to redistricting, based on the successful model in Iowa.

It's an effort that we support, and one that has been picking up bipartisan support, too.

For example, State Rep. Todd Novak, R-Dodgeville, has signed on to the Assembly bill, the only Republican in either house to do so. On the national level, U.S. Rep Reid Ribble, R-Sherwood, earlier this year reintroduced the John Tanner Fairness in Redistricting Act and the Redistricting Transparency Act of 2015. They would institute a more transparent process and an end to gerrymandering, which is the act of rigging a district so that it favors one party over any others.

"Making districts so heavily liberal or conservative that the only competition for a seat occurs during the primary election is dishonest," Ribble said at the time.

We couldn't agree more.

We can think of no quicker way to discourage people from voting than to rig the outcome by drawing up congressional and legislative boundaries that overwhelmingly favor one party. It totally trashes the principle of one person, one vote – which is the very basis for redistricting every 10 years.

If you think the current model is the way to go, then you're simply ignoring the reality.

In the 2014 election, 90 percent of the candidates won by more than 10 percentage points, according to Common Cause of Wisconsin. In 2012, more state residents voted for Democrats than Republicans yet Republicans took more congressional seats and added to their leads in the Assembly and Senate.

Also, consider what happened the last time Wisconsin went through redistricting, in 2011. The Republicans hired law firms to help them to secretly redraw the political boundaries, shutting everyone out of the process until they were ready to unveil the maps. Within days, the GOP held one hearing, called an extraordinary session of the Legislature and swiftly got approval of both Republican majority houses.

There was no time for legislators to study the maps. Furthermore, voters were shut out of the process entirely yet they had to foot the law firms' bills

The process cost the state taxpayers $2 million because it ended up in federal court, which was the same outcome in the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s when neither the Legislature nor the governor could agree on a plan.

Contrast that mess with the current proposal, based on the method used in Iowa:

A nonpartisan commission draws up the maps without regard to where incumbents live, districts adhere to municipal boundaries and are compact and contiguous. Three public hearings are held throughout the state, including at least one in northern Wisconsin. The maps are presented to the Legislature.

The total cost, as estimated in 2011, would be about $580,000.

Iowa has used this method four times and encountered very little opposition.

Yet opposition remains because for all of the partisan maneuvering in gerrymandering, the practice has had bipartisan support over the years. When the Democrats controlled the state Legislature they could have changed the current method. Instead they opted for the status quo.

What we need are elected officials with the political courage to act on behalf of their constituents and not their party, to make changes that benefit voters, not themselves.

Smothering any competitive races for the Legislature and Congress does a disservice to everyone. It discourages candidates from seeking office and residents from voting. It more easily allows corruption of incumbents who are tempted to be more beholden to special interests than their constituents.

Plus, it flies in the face of one-person, one-vote, a principle that has served our democracy well.

The bottom line is this: Politicians should not be so concerned with re-election that they redraw boundaries to protect their party.

They should be more concerned serving their constituents, not their partisan interests.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1F6Fo0z