Lead, SD

The former Homestake Gold Mine in Lead is building an international reputation for scientific research.

Scientists at the Sanford Underground Research Facility are working on neutrino and dark-matter projects almost a mile beneath the surface. But the impacts reach above ground to the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology in Rapid City, where the physics department is expanding to meet the research needs.

As a physicist studying some of the smallest particles in the universe, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology professor Luke Corwin is used to thinking small - but in a big way.

Maybe as big, if things go right in a planned Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment, as the Nobel Prize for physics.

"Well, sometimes I think about it," says Corwin. "There are certain things that if we discover them and DUNE, would win a Nobel Prize for it. Since the Nobel prize only goes to individuals, I doubt I would be one of them. But one can always hope."

Hope paid off this month for physicists in Japan and Canada, when they shared a Nobel Prize for their research into the tiny subatomic particles called neutrinos. The work is similar to past and ongoing research at the Sanford Underground Laboratory in the old Homestake Gold Mine in Lead - with collaboration by scientists at the South Dakota School of Mines and many other universities.

Past neutrino work done at Homestake earned scientist Ray Davis a share of a Nobel prize. Work 4,850 feet underground at the new Sanford Lab, which is building toward a much bigger neutrino project, is the next generation of that.

"We're doing the same research the Nobel prize winners were doing," Corwin says. "We're building upon their work and measuring what they measured, with more precision and learning more about these mysterious particles."

That and complicated research into the existence of dark matter were the foundation for a new doctorate physics program at South Dakota School of Mines. It started two years ago has grown fast.

The expanding physics department is moving into office and research space across campus, including the entire first floor of this building, which also houses the South Dakota School of Mines Foundation.

What was once empty space is fast turning into an important research facility.

"What you see here is all new," says physics professor and researcher Juergen Reichenbacher. "Before that was basically just empty warehouse space. The floor was painted. It was completely empty. Everything in this building has been set up within a year."

There's more coming. What's there now has begun essential research into the detection of background radiation that could interfere with sensitive neutrino research at Sanford. Work done here will make research on a much grander scale to come more precise.

"It's a very exciting time," Reichenbacher says. "It's the right time -- to be here, to take the next step, to take on the next future experimental effort in the field of neutrino physics."

That could matter to the way the universe is understood. But there are other more pragmatic benefits to the research.

Unexpected discoveries that come with such research could also affect the general public. Corwin said leftover neutrons from neutrino-beam experiments benefit certain cancer patients.

"There are particular kinds that respond very well to that treatment, so they're saving people's lives," he said. "That wouldn't be possible without the accelerator research that went into this."

Research in other areas helped develop GPS systems which are now widely used in everyday life.

"The short answer is, we don't know why neutrinos are going to be important to us," Corwin says. "We hope we'll be given a chance to find out."

He has no doubt it will be worth it, Nobel prize or not.

The new physics program at South Dakota Mines has 21 doctoral students this fall. Within a few years, it will produce the first doctorate graduates in physics in South Dakota history.

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.