Annette Taddeo, Charlie Crist’s running mate in the Florida governor’s race, visited Kathy Wiley in New Tampa on Monday to talk about health care in one of the campaign’s series of “Kitchen Table” events.

Wiley told the story of her brother’s battle with throat cancer, a story intended to dramatize Florida’s failure under Crist’s opponent, Gov. Rick Scott, to expand its Medicaid program through the Affordable Care Act.

The campaign’s 10-day Kitchen Table Tour, in which both Crist and Taddeo visit Florida families, is intended to “highlight the stress Florida’s middle-class families are facing in Rick Scott’s low-wage, high-cost economy,” the Crist campaign says.

It’s not clear, however, whether the Medicaid expansion program would have helped Wiley’s brother.

According to the information supplied by Wiley, her brother and the campaign, his income would have been too high to make him eligible for Medicaid coverage even under the expansion that Crist supports.

Scott has taken a public stance favoring expanding Medicaid under the ACA, which would cover the lion’s share of the full cost of allowing eligibility to those just above the poverty line for 10 years.

But the state Legislature, dominated by Republicans, has refused the money, expected to be about $66.1 billion, according to a recent study, and Scott has not pressed the issue. Crist contends Scott has “sat on his hands.”

Opponents, including outgoing House Speaker Will Weatherford, R-Wesley Chapel, say they don’t believe the federal government would be able to pay the tab and would leave the state holding the bag for a huge expansion of already burdensome Medicaid costs.

The Crist campaign chose the individuals they visit, including Wiley, from among people who responded to campaign mailings asking supporters to provide stories of economic problems including property insurance, utility rates, education and scholarship cuts and health care costs.

Wiley described herself as a liberal but says she has voted for some Republicans, including former Sen. Connie Mack and Crist, a former Republican who switched parties in 2012. She said she hasn’t been involved in politics.

“It’s a bad idea for the economy not to take care of the working poor,” she said. “People who thumb their nose at universal health care should think about what they would do if it was somebody in their family.”

Wiley’s brother, Wil Keener, a 55-year-old swimming pool construction and maintenance worker, lost his employer-provided health insurance when the industry collapsed during the recession. He said in an interview he hasn’t been able to afford a private policy. At just under $30,000 a year, he makes too much to qualify for Medicaid.

After he was diagnosed with cancer last year, he had to get $20,000 from another sister to pay for radiation treatments — a heavily discounted fee provided by sympathetic physicians at Bardmoor Cancer Center in Largo, he said.

He said he kept working through the therapy and is now making about $500 a week. “It was a little tough,” he said. “I didn’t feel real good, but I did it.”

When Bardmoor personnel sent him to government offices to seek assistance, he said, “They looked at me like I was insane. They said there was nothing they could do because I had a job.”

The ACA Medicaid expansion would make the program’s benefits available to those with incomes up to 138 percent of the federal poverty line.

This year, the poverty line is $11,670 for a single adult such as Keener, so with an income of $25,000 to $30,000, the expansion program still wouldn’t make him eligible.

Other programs exist to help people who are “medically needy,” meaning they aren’t poor but are burdened with medical expenses they can’t handle, but Keener said he was told by the agencies he visited that no help was available.

Keener said he has since tried to obtain a private policy through the exchange set up under the ACA but can’t afford a policy with a deductible low enough to make it worthwhile.

He said doctors tell him his prognosis is “very good,” with a 95 percent success rate. “They said the first year’s the most important.

“I really don’t know who to believe anymore,” he said. “I used to lean more Republican, but now I believe in my sisters and my family and God.”

After hearing Wiley, Taddeo said, “These stories have been heart-wrenching,” and that failure to expand Medicaid “has affected real people.”

wmarch@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7761