Obamacare participation rates in Alabama varied dramatically during the first enrollment period by geography, and to a lesser extent race, an AL.com analysis of data released this month by the federal government shows.

A week ago, AL.com published data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services showing variation among ZIP codes. A deeper dig into those statistics indicates that variation is even greater when examining households that generally were eligible for subsidies under the Affordable Care Act.

Success in signing up the eligible uninsured ranged from nearly 100 percent all the way to Collinsville in DeKalb and Cherokee counties, where just 9.7 percent of potentially eligible people bought policies. A look at the map below makes immediately clear where Obamacare had the most and the least success. Generally, large cities and their suburbs – places like Birmingham, Huntsville and Mobile – had high percentages of uninsured sign up, while in rural areas, participation was more sparse.

"There are huge holes all over it, like Swiss cheese," said Jim Carnes, policy director of the Arise Citizens' Project. 'There are lots of areas where there were almost no sign-ups."

Methodology and analysis

The federal government did not release ZIP code data on the number of residents who were eligible for subsidies under the Affordable Care Act. So AL.com approximated the number from the U.S. Census Bureau's most recent estimate for number of uninsured resident in each ZIP code.

The agency divides that population into three income categories. AL.com removed those earning less than 138 percent of the poverty rate to eliminate many of the people whose incomes are too low to qualify for subsidies. Congress meant for those people to be covered by an expansion of Medicaid, but Alabama Gov. Robert Bentley has delinked to accept federal funds to do so.

The estimates for the uninsured do not exactly match the eligibility requirements for Obamacare. People can receive subsidies if their household income exceeds the poverty line, meaning that some residents who were eligible are not included in this analysis. That likely explains why in a couple of cases, the percentage of eligible people who purchased plans is 100 percent or more. The actual number of eligible uninsured resident was higher than depicted here.

Search your ZIP



The numbers presented here also do not include every ZIP code. The government did not report data from ZIP codes where 50 or fewer people bought health insurance on the federal exchange. Over concerns about high margin of error, AL.com also eliminated ZIP codes where the estimated number of uninsured people was less than 150.

Still, the analysis offers a ballpark estimate of how well volunteers managed to reach the eligible, uninsured population in each ZIP code between Oct. 1 last year and through March 31 of this year.

Racial divide

The data suggest a racial divide: ZIP codes with high black populations were more likely to have high participation rates than majority-white ZIP codes.

Of 62 ZIP codes where minorities make up more than 50 percent of the population, 25 – or 40.3 percent – had sign-up rates below that median figure of 28.5 percent. Among majority-white ZIP codes, 51.7 percent were below the median sign-up rate.

Some of the federally trained navigators who tried to enroll uninsured people under the Affordable Care Act said there was a racial component in the level of acceptance detected in various communities. Doug Hoffman, a retired Children's Hospital of Alabama finance manager who worked for Enroll Alabama in the Birmingham area, said black residents in general were less resistant to accepting government assistance.

He also noted that the health reform law is "tainted by anti-Obama politics" in a state where President Barack Obama is nearly as unpopular among whites as he is popular with blacks.

"Rural, white folks who came in were almost kind of ashamed of having to come in, and distrustful of the whole process," said Hoffman, who started Engage Alabama in April. "I didn't see that as much in the black community. Let's face it, this whole program is associated with a black president."

Hoffman said he has high hopes for year two, though, as more people report positive personal experiences with their health coverage.

"It was amazing how word of mouth gets around. A lot of it is word of mouth," he said, adding that he noticed a big difference in communities where pastors or prominent people played active roles. "The success stories are out there. They're spreading."

Christopher Mosley, the outreach and education supervisor for Birmingham Health Care Services, said he found turnout for Affordable Care Act information sessions was better in black neighborhoods.

"We have done events in every county that is in the Birmingham Health Care service area. ... What it is, is that I think people in these (minority) ZIP codes are more receptive," he said.

Rates high on Gulf Coast

Like other big cities, Mobile had a relatively high participation rate. The 36610 ZIP code, which covers parts of downtown Mobile and Prichard, was among the 20 highest in the state.

But some ZIP codes in Baldwin County saw high rates of eligible uninsured residents buy policies, good. Elberta and Fairhope both were in the top 20 statewide. ZIP code 36542 in Gulf Shores (36.1 percent) and ZIP code 36561 in Orange Beach (55.6 percent) both exceeded the state average.

At first blush, heavily Republican and relatively wealthy Baldwin County would not seem to be prime territory for a successful Obamacare push.

Hoffman, who helped enroll folks in the Birmingham area, offered a theory: Orange Beach, Gulf Shores and other cities in Baldwin have a high number of early retirees who did not have employer-provided insurance and were not yet old enough for Medicare.

He said those people benefited greatly from the Affordable Care Act, both because of the subsidies and because insurance companies no longer could charge more than three times the amount paid by young, healthy customers.

"The Affordable Care Act has been a huge boon to early retirees," he said.

In Fairhope, a group of volunteers set up shop for months at the library, handing out information and arranging for people to meet with navigators.

"It was an uphill struggle because we had no money," said Rebecca Titford, a volunteer with Organizing for America. "We had no state support."

Titford said the volunteers met resistance in some quarters but noticed increased support from the city leadership after Mayor Tim Kant returned from a March meeting of the U.S. Conference of Mayors in Washington, D.C. She said she believes he got positive feedback about efforts in his city to get people insurance.

In Mobile, lawyer Henry Brewster organized volunteers and navigators, and they held sign-up sessions all over the city in libraries and community centers.

"It really turned into almost a political campaign at the end," he said.

Tony Garr, the southeast state assistance manager for Enroll America, said volunteers were particularly active in Coastal Alabama.

"There was a very strong volunteer outreach in Mobile," he said. "That did not happen in a lot of areas."