Fast food and other low-wage workers took to the streets of cities across the country this week to demand a minimum wage of $15, earning the support of liberal mayors, governors and even presidential candidates.

In New York, Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo stood with the “Fight for $15” crusade, announcing he would take executive action to establish a $15-per-hour floor for state employees by 2021, which means they would have a higher minimum wage than public sector workers in any other state.

Among the Democratic White House hopefuls, Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) and former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley have backed a $15 minimum, while former Secretary of State and front runner Hillary Clinton wants to make it $12 nationally, arguing that $15 may not suit places where the cost of living is lower than in major metropolitan areas.

In many ways this is a classic business-labor split. All three of the Democratic presidential candidates have earned support in past races from the group that is bankrolling Fight for $15 – the Service Employees International Union, which for years has been one of the most politically active labor organizations and one of biggest donors to the Democratic Party. SEIU boasts 2 million members who work in areas like health care, food service and state or local government.

The SEIU dished out nearly $5.2 million advocating for or against federal candidates during the 2014 election cycle, ranking the union 21st among outside spending groups that made independent expenditures or electioneering communications. It spent half of the money supporting Democrats, while roughly the other half was used to attack Republicans.

Among its targeted congressional candidates, the group spent the most – about $950,000 – urging voters to reject now-Sen. Cory Gardner (R-Colo.), who defeated Democratic incumbent Mark Udall in a close race. The SEIU also spent $266,000 in support of Udall, who as a senator favored increasing the national minimum wage to $10.10.

Separately, the union’s hefty PAC donated more than $1.6 million to congressional candidates – all of them Democrats – in the last election cycle. In 2000, the PAC put $10,000 (the maximum allowable gift) into Clinton’s campaign coffers as she mounted her first Senate bid, and it again maxed out when she ran for re-election. Sanders received $8,000 when he ran for his second Senate term in 2012, and O’Malley had strong support from a local affiliate of the labor giant when he ran for Maryland governor.

Compared to its involvement in elections, the SEIU is a smaller player in the lobbying world. After a peak of $2.9 million in 2009, the union’s annual outlays for lobbying – mostly on health, labor and immigration issues – have dropped to about $1 million. This year, the SEIU joined the debate over Planned Parenthood, lobbying against GOP efforts to defund the reproductive health services organization. The group also lobbied on a Medicare-related bill known as the “permanent doc fix.”

One of the union’s major opponents on Capitol Hill is the National Restaurant Association, which counts McDonald’s Corp., Wendy’s International and Burger King Corp. among its members and has spent at least $2.2 million lobbying the federal government every year since 2006. Its political action committee, which spent close to $1 million in the 2014 cycle, has helped fund the Senate campaigns of current GOP presidential candidates Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Florida’s Marco Rubio and Carly Fiorina, who tried to defeat incumbent Sen. Barbara Boxer of California in 2010. The “other NRA” flat-out opposes a minimum wage increase, claiming it would hurt young people looking for their first jobs and force restaurant owners to raise prices or cut hours.

“As businesses struggle to recover from the economic recession, dramatic, mandatory wage increases would place yet another financial burden on business owners who are already feeling the pressures of a weak economy and additional costs and regulatory complexity associated with the Affordable Care Act,” the association states on its website.

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce also contends that economic studies show “mandatory wage hikes price the lowest skilled workers out of jobs.” The organization is consistently the biggest lobbying spender in Washington. Its outlays haven’t dipped below $66 million since 2008. In fact, it has outspent every other group that’s filed a lobbying report since 2001. The Chamber’s PAC these days gives almost exclusively to Republicans, and has contributed to both Fiorina’s and Graham’s Senate election bids.

But if it’s a battle of the spenders, there’s no real contest. As is true every cycle, business interests contributed far more than labor unions to political causes in the 2014 cycle – more than $1.6 billion versus $140.7 million. Not everyone involved in business opposes a higher minimum wage, but about 60 percent of business-connected contributions went to Republicans in the last cycle, and precious few GOP members of Congress are inclined to hike the wage.