President Barack Obama has been given a clean bill of health, and even with the occasional use of a nicotine gum his doctor says that test results indicate he’ll remain healthy for the rest of his time in office.

Obama, a former smoker, remains tobacco free, exercises daily and drinks alcohol occasionally and in moderation, according to the third physical of his presidency, which was conducted last month.

It was Obama’s first physical since October 2011. His doctor, Ronny L. Jackson, said he was releasing the health information included in a letter to press secretary Jay Carney with the consent of the president.

“The President’s overall health is excellent,” Jackson wrote. “All clinical data indicates that the President is currently healthy and that he will remain so for the duration of his presidency.”

In addition to the nicotine gum, which he uses occasionally, Obama, 52, takes a daily Vitamin D supplement to treat a mild deficiency and occasionally takes ibuprofen, a non-prescription pain reliever and anti-inflammatory drug to treat intermittent plantar fasciitis, his doctor said. The president also has taken an anti-malaria pill, Malarone, for the times he’s traveled to areas where the disease is endemic.

Cholesterol Levels

Obama, who in previous years blamed his cholesterol results on the plethora of desserts available to him as president, still has elevated levels. At 213 mg/dL, he falls in the range of “borderline high” according to the Mayo Clinic’s website, which classifies anything from 200-239 mg/dL in that category.

At 6 foot 1 inch, Obama weighs 180 pounds and has perfect 20/20 vision. Exams of Obama’s eyes, head, ears, nose and throat as well as neck, were all normal. So too were his neurological, pulmonary, cardiology, gastrointestinal and genitourinary tests.

Other than Obama’s recurrent plantar fasciitis in his right foot, which could explain why he’s been playing less basketball, the president’s musculoskeletal exam was “unremarkable.” The doctor also noted “several small benign skin tags” on his neck, though there’s no evidence of skin cancer or any sort of skin disease.