Topics: Air Travel, airplane, airplanes, Alpine plane crash, Andreas Lubitz, French Alps, Germanwings, MH370, missing airplane, plane crash, Plane crash France, Plane Crashes, Entertainment News, News

What sense can we possibly make of this week’s nightmarish disaster in the French Alps, where the young and apparently healthy co-pilot of a German jetliner deliberately crashed his airplane into the mountains, killing himself and 149 other people? We learned on Friday that Andreas Lubitz had been diagnosed with a mental illness he concealed from his employers, but that should be understood as a clue rather than anything like an explanation. It’s reasonable to argue that people with certain psychiatric diagnoses shouldn’t fly airplanes, but almost none of them contemplate spectacular acts of mass murder, still less commit them. To launch a witch hunt against every pilot who’d ever seen a shrink or taken an antidepressant would be one of the worst possible outcomes of this tragedy.

Does this bizarre eruption of murderous and/or suicidal madness (if that’s what it was) represent a failure of technological and bureaucratic oversight? Or is it a symptom of some cultural pathology that goes much deeper than that? Was it an enactment of the decline of the West, a pathetic display of our collective loss of moral fiber? Does it go along with the melting polar ice caps and perishing songbirds, as an early death knell for our civilization? Or is it best understood as a fluke event, not entirely avoidable but probably not repeatable, that should not be allowed to interrupt the normal course of business?

Those questions don’t have answers, especially since we are still learning how and why Lubitz wound up in the cockpit of a Germanwings flight from Barcelona to Düsseldorf in such a severely disordered condition. But the existence of such questions and many others like them, which carry such obvious ideological freight, speaks to our desire to frame this random and terrifying event as part of a story we already understand. Personally, I see our horrified fascination with Lubitz and the crash as a metaphorical displacement, almost a distraction. It’s a way to confront evil and madness at an individual and unavoidable level, instead of dealing with manifestations of those things that are more difficult to see and almost impossible to combat.

Friday’s New York Times was dominated by news of the Germanwings disaster, and no wonder – it’s a spectacular tragedy that had already ruled cable news for more than 24 hours. But the Times published something much more important on Friday, not to mention more disturbing: a hair-raising investigative feature by Mark Binelli, from the forthcoming Sunday magazine, about the devastating psychological damage inflicted on thousands of American prison inmates housed in “Supermax” isolation units. So one of the day’s big stories had far-reaching social and cultural consequences, and spoke to our civilization’s misguided and self-destructive priorities. As far as we can tell right now, the other one (the one everybody read) was about one crazy guy who did a crazy thing.

It was a spectacularly crazy thing, to be sure. We’ll never know what was going on inside Andreas Lubitz’s head and no doubt we’re better off, but creating a massive media spectacle may well have been the point. As a co-worker of mine put it, the story of that Germanwings flight feels like a horrible dream suffused with inexplicable dread – a “Final Destination” movie, as scripted by Kierkegaard. It was supposed to be a routine European commuter journey, which in thousands upon thousands of previous iterations had involved short naps, a bored perusal of the Financial Times and a cup of bad coffee. This time it ended with screaming passengers, a pilot hammering on a locked door and a vertiginous plunge to instantaneous death.

Sheer horror and pity, along with the irrational if technically accurate fear that something dreadful is just as likely to befall us as someone else, may account for our fascination with the spectacle. But the uncanny quality my colleague referred to plays a major role as well. Like the mysterious disappearance of the Malaysian Airlines plane a year ago, the Germanwings crash seems to involve factors that elude ordinary understanding, most notably those factors hidden in the human mind or the human soul. Statistics tell us that air travel is safer than ever, and that on the rare occasions when planes crash, deliberate action by a pilot is perhaps the least likely cause. (Nothing can be absolutely ruled out in the Malaysian case, but that particular explanation seems unlikely.)