Father-and-son team Don and Alex Tapscott, both business strategy consultants, have a new book out today called “Blockchain Revolution: How the Technology Behind Bitcoin is Changing Money, Business and the World.”

Addressing the issue of climate change at his annual shareholder meeting, Warren Buffett said he doesn't agree that climate change is the most pressing issue facing the Earth. However, he does want to reduce our dependence on oil out of a fear that we're going to use "every last drop."

Warren Buffett is an Obama supporter, but he is still bullish on America even if Trump becomes president. He cited the fact that in his lifetime, GDP per capita has gone up six times. He thinks it will continue to rise for at least the next 50 years and that no presidential candidate is going to put an end to that.

At the annual Berkshire Hathaway meeting, Warren Buffett answered a tough question from a shareholder about Berkshire's substantial holdings of Coca-Cola shares. He said, "I elect to get my 2600 or 2700 calories per day from things that make me feel good."

The Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, is back in the spotlight once again. This time it’s under dissection by both the Congressional Budget Office and the Supreme Court.

The highest court in the U.S. will decide on King vs. Burwell before the end of June. The case could potentially end the subsidies of 6.4 million Americans who buy their health care through the Affordable Care Act. Meanwhile, the CBO has released an analysis on the costs of repealing Obamacare-- a repeal that it says could add $137 billion to the U.S. deficit over the next 10 years. The number comes from an estimated $353 billion in deficits and an economic boost from increased supply of labor that would remove $216 billion from the deficit.

Douglas Holtz-Eakin, director of the American Action Forum and former director of the CBO, chooses to focus on the increased supply of labor. “The CBO has said definitively for the first time that the Affordable Care Act is harming economic growth in the United States,” he tells Yahoo Finance. “Most of this hinges on what you chose to believe about the future of the Medicare cuts…The real question is, 'Do you believe that we’re going to cut $800 billion out of Medicare in the next ten years?' If you do, then repealing the ACA gets rid of those cuts.”

Holtz-Eakin believes that the CBO report is fuel for those calling to repeal Obamacare. “Many people have suspected for a long time that the combination of higher taxes, entitlement expansion, [and] a very large regulatory burden was harming the U.S. economy.”

The CBO does note that undoing the ACA would be incredibly complicated and would present challenges since. In their report they write, “In the five years since its enactment, nearly every key provision of the law has taken effect and has been incorporated into final rules and other administrative actions.” Holtz-Eakin agrees that unwinding a large bureaucracy is difficult and proposes to replace ACA subsidies with subsidies based on people’s age and the risk that comes with age and other Republican-proposed alternatives.

“We will have in the future something that’s not the ACA whether it’s because the ACA gets repealed or replaced or because in the future the ACA gets modified,” he says. “Nobody believes this is the end of healthcare reform. It’s probably just the beginning.”

Get the Latest Market Data and News with the Yahoo Finance App