Believe it or not, the big three credit-reporting agencies are here to help you in your struggle with medical debt. Kind of.



After a year of negotiations New York attorney general Eric Schneiderman, whose office has been investigating the credit bureaus’ practices, Equifax Information Services, Experian Information Solutions and TransUnion have agreed to new policies that include an agreement not to add delinquent medical bills to consumers’ credit reports until they have been outstanding for 180 days.

That will be welcome news to the (too) many Americans who find themselves caught trying to navigate the tangled web of reimbursements for medical services, struggling to decipher who owes how much to whom and monitoring whether those payments are actually being made by insurance companies.

Too often, it has seemed, the only safe way to avoid ending up without a black mark on your credit report is to pay the whole bill up front yourself – something that might only be possible for a routine doctor’s visit. And if you have to pay up front, then what’s the point of having insurance in the first place?

A report published last December by the Consumer Protection Financial Bureau, which regulates the credit reporting agencies, noted that many of those consumers who have medical bills showing up as unpaid on our credit reports “show no other evidence of financial distress” and pay most of our other bills on time.

In fact, 22% of them have only medical bills showing as unpaid on those reports and half of those have otherwise “clean” credit. They owe less, the CPFB concludes, have more available credit to repay that debt and are generally more reliable payers than the folks who have just racked up a lot of credit card debt for that vacation in the Bahamas they couldn’t really afford.

Then why did those bills end up unpaid, and with collection agencies? A lot of the time those individuals didn’t even realize that the bills were outstanding, they were querying suspect charges, or they believe their insurance companies should have paid these expenses. Requiring the credit companies to wait before adding them to a credit report – and damaging your ability to get an affordable mortgage or even hurting your chances of getting a new job (since many employers now routinely run a credit check on job applicants) – will give you more time to sort out those billing problems.

This isn’t the first attempt to address the issue. About 43 million Americans have past-due medical debt on their credit reports and about half of all outstanding debt awaiting collection is medical debt. Last summer, Fair Isaac Corp, whose FICO scores are the most widely used measure of creditworthiness, altered the weight that it places on medical debt when calculating that influential figure. Those Americans whose credit problems are almost exclusively tied to medical bills got a break: if your credit was otherwise good, you probably saw your FICO score jump by 25 points.

These are all welcome initiatives. But none of them go to the heart of the matter, and none of them will stop medical debt from weighing on Americans’ balance sheets or their credit ratings. Some of the remaining problems may not be subject to a quick change in policy on the part of a credit rating agency; others may be worth pondering by those involved either in calculating credit ratings or in deciding how they are used.

1. Consumers still face a dilemma when it comes to figuring out what they owe, and to whom. They need to be their own accountants, trying to figure out (in spite of the lack of transparency) just what costs they have incurred and who will be paying for what portion of the bill. As someone who has visited emergency rooms to get treatment for migraines, I’m relieved that I don’t have whip out my credit card when I leave the premises. On the other hand, I’m always stunned to receive a steady stream of different bills for the same visit – bills from the hospital, from the physicians, etc – and bills that can vary by 500% from one institution in the same city to another, for precisely the same treatment. Then row insurance companies into the mix – how much of that bill will insurance pick up? Will they pay? Have they paid? Will they provide proof of payment that you can wave in front of the hospital/doctor’s eyes? – and it gets scarier still.

2. The sheer size of those bills remains overwhelming for many relative to their income. Even with Obamacare in place, that is true, since for many lower-income Americans only high-deductible plans have been available or affordable. That means that those who can least afford to pay a few thousand dollars in medical expenses are least able to simply turn those bills over to their insurer. Medical bills remain the single largest factor for Americans declaring bankruptcy, according to many studies.

3. Medical debt simply isn’t predictive of consumers’ attitudes to other forms of debt at all. No one starts the year saying, oh, I think I’ll get leukemia, or goes skiing with the intention of incurring a complex fracture and spending weeks in a cast and weeks more in physiotherapy. Those are bills that derail the best-planned budgets – and, as the CFPB has demonstrated, don’t reflect your general attitude to credit. Does it even have a role in FICO scores and in credit bureau ratings? Why not break it out as a completely separate category?

4. More broadly, your FICO score is simply a snapshot of your credit – your payments, the amount of credit you have and how much you have used, how long a credit history you have and so on – taken at a specific moment in time. If that moment happens to be after you’ve lost a job and suffered from an illness, that’s going to take a toll on that score. Someone studying your credit report might realize what went wrong. The key word there, of course, is “might”. Wouldn’t it be great if there was some ability to note when there was a dramatic, exogenous event – an illness, a job loss – that distorted your payment history? True, it takes time for an event of this kind to hit your credit score, but how much better it would be for someone to be able to view that number through some kind of filter that tells them: this individual has a 15 year credit history, 13 years of which was pristine, until medical debt caused a problem in these two years and altered the score.

The question of how credit reporting agencies handle the question of medical debt shows how a twist of fate can leave otherwise financially-responsible individuals lumped together with those who simply are irresponsible. The changes will make a difference – including the use of real human beings trained to review documents and correct errors in consumers’ credit reports. But the size, troublesome and ubiquitous nature of medical debt mean that it’s just a start. It’s still up to us to prevent medical bills from giving us a black eye on our credit reports: monitoring the bills and insurance payments proactively, chasing down the latter when needed, and setting aside (whenever possible) savings accounts to cover out-of-pocket and unexpected costs. It may not be fair, but it’s prudent.

Meanwhile, we can’t afford to let up the pressure on politicians and industry to do what it takes to make the health care system more efficient – and less costly. To the extent that fear of racking up medical debt causes people to delay getting timely treatment, that’s only going to worsen the situation.