Back before the days of campaign finance laws, there was a safe in the office of the Secretary of the Senate. And there was no secret about what function it served.

"Somebody who was a multi-millionaire would come in and give you $20,000 for the boys in the next election. You put it in the safe that was always in the secretary's office … The contributor didn't know whether you put $10,000 or $20,000 in that safe. He had no way of knowing it," recalled Darrell St. Claire, a former assistant secretary of the Senate. "But if he came back with a request, it was up to me to produce: 'I'll have some senators together for lunch tomorrow and you can tell them what you want.' That's the way it was done," St. Claire, who worked for the U.S. Senate from 1966-77, told Senate Historian Donald A. Ritchie, who conducts oral histories with Senate figures.

[READ: Hillary Clinton Calls For Campaign Finance Constitutional Amendment]

It sounds like something out of the Dark Ages, or at least the heavily ethically-clouded age before Congress began regulating how campaigns can be financed, and by whom. In 1972, Congress passed a law requiring candidates to disclose their contributors and how the campaigns spent the money. Two years later, Congress put limits on contributions by individuals and political action committees. In 2002, lawmakers passed the landmark Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act, which for the first time banned unlimited "soft money" to political parties, and controlled what were derided as candidate advocacy ads disguised as "issue ads." Money continued to flow heavily into political campaigns, but campaign finance reform advocates believed they had achieved a historic goal in protecting democracy, thwarting a trend that would have handed elected offices to those with the wealthiest benefactors.

Instead, the 2016 campaigns are shaping up to be exactly what campaign finance control advocates had feared, a "one percent election" with a small group of wealthy individuals poised to exert outsized influence on both presidential and congressional. An exhaustive and jarring joint report by the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics and the Sunlight Foundation found that in the 2014 midterms, fewer than 32,000 donors made $1.18 billion in contributions. Put more starkly, that means that the political one percent of one percent of the population accounted for 28 percent of the cash dumped into political campaigns, including the "super PACs" that grew after the 2010 Citizens United Supreme Court ruling. Raise the financial bar, and the numbers are even more shocking: barely five dozen people contributed $1 million or more, and just a trio gave more than $10 million. The "political one percent," as CRP spokeswoman Viveca Novak calls them, are overwhelmingly male, and Wall Street is the most common sector represented among their occupations.

Most of the donations have gone to Republicans and conservative causes, although the leading contributor, San Francisco-based hedge fund manager and environmentalist Tom Steyer, dumped $73 million into 2014 campaigns, largely to defeat GOP candidates.

Does that mean the megadonors can buy themselves a candidate? Not necessarily; the biggest fundraisers don't always win, and self-financed candidates are notoriously unsuccessful in winning elections. But "it does seem to provide donors with greater access than the average citizen has," Novak says. "The big donors are the people candidates will be listening to."

Money has always been a force in campaigns, of course, but a series of court decisions in recent years has changed the landscape dramatically, even from the last two presidential campaigns, experts note. The 2010 Citizens United decision listed the ban on political spending by corporations, labor unions and other groups, declaring such activity a form of free speech.

A 2014 decision, McCutcheon vs. Federal Election Commission, lifted the aggregate amount any single individual can give to federal candidates, parties and political action committees, paving the way for the super-rich to throw around vast amounts of money. And while super PACs are not allowed, under the law, to coordinate with the candidates' campaigns themselves, FEC advisory opinions have blurred those lines as well, dictating that a candidate may speak to a group of super PAC donors, speak favorably about the PAC, and solicit donations up to $5,000 (the current limit for regular PACs).

"Things are going back to the Wild West," observes Candice Nelson, an American University professor and academic director of The Campaign Finance Institute. Short of a major scandal, she adds, it's not likely that Congress or the courts will act.

"We are in the midst of a major change. You can really say we have entered the age of the megadonor," says Anthony Corrado, a government professor at Colby College in Maine and a leading expert on political finance. As recently as 2008, Corrado notes, candidates focused on building as large a donor base as possible. Barack Obama was particularly adept at collecting small donations by Internet and smartphone technology. While the contributions might have been small, political specialists in both parties believe the donations translate into votes, since someone who has given even ten dollars to a campaign has become literally invested in it, and more likely to show up at the polls. But "less than a decade later, the emphasis now is on the ability to recruit wealthy donors who are willing to write large checks. As a result, the focal point is on the ability to solicit contributions from what is a very small number of potential donors," Corrado adds. "The universe you're aiming for is not four million people, but 200 people."

[MORE: Bernie Sanders: The Billionaires May Just Win]

The increasing dominance of big-money donors is already evident in the emerging presidential campaign, experts say. George W. Bush, for example, had his "Pioneers," a select group of people who committed to raising at least $100,000 each for the candidate, Nelson notes. Now, such an effort "won't even get you a phone call," she says. And people who give the maximum of $2,700 for a primary and an equal amount for a general election? "They're inconsequential," Nelson says.

And while the 2002 campaign finance law banned so-called "soft money," the evolution of super PACs has extended the concept of soft money beyond political parties (the previous recipients of such unlimited funds) and to the candidates themselves, as campaigns find ways around the requirement that super PACs not "coordinate" with campaigns. Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, for example, has not even announced his candidacy for president yet, but has helped launch a super PAC, "Right to Rise," that is expected to help his quest for the presidency, raising more than Bush himself is expected to collect.