That prompted Mr. Christie to lash out at Mr. Rubio on Sunday during a town-hall-style meeting in Portsmouth, N.H. The governor ridiculed Mr. Rubio at length for his incomplete attendance record in the Senate and noted that some of the ads on Mr. Rubio’s behalf were funded by a group that did not have to disclose its donors.

The cumulative effect of all the ads, and corresponding attacks through harshly worded mailings, has been to stunt the growth of the so-called establishment candidates, keeping them clustered together in New Hampshire polls while Mr. Trump soars.

“These guys are so busy fighting one another that they’re only continuing to facilitate the rise of Trump and Cruz,” said Representative Tom Cole of Oklahoma, a longtime Republican strategist.

After the Iowa caucuses, and then the New Hampshire primary on Feb. 9, the pressure on those candidates who are lagging in the polls will intensify.

“Whoever is not named Trump and not named Cruz that looks strong out of both Iowa and New Hampshire, we should consolidate around,” said Henry Barbour, an influential Republican strategist based in Mississippi.

But it is not clear that the Iowa and New Hampshire results will come so neatly, or that the also-rans will be so willing to drop out after two states. Mr. Bush, in particular, still has the support of a well-funded super PAC. And even if he were to trail Mr. Rubio after the first contests, Mr. Bush might still fight on to South Carolina, where he recently won the support of Senator Lindsey Graham and where he plans to call on his older brother, former President George W. Bush.

Some in the party now concede that it might take until March or beyond for the Republican establishment to coalesce behind an alternative to the current front-runners. And that could be too late to catch Mr. Trump or Mr. Cruz.

Photo

Judd Gregg, a former senator from New Hampshire, said he believed his state would cull the field, but he acknowledged that the primary calendar — and the lineup of conservative Southern states that vote in March — could prolong the race.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Robert F. List, a former Nevada governor, agreed.

The current “circular firing squad against the lower team,” Mr. List said, “is not helpful.”

Many in the party say they believe the assault by Mr. Bush against Mr. Rubio has been particularly damaging.

Mr. Rubio has stepped up his complaints in recent days about the ads from Mr. Bush and his supporters. Rubio aides have been working aggressively behind the scenes to portray the attacks as strengthening Mr. Cruz and Mr. Trump, highlighting, for instance, an article in The Weekly Standard that argued that Mr. Bush would be to blame if Mr. Trump became the nominee.

But it is not just supporters of Mr. Rubio who are uneasy about the attacks against him by the super PAC backing Mr. Bush, Right to Rise, an assault that will have lasted two months by the New Hampshire primary.

Asked about the attacks, Mr. Cole, who has not endorsed a candidate, suggested Republicans would not tolerate them much longer if Mr. Bush did not show viability in Iowa and New Hampshire.

“You need to be prepared to stop if the evidence is that it’s not working,” Mr. Cole said, lamenting the “amazing amount of resources wasted on one candidate.”

Mr. Barbour, who is also uncommitted, was even blunter. “Why is Right to Rise spending all this money on somebody who can beat Hillary?” he asked. “Meanwhile, Trump and Cruz go mostly unscathed.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Barbour was so exasperated by the intra-establishment combat that this month he sought to raise money for the super PAC supporting Mike Huckabee that would have been spent to attack Mr. Cruz in Iowa. But Mr. Barbour found few donors willing to intervene in such a volatile race.

The party’s major contributors are starting to become increasingly vocal in their impatience.

“The next couple of weeks are very important for Jeb,” said William E. Oberndorf, who has given more than $1.5 million to Mr. Bush’s campaign and the super PAC backing him.

Others in the party’s donor class are so worried that they are already envisioning another path to their preferred nominee, months after the primary contests, at the Republican convention this summer.

Earle I. Mack, a real estate developer and former ambassador to Finland under George W. Bush, said the heavy bloodletting in the Republican race might prevent any candidate from clinching the nomination. In that case, he said, Republicans should turn to Speaker Paul D. Ryan.

“In these horrible crossfires, with everybody shooting each other down, it would be good to nominate somebody uncontroversial, who could appeal to a broader electorate,” Mr. Mack said.