In 1962, the president of the Endocrine Society said, “Obesity is a disorder which, like venereal disease, is blamed upon the patient.” In the 50 years since, little has changed.

Though an expert panel convened by the National Institutes of Health in 1998 stated that “obesity is a chronic disease,” Americans have continued to treat weight gain and regain as the products of a lack of willpower. Obesity has not been considered a medical problem until it is complicated by co-morbidities such as diabetes or hypertension.

Advertisement

As of 2010, 35 states have allowed the diagnosis of obesity to be a criterion for insurance rate adjustment — that is, higher billing — but only eight states fully covered obesity treatments such as nutritional counseling or medication under Medicaid. Recent guidelines from the US Preventive Task Force (which influenced obesity coverage decisions under the Affordable Care Act), “recommend” that individuals who have obesity should be offered “intense, multicomponent, behavioral interventions.” This is great advice, but these interventions will never be implemented as long as they remain uncovered and unaffordable.

We are now seeing the health consequences of inattentiveness to an obesity epidemic that began decades ago. In the August issue of The Lancet, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that more than 40 percent of all Americans (and more than 60 percent of obese or overweight Americans) are likely to develop diabetes. The 50 percent increase in lifetime diabetes risk over the last 25 years is dramatic but not really surprising. We can expect that the prevalence of diabetes, hypertension, and other obesity-related health problems will continue to increase as long as we continue to medically ignore obese individuals who have not yet developed them.

What can we do? In June of 2013, the American Medical Association finally recognized obesity as a disease affecting more than one-third of U.S. adults. This is still not reaching enough people though. Only 25 percent of doctors are comfortable even discussing nutrition with their patients, and almost 30 percent say that no one in their practice is trained to deal with weight-related issues.

Insurance mandates need to include coverage for referrals to nutritionists, exercise programs, and obesity specialists to provide care before there are complications. Maybe, if the legislature, insurance companies, and Medicare (neither of which usually reimburse for obesity therapy) pick up on this, we can make a dent in the approximately $200 billion dollars per year, or 21 percent of our health care costs, that are attributable to obesity and its complications.

Our legislators are currently evaluating a number of important bills relevant to the treatment and prevention of this disease. The bipartisan Treat and Reduce Obesity Act of 2013, sponsored by Senators Tom Carper, a Democrat from Delaware, and Lisa Murkowski, a Republican from Alaska, and Representatives Bill Cassidy , a Republican from Louisiana, and Ron Kind, a Democrat from Wisconsin, mandates Medicare reimbursement for multiple resources including dietitians, lifestyle counselors, and medication to all individuals who are obese (that is, have a BMI that is greater than 30 kg/m2) and to individuals who are overweight (who have a BMI greater than 25 kg/m2) and who also have at least one co-morbidity such as diabetes or hypertension. The bill also directs the Health and Human Services Department to develop and implement a comprehensive new research and outreach plan to combat the obesity epidemic, thereby encouraging much needed scientific research into the prevention of this disease and its complications.

Advertisement

The Stop Subsidizing Childhood Obesity Act of 2014, sponsored by Democratic Senators Tom Harkin and Richard Blumenthal, would end federal tax subsidies for advertising that promotes the consumption of products that are unhealthy for children. The money would be re-routed to provide more healthful food to elementary school students in low income schools under the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program. The idea that we should stop government support for things that are unhealthy and instead use those funds to promote wellness should not be controversial. And yet, there has been significant Republican opposition to programs requiring more fruits and vegetables in school meals.

There are likely to be many concerns raised regarding such legislation. There will continue to be a huge fat-biased outcry from pundits stating that obese people are lazy or that the treatment is simple.

But obesity needs to be addressed as a complex individualized disease by a team of health professionals. Currently, only about one third of individuals who have lost more than 5 percent of their weight (only ten pounds for a 200-pound adult) keep most of it off, but with a more personalized, instead of a one-size-fits-all approach, we might actually do better.

Insurers will probably complain about the finances. Addressing obesity in people without complications will require spending, but this seems like a good investment given that more than 70 percent of adults and 35 percent of children in the United States are overweight or obese. The co-morbidity costs are huge. Let’s move now, instead of waiting for complications.

Legislators may try to circumvent this issue on the grounds that health benefits of obesity treatment may not be evident before the next election, are outweighed by various lobbies in their districts, or because fatness has taken on such a negative stigma that it is avoided in political campaigns. Let’s exercise our rights and pressure them to deal with these problems.