Thousands of families of elderly and vulnerable people living in care homes may be due refunds

Thousands of families of elderly and vulnerable people living in care homes may be due refunds for fee payments running into hundreds of pounds a week, a watchdog said yesterday.

It condemned the way families have been wrongly made to pay ‘top-up fees’ when they choose the care home they think is best for their elderly relative rather than the cheapest one they are offered.

A report by the Local Government Ombudsman blamed councils for failing to give families enough information or choice about care homes, and for breaking the law to extract the top-up fees from them.

‘Families across England are paying more than they need to because they have not been given comprehensive information about the costs of care available in their area,’ it said.

The Ombudsman, Dr Jane Martin, recommended that councils refund top-ups that should not have been charged, pay compensation to those forced to complain about wrong decisions or poor behaviour, and apologise for their mistakes.

Under the laws governing care home places, anyone with savings and assets of less than £14,250 should have their bills paid by their local councils. Those with property and savings worth up to £23,500 should have most of their bill paid by the council.

But councils only have to offer ‘affordable’ care home places. Any family that wants a better and more expensive care home for their relatives must pay a weekly top-up fee.

According to industry estimates, local councils offer on average to pay £512 a week for a care home place.

But analysts Laing Buisson said the real cost of a care home place is between £554 and £625 a week, and between £591 and £662 for an elderly man or woman with dementia.

That means that top-ups, usually paid by the children of someone in a care home, can be between £42 a week and £150 a week. They are paid by families of many of the 170,000 people in England whose care home bills are met by their council.

The Ombudsman’s report said: ‘We see cases where councils provide either confusing or incorrect information; do not offer potential residents and their families a genuine choice of affordable care home; or who do not have an affordable option at all.’

A report by the Local Government Ombudsman blamed councils for failing to give families enough information or choice about care home

It said that council social workers had a duty to provide families with full information in writing at the time they need it.

The report said: ‘We have no legal power to force councils or care providers to follow our recommendations, but they almost always do.’

The problem is highlighted by the case of David and Maureen Butcher. Their council in Bournemouth told them they would have to pay £52 a week towards the £700-a-week cost of the home they had selected for Mr Butcher’s mother Winnie when her worsening disability and dementia meant they could no longer look after her in their home.

Mr Butcher, 68, a retired Pentecostal minister, said he and his wife could not afford that.