Daniel Clayton, Enroll America’s regional organizing lead in North Texas, is a jovial man. Ask him about his past and he’ll smile and discuss working on former Dallas Mayor Ron Kirk’s Senate campaign. He’ll laugh and then rattle off all the legislative tasks he had his hands in when he worked for Democratic state Sen. Royce West: speech writing, fundraising, advising constituents.

When he walked into its downtown Dallas headquarters on a Friday morning earlier this month, he was beaming. He’d just convinced a pair of high school students to volunteer over the summer, to help get the word out about the Affordable Care Act.

Sometimes, though, his tone shifts. He straightens out, sits up, and stares forward. He adds a weight to his words: “Texas is the most uninsured state, Dallas/Fort Worth and North Texas is the most uninsured region. So we’re the most uninsured area in the United States.”

Enroll America is the Washington D.C.-based nonprofit that serves as an intermediary between the uninsured and the navigators who can help them register for insurance under the ACA. It is informational, answering questions no matter how nuanced or seemingly obvious they are. It organizes community meetings, tracks where the most uninsured residents live, and cultivates a network of volunteers in regions across the country.

On June 18, it celebrated its one-year anniversary. Clayton oversees its North Texas outpost. And he’s right about those uninsured numbers—about a quarter of the state’s residents are without coverage. In Dallas/Fort Worth, some estimates point that amount north of 30 percent.

Enroll America is split into 11 operations across the country. Clayton has five organizers under his employ who cast a wide net south to Ferris, west to Fort Worth, north to Sherman, and east to Commerce. Most of their time, though, is spent in Dallas County: “We have to concentrate our time here,” Clayton says.

It’s headquartered on the fifteenth floor of a high rise across the street from the Mercantile. There are still boxes out in plain sight and Clayton’s office is sparse, like a furniture display in an office supply store. Looking at the data, it’s tough to believe they’re in it often: According to Enroll’s Texas spokeswoman Christine Sinatra, Clayton and his team have helped organize more than 500 events since last June. They’ve spoken directly to more than 10,000 consumers throughout the region.

Meeting people where they are is key to the process. Enroll America uses a heat map to determine high densities of the uninsured. The group overlays that data with population density and then organizes events at a church or a school or a community center or a CVS. They’ll bring navigators who can help residents sign up on the spot, although Enroll America employees and volunteers are not able to do any enrolling themselves. According to in-house data, a person is 10 percent more likely to enroll after speaking with the group just once. Speak with them four times, and that likelihood triples.

“We have a tremendous amount of success with getting folks in Dallas and North Texas, getting them connected and enrolled,” said Mimi Garcia, Enroll’s Texas director.

That success didn’t come quickly. Early statewide projections had enrollment pinned at 629,000—and that was if Texas was lucky. Enrollment was tepid out of the gate and meandered its way to March, the last month the majority of residents could get coverage until the next period opens in November. Just 295,000 Texans had signed up for care as of March 1. That amounted to about 9.4 percent of the 3.14 million who were eligible.

But something happened that month. The state’s numbers surged. More than 733,000 Texans got insurance. “I’m incredibly proud of what the team has been able to accomplish and what we’ve been able to do across the state,” Garcia says.

During a conference call with reporters after the data was released, Garcia pointed to an Enroll America event in San Antonio on the final day of enrollment at the Alamodome that registered 3,100 uninsured residents in one day.

Enroll’s strategy benefits from its grassroots ability to pivot. If something’s not working, it’s scratched out or modified until it does. And that late surge, evidenced by the San Antonio event, hit North Texas too, Clayton says. The group’s initial strategy of one-on-one meetings was resulting in long lines and waits, he recalls.

“We had all this going and it worked really well until toward the end when we had this flood of people coming. We started having events where the line’s out the door and, you know, you’re hitting 10, 11 o’clock at night and folks have got to go home,” he says. “Locations shut down, and unfortunately we had people who had come for help and who had to try and go to another location.”

So he began locating venues with computer labs that allowed for group teaching. The lines eased and Enroll saw more residents. Clayton is hopeful it will allow the group to help more enrollees once the marketplace reopens in November.

Another example: Early on, it became clear residents were not attending their meetings. So the organizers connected with community leaders who were in good standing among the residents. LULAC and County Judge Clay Jenkins and Parkland and community churches strengthened the group’s validity. Parkland, the county’s public hospital system, even staffed 456 certified application counselors to help residents register.

“Once we started getting partners that were heavily involved in the community like LULAC and some of the churches, folks started saying, ‘well, if my community leaders are backing this measure then it must be OK,’” said Jesse Hernandez, one of the five field organizers.

It also carefully chooses its leaders. Hernandez has a stake in the Affordable Care Act—without it, his mother wouldn’t have insurance. Neither would his brother, who, as a junior in college, hasn’t been insured in four years. Hernandez, 25, remembers the ER visits. His mom had to travel to Mexico to receive care for a serious health problem she couldn’t afford to treat here, he says: “It’s nice that she doesn’t have to do that now.”

Hernandez says his life experience helps ingratiate him among the people he’s speaking to. Spanish was also his first language, which helps him bridge the often-common barrier. He’s not some out-of-towner hawking a product; he says he’s able to meet people where they are and address any concerns.

“Every time I start talking in a group of people, I always start off with my own personal story and the struggles my family had getting healthcare,” he says. “It almost always breaks down any mistrust they have.”

But now, with enrollment closed until November, the group is refocusing. During that conference call, Garcia spoke plainly about the importance of not sitting still: “We can’t wait until November to start the conversation.” Clayton and his team are working to identify residents who need insurance and then foster relationships with them. He wants them to be familiar with the open enrollment period so they’re ready when it comes.

They’re honing in on areas like West Dallas and Pleasant Grove, knocking on doors and holding small community events. He’s adding volunteers, like those two high schoolers he was so happy about. The group is launching fellowships to train more leaders. It’s using this period to reinforce its resources and prepare a strategy to reach those who need insurance.

It’s particularly easy, from the outside, to get caught up in the numbers game and the politics surrounding healthcare reform. For one, Enroll America is nonpartisan and doesn’t comment on what’s going on in the statehouse. Clayton didn’t take the bait when asked about whether he expects the legislature to expand Medicaid in the next session. Politics be damned, Enroll, he said, simply wants to get people insured.

And there are plenty remaining: After the last enrollment period, there are still nearly 3 million Texans who need insurance. When Clayton mentioned that, his tone shifted again. He descended from 10,000 feet to personalize that number: “Everything counts,” he says, lightly stabbing his desk with two fingers for emphasis. “Especially when we’re talking about 2.8 million people.”

“The last person that enrolled into the ACA is a person that has health insurance,” he continued. “Something may happen, hopefully not, but something may happen to where they need it. And then they may have waited until the very last minute and they’re the last person to get in, but we got them in and they got health insurance. And it’s available to them and their family. That’s a game changer for that person.”