(Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images)

The new chief of the Transportation Security Administration is planning to retrain officers on monitoring for weapons and contraband and to limit expedited screening as a means of managing long lines, Ron Nixon reports in The New York Times. He writes that officers and their supervisors at airports nationwide have made reducing wait times their main goal, instead of security.

Peter V. Neffenger, a former Coast Guard admiral who took charge this month after the agency flunked a security audit, told Nixon that safety must come before convenience. "Efficiency and getting people through airport security lines cannot be our sole reason that makes you take your eyes off the reason for the mission," he said.

More rigorous screening will make security even more of a hassle for travelers, and inevitably, more of them will miss their flights. Whether it will also make the nation safer from terrorism is an open question. As Wonkblog has previously reported, the limited data available suggests that in response to security at airports, terrorists just carry out their attacks elsewhere, and no lives are saved on the whole.

Welcome to Wonkbook. To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. Follow Wonkblog on Twitter and Facebook.

What's in Wonkbook: 1) FOMC meeting 2) Opinions, including Barro and McArdle on New York's minimum wage 3) New projections for health care spending, and more

1. Top story: The Fed prepares for a September rate increase

The Federal Reserve will issue a statement Wednesday. "Janet Yellen has been priming the markets for an increase in short-term interest rates later this year, making this week’s policy meeting an important one. No move is likely by the Federal Open Market Committee, and there will be no press conference from Ms Yellen, but the language the committee uses in its post-meeting statement at 2pm US eastern time on Wednesday could contain important signals. The next time the FOMC gathers after this week will be mid-September, when some analysts expect it to pull the trigger on a rate increase." Sam Fleming in The Financial Times.

Number of the day: 2.8 percent. That's the average increase in the price of a haircut in the United States over the past year, the largest gain since 2008. Christopher S. Rugaber for the Associated Press.

In many places, rents are rising faster than wages. "The cost of renting a home is rising faster than wages across wide swaths of the country, a problem that has become especially acute in the past year, putting a big squeeze on many household budgets. ... In a structural shift for the real-estate market, new households are much more likely to be renters than buyers. ... The homeownership rate hit a 48-year low, according to estimates published Tuesday by the Commerce Department, declining to 63.4% in the second quarter from 64.7% in the year-earlier period." Jeffrey Sparshott in The Wall Street Journal.

Is the focus on wages misplaced? "Once a staple of the American workplace, the annual raise is turning into a relic of the pre-crisis economy as companies turn to creative -- and cheaper -- ways to compensate their employees. More businesses are upping their spending on benefits such as one-time bonuses, health care and paid time off, according to recent survey data. Many are rolling out perks such as free gym membership, commuting subsidies, even pet health insurance. But often, those benefits are being provided in lieu of higher salaries. ... The decline of the raise could help explain one of the most frustrating puzzles of the America’s lumbering economic recovery: stagnant wages. Wage growth has been stuck at about 2 percent for the past five years despite a rapid drop in unemployment and a surge in hiring since 2014. Without a bigger bump in their paychecks, many workers feel the recovery remains elusive." Ylan Q. Mui in The Washington Post.

DUY: The Fed is almost ready to raise rates. "This week’s meeting is really about gauging the likelihood of a September liftoff. And that likelihood will depend in large part on the Fed’s confidence in hitting its inflation target—which Fed officials may feel is much closer than many people think. ... On net, concerns over the growth outlook eased somewhat since the June meeting, increasing the Fed’s willingness to consider September. Similarly, labor market data show steady underlying trends despite a first-quarter swoon, with job growth rebounding. Meanwhile, measures of labor underutilization generally continued their slow yet steady improvement in June. ... With both oil prices and the dollar stabilizing since the beginning of the year, the transitory impact on inflation fades. ... But a hike in September does not guarantee a hike in December; the Fed could take a pass at that meeting." Bloomberg.

COOPER: Without stronger demand, Americans won't become more productive. "It appears that the U.S. is getting a case of the British disease. After a huge spike following the Great Recession, productivity growth has fallen to historically low levels. For the first quarter of 2015, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that productivity actually fell at a 3.1 percent annual rate. ... Full employment — in which good employees are scarce and must be paid well — provides a powerful impetus towards increased productivity. (As economists say, incentives matter.) Anecdotally, a slack economy has made employers extremely lazy about worker training, since they have been getting the pick of the litter for years now. ... Weak aggregate demand... is both one of the most plausible explanations for the drop in productivity and a complete no-brainer to fix. You just dump money into the economy (literally) until inflation starts to kick up, and then back off. It's really that simple." The Week.

2. Top opinions

BARRO: New York's new fast-food minimum wage makes no sense. "The raise would apply only to fast-food workers, and only if they work for a chain with at least 30 locations. A wage increase applying to such a narrow segment of the economy is bound to have unintended consequences. ... A business owner who previously ran chain fast-food franchises might choose instead to open independent stores so he could avoid the wage requirement. If he already has 29 stores, he might choose not to expand. If subject to the requirement, he could install iPads at the counters to take orders instead of live, wage-earning humans. He could buy food that is already prepared by an outside vendor (who wouldn’t have to pay the higher wage) and employ fewer workers in the kitchen. Economists call these changes 'distortions,' and they cause two kinds of problems. One, fewer workers get a raise as a result of the minimum wage. Two, it encourages businesses to do things that customers may not prefer." The New York Times.

McARDLE: Upstate New York can't afford the new minimum. "The median hourly wage for New York state is only $19.65, meaning that fast-food workers will now be paid 75 percent of the median for doing work that involves so little skill that it is frequently performed by teenagers who aren't old enough to drive. And in the poorer regions, that disparity is likely to be even more stark. ... The rural north is so economically depressed that prisons are fondly regarded as sources of employment, and the deindustrializing western portion of the state has many of the same problems, plus large brownfield areas from long-departed factories that no one can afford to clean up, and a structural overhang of buildings, government programs and people left over from flusher times. The more young people depart in search of work elsewhere, the worse the problems become." Bloomberg View.

FLEISCHER: Clinton's proposal on capital gains won't counter short-termism. "It is true that corporate executives are often overly focused on quarterly earnings. Earnings reports often drive stock price movements in the short run. Too much focus on quarterly earnings invites earnings management, where executives change the real or paper timing of transactions to strengthen earnings in a particular quarter, sometimes at the expense of the long-term stability and profitability of the firm. ... The problem with Mrs. Clinton’s proposal is that it slides over some important institutional details about how people invest. As a result, the proposed changes would do little to shape the behavior of corporate managers. Top corporate executives receive substantial equity compensation in the form of restricted stock grants or similar arrangements. Executives often manage earnings to try to bolster them in periods when they can sell off shares. But changing the capital gains tax rate will not discourage this destructive behavior. ... When stock vests, an executive recognizes ordinary income for the fair-market value of the shares, taking that amount as the tax basis in the shares." The New York Times.

3. In case you missed it

The administration will seek to extend Pell Grants to prisoners. "Education Secretary Arne Duncan says the Obama administration wants to expand the Pell grant program to prisoners. He and Attorney General Loretta Lynch will visit the Maryland Correctional Institution in Jessup, Maryland, on Friday to announce the plans. In a speech Monday, Duncan said the administration wants to develop "experimental sites that will make Pell grants available" to inmates so they can get training for jobs." Jennifer C. Kerr for the Associated Press.

This is how Germany won in the Greek crisis. "Germany persuaded European leaders to rally more firmly around what might be called the Berlin consensus by a combination of patient diplomacy and clever brinkmanship and by exploiting alarm over the antics of Greece’s leaders, numerous participants in the crisis talks recounted in interviews. It was a victory, many of those participants acknowledge, that reflected the politics of today’s Europe rather than a viable plan to help Greece’s economy in the short run. ... The rising influence of the Berlin consensus... has much to do with the political backlash in Europe to the Greek government under Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras and his radical-left Syriza party. ... Rather than rallying the opponents of austerity to their cause, the Greeks sent so many conflicting signals that even potentially sympathetic governments became exasperated." Neil Irwin in The New York Times.

China is working to fragment the global Internet. "President Xi Jinping—with the help of conservatives in government, academia, military and the technology industry—is moving to exert influence over virtually every part of the digital world in China, from semiconductors to social media. In doing so, Mr. Xi is trying to fracture the international system that makes the Internet basically the same everywhere, and is pressuring foreign companies to help. On July 1, China’s legislature passed a new security law asserting the nation’s sovereignty extends into cyberspace and calling for network technology to be 'controllable.' A week later, China released a draft law to tighten controls over the domestic Internet, including codifying the power to cut access during public-security emergencies. Other draft laws under consideration would encourage Chinese companies to find local replacements for technology equipment purchased abroad and force foreign vendors to give local authorities encryption keys that would let them control the equipment." James T. Areddy in The Wall Street Journal.

New projections show increasing health care spending. "According to a new projection published on Tuesday in Health Affairs, the U.S. is at the beginning of a period in which health-care spending will creep up after years of a slowdown in spending growth. Health spending could even modestly outpace the growth in the economy. By 2024, health care is projected to account for nearly a fifth of the gross domestic product and federal, state and local governments are expected to foot nearly half the bill. ... More people [buying] health insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act, the aging of the Baby Boomer generation and stronger economic growth will all contribute to the long-term trend. ... Although spending growth rates are picking up, they are still below pre-recession levels. Health care costs increased 9 percent annually in the 30 years preceding the recession." Carolyn Johnson in The Washington Post.

HILTZIK: Prices for Hep C drugs are driving up national health spending. "There's one especially eye-catching number in a new report by Medicare actuaries about U.S. healthcare spending: 12.6%. That's the leap in prescription drug spending last year over the year before. How sharp an increase is it? It was five times as much as the increase for 2013 over 2012, which was a mere 2.5%. The actuaries have no doubt what's driving the increase. It's 'a result of expensive new treatments for hepatitis C,' they write in their report for the journal Health Affairs. And more than any other drugs, that means Gilead Science's Sovaldi, which cost about $84,000 for a 12-week treatment, or about $1,000 per once-a-day pill. ... The new drugs' arrival brought thousands of patients out of the woodwork; new patients leaped from 17,000 in 2013 to 161,000 last year. The caseload and the cost stunned commercial insurers and public programs... Gilead's profit margins on the drugs are stupendous. In the first half of this year, it recorded profit of $8.8 billion on $15.3 billion in sales, a net profit margin of nearly 58%. For the full year, the company projects gross profit margins of up to 90%." Los Angeles Times.