10 most-read healthcare finance stories of 2015

Healthcare costs and hospital closures are among the issues that captured the attention of Becker's Hospital Review finance readers this year.

Here are the 10 most-viewed healthcare finance stories in 2015.

1. Average cost per inpatient day across 50 states

Here are average costs per inpatient day in 2013, organized by hospital ownership type, in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Read more

2. Dallas hospital closes after failing to make payroll

Forest Park Medical Center's hospital in Dallas closed Oct. 30, affecting about 150 employees. Read more

3. Geisinger to begin offering refunds to unsatisfied patients

Geisinger Health System President and CEO David Feinberg, MD, said the Danville, Pa.-based health system is going to start offering a money-back guarantee to patients who receive care at its facilities. Read more

4. 50 things to know about healthcare costs

Total healthcare spending is expected to rise again this year and hospital prices are continually growing. From an aging population to Affordable Care Act mandates, there are a number of factors influencing healthcare costs in the U.S. Read more

5. Hospitals face payment cuts at outpatient sites under budget deal: 10 things to know

Republican congressional leaders and the Obama administration reached a tentative budget deal Oct. 26 that would raise spending $80 billion over the next two years and includes cuts in spending on Medicare. Read more

6. San Antonio hospital shuts down

Forest Park Medical Center's San Antonio hospital has closed after the hospital's property owner filed for bankruptcy protection. Read more

7. 100 things to know about Medicare and Medicaid — 2015 update

An overview of Medicare and Medicaid, including the history, innovation and the politics behind the programs. Read more

8. Texas hospital files for bankruptcy due to out-of-network payment challengesForest Park Medical Center at Frisco (Texas) filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. Read more

9. CMS releases OPPS rule for 2016, finalizes two-midnight changes: 10 things to know

CMS released its final 2016 Hospital Outpatient Prospective Payment System and Ambulatory Surgical Center Payment System rule on Friday, which finalizes CMS' proposal to alter its controversial two-midnight rule and implements previously announced modifications to CMS' medical review strategy. Read more

10. Kansas hospital to close next month

Chesterfield, Mo.-based Mercy health system announced it would close Mercy Hospital Independence (Kan.). Read more

More articles on healthcare finance:

For-profit hospital stock report: Week of Dec. 21-24

New York hospital to close this week

6 great quotes from revenue cycle leaders in 2015

© Copyright ASC COMMUNICATIONS 2016. Interested in LINKING to or REPRINTING this content? View our policies by clicking here.