Black history, black culture and the politics of black American life serve as rich fodder for creative expression in the Delta Arts Center’s “Invitational 2016.”

Opened to coincide with February’s national celebration of Black History Month, and on view through April, the exhibition brings together a variety of works by 22 contemporary black artists from across the state. The selection is uneven, but that’s to be expected in a show that includes works by “students and other emerging artists, as well as art teachers, professors, and established professionals,” as noted in the press release.

Joyce Fulton celebrates black women’s fashion and the culture of the black American church in her painting “Church Ladies,” a stylized group portrait of five women modeling their boldly colored Sunday best in front of a white country church. The subject matter and composition call to mind the memory paintings of American folk art, although the style is more streamlined and the five women are faceless.

Joseph King strives for a more realistic style in his verdant landscape paintings. Both of his contributions to the show depict rural settings in Jamaica as idyllic, unspoiled places whose human inhabitants live in respectful harmony with nature.

The landscape George Steele depicts in his painting “The Last Exodus” is much more vaguely defined, as befits a forest largely obscured by what appears to be dense fog or smoke. The outward migration referenced in the title is represented by a procession of tiny, loosely sketched black and gray figures walking away from the viewer and directly into this unknown terrain.

The setting is similarly obscured in Steele’s other painting, but the title (“Buffalo Riders”) and the central imagery render it more specific. Again, the focus is on a procession of figures, in this case dark-skinned, blue-clad equestrians wearing cowboy hats with the brims bent vertical in front. Although their horses are blurred to invisibility in a pink cloud presumably representing dust, they’re obviously Buffalo Soldiers, the informal name given to black men who joined the U.S. Army immediately after the Civil War.

Carolina Lara Corona fuses landscapes with female figures in her two paintings that suggest imaginative portraits of pagan nature goddesses. The figure in “La Fuente de la Vida” (“The Fountain of Life”) is also a waterfall surrounded by tropical vegetation and exotic mushrooms, while the one in “El Rugir y el Impacto” (“The Roar and the Impact”) possesses physical characteristics of both a waterfall and a tree.

Donald Sawyer highlights social issues affecting black Americans in his paintings. The black-faced figure dressed as a rag doll and collapsed against a weather-scarred wall in his “Raggedy Ann” stands as a sobering comment on homelessness and hopelessness among urban blacks.

Sawyer takes on the contentious issue of white-on-black violence in his other painting, “Trayvon.” This smaller, more expressionistic composition pays homage to Trayvon Martin, an unarmed black teenager shot to death near his home in Florida by a white neighborhood-watch patrolman. It juxtaposes the figures of two men in different modes of mourning — one with his head bowed and palms together in prayer, the other wearing a hoodie and holding a protest sign memorializing Martin.

Pamela Cola employs a similarly expressionistic painting style in “Contemplation,” her portrait of a seated man smoking a cigarette and holding a book in one hand. Its most distinctive component is the eye and nose cut from a photograph and collaged in place on the seated man’s head, a touch reminiscent of Romare Bearden’s work.

Kyla Simpson celebrates the Affordable Care Act in her mixed-media piece titled “The Plan,” a U.S. flag painted on a surface collaged from pages of text pertaining to democracy and government healthcare programs.

David Wilson employs digital collage techniques to bold effect in three pieces that are highlights of the exhibition. His “Toussaint (Spartacus Noir)” is a composite equestrian portrait of Haitian revolutionary hero Toussaint l’Ouverture. Another of his works pays homage to Josephine Baker, a black entertainer, and his third piece shows a lively crowd inside a black juke joint or drink house.

Gilbert Everard Young also celebrates black music traditions in his idiosyncratic surrealist portraits of two American jazz masters. In “Birdland (Life of Charlie Parker),” he portrays the troubled, brilliantly innovative musician clutching his alto sax even as he lies asleep, passed out or dead on the ground in a desert landscape littered with symbolically loaded images including whiskey bottles and a roast turkey (as in “cold turkey”).

This painting’s most distinctively strange feature is Young’s treatment of the figure. His portrait of the collapsed saxophonist appears to be composed entirely of densely tangled vines or brambles bleached bone-white. Young took the same approach in rendering his portrait of composer-bassist Charles Mingus, but in this case he painted the densely tangled vines green instead of white. Also, Mingus is shown standing upright, alive and playing an acoustic double bass tightly fitted with four gold strings raised slightly off the painting surface. The painting borrows its title from Mingus’ 1988 album “Reincarnation of a Lovebird.”

Another black musician — a conga drummer wearing traditional African clothing — is the subject of Owens Daniels’ photograph “Spirit of the Drum,” which might be a portrait of world-renowned Nigerian percussionist Babatunde Olatunji, although it’s not identified as such.

Daniels’ other contribution to the show, “Moral Monday,” is a print that combines 13 black-and-white photographs documenting one of the recent Moral Monday marches in Raleigh, mass gatherings held to protest the North Carolina legislature’s cuts to education and social programs. The Moral Monday movement is also celebrated in Bobby Roebuck’s photograph of eight marchers carrying a large banner.

Other noteworthy contributions to the show include paintings by Sunny Gravely, small narrative quilts by Andrena Stoddard, glass bowls by Clarice George and handmade jewelry by Debi Drew.