“He’s not one that this community is clamoring for,” said Tony Perkins, president of the Family Research Council, a conservative public policy group that sponsored the meeting. “Christie does not connect with them.”

Al Cardenas, the chairman of the American Conservative Union when it locked Mr. Christie out of its annual convention last year partly as punishment for praising President Obama’s response to Hurricane Sandy on the eve of his re-election, said conservatives “used to give passes to Republicans who were elected in areas like the Northeast.”

Now, he said, “passes are no longer issued with as much frequency.”

The resistance is a test of how deeply the unconventional approaches to conservatism adopted by party leaders like Mr. Christie, Mr. Bush and Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin can endear them to a voting bloc that is still animated by a handful of decades-old social issues like abortion and traditional marriage. All three emphasize redemption through education, drug treatment and alternatives to prison.

During his meeting with evangelical leaders, held at the governor’s mansion in July, Mr. Christie spoke again and again about the poor. “He said he would talk about issues of the poor in a positive away, and not make the poor the scapegoat of every ill in the country,” said the Rev. Raymond Rivera, president of the Latino Pastoral Action Center. “He was trying to say, ‘I am a Republican more in the spirit of moderation.’ ”

Russell D. Moore, a leader of the Southern Baptist Convention who attended the meeting, said religious conservatives could be drawn to that message, but only if they first trusted Mr. Christie to deliver on their biggest priorities.

“The idea that those issues have been transcended by caring for kids in failing schools and prison reform — that’s a misreading,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Aides to Mr. Christie, who fueled his political ascent through YouTube-packaged bursts of combativeness and candor, are prepared to bypass what they see as spitballing from conservative leaders who have ignored his victories in a state dominated by Democrats. (A case in point: his vetoing of state funds for Planned Parenthood year after year.) And they recognize that a measure of conservative displeasure can work to their advantage: It reinforces Mr. Christie’s reputation for telling voters what they may not want to hear.

Asked about the depth of his conservatism this spring, Mr. Christie replied, “I just act like myself and people take it or leave it, and I’m completely content with that.”

In nearly two dozen interviews with prominent social conservatives, right-wing Christian leaders and the heads of family values groups, a stark consensus emerged: Although they are drawn to Mr. Christie’s bumptious style, and believe that his opposition to abortion, their chief priority, is deep-seated, they feel he has crossed them on pivotal issues and at key moments.

They were dismayed when, over their pointed objections, he became the first Republican governor to sign a law barring licensed therapists from trying to reduce or eliminate same-sex attraction in children, a move they see as a liberal-driven encroachment on freedom of speech and parental rights. They were troubled by his early embrace of Common Core education standards, a totem of big government overreach to many conservatives. And they were frustrated by his refusal to appeal the New Jersey Supreme Court ruling legalizing same-sex marriage last year.

“A tremendous mistake,” said Brian S. Brown, president of the National Organization for Marriage.

They reserve their deepest disapproval, however, for his judicial appointments, an issue that has taken on greater urgency now that the role of courts has rapidly expanded, in determining issues as broad as state education funding to same-sex marriage.

Mr. Christie’s first appointment to the State Supreme Court was Anne M. Patterson, a Republican who he promised would never use “legal precedent to set social and tax policies.” Two years later, she broke with Mr. Christie and voted to allow same-sex marriage in New Jersey. This year, in a deal with Democratic lawmakers, Mr. Christie agreed to renominate Chief Justice Stuart Rabner, a Democrat with a liberal judicial record.

“He has appointed some really terrible judges to the State Supreme Court,” said Maggie Gallagher, a prominent social conservative, writer and senior fellow at American Principles Project, a right-leaning think tank.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Officials at the Judicial Crisis Network, which has sponsored the billboards and banners assailing Mr. Christie, argue that he could no longer be trusted to nominate conservative-minded judges to the United States Supreme Court.

“He’d be the same kind of disaster as president that he was as governor,” said Carrie Severino, the group’s chief counsel and a former clerk to Justice Clarence Thomas of the Supreme Court.

Mr. Christie, who insists he has moved the court to the right, has called his judicial appointments “the product of compromise,” adding tartly: “Organizations like the Judicial Crisis Network who run out of Washington, D.C., have absolutely no concept of what the word ‘compromise’ means.”

Unprompted, and perhaps unfairly, several conservative leaders likened Mr. Christie to Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, whose cultural and political disconnect from the religious right contributed to the collapse of his bid for president in 2008. Their not-so-subtle message: He is not one of us.

For now, Mr. Christie appears unmoved by that sentiment, passing up even painless opportunities to appeal to social conservatives.

After the Supreme Court ruled on June 30 that it violated a federal law protecting religious freedom to compel family-owned corporations to pay for contraception under the Affordable Care Act, a decision widely celebrated by religious conservatives, Mr. Christie’s likely rivals in 2016 rushed out detailed statements of support. Mr. Christie was silent and, the next day, seemed unfamiliar or uninterested in the case.

“Who knows? Is the Supreme Court right?” he replied to a July 1 query about the decision.

Evangelical leaders were dumbfounded.

It took Mr. Christie two more weeks to express terse support for the ruling.