KALAMAZOO, MI -- The Kalamazoo City Clerk's office released a list of candidates Friday who have successfully filed to run for the Kalamazoo City Commission or mayor in the upcoming Nov. 3 election.

This will be the first election where candidates must declare whether they intend to seek one of six commission seats or the mayor's position after changes to the city charter were approved by voters last fall. The change does not grant the mayor any additional authority.

The following are candidates who have submitted their nominating petitions with the required number of signatures and have had those signatures verified by the clerk's office:

Mayor:

Kalamazoo Mayor Bobby Hopewell, 51, who is seeking a fifth consecutive term as mayor and seventh overall on the commission after being first elected in 2003. Hopewell is currently the president and CEO of Mobile Health Resources, of Lansing. He is a resident of the Stuart neighborhood.

City Commission:

Kalamazoo Vice Mayor David Anderson, 63, who is seeking a sixth term on the city commission. Anderson is chairman of the Kalamazoo County Public Housing Commission and works as director of housing and facilities at Kalamazoo Community Health and Substance Abuse Services. He is a resident of the Stuart neighborhood.

Kalamazoo City Commissioner Don Cooney, 78, who is seeking election to his tenth term on the city commission after being first elected in 1997. Cooney is an associate professor of social work at Western Michigan University and is the commission's longest serving member. He is a resident of the Milwood neighborhood.

Kalamazoo City Commissioner Jack Urban, 73, who is seeking election to his second term as a city commissioner after previously serving three terms as a Kalamazoo County Commissioner from 2007 to 2012. Urban is a retired chemical engineer who worked for Pharmacia and Upjohn. He is a resident of the Westnedge Hill neighborhood.

Kalamazoo City Commissioner Eric Cunningham, 33, who is seeking election to his first term as a city commissioner after being appointed in January to fill former city commissioner Stephanie Moore's seat after she was elected to the Kalamazoo County Board of Commissioners. He is an eligibility specialist with the state of Michigan and has worked for the state for 11 years. He is a resident of the Westnedge Hill neighborhood.

Timothy Graham, 62. He is a resident of the West Main Hill neighborhood.

Matt Milcarek, 31, who is the construction manager at Kalamazoo Neighborhood Housing Services. Milcarek is also a member of the city's budget revenue panel recently created by city manager Jim Ritsema. He is a resident of the Vine neighborhood.

Erin Knott, 40, who works as the Michigan director of Enroll America, a national non-profit that works to maximize the number of U.S. citizens who receive health care under the Affordable Care Act. She is a resident of the Douglas neighborhood.

Shannon Sykes, 33. According to her LinkedIn page, Sykes has previously worked as the African American Constituency Director for Friends of Jon Hoadley during Hoadley's 2014 campaign for state House. Hoadley, a Democrat, is a first-term state Representative for the state's 60th District, which covers Kalamazoo. She is a resident of the Westnedge Hill neighborhood.

The clerk's website also notes that Sid Ellis, director of mission advancement at the YMCA of Greater Kalamazoo, submitted petitions to run for the city commission but has since withdrawn.

Incumbent commissioners Bob Cinabro and Barb Miller have announced they will not seek re-election, meaning there will be at least two new officials on the seven-member commission this fall.

In addition to the above candidates, Vine neighborhood residents Cody Dekker and Leona Carter have also announced they intend to run for the city commission this fall.

Additionally, Milwood neighborhood resident Kris Mbah has stated he intends to challenge Hopewell for mayor.

Commissioners and the mayor are elected on an at-large, non-partisan basis.

Due to the recent charter changes, the top three finishers in the Nov. 3 election will serve four-year terms and the next three finishers will serve two-year terms. Starting with the 2017 election, all commissioner terms will be for four years.

The highest vote-getter amongst candidates seeking to become city commissioners will become vice mayor.

City residents interested in running must submit nominating petitions and affidavits of identity to the city clerk's office by 4 p.m. July 21.

Alex Mitchell is a reporter for the Kalamazoo Gazette. Email him at amitche5@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter.