The sure sign that someone is running for president is whether he or she is raising money and hiring staff in advance of the big announcement. In that vein, according to a Sunday article in the Houston Chronicle. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas is all but certain to run for president. He is raising and spending money through his Pac and is hiring heavy hitter political talent. ”Entering 2015, Cruz’ PAC had $131,000 on hand and his fundraising committee had $227,000. His Senate campaign account had not yet filed its end-of-year report.”

On the other hand, Cruz has not formed an exploratory committee nor has he started to set up state organizations that will be needed for both the long primary slog and the general election. However, according to the National Interest, he is looking at two past elections for a model for his run for the White House. These are the 1980 election that catapulted Ronald Reagan to the presidency and changed to course of history and the 2004 election that returned George W. Bush to the Oval Office.

1980 as a model is a no-brainer. Then as now a dysfunctional Democratic president presided over economic malaise at home and chaos abroad. Reagan swept into power with the promise to fix both, a promise that he subsequently kept. That feat, in turn, catapulted Reagan to the pantheon of great presidents inhabited by the likes of George Washington and Abraham Lincoln.

2004 as a model is somewhat curious, however. Bush followed the Karl Rove strategy of cobbling together enough conservative voters to win reelection over John Kerry narrowly, but convincingly. The conventional wisdom suggests that with the American people deeply divided between left and right, that strategy is the way for a conservative candidate to go.

Of course, events, as they tend to do, could render that kind of strategy moot. What if Hillary Clinton, the presumed Democratic candidate, collapses? Cruz would be forgiven if he yielded to the temptation to run the table, to execute a 1972 or 1984 blowout that would coincidentally prove to be a realigning election. Cruz, being the adroit politician that he is, will want to govern as well as win. Nothing furthers the former like being able to do the latter with conviction.