WICHITA, Kansas — The Democratic challenger in the race for U.S. Senator from Kansas, Chad Taylor, responded to the KSN News Poll released August 26 in Topeka.

Taylor first reacted to the latest KSN News Poll results.

“Based upon the poll reports, I think it’s indicative that Senator Roberts has a problem,” said Taylor. “Obviously, with over 63 percent of Kansas not wanting to send him back for a fourth term, what I read in as it relates to our particular campaign, is that our message is working. Obviously we are within five points of the senator in a poll that has a margin of error of [4.2] percent, and that our different sort of campaign that we’re running is working, in going to the rural parts of the state or the urban parts of the state, and meeting people where they live and looking them in the eye and shaking their hand and them getting to know what I stand for and me being able to address or hear their concerns that they have,” continued Taylor.

“We’re pleased with where we’re at,” he said.

Regarding the Economy:

“If you look at how to grow an economy overall, what you have to understand is the economic principles that lead to job creation and job growth,” said Taylor.

As an example, Chad Taylor referred to the NBAF facility in Manhattan, Kansas.

“Understanding how the synergy between the private sector and the public sector works together, that’s a facility within the bioscience corridor, which provides us a phenomenal opportunity to grow good paying jobs in our community that can’t be exported,” said Taylor.

Taylor told KSN that with his experience as district attorney, he understands the principles of how economics works.

“Understanding how those synergies work together in building coalitions, it’s all in a transferable skill set,” added Taylor.

“One of the first things that I would do is push for an initiative that we get back to the point that we haven’t been to since 2009, when we actually passed a budget in the U.S. Congress,” said Taylor. “Get off this roller-coaster of continuing resolution after continuing resolution, and go back and utilize pay go budgeting rules, which require transparency on the part of the congress and will identify where every dollar of spending is going to come from.”

Taylor continued, “If you wanna move money out of this pot to this pot over here, it has to be identified, or if you want to increase deficit spending that has to be identified, as well, so that way the American people know what they’re in for and they know what’s actually going on with the bottom line when it comes to spending in Washington.”

Regarding Washington:

“My priority when elected to go to Washington would be to be an advocate for the people of the state of Kansas,” said Taylor. “I believe that the senator is spending a substantial amount of time engaging in party rancor, which is part of the reason we’re in the situation that we’re in today and the reason Congress’ approval rating is as low as it is.”

Taylor says, if elected, he would clearly identify Kansans’ priorities.

“Job creation, being fiscally conservative, getting federal spending under control, utilizing that platform to get involved, and be that advocate the people of our state deserve,” explained Taylor.

Regarding Obamacare:

“I think that if you look at the basic premise of the Affordable Care Act, there are components of it, the way it was rolled out, the way it was promulgated that have created some problems,” said Taylor. “The United States Supreme Court, the Speaker of the House John Boehner, said it’s the law of the land.”

Taylor argues that we need to “move forward.”

“We need to get the right people in the room around the table to be able to determine what needs to be fixed and what needs to be tweaked in order to make it more economically efficient and helping lower the taxpayer burden, while still providing that high level of care for our citizens,” said Taylor.

“I have no problem reaching across the aisle and working with people regardless of their political party,” said Taylor.

“As district attorney, I’ve had to do that in working with Republican sheriffs, Republican police chiefs, and I can tell you that sitting down, knowing people, building relationships with them and trying to do the right thing for the right reason, doesn’t have a party label attached to it… and I believe all those party labels are doing is dividing our country,” continued Taylor.

Regarding Immigration:

“The immigration issue has been one that Congress has put off and put off for at least the last 15 years,” said Taylor. “As district attorney, it’s extremely frustrating not having a clear immigration policy on how to handle people illegally in the country.”

“We have to sit down and determine what our priorities are, and once that’s been done, promulgate legislation that is easy to understand and takes the burden or the level of bureaucracy built into the immigration process and lessens that so we stop incentivizing people to immigrate illegally because of the bureaucracy that we have that’s what we’re incentivizing, so I think that’s the strongest fix that we can put forward,” continued Taylor.