No high marks for Highmark in this insurance debacle

Highmark's lack of details leaves woman with coverage she can't afford

The 40-year-old Allentown woman has a medical condition and lost her job this year. No longer able to obtain health insurance through her employer, in February she turned to the insurance marketplace set up under the Affordable Care Act.

She's been going out of her mind ever since, trying to resolve one issue after another with her coverage through Highmark Blue Shield. She seemed to be getting somewhere after the Watchdog jumped in to help, until yet another roadblock popped up last week.

"I didn't know it would be this hard to get something that would be good for me," Knauss said.

She enrolled in the Highmark plan after she went to a broker for assistance navigating the marketplace. She said she told the broker she needed certain brand-name drugs. She said the broker identified a Highmark plan that listed those drugs as being covered, so she signed up.

But when she filled her prescriptions in April, her insurance hardly covered any of the cost. She paid $451 for one and $163 for another. Her insurance paid $1.16 total.

Fortunately, she had a tax refund and could pay. But being unemployed, she could have used the refund for other things.

Knauss said it took several calls to Highmark to identify the problem. She said her broker eventually was told her plan had a "hard mandate." That meant if a generic drug was available, the coverage for the brand name would be minimal. In addition to the co-pay, members are charged the difference in cost between the brand-name drug and its generic equivalent.

Knauss told me that information wasn't available to her or her broker when they selected the plan. It's not mentioned in the 14-page "summary of benefits and coverage" they relied on. There's not even a footnote in the prescription section, and it's not among several exclusions that are listed.

"It's really frustrating," Knauss said. "I feel I did my homework before I signed up for this."

The benefits summary says that for more details about coverage, "you can get the complete terms in the policy or plan document" by calling Highmark or going to its website.

But you can't.

I couldn't find them online. I asked a Highmark spokesman if they were there, but he didn't answer. I'll give Highmark high marks for ducking my questions.

I fared no better when I called Highmark customer service. I said I was a consumer and wanted to review the complete terms. Two representatives couldn't provide them.

Knauss said she filed a dispute with the federal insurance marketplace in April but was denied the opportunity to switch plans. That changed after the Watchdog contacted Highmark.