Advertisement - story continues below

While leftist activists anxious to impose new regulations continue to portray anthropogenic global warming as the greatest threat facing mankind, ordinary Americans see the issue much differently. Even though about four in 10 individuals surveyed in a recent Gallup poll identified the issue of climate change as ‘very’ or ‘extremely’ important to them, that number is a full 10 points lower than the nearest issue: abortion.

Half of all respondents say that access to abortion or birth control falls into one of the two highest levels of importance.

Both climate change and abortion fall well below any of the other 11 concerns listed in the poll, which was conducted to determine which issues will most affect voters’ decisions in upcoming midterm elections.

Advertisement – story continues below

Perhaps even more detrimental to leftist candidates than these two issues falling so low on the importance spectrum are the issues voters find most concerning. Topping the list is the economy, which nearly nine in 10 respondents deemed highly important. Closely following that concern was good jobs, how the federal government is working, and the threat posed by ISIS.

Democrat leaders, up to and including Barack Obama, have faced widespread criticism for their handling of each of these issues, which could play into the hands of Republican candidates next month.

Rounding out the middle of the list are concerns about gender income equality, the federal budget deficit, foreign affairs, taxes, immigration, Obamacare, and wealth distribution.

Advertisement – story continues below

Gallup found that the GOP was the preferred party to combat a clear majority of each of these issues. Voters favor Republicans to handle the budget by a 20 point margin, ISIS by 19 points, foreign affairs by 13 points, and the economy as a whole by 11 points. Other issues the poll found Republicans are viewed as best suited to tackle include how the federal government works, good jobs, foreign affairs, taxes, and immigration.

Democrats lead in just a few areas, including the two relegated to positions of least importance. The only other concerns voters trust the party most with are equal pay for women, Obamacare, and, by a slim margin, income and wealth distribution.

While facing accusations that it has failed to take a firm position on the topics real Americans deem most important, the Obama administration continues to lament the ostensible catastrophe that is climate change. As CNS News pointed out, Secretary of State John Kerry recently suggested the issue is “the most serious challenge we face on the planet.”

Advertisement – story continues below

Photo credit: World Economic Forum (Flickr)