Yuma BBRacers in for look at college life as part of overnight Bolder Boulder stay

Before the starting gun was fired for her wave in the 2013 Bolder Boulder, Stephanie Sauer woke up at 4 a.m., spent more than 2 hours on a bus and traveled more than 150 miles with classmates and chaperones.

Not exactly the ideal pre-race routine.

This year, the Yuma Middle School sixth grader won't have such an early wake-up call. Sauer, along with more than 40 other students from Yuma, will spend Sunday night before the Bolder Boulder in Libby Hall on the CU campus. About the same amount of students from Brush will join the Yuma students for the overnight stay as part of the BBRacers Club program, Alice Swanson of the Bolder Boulder said.

"We have done it once or twice before," Swanson said, but it's been about a decade since the last overnight stay at CU. "We think it's great to really give these kids who come from so far away and train and run to have a special treat."

The overnight group is in for a fun-filled stay. They'll get a tour of the Boulder campus and spend some time playing with CU student-athletes before dinner and screening of "Monsters University" in the Dal Ward Auditorium.

Even without the perks, Sauer would have been back to run the Bolder Boulder, after all, she's got some unfinished business on the course.

"I liked the dancers that we see and the people that are singing," Sauer said of her favorite memories from last year. "And the Slip 'N Slide. We were already past it last year, but I will try to do it this year."

Advertisement

Rory Lynch is Dean of Students at Yuma Middle School and the BBRacers Club coach for the kids there. When he arrived in the eastern Colorado town of just over 3,000 in 1999, there wasn't much love for running. Then Lynch took a group of students to the Haxtun Corn Festival 5K in the fall. His principal at the time noticed the kids' enthusiasm and mentioned the Bolder Boulder. At the time, the race didn't extend the BBRacers Club (then the Middle School Challenge) outside of Boulder County, but told Lynch they'd love to have his group. The first year Yuma brought about 50 kids to Boulder and they have averaged 45 a year overall.

"Road running, or just running as a culture, isn't real strong out here, but it's growing," Lynch said. "I think the running culture when we go to Boulder is an eye-opener to see so many people interested."

This year, the overnight stay on campus will offer another eye-opener to the young students: what it might be like to go to school and live on a college campus like CU's.

"We went from NCAR to Estes Park a couple of weeks ago, and kids were amazed as they went by (the CU) campus, asking why all the buildings were the same and why it was so nice," Lynch said. "I explained that it was a college campus and that's how they look."

CU athletic director Rick George fully embraces the idea of the BBRacers staying on campus.

"This race is the best in the world," George said. "It's great for this community, Boulder, for the Front Range and for Colorado in general. We just want to be an active participant in the race. To me it's great to be able to engage young people and show them what we have to offer."

Being a part of the BBRacers Club has plenty to offer according to Lynch.

"The run is great, being on campus is awesome and the Memorial Day celebration is incredible," Lynch said.

Or more simply put by the 12-year-old Sauer: "It's really fun!"

Contact Camera Staff Writer Jennifer Osieczanek at 303-473-1316 or osieczanekj@dailycamera.com