Five of today’s top Florida political stories at your fingertips:

In Sarasota, Donald Trump promises ‘bigger and stronger and bolder’ American Dream – Thousands of Donald Trump fans packed inside and outside a Sarasota arena Saturday to hear the Republican frontrunner rip Marco Rubio, Jeb Bush, super PAC political committees, “phonies” in the press corps (especially the New York Times), Obamacare, “weak” generals leading America’s military, political correctness, Hillary Clinton and assorted people who have doubted or criticized him. Read more

Related: Thousands cheer Trump at raucous rally in Sarasota

Debbie’s dilemma: Democrats drenched in debt – As the fight to control the U.S. Senate intensifies, the Democratic National Committee finds it has a money problem — as in, not enough of it. The DNC is now $2.2 million in debt. The committee that Florida Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz chairs disclosed last week it spent $5.25 million in the past month but only brought in $4.45 million in contributions. Read more

‘Muslim Free Zone’ stands: Fla gun store owner vindicated, CAIR lawsuit DISMISSED – Florida gun shop owner who was sued by the Council on American-Islamic Relations for declaring his store a “Muslim Free Zone” has been vindicated by a federal court. Andrew Hallinan, owner of Florida Gun Supply in Inverness, was sued by CAIR’s Florida chapter after he made the declaration in a YouTube video in July. Read more

Hours after Colorado shooting, Annette Taddeo’s political opportunism is in full force – After Friday’s shooting at a Planned Parenthood facility, Democrats across the country are jumping at the opportunity to politicize the five-hour standoff that left three people dead, including a University of Colorado police officer. One of the first to capitalize on the attack – even before police determine a motive – was South Florida congressional candidate Annette Taddeo. Read more

Florida pastor: Planned Parenthood President Cecile Richards ‘hates our God’ and ‘loves death’ – Following the domestic terrorist attack on a Planned Parenthood in Colorado, Jacksonville First Baptist Church Pastor McCall “Mac” Brunson accused the organization’s president, Cecile Richards, of hating God and loving death. Speaking to his congregation “in light what what we’re living through” on Sunday, Brunson read a verse from the Bible warning, “the person who sins will die.” Read more

Bonus for Ohio readers: Ohio police captain fired after wearing pro-marijuana legalization button next to badge

For more Florida political news, visit BPR’s FLORIDA NEWS page.