Topics: Cars, Dream City, driving, Gas Tax, Highways, Tolls, Innovation News, Sustainability News, News

It has always been cheap to drive in the United States, relative to other developed countries. As far as our road budget goes, it’s too cheap.

The money American drivers pay into the federal Highway Trust Fund, through a tax exacted at the gas pump, no longer covers the costs of building and maintaining the nation’s road network.

It’s easy to see why this levy, which dates from the inception of the Interstate Highway System, no longer serves its purpose. The federal gas tax has stood at 18.4 cents a gallon since 1993, rendering its budget-replenishing power woefully small. Neither President Obama nor Congressional Republicans seem to be interested in raising it and resetting the calculus.

Want a glimpse of the future of roads in this country? Look elsewhere. As Congress juggles stopgap solutions, the U.S. road network is in the beginnings of a profound structural shift towards privately run turnpikes.

Toll road mileage in this country has grown steadily over the past couple of decades, with annual capital spent on toll roads ballooning from $155 million at the turn of millennium to $3.65 billion in 2011. All in all, we’ve spent $54 billion on 96 public-private road projects since the early ’90s, almost all of which include tolls. (That’s how investors make their money back.) The trend is particularly pronounced in urban areas, where tolled miles jumped 36 percent between 1998 and 2010.

There are several explanations for this shift. First, state roadway budgets have run low. Many states get more than half their highway funding from the federal government, and in any case statehouses have their own gas taxes to argue about. Second, tolling technology has advanced significantly in the past two decades, and its applications have multiplied. No longer does a toll road required controlled access, or full stops — cameras can capture license plates and bills are sent in the mail. Finally, states are learning, through trial and error, how to properly harness private investment for public infrastructure projects.

Relatively speaking, toll roads remain few and far between. Of the 46,876 miles of Interstate Highway in the country, only 3,300 are tolled — and many of those miles, as sections of older turnpikes, were grandfathered into an otherwise free system. Still fewer are the miles of state highway with tolls.

Why didn’t planners make Americans pay to use the Interstate in the first place? For one thing, the gas tax saved the Interstate Highway System from building several thousand tollbooths and employing tens of thousands of toll collectors. Free travel also helped the big roads accomplish their aim of decongesting existing streets — tolls might have encouraged drivers to continue using other routes. Finally, the planners simply didn’t anticipate that tolls could cover the costs of the new roads.

In the master architect of the Interstate system, Thomas McDonald, “you find a belief that free and unimpeded travel to the greatest extent possible should be, if not a right, then an easily obtained privilege for people,” said Earl Swift, historian and author of “The Big Roads.”

In most other countries, though, paying to drive on the highway is as normal as paying to board a train. France, for example, offered public and private companies concessions to build the nation’s motorways in the post-war decades. Today, more than three-quarters of the country’s 8,000-mile network is tolled. For countries without the means to raise enormous sums of capital, the concession business has been a ticket to invaluable transportation infrastructure.

Currently, nearly half of U.S. states don’t allow tolling. But the big ones — California, Texas, New York, Florida and Illinois — all do. And the Obama administration has said it would like to relax long-standing rules regulating how and when states can toll Interstate Highways, opening up a vast, untapped resource to statehouses.