SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - As officials in southern Utah prepare to release new details on plans to build a billion-dollar pipeline from Lake Powell to the growing city of St. George, environmentalists are raising questions about who will pay for the project and when.

The Washington County Water Conservancy District is releasing a report Tuesday listing about a dozen proposals for the 140-mile pipeline. But the district’s plan won’t include information about the pipeline’s cost or how the water district will repay Utah for the project.

The project, which is expected to begin construction in 2020, would allow Utah to grab more of a share of the Colorado River, which several states rely on for water.

District manager Ron Thompson said officials believe the pipeline will cost about a billion dollars and the water districts will have 50 years to repay the state.

But Thompson said it will be several years before details are finalized about where or how the pipeline will be built, so officials aren’t yet trying to get a final cost estimate.

“Until we know which options they’re going to allow us to use, it’s a little hard to put a price on this project,” he said.

He added he’s confident the district will be able to repay Utah by raising water rates and fees.

Zach Frankel, executive director of environmental group Utah Rivers Council, said he believes state water officials and the Washington County Conservancy District are purposely withholding details about the cost because the agencies know it won’t be repaid with interest.

Frankel told The Salt Lake Tribune (http://bit.ly/1Yv384c) that the repayment plan should be released now as part of public debate on the project.

“It is time for them to put up or shut up,” he said. “Show us the debt payment schedule, or shelve the proposal to spend the taxpayers’ money.”

Some University of Utah economists say they believe the high cost of the project may lead the water district to hike water rates so high that residents eventually use less water and eliminate the need for the pipeline entirely.

A university study on the project found that the water district would have to raise fees by at least 123 percent and water rates by 576 percent to pay for the pipeline.

Economics professor Gail Blattenberger, who is a former member of the Rivers Council, said it’s possible that Washington County residents are using more water now because it is relatively cheap.

Thompson said the rate hikes estimated by the university economists were manipulated to follow their environmental agenda.

He said the water district he manages is working on a repayment plan but it’s not finished or ready to be released.

Story Continues →