PARMA, Ohio -- The first murmurs of dissent surfaced even before Dr. Murray Altose had finished his presentation Tuesday about the Louis Stokes Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, where he is chief of staff.

Altose was joined by Todd Weber, assistant director of the VA's Cleveland Regional Benefit Office, for a third town hall meeting of this year, inviting vets and their families to provide feedback about the agency's performance.

The event, held at the Parma VA Outpatient Clinic, is part of a national effort to restore confidence in the VA's medical treatment and benefits system. Local officials said the meetings will be held quarterly, with the next one possibly in March.

The two previous sessions were marked by sharp criticism and complaints, and this latest gathering was no exception.

As Altose extolled the medical center's commitment to quality, one woman in the audience muttered, "Then why doesn't this happen?"

A veteran seated nearby was even harsher. "Lies!" he simply said.

Questions about individual circumstances raised by some of the 60 or so veterans attending were referred to consultations with case workers in separate rooms.

Other remarks by veterans and family members were met with sympathy and promises to improve.

One widow of a Vietnam veteran who had been treated by the VA said, "I hope no veteran has to go through what my husband went through. He came in for dental implants and went out in a body bag."

Altose expressed his regrets for any difficulties that she or her husband had experienced, and noted, "We take very seriously any areas that need to be improved. We are dedicated to improving."

One veteran said it took three months to get an appointment with a VA doctor. Come time to file a claim for benefits, "they used that time against me (in denying the claim), saying I was at fault for not acting promptly," he said.

"I volunteered to fight for my country, nobody forced me, and I think I deserve better care than that," he added.

A woman veteran diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder complained about calls from VA staffers who rate benefit claims, asking questions without being sensitive to the potential psychological impact of some inquiries.

"You have raters asking questions without knowing the consequences of those questions," she said.

Weber agreed. "I can see how that can be a bad thing," he said. "I'm going to take that back with me and try to own it."

Some veterans were there to vent.

One vet said he had been given three different disability claim ratings by the same VA doctor over the years, "and I didn't get a penny out of it to this day. How can I have any confidence and faith in a system that does that?"

He abruptly left before VA officials could answer, saying, "I don't need to hear your response."

Another man took issue with a statement about the timeliness of VA medical care. "If it were timely care, I still would have my father here," he said. "It was not timely care, and now my father is dead."

But some vets also voiced support of VA programs and medical care.

Jen Pitts, 46, a Marine veteran from Parma, said she found the critical stories of other vets a little "confounding" because "my care has always been really great."

Another vet, treated by the VA for heart attacks and kidney cancer, said, "You guys have taken excellent care of me. I wish everybody could experience what I have with the VA."

A woman Marine veteran said the VA has improved during the past 13 years, and its program for female vets has "grown by leaps and bounds. It's a safe environment, and the staff is wonderful."

Near the end of the two-hour session, Altose, his voice gone hoarse, thanked the veterans for their input, both good and bad. "We take this seriously," he said. "We wlll all work to make things better.

"This is a team sport," he added. "We all need to be working toward serving the veteran. That's the bottom line.

"Let's not forget that we do an awful lot of good things," he continued. "Is there room for improvement? Absolutely."

Richard Lasky, 65, of Parma, similarly urged his fellow veterans to be patient participants for change. "If we don't complain, they're not going to change. But they've been very responsive to doing that," he said.

The Vietnam vet said that when he got back home in 1969, "I would never walk into a VA."

But Lasky said the system has changed for the better. As he told the VA officials, "The bottom line is that now you listen. I think you're making strides."