"Fundamentally, the industry is doing well. People can still get in the market and make money today."

Advances in biotech have also boosted the health-care sector performance. In each year over the last four years, biotech has been the best-performing niche by a wide margin.



A lot has changed since the late 1990s, when the biotech space went through a boom-and-bust cycle, much like the tech sector. Back then returns were rooted more in expectations than results. Biology-based drugs, as opposed to more traditional chemistry-focused ones, were expected to treat ailments that could never be treated before, but there wasn't much science to back the excitement up.

John Schroer, head of health care at Allianz Global Investors, said that in 2003 the human genome—critical to biology drugs—was finally fully mapped out. Regulators have also made the drug-approval process easier, and that's dramatically sped up the time it takes to get a drug from concept to shelf. Companies are also more focused on creating treatments for specific cancers and diseases rather than trying to make something for the masses. That allows them to develop numerous drugs and also sell them at a higher price.

"There's been this (renewed) understanding of diseases at a greater level," Schroer said.

Read MoreThe action in cancer drugs is hard to keep up with

These medicines also have massive sales potential, according to Jeff Loo, a health-care analyst with S&P Capital IQ. At the moment, there are between 10 and 12 biotech drugs in the industry pipeline that have the potential to earn at least $1 billion in revenues, Loo said. Last year Gilead Sciences made about $10 billion on a groundbreaking hepatitis-C drug, Sovaldi, and it could bring in $13 billion more in 2015, Loo said. He expects to see double-digit revenue expansion in the biotech space over the next few years.

While the sector has certainty rebounded since 2010, valuations aren't unreasonable for what's considered a more growth-oriented sector, in Loo's analysis. He pointed out that health-care stocks on the S&P 500 are trading at 18.5 times earnings, compared to 17.9 times for the overall index.

"That's a small premium," Loo said.