Advertisement - story continues below

So now even our Secretary of Defense is warning American citizens that The Islamic State is coming for them and is preparing to attack the United States in a major way. He tells the American people to Be Ready.

Excuse me, but I thought the number one responsibility of the President of the United States was to protect the American public and, as Commander in Chief, defeat our enemies. That is what the Constitution calls for; but that is not the agenda of this president, our Dear Leader. Rather, President Obama has created a scenario for the destruction of the United States.

We’ve talked over and over on these pages about the out of control spending on wealth redistribution and the burgeoning federal deficit that is approaching twenty trillion dollars. The deficit has come down somewhat recently but is scheduled to skyrocket as expenses for Obamacare kick in. This explosion of debt has crowded out spending on needed priorities such as military spending, which is the first and foremost responsibility of the federal government. Our military is being downsized to irresponsible levels at the exact moment when the threats against this country are ballooning all over the world. I believe the run up in debt and the resulting reduction in military spending by the United States is on purpose.

Advertisement – story continues below

Now let’s shift the discussion to the border. Since 9/11, the Department of Homeland Security has made a huge issue of keeping watch of who enters the country. The consequences of a weapon of mass destruction being detonated within the country in a major city are too horrible to contemplate.

However, since the children began showing up on the border and the Obama administration began relocating them across the country even without informing state officials, we now have thousands of individuals who are here illegally–and we don’t even know who they are! The administration even recently admitted that many were flown across the U.S. without any proper identification at all. Many of these children are now known to be violent gang members from Central America. Many of them look like adults. Many of them are very possibly terrorists who used the border crisis and the Obama administration’s refusal to secure the border as a way to enter the country.

Now let’s take this a step further. We know the Obama administration has been hellbent on removing American troops from the Middle East since coming to power. Obviously, our intelligence services briefed the White House on the consequences of this action. The administration had to know that removing American troops would foster the rise of Islamic jihadism and terrorism in the region once our forces were removed. President Bush always said, I’d rather fight them over there than here. Now we have a situation where a violent Islamic caliphate has been created in the Levant and Iraq. The administration had to know this would happen. The question is, why did they let it happen?

Advertisement – story continues below

So currently, we have a much weaker military. We have an open border where terrorists are pouring through. Terrorism is back in force after we spent trillions and lost thousands of brave soldiers to defeat it. ISIS now has unimaginable resources and can provide these terrorists in-country with weapons of mass destruction that could destroy our cities. We have an arch enemy that only a few days ago vowed to raise the flag of ISIS over the White House.

With all of this being allowed to happen in front of our faces, the question has to be asked: Is ISIS already living at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue?

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.