More than 80,000 people in Duval County have obtained health insurance under the Affordable Care Act since enrollment began in November 2013.

They joined 1.4 million people in Florida and more than 20 million people in the U.S. who have purchased coverage through the Federal Health Insurance Marketplace.

About 55 percent of Floridians who signed up did not have any health insurance before the program became available, said Pamela Roshell, regional director of the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services.

“It sends a powerful message,” she said.

State Rep. Mia Jones, who serves as Jacksonville Health Commissioner when the Legislature is not in session, said the number of people enrolled in Duval County increased dramatically during the second of open enrollment period that ended in February.

About 1,300 people enrolled during the first open enrollment period that spanned November 2013-February 2014.

As of the end of this year’s open period, 80,256 Jacksonville residents are covered through the program.

“It’s clear the Affordable Care Act has made a huge impact,” Jones said.

The local effort is led by the Health Planning Council of Northeast Florida. With a $440,000 grant through the University of South Florida, the council provides public education about the Affordable Care Act to consumers and small businesses.

The council also administers the local enrollment effort, including a team of trained “navigators” who help consumers make their way through the process of selecting from among 14 insurance carriers that participate in the marketplace.

The council partnered with United Way to provide program information through the 211 call center and set up permanent enrollment sites at local hospitals and agencies.

Roshell said in Florida, 93 percent of enrollees qualified for a tax credit that lowers their out-of-pocket cost for the insurance and 72 percent pay only about $100 per month for coverage, taking into account the tax credit.

She attributed the success of the program to the low cost of coverage, multiple choices of insurance providers, insurance guaranteed despite pre-existing conditions and preventive care at no cost to the consumer.

Jones said in addition to the work done by the council, Duval County’s enrollment increased due to word-of-mouth marketing by people who enrolled in the first year who shared their health insurance experience with friends and family members.

“Jacksonville’s numbers represent lives that have been changed,” she said.

The numbers are likely to go up due to an extension of the enrollment period until April 30. That will allow people who discovered when they filed their 2014 income tax return they were subject to a penalty for not having health insurance to secure coverage, Roshell said.

In addition, year-round enrollment is available for people who have experienced life changes such as marriage or losing their job.

According to data provided by Health & Human Services, about 120,000 people living in Duval County remain uninsured but are eligible for coverage through the Affordable Care Act. Planning is underway for the next open enrollment period scheduled to begin in November.

“We are assessing the second period and looking for areas where we can improve the consumer experience,” said Roshell.

mmarbut@jaxdailyrecord.com

@DRMaxDowntown

(904) 356-2466