This dog and her puppies were rescued from the side of the road on Hooper Avenue in Toms River. (Photo: COURTESY TOMS RIVER POLICE )

A homeless dog and her nine puppies were rescued through some crafty work by an observant local woman, police and animal control officers Wednesday, said Ralph Stocco, police spokesman.

A woman and her two children were near 1430 Hooper Ave. at 10:45 a.m. Wednesday when she saw two tiny puppies walking dangerously close to the roadway with a larger dog that appeared to be the mother of the puppies, Stocco said.

The woman stopped and retrieved the two puppies, but their mother fled into the woods, he said. The woman called police, and the Toms River Animal Control Officers Dale Beley, Tom Manolio and Stacy Garabics responded.

Animal control officers took custody of the two puppies and, along with Patrolman Eric Divone, searched the wooded area for the mother dog.

The officers found a den that was dug into the dirt under some pine tree branches approximately 50 feet from the sidewalk adjacent to Hooper Avenue. Seven more puppies were huddled in the wooded den and were rescued.

However, the mother dog was not around.

The officers set up a humane trap near the den to capture the mother, and five hours later she entered the trap and was rescued by officials.

They were evaluated and treated by a veterinarian and they are now housed in the newly erected Toms River Animal Shelter at 235 Oak Ave.

The reunited family was found to be in generally in good health, officials said.

“A search is being conducted to locate the owner of the dogs. However, if no one claims them they will be placed up for adoption after a minimum wait of approximately three weeks,” said Jim Bowen, director of the animal shelter, who coordinated the rescue of the animals. “The mother appears to be a Jack Russell terrier and the puppies, which are approximately 5 weeks old, are of an unknown mix.”

The shelter can be reached at 732-341-1000, ext. 7300.

Margaret F. Bonafide: mbonafide@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://www.app.com/story/news/local/toms-river-area/toms-river/2014/06/12/toms-river-puppies/10373697/