Feeling thoroughly worn out from a national bicycle challenge, Topekan Eric Nordgren said he considered not going through with his eighth annual Sunflowers-to-Roses cancer fundraiser, a 350-mile, nonstop bike ride throughout northeast Kansas.

But Nordgren said he changed his mind after he reviewed the stories and conditions of the two young cancer patients he was considering supporting with this year’s ride’s proceeds: 6-year-old Karis Selk and 3-year-old Londyn Hibbert.

Nordgren said he reasoned that while he was exhausted and hurting, Karis and Londyn and their families had endured more than he could even imagine in their ongoing and overwhelming battles against cancer.

Londyn has lost one eye and is struggling to save the other, while Karis is undergoing treatments in a back-and-forth battle to save her life, Nordgren said.

He said he consequently feels a dedicated sense of purpose as he gears up for this year’s fundraising ride, which begins Monday and ends Tuesday.

A 59-year-old, semiretired businessman, Nordgren holds the ride each year in honor of his parents and parents-in-law, who all had cancer and two of whom died from cancer.

He plans to start at 3 p.m. Monday in Topeka.

Members of the Topeka Old Phogies bike group and the Topeka Road Riders will join Nordgren for the final, 50-mile leg, which will leave about 10 a.m. Tuesday from the west end of Lake Shawnee’s Tinman Circle and is expected to go to Lake Clinton and back before arriving about 3 p.m. at Ice & Olives, S.E. 29th and Croco Road.

Nordgren said he was uncertain if he would go through with this year’s fundraiser after he recently completed the five-month, Endomondo National Bike Challenge, in which he finished first by riding 13,500 miles. Nordgren’s team, the Topeka Old Phogies, won first place in the 10-person team division of the competition, which involves more than 50,000 riders.

Among the two girls Norgren will be riding for:

■ Karis, the daughter of Kyle and Stephanie Selk, of Topeka, was diagnosed at age 5 with medulloblastoma, the most common type of brain cancer found in children. When she was diagnosed, Karis had three tumors in her brain, and the cancer had metastasized to her spine. She has undergone two brain surgeries, 30 radiation treatments and chemotherapy.

■ Londyn, the daughter of Danielle Hibbert, of Topeka, was diagnosed at the age of 9 months with the hereditary form of a rare form of childhood cancer, bilateral retinoblastoma. She has undergone chemotherapy, received prosthetics to replace her left eye and has three tumors remaining in her right eye.

Nordgren said tax-deductible donations may be made:

■ On a Facebook site, which can be found using the keywords Karis and Londyn Cancer Support.

■ By sending an email to Nordgren at aspentopeka@sbcglobal.net. Nordgren will send a pledge card to those who email him.

■ By calling Nordgren at (785) 266-7648 at his local remodeling company, Aspen Construction Services Inc.

■ By going to the website Nordgren plans to set up Monday at livestrongtopeka.org.

All fundraising costs are being covered by Aspen Construction Services.