Loretta Mester, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, said Wednesday the economy “can handle” an increase in the fed-funds rate. Bloomberg News

The leader of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland said Wednesday the U.S. economy could easily deal with a rate rise right now, but she didn’t call for short-term rates to be boosted at any specific time period.

“The economy can handle an increase in the fed funds rate,” Cleveland Fed President Loretta Mester said. “A small increase in interest rates from zero is not tight monetary policy, and with the economic progress we’ve made and that I expect to continue, monetary policy can take a step back from the emergency measure of zero interest rates,” she explained in the text of speech to be presented before an audience in Columbus, Ohio.

Ms. Mester’s appearance coincided with Fed Chairwoman Janet Yellen’s trip to Capitol Hill to provide the central bank’s semiannual update on the economy and monetary policy. Ms. Yellen reaffirmed that if the economy plays out as she expects it’s very likely the Fed will raise rates this year. But she declined to say when, explaining it’s more appropriate in any case to think about the path of future rate rises, rather than when the first move up off currently near-zero rates will happen.

Still, some Fed officials have pointed to September as a potential starting point for the Fed’s rate rise campaign. Ms. Mester said in her remarks that it’s reasonable Fed officials might have differing views about when to start raising short-term rates. Ms. Mester isn’t currently a voting member of the monetary policy setting Federal Open Market Committee.

In her remarks, Ms. Mester was upbeat about the economy’s outlook, both in terms of expected job and inflation performance. But she also cast a cautious eye toward overseas events. She also said that while there are risks to financial stability for keeping rates very low for a long time, she doesn’t see right now evidence of brewing trouble.

“I expect that after a weak first quarter, growth will pick up to an above-trend pace over the rest of this year and next, in the 2.75-3% range,” Ms. Mester said. She said she was aware of the risks presented by events in China and Greece, and said trouble in the latter country’s woes should have a “limited impact on the U.S. economy because our direct exposure via trade and banking is limited.”

When it comes to the performance of hiring in the U.S., Ms. Mester said “the totality of evidence suggests that the economy is at or nearly at the Fed’s mandated monetary policy goal of maximum employment.”

Meanwhile, weak price pressures are likely to give way, allowing the Fed achieve its desire to get inflation back up to its 2% target, something that hasn’t happened for three years.

“Would I like to see higher inflation numbers? The answer is yes. Am I reasonably confident that inflation will move gradually back to the Fed’s 2% objective over time? The answer is also yes,” Ms. Mester said.