Larry Hogan, the Republican candidate for governor, has focused his platform heavily on the economy and plans to cut inefficiencies, lower taxes and create jobs. As a real estate broker and founder of Change Maryland, Hogan said he was motivated to run because of Maryland’s economy.

One of Hogan’s most detailed plans involves getting rid of what he said is waste and fraud in the government’s budget. Hogan said the federal government and Office of Legislative Services have done 300 audits of the Maryland budget and found ways to cut waste in almost every agency. He said he would like to initiate an independent audit of every agency if he took office.

“We believe there’s at least $2 billion out of a $40 billion budget that should be eliminated without touching a single program, without hurting any of the essential services,” Hogan said.

Hogan’s website consistently refers to his plan to cut $1.75 billion. The Baltimore Sun conducted an independent review of three of the audits to which the Hogan campaign refers, showing the campaign incorrectly called at least $800 million “waste.”

According to Hogan’s campaign, there is still much room for improving efficiency. With the extra funds, Hogan said he would want to provide some tax relief to middle class families and improve the economy, which he believes is driving families and businesses out of Maryland.

Hogan also said the Maryland health exchange was a waste of money under Brown’s watch, calling it the “biggest boondoggle in state history,” and saying Maryland should have proceeded as Virginia did. Brown was in charge of the health exchange board but said he worked to fix the problems and rearrange leadership when the rollout was unsuccessful. It is now being rebuilt from Connecticut’s model to open on Nov. 15.

“Virginia said ‘you know what, if you want to take advantage of the Affordable Care Act, the federal site is now working’ – at first they had some glitches with that but they fixed it – so (Virginia) said ‘you can use the federal system, or we have great private sector exchanges in Virginia that you can use,’” Hogan said.

Hogan said aside from the economy, his other two main priorities are education and the environment.

He said Maryland has some of the best schools in the nation, particularly in Montgomery County, but the state still has one of the widest achievement gaps.

He would look to charter schools and giving families school choice, which he said has been successful in other states. Montgomery County does not have any charter schools currently in operation.

To improve the environment, Hogan said he wants to focus on cleaning up the Chesapeake Bay, which has been collecting sediment and other pollution. He said much of the sediment comes from New York and Pennsylvania and so should not fall on Maryland taxpayers. He also plans to enlist the federal government’s help in cleaning up the portions it controls and said Exelon has a role to play because it owns the Conowingo Dam.

Hogan said he also wants to focus on renewable energy and innovation, but not to the extent that it burdens businesses.

“We want to encourage sustainability wherever we can in the public and private sector but we also have to balance out so that we’re not having additional costs and burdens pushed on these businesses and individuals who are already struggling and about to leave,” Hogan said.

Hogan said the Purple Line – a 16-mile light rail that would run from New Carrollton to Bethesda – should be put on hold for similar reasons. He said while he supports continuing to fund the engineering and planning phases, he wants to prioritize fixing roads and avoid raising taxes to fund the construction.

“That station is a perfect example of mismanagement and waste of tax money and how cost overruns and mistakes have really cost the taxpayers dearly,” he said of the Silver Spring Transit Center, which will house the Purple Line but has run into engineering mishaps. “We simply have to be very cautious.”

Although Hogan’s platform emphasizes economic issues, many of Lt. Gov. Anthony Brown’s campaign ads attack his views on social issues, such as abortion and birth control. Hogan said the ads are not true and he does not plan to change anything regarding reproductive rights when in office.

“I have my own personal opinion about abortion but I would never impose my views on anybody else ...The voters of Maryland decided this issue 22 years ago,” Hogan said. “(Brown) has a commercial that says I want to take away a woman’s right to choose even in the case of rape and incest, and I want to take away birth control … I’ve never felt that way.”