Health Major Scientific Breakthrough Allows Paralyzed Man to Walk Again CREDIT:

Years after a knife attack paralyzed him, a Polish man can walk again with the aid of a frame, thanks to what members of the medical community are calling a scientific breakthrough.

British surgeons repaired Dark Fidyka’s spinal cord by transplanting olfactory enstheathing cells — often found in the peripheral and central nervous system — from his nose and constructing a nerve bridge between two parts of the damaged spinal column.

The surgery and 19-month treatment has helped Fidyka regain feeling in his legs and live more independently.

“I hope to recover further,” Fidyka told reporters during a press conference in Wroclaw this week. “I could live alone. I drive my car. True, it’s been adapted, but I do drive it.” Fidyka, a former firefighter said.

Paralysis — the loss of muscle function for one or more muscles — affects nearly one in 50 Americans. Causes include stroke, trauma with nerve injury, cerebral palsy, Parkinson’s disease, and ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease.

While scientists initially thought that damaged nerve cells can’t self-repair, experiments conducted since the 1980s have confirmed that some types of central nervous system neurons could regenerate under certain laboratory conditions. Research since then has brought forth the discovery of proteins that block the growth of nerves. Scientists have also facilitated axom growth, the replacement of lost cells, prevention of scarring on the site of spinal cord injury, and the redesign of physical therapy regimens.

The groundbreaking procedure, outlined in a recent issue of journal Cell Transplantation, culminates nearly 40 years of research conducted by University College London (UCL) Institute of Neurology Professor Geoff Raisman, which started with a study of the nose’s olfactory cell’s ability to restore itself.

While Raisman considered the surgery a success, he and other UCL researchers said they don’t want to jump to conclusions. Instead, they want to conduct the same procedure on two more patients suffering from spinal cord injuries similar to that of Fidkya.

“We believe… this procedure is the breakthrough which, as it is further developed, will result in a historic change in the currently hopeless outlook for people disabled by spinal cord injury,” Raisman told BBC.