Jarome Iginla scored his 598th career goal in Saturday’s 5-1 win over Edmonton at the Pepsi Center:



The Avalanche had eight skaters and backup goalie Reto Berra practicing under the direction of Francois Allaire on Sunday at team headquarters. On Monday, the Avs will look to improve to 9-2 this month with their sixth consecutive win, which would match the longest since coach Patrick Roy’s rookie season in 2013-14. Colorado’s eight wins this month was tops in the NHL entering Sunday’s games.

Game story from Saturday’s 5-1 win over Edmonton looks at red-hot goalie Semyon Varlamov and the efficient offense in front of him.

The notebook from Saturday’s game leads with Colorado draftee A.J. Greer’s mid-season move from Boston University to the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League’s top team, with Avs GM Joe Sakic talking.

Since Saturday’s game was an 8:10 p.m. start, many newspaper subscribers didn’t get the game story. Instead, those folks got a quick look at what a handful of Avalanche players are doing for the Christmas break, which for them is a whopping four full days.

Back to the A.J. Greer situation. The 39th pick in the 2015 draft struggled at Boston University and is now joining the Quebec league’s top team, the Rouyn-Noranda Huskies (27-4-3-1), who have several Avalanche ties. Rouyn-Noranda’s assistant GM is Mario Duhamel, who was Roy’s video coach the past two seasons. And Huskies forwards Jean-Christophe Beaudin and Julian Nantel are Avalanche draft picks. Beaudin is a third-rounder from 2015 and Nantel a seventh-rounder in 2014.

Greer, 19, is from Quebec and was an 11th-round pick by Rouyn-Noranda in the 2013 QMJHL draft.

I get it. The carrot was dangled in front of him since he joined BU. His junior draft rights are owned by a team that is the favorite to win the league championship and play for the Memorial Cup. He probably came to college too early — he was 17 last season as a freshman, the youngest forward the NCAA — and his four goals in 55 games at BU probably made everyone around him panic, including the Avalanche.

But I hate to see a teenager leave a hockey team mid-season, especially if the move is driven by an NHL team he might never play for.

On Sunday I asked Patrick Roy to comment on Greer. Verbatim: “I’m not that aware of what really happened. At the same time, every player is trying to make the best decisions for their career. I assume he talked to his parents, his agent — I’m sure he has great people around him helping him make his decision. For us as an organization, we just hope he develops. That’s all we care about. Is is in the Quebec league? Is it in college? It’s his decision, his choice.”

When asked about the character value, or lack thereof, of bolting on BU, Roy politely declined to comment.

“I have enough to worry about with my own players and the (possible) call-ups,” he said.

Patrick Roy after Saturday’s win over Edmonton: