PITTSBURGH — Clint Hurdle sits at his desk, talking about the evolution of the Pittsburgh Pirates from perennial big-league losers into World Series contenders.

He talks about how a team with a payroll of about $99 million — right around what the Rockies spend — have an organization others look to emulate.

Stacked neatly on Hurdle’s desk are books about leadership, self-motivation and fulfilling individual potential.

On an end table, near a big leather coach, stands a bronze statue about 18 inches high. It captures the unmistakable image of Pirates legend Bill Mazeroski, helmet held high, rounding the bases after hitting a home run in the bottom of the ninth inning to beat the heavily favored New York Yankees in the 1960 World Series.

It was a Steel City miracle, ranking right next to Franco Harris’ “Immaculate Reception” in the Steelers’ playoff victory over the Oakland Raiders in 1972.

But what Hurdle’s Pirates are doing is no miracle. Rather, it is the payoff for years of planning, building, acquiring talent and keeping the faith.

“There is an incredible foundation of trust that has been built up here,” said Hurdle, in his fifth season as Pittsburgh’s manager. “I think it was in development when I got here. You see the signs on the road, ‘under construction.’ That was us.

“Our minor-league farm system was fertile and trending upward in a big way. I thought the scouting department was doing excellent work. The seeds were planted.”

The Pirates come to Coors Field on Monday to begin a four-game series with a playoff slot secure, with the second-best record (87-60) in baseball entering Saturday. The Rockies, headed to their fifth consecutive losing season, have taken notice.

“We are not so blind and dumb that we don’t understand that there are a lot of people in this industry, and outside this industry, that have taken on challenges and reversed the fortunes of franchises before,” said first-year Rockies general manager Jeff Bridich. “There are so many lessons to be learned there, in Pittsburgh, and also Kansas City.”

The Royals were the darlings of baseball last year after making it to the playoffs for the first time since 1985, then advancing to the World Series. This year they are the runaway leaders in the American League’s Central division.

Bridich cautions, however, that Pittsburgh and Kansas City went through long dry spells before finding success, and there’s no one common denominator to reversing a team’s fortunes.

“To turn around that losing at this level — whether it’s the Pirates after 20 years of losing, or the Royals after all that time, or us after five years — is not easy,” he said. “In hindsight, things can get lost in the story. It’s not all easy, it’s not all Pollyanna and rosy stories. What adjustments were made? What worked and what didn’t? Coming to the truth of those turnarounds takes work.”

Fresh off 105-loss season

When Hurdle interviewed for the Pirates’ managerial job in November 2010, he spent two days talking with, among others, team owner Bob Nutting, president Frank Coonelly and general manager Neal Huntington. To outsiders, it certainly didn’t seem like a plum job. The Pirates were fresh off a 105-loss season. They hadn’t had a winning season since 1992, when a slim Barry Bonds wore Pirates black and gold.

And yet Hurdle — the man who managed the Rockies from 2002 until he was fired in late May 2009, and led the club to its only World Series berth in 2007 — saw Pittsburgh as the opportunity of a baseball lifetime.

“I actually used these words to my wife (Karla) and my father,” Hurdle recalled. “I said, ‘This is the greatest coaching opportunity in all of sports at this time.’ That’s exactly what I told them.”

What excited Hurdle was a group of young players, including budding star center fielder Andrew McCutchen, first baseman Pedro Alvarez and second baseman Neil Walker, whom he believed could form a valuable core, and promising minor-league prospects on the way. He also saw a franchise that had changed its philosophy, one that was willing to follow a blueprint, be patient and not panic if things weren’t going well.

On Sept. 9, 2013, deep into Hurdle’s third season, the Pirates beat the Texas Rangers 1-0, with 2011 first-round draft pick and current ace Gerrit Cole getting the victory. It was Pittsburgh’s 82nd victory, ensuring a winning season for the first time in 21 years. During that wretched losing era, the Pirates had moved into PNC Park, changed owners twice, employed seven managers and five general managers and lost 1,857 games.

Huntington, who came on board at the tail end of the 2007 season, had plenty of early failures, and there were plenty of critics who wanted him to be fired when he failed to field a winner after five years. Few general managers are given a sixth season to build a winner, but he got it.

After a series of missteps, Huntington and his staff have proved adept at building a roster with young players and affordable acquisitions at the big-league level.

Farm system bears fruit

For this year’s team, Huntington signed key free agents, most notably re-signing starting pitcher Francisco Liriano to a three-year, $39 million contract. That was important, because, for many years free agents shunned Pittsburgh. Huntington made a terrific move by signing versatile infielder Jung Ho Kang from the Korean Baseball Organization. Huntington traded for catcher Francisco Cervelli, utility player Sean Rodriguez and reliever Antonio Bastardo.

The bulk of Pittsburgh’s talented lineup, though, came through the farm system: shortstop Jordy Mercer (third round, 2008), Alvarez (first round, 2008), Walker (first round, 2004) and McCutchen (first round, 2005).

“Man, it’s hard to pinpoint when we turned things around,” said McCutchen, a five-time all-star who was named the 2013 National League MVP. “Mostly, I think it’s the draft. We got the players we needed, and that helped us build this team. It created unity.”

Bridich, who traded all-star shortstop Troy Tulowitzki to Toronto in a bold move just before this summer’s trade deadline for pitching prospects and veteran shortstop Jose Reyes, still considers the Rockies a draft-and-develop franchise. Bridich hints, however, that the Rockies are open to changing their philosophy on acquiring pitching.

“It’s not like we are going to go off all willy-nilly in one direction,” he said. “We are still going to be invested in player development and extremely invested in drafting and signing out of Latin America. So it’s not a huge change in philosophy, but how we evaluate, collectively, the available pitching in the industry, might shift a little bit.”

But Bridich said the Rockies are not going to do a 180-degree turn and start throwing money around.

“If you are asking if there is going to be massive monetary or financial shifting with us, I would be very surprised if that happens,” he said. “The Pirates didn’t do it that way and neither did the Royals. The Royals tried spending big money, and it didn’t work. It took Neal (Huntington) a long time.

“Obviously, we aspire to have it be a shorter window than (the Pirates) before we win, but in terms of money, and salary, some of the things we might do in free agency, or in the trade market, I think we are looking to grow those things intelligently.”

“Clint has our back”

Hang around the Pirates for a few days and camaraderie is evident in the clubhouse and the dugout.

“We’re a tight team,” McCutchen said. “Clint has our back, and we have his. He loves us and we love him right back. That’s pretty special.”

The button-downed Bridich doesn’t usually talk about building a baseball team in a tight-knit manner, but he said he understands the importance of chemistry.

“It’s important that there are significant stakeholders who believe in that ‘stuff,’ for lack of a better term,” he said. “You look at the Cardinals and what they have going and you know that they have significant stakeholders in that clubhouse, guys who believe that is important. It sounds like the Pirates do as well.”

In star third baseman Nolan Arenado, just 24, the Rockies have a player to build around, but Bridich said leadership can’t be heaped on Arenado’s shoulders.

“Does it have to be the, quote-unquote, superstar or the best player? No,” Bridich said. “Does it help when it is that player, because of the private and public weight that person carries? Yes. But it’s unrealistic in this day and age for that to be one player. At the very least, it takes a group.”

Hurdle said grinding through years of losing created a toughness that now serves the Pirates well.

“The closeness of this team started a while ago,” he said. “I think a lot of that was planted during our hardest times here, in 2011 and 2012, when we started well and then collapsed. We got beat up, and we got kicked off the playground.

“I told the players, ‘For a lot of you, this might be the first time you have tasted your own blood. You have to go home and tell your dad you got bloodied. But then you get bigger, stronger and faster and you go back because that’s the only playground there is.’ “

Death of McGregor

Much of what he learned about team building in Colorado and Pittsburgh came from the late Keli McGregor, the Rockies’ team president who died April 20, 2010, at age 47 of a rare virus that infected his heart muscle.

“Truth be told, when I talk about love on this team, that’s just Keli dripping all over me,” Hurdle said. “In Colorado, Keli reminded me every day that my job is to make everybody else’s job easier.”

Hurdle doesn’t believe it’s his place to speak about the current struggles of the Rockies, but he does say the void left by McGregor’s death still lingers.

“There was so much depth to that man, and he reached so many people and so many places so incredibly well,” Hurdle said. “There was a definite void created upon his loss. That being said, that creates an opportunity in Colorado.

“Who learned what when he was there? Who can impart some of that? He’s gone and he’s not coming back. He was a tremendous leader.”

The Rockies never filled McGregor’s position after his death and team owner Dick Monfort essentially took over McGregor’s responsibilities. Since 2010, the Rockies have averaged over 90 losses per season.

Bridich insists that his first year on the job has been about evaluation and patiently setting the framework for the long term.

“There really hasn’t been a rush through anything,” he said. “I very much did not want to make impulsive or rash conclusions or decisions on much of anything. I think that’s a good thing for the future.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp

2007 ROCKIES

Manager Clint Hurdle led Colorado to a 90-72 record and a World Series berth.

2014 ROCKIES

They finished a dismal 66-96, and are faring only slightly better in 2015.

2010 PIRATES

The franchise struggled to its 18th consecutive losing season (57-105).

2014 PIRATES

Hurdle led Pittsburgh to an 88-74 record and an NL wild-card playoff slot.