Wasteful government spending, for many, is an abstract concept:

Perhaps it’s a figure of speech that folks toss around. A buzzword in newspaper columns, an image from a fading political campaign — even a dog whistle depending on where you stand on the political spectrum.

But here in the North Country, visible reminders of a government run amok cruise our streets daily.

Medicaid taxis.

Essex County spent $2.5 million last year paying for medical transportation for Medicaid recipients —

All 378 of them.

Now this would be ludicrous enough if these were all legitimate trips by patients in need of medical treatment.

After all, for $6,613 per person, you could buy them each a very nice used car for that amount.

But we’re doubtful considering the horror stories we’ve been hearing since a heroic Essex County whistleblower blew the roof off this crooked scam last summer —

It’s pretty ingenious:

Incorporate a cab company. Link up to the state’s registry. Drive people to wherever they want to go. Then stick state and federal taxpayers with the bill.

Do it again and again until you turn a tidy profit.

Boom, you’re on cruise control. Just don’t get caught.

New York State caps county Medicaid costs at $6.9 million annually. As such, local governments generally incorporate that number into their spending plans, thank the heavens that it’s not higher and go on with their daily business.

That means attention isn’t really focused on this industry until one of the operators raises eyebrows with their misbehavior.

Like getting into a fender bender.

Or violating privacy procedures.

Or, in the case of one Broome County operator, bombing around in an unlicensed vehicle while allegedly defrauding the government of $80,000 within two years.

More are inevitably out there, haunting the streets.

No checks, no balances.

But the state doesn’t seem to be putting the brakes on this mutant industry, which has mushroomed overnight.

In July 2012, the state health department shifted the responsibility from counties to provide Medicaid transportation to a private company based in Syracuse.

Doing so, they said, would save the state money as it continues to embark on Medicaid reforms.

But figures are scant because the health department isn’t talking.

While oversight mechanisms are said to exist, the health department isn’t dishing on those, either.

This opacity has even been noted by the state comptroller’s office, who said in a report last year that an unfortunate “side effect” of the state’s move to managed care has been reduced transparency with regard to the use of Medicaid dollars.

Even county officials are skeptical that complaints are being reviewed in an expedient manner.

Now that local officials are getting wise to the issue, discussions about possible regulations have begun to percolate to the surface.

It’s a noble cause.

But is the solution of big government more government?

We’re skeptical.

To us, this unfairly penalizes law-abiding citizens at the expense of the fraudulent few.

It really is a microcosm of the bigger problems in our country.

Not only is the state’s Medicaid transport industry warped, but so is the overall entitlement system.

Barron’s recently likened the relationship states have with the federal government’s Medicaid program as a “three-card monte,” a cozy relationship that relies on an incestuous cycle to keep the dollars flowing — even more so now that the Affordable Care Act is the law of the land.

We agree.

But we also acknowledge that health care is an enormously complex issue that can’t be summarized in soundbites.

And because Medicaid plays such a large role in our state’s overall health care system, we understand efforts to limit spending could lead to the costs being shifted into the public sector.

As such, we agree with the comptroller that the state health department should continue to be transparent on each major step in this major overall.

Because right now, this waste is enough to give anyone a heart attack.

The good news is, beep beep, folks — a free ride to the hospital is just a phone call away.

The Sun Community News Editorial Board is comprised of Dan Alexander, John Gereau, Pete DeMola and Keith Lobdell. We value your opinion and want to hear from you. Drop us a line on our new Facebook page, follow us on Twitter, or email us at johng@suncommunitynews.com.