Emilio Huerta, right, gets a group of supporters together in Lamont to reach out to voters as he is running for Congress in he June primary.

Emilio Huerta reaches out to voters in Lamont recently on his quest for congressman in the June primary.

Daniel Parra talks to supporters at the Labor Hall on H Street, Saturday, in downtown Bakersfield that were helping him walk the precincts to gather votes for his campaign for the 21st Congressional District race against David Valadao and Emilio Huerta.

Daniel Parra thanks volunteers downtown Saturday at the Labor Hall on H Street before the canvas his precinct to get votes for the 21st Congressional District.

Emilio Huerta and his mother, Dolores Huerta, reach out to voters in Lamont in his quest for Congress.

Emilio Huerta, right, gets a group of supporters together in Lamont to reach out to voters as he is running for Congress in he June primary.

Emilio Huerta reaches out to voters in Lamont recently on his quest for congressman in the June primary.

Daniel Parra talks to supporters at the Labor Hall on H Street, Saturday, in downtown Bakersfield that were helping him walk the precincts to gather votes for his campaign for the 21st Congressional District race against David Valadao and Emilio Huerta.

Daniel Parra thanks volunteers downtown Saturday at the Labor Hall on H Street before the canvas his precinct to get votes for the 21st Congressional District.

Emilio Huerta and his mother, Dolores Huerta, reach out to voters in Lamont in his quest for Congress.

Three men are running for the 21st Congressional District seat this year.

But the real question for voters in June will be which Democrat to choose to challenge Rep. David Valadao, R-Hanford, the two-term conservative who has twice won the Democratic district easily.

Emilio Huerta, a Bakersfield attorney and son of labor icon Dolores Huerta, will tangle with Fowler City Councilman Daniel Parra.

Both men understand that Valadao is almost guaranteed to land enough votes next month to lock up a spot in the November general election. They’re fighting for the other spot in the top-two contest on the streets of the far-flung 21st District, which runs from east Bakersfield, Arvin and Lamont through the rural areas of Kern, Kings and Tulare counties to Fresno.

THE CHALLENGERS

Related Info DEMOCRATS DUELING IN THE 21ST



You know Rep. David Valadao, R-Hanford. These are the Democrats hoping to unseat him.



Emilio Huerta



Age: 58



Bio: Son of United Farm Workers co-founder Dolores Huerta



Received his GED from Cal Poly High School after attending Delano and Tehachapi high schools.

You know Rep. David Valadao, R-Hanford. These are the Democrats hoping to unseat him.58Son of United Farm Workers co-founder Dolores HuertaReceived his GED from Cal Poly High School after attending Delano and Tehachapi high schools. Associate’s degree in negotiations and collective bargaining in 1978 from the Fred W. Ross Labor Education Center. Bachelor’s degree in political science in 1983 from Cal State Bakersfield. Law degree in 1987 from Santa Clara University. 1988-1993 — worked at several law firms. 1993 to present — sole practitioner at Law Office of Emilio J. Huerta. Family: Daughter, Ana Huerta On his legacy: “You can’t assume they’re going to vote for you because you’re a Democrat or a Huerta” On voter apathy: “Our biggest challenge is to motivate people — get them plugged in. If our apathy allows a Donald Trump to get elected...we all pay the price.” On Daniel Parra: “Had Mr. Parra been able to get traction and appeal, we would be behind him.” On David Valadao: “He clearly represents ag. Ag continues to get subsidies. They’re willing to be subsidized on a corporate level but they’re not willing to invest in our children.” Endorsements: U.S. Sen. Barbara Boxer, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, California Attorney General Kamala Harris, former state Sen. Dean Florez, former Kern County Supervisor Pete Parra, United Farm Workers, IBEW, and a host of local and regional dignitaries. Daniel Parra Age: 50 Bio: Graduated from Parlier High School in 1983. Served in the U.S. Air Force from 1985 to 1987, followed by time in the reserves. Obtained a bachelor’s degree in business administration from National University in 20O5 and a master’s degree in public administration in 2007. Worked as a computer systems analyst at Northrop Grumman’s Naval Air Station Lemoore for 20 years. Elected to the Fowler City Council in 2008. Family: Wife, Sandra, married 28 years. Son, Daniel, 20. Daughter, Danielle, 15. On campaigning: “I’m used to the grind. I’m used to taking it on the chin when things go bad,” Parra said. But he loves connecting with people and talking to them. “I’ve had a great response. Even some of the ‘Nos’ I convert when I talk to them.” On Democratic voters: “Democrats cross over to the other side. We’ve got to win them back.” On health care: “I believe in health care for everyone, including the undocumented children. We’ve just got to make sure we keep the president blue — that’s your only safeguard” against losing the Affordable Care Act. On democracy: “We’ve got to find a way to make sure everybody’s vote counts.” Endorsements: Thanks to his long-standing presence in the race, Parra has collected a good list of endorsements from state, regional and local Democratic leaders and unions. Among the big names are Congresswoman Loretta Sanchez, Fresno County Supervisor Henry R. Perea and city council leaders from Arvin, Delano, Shafter, Lemoore, Sanger and Huron.

“We talk a lot about working people having a chance to get ahead,” said Huerta. “A lot of the families I talk to have kids in college and everyone is working two jobs. A lot of people have lost hope.”

Traveling across the 45 rural communities in the district, he said, he’s been surprised to see how little change and progress has happened in recent years.

What the district needs, more than anything, is the economic power to improve their lives and their communities, Huerta said.

The Republican policies of cutting Medicare and financial aid for children who want to attend college will only harm the future of the 21st District, he said.

His goal, he said, is to create a broad-based coalition of groups that will pursue other businesses beyond agriculture and oil to power economic progress for families and access to higher education for their children.

But what the district also needs is political power that can only be built by engaging voters and getting them passionate about change, Huerta said.

“The race has nothing to do with me at the end of the day,” he said. “This is just another page in the fight for social change in (these) communities.”

Parra said his top issues are water, health care for all citizens, immigration reform and public safety.

In many rural communities, “water at the tap used to be good. It isn’t any more,” he said. “We have the pumps. I’ll work in a bipartisan way to get those pumps running.”

Immigration reform is personal for him, Parra said. He remembers working in the fields with a couple of relatives and, at the end of the day, growers called immigration authorities on the workers so they didn’t have to pay them.

His two relatives, who were from Mexico, stood and waited while other workers ran from the immigration officers so they could make sure that Parra — who was a U.S. citizen — wouldn’t be rounded up and deported.

“They took care of me and it’s my job to pay it forward,” Parra said.

AN OUTSIDE PERSPECTIVE

Political Science Professor Thomas Holyoke of Fresno State said despite Parra’s long-term presence in the race, Huerta holds the upper-hand going into June’s primary election.

“Parra doesn’t seem to have much organization, money or support,” Holyoke said. His support is “pretty isolated in specific parts of the district.”

To build momentum across the 21st District, he said, Parra needs to really introduce himself to voters in Kern County, where a substantial number of the district’s Democrats reside.

“That’s a tall order for a person that doesn’t have a lot of campaign resources,” Holyoke said.

Between January and March, Huerta raised $142,302. It’s taken Parra nearly a year to raise only $58,883, and most of that money has been spent.

Huerta said he’s confident he’ll make it into the November general election against Valadao. His team is building a network of volunteers designed to get vote-by-mail and poll voters to actually cast their ballot.

But, no matter who makes it into the general election, they will have a challenging fight against Valadao, Holyoke said.

“He’s a good campaigner. He’s got a good organization,” he said.

And, while the Democrats hold a significant 15.5-point voter registration advantage over Republicans in the 21st District, that hasn’t stopped Valadao from steamrolling over poorly funded John Hernandez in 2012 and well-funded, politically connected Amanda Renteria in 2014.

THE SITTING CONGRESSMAN

Valadao’s top issues, he said in an email this past week, remain to “secure a reliable water supply for both families and farmers, achieve comprehensive immigration reform and reduce unnecessary government regulations, which in turn, will lead to real job creation in the valley.”

He doesn’t seem to be treating Parra or Huerta’s candidacies with much worry. He was overseas on a trip to learn about the terrorist threats in the Middle East.

Asked to comment on his opponents, Valadao wrote, “I'm not going to focus on politics. Instead, I'm going to keep doing what I was elected to do: represent my constituents. Rather than discuss potential opponents, we need to prioritize water, strengthening the economy, and protecting Social Security and Medicare for our seniors.”

Whichever Democract faces Valadao in November will need to electrify his voting base, observers say, and they will need to do it without much help.

“The Democrats have a big enthusiasm problem in the 21st District,” Holyoke said.

Will Donald Trump’s nomination as the Republican presidential candidate, and his promises of mass deportations and a wall along the Mexican border, energize Latino voter registration and turnout?

Paul Mitchell, whose Political Data company provides voter registration data to candidates, has tracked recent statewide trends that show surges in Latino registration that coincide with Trump’s progress toward the nomination.

“I have also seen polling that shows that by a 2:1 margin, Latinos who are registering Democratic are doing so because of someone they are afraid of, rather than candidates they believe in. This would speak to the idea that Trump is actually having the impact of registering more Democratic Latinos than Bernie or Hillary,” Mitchell wrote in an email.

But Mitchell is not looking at specific districts in his analysis.

Holyoke said he’s not sure how much impact Trump is going to make in the 21st District.

“Yeah there is a lot of anger,” he said. But “you need more than that passion. You have to have a lot of organizational resources” to win.

The bottom line is that California is not a battleground state for the presidential contest. The state is solidly Democratic.

“The national parties are not going to contest California, so you’re not going to see a lot of party money here. There is no reason for the national and state parties to be involved in the Central Valley,” Holyoke said. “If the Democrats are going to beat Valadao, it’s going to have to be with local resources.”