The Foundation for Morristown Medical Center announced Tuesday, May 24, 2016, that its “Campaign 3SIXTY” fundraiser reached $106 million. Funds will be distributed across 20 projects, programs and services.

Buy Photo Morristown Medical Center will benefit from a $106 million fundraising campaign. (Photo: File photo)Buy Photo

MORRISTOWN - Less than five years after a campaign was launched to support Morristown Medical Center, the foundation that shares its name announced its $100 million goal had been exceeded.

The news was announced Tuesday evening at a donor celebration event at Hartley Farms in New Vernon, where the Morristown Medical Center Foundation said its Campaign 3SIXTY fundraiser reached $106 million.

That figure marked the largest campaign in the hospital’s history, according to officials.

“We rely on our donors to help us provide high-quality care in a healing environment,” Morristown Medical Center President Trish O’Keefe said. “The community’s exceptional philanthropic investment through Campaign 3SIXTY has given us the resources to establish critical new programs, advance technology, and improve care in our community that keeps us on par with the top hospitals in the nation. We will also be able to provide better care coordination as we expand our services and facilities.”

As part of the donations, the campaign received about two dozen gifts exceeding $1 million, including $5 million from Robert and Louise Deskovick to complete the maternity center.

The funds will be distributed across 20 projects, programs and services at Morristown Medical Center.

Some of the funds will support ongoing programs including the Carol W. and Julius A. Rippel Breast Center, Deskovick Maternity Center, Sameth Emergency Department and the Project Independence relief fund.

READ MORE MORRISTOWN MEDICAL NEWS:

Morristown Medical, Madison borough making Morris business news

1,000 tested, cleared in Morristown Medical Center lead exposure

Atlantic Health opens Rockaway location

First-time initiatives that will be funded include the Chambers Center for Well Being, Chanin T. Mast Center for Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy, David and Joan Powell Center for Healthy Aging, Lois A. Reid Fellowship in Breast Imaging, Farris Family Center for Advanced Medicine in Pediatrics, Grant Parr Endowed Chair in Cardiovascular Surgery, Head Family Inpatient Psychiatric and Behavioral Health Center, Huff-Winters Atrial Fibrillation Center, Jacobs Levy Equity Management Personalized Genomic Medicine Program, Leonard B. Kahn Head and Neck Cancer Institute, and the Nancy and Skippy Weinstein Inpatient Hospice and Palliative Care Center.

“I am proud that we not only met but exceeded our Campaign 3SIXTY fundraising goal,” said Finn Wentworth, campaign chairman of the Morristown Medical Center Foundation. “This also speaks to the unique way we are supporting the medical center through this campaign. Rather than raising funds for one specific area or need, we are distributing these gifts throughout, ensuring the facility continues to provide cutting-edge technology and high-quality medical care.”

Campaign 3SIXTY began in November 2011 to help the hospital maintain high-quality medical services under the Affordable Care Act. For more information, visit www.f4mmc.org/What-s-Needed/Campaign-3SIXTY.aspx.

The Foundation for Morristown Medical Center is a nonprofit public foundation whose mission is to inspire community philanthropy to advance exceptional health care for patients at Morristown Medical Center. Call 973-593-2400 or go to www.f4mmc.org for more information.

Staff Writer Michael Izzo: 973-428-6636; mizzo@gannettnj.com.

Read or Share this story: http://dailyre.co/1VhxMP8