A free health fair where attendees can get free health screenings and talk to everybody from personal trainers to nutritionists will take over Ferndale High School Saturday.

The Spring Check Up Family Health Fair is a first this year for Ferndale Schools and is open from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. at the high school, 881 Pinecrest.

A variety of local specialists, including those doing screenings for vision and dental, are taking part in the fair along with personal trainers, yoga instructors and nutritionists.

Local insurance companies will also be on hand to answer questions about the Affordable Care Act and people can review their healthcare needs with professionals. Food vendors from the area are also ready to do demonstrations during the event on preparing healthy, inexpensive meals for families on the go.

Advertisement

“We’ll have a bunch of local businesses here as well,” said Bill Good, a spokesman for the school district. “And Playworks will be doing games with kids and Ferndale Parks and Recreation will be here, too.”

Playworks, a non-profit that specializes in safe and healthy game activities for children, will offer a range of athletic events for families to take part in.

The school district plans to offer the free health fairs twice a year and the next event is set to take place in the fall.

The Oakland Livingston Human Service Agency, which offers free Head Start programs for at-risk children from low-income families, is also part of the free health fair. Staff members are prepared to provide information on a variety of services through OLHSA such as enrolling children in Head Start, home weatherization and utility assistance.

Good said the idea for the health fair got started after a district parent, John LaCroix, brought it up.

“We have a wide variety people from many different socio-economic groups in our districts,” Good said. “The fair is a way to offer some of our under-served (residents) services they might not otherwise have or be able to afford.”

OLHSA got involved because at-risk children in the district’s pre-school Head Start and other programs need to get annual health screenings.

“Many of their parents don’t have the means to get those screenings done,” Good said.