On Tuesday, voters across Alabama will go to the polls to vote in Republican and Democratic primaries, and the fate of health care reform is one of the issues hanging in the balance.

Leonard Nelson, a lawyer and adjunct professor at the UAB School of Public Health, has produced a breakdown of candidate positions on insurance coverage and drug prices.

The Republican candidates want to repeal Obamacare, and replace it with a system of tax credits and insurance regulation changes. Donald Trump, Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) and Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) all advocate changes that would allow consumers to buy health insurance policies across state lines.

Nelson said consumers can already purchase some insurance plans across state lines, and said he doubted such a change would really help consumers.

"There's no reason to believe that would have much impact on anything," Leonard said.

Most of the proposals will not affect the majority of Americans who get private insurance through an employer – except Sen. Bernie Sanders' (D-Vt.). His platform includes the abolition of private insurance and implementation of Medicare for All. This plan would transform the American health care system into a single-payer model similar to Canada.

Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has the most detailed health care proposal, Nelson said, which reflects her long involvement with health care reform. Her proposal would maintain Obamacare and increase efforts to cover the uninsured. Her plan also includes a series of regulations on the pharmaceutical companies to control drug prices.

Proposals by Rubio and Sanders would greatly simplify the process of buying health insurance. Nelson said Rubio would replace the bulky Affordable Care Act with tax credits for all people who buy private insurance. Sanders would abolish private health insurance altogether, and replace it with public insurance supported by higher taxes.

Nelson said there is value in simplicity.

"I don't know that we really need all this bureaucracy," he said. "The Canada Health Act is nine pages long. I'm a lawyer and all of this is good for lawyers, but I'm in favor of simplification."