By Frank Munger of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Since Oct. 1, the beginning of fiscal year 2015, Oak Ridge National Laboratory ? like other federal installations ? has operated under a continuing budget resolution that freezes spending at 2014 levels.

So far, so good, according to ORNL Director Thom Mason, but he expressed concern about impacts later in the year if Congress doesn't pass an actual budget. The continuing resolution approved in September is due to expire Dec. 11 and could be extended if there's no budget agreement.

In a recent interview, Mason said the lab wasn't expecting big funding increases for FY2015, but the areas of most concern are the neutron sources ? the Spallation Neutron Source and the High Flux Isotope Reactor. They are two of the most widely used scientific resources at the Oak Ridge laboratory, and the SNS only recently restarted after being shut down for most of the fall because of repeated problems with the target vessel ? a key component in producing neutrons ? and other issues.

Scientists come to Oak Ridge from around the nation and the world to use the streams of neutrons for unique experiments that explore the structure and properties of materials.

The proposed budget for FY 2015 includes a funding increase for both the SNS and the research reactor, and Mason said both are really needed.

"If we don't get a budget for this year, then we'll have some issues," he said. "Because the funding request for SNS reflected an increase in the operating budget of about $8 million ? associated with the fact that we have a number of new instruments that are coming on-line. And in order to get that funding increase, we have to have a budget."

If the continuing resolution remains in effect for the rest of the year, ORNL will have to come up with a way to address costs associated with the SNS problems.

"We do incur additional costs when we have to change out the targets more rapidly," Mason noted.

Because of the unexpected target failures and a flooding problem in the SNS linear accelerator, about 250 research experiments were postponed and will be rescheduled in the months ahead. The management team at the research facility hopes to offset some of those impacts by shortening the winter maintenance shutdown at SNS, extending operations and expanding the research opportunities.

Without the additional funding, however, it will be much harder for the lab to make up the lost time in coming months, Mason said.

"But I'm still hopeful that there will be a budget this year," he said.

The proposed $2 million funding increase for the High Flux Isotope Reactor is sorely needed because the reactor's operating budget has been flat for the past seven years.

"We've taken a lot of steps to reduce our costs with changes in benefits and workforce restructure," Mason said, but we've sort of tapped out what we can do with being smarter with our money. So, at this point, we need the money."

Increasing the reactor's operating budget from $58 million to $60 million "is not a windfall by any means, but it does help us keep our heads above water," he said.

Among other things, ORNL needs to rebuild the reactor's inventory of highly enriched uranium fuel, Mason said.

Became he became director of ORNL, Mason was the director of the Spallation Neutron Source and associate lab director for neutron sciences. So he maintain a keen interest in what's taking place at the neutron facilities.

The problems at the Spallation Neutron Source have been troubling.

"Well, obviously, anytime you're down for an unexpected outage, it's serious," Mason said. "We're there to make neutrons and do science with it, and we're not when we're not running and that's a problem."

There is "speculation" and circumstance evidence about what caused the stainless-steel target vessels to fail premature.

The vessels that have lasted the longest were used when the SNS operated at lower beam power for a while before being ramped up to full power or nearly so. Mason said there may be "conditioning effect" that takes place during the low-power operations.

If that proves to be the case, adjustments could be made in the operations to condition the target before increasing the power to desired levels. Those adjustments would also lower the costs.

"That'll really help us going forward," Mason said.