12-year-old recognized for work on and off the field

Instead of running up the center of the field, Lyons resident Dhani Russell paced the sidelines at Affolter Park Saturday cheering on the Lyons Lions.

At 12-years-old, Dhani is trying his hand at coaching a team of eight 6-year-olds from Lyons, including his little sister, Hana.

Soccer is more than a game for Dhani, who grew up in Ethiopia playing soccer at school, at home, in the streets — anywhere there was a ball and a handful of willing participants. It's a piece of home.

"We didn't wear uniforms like we do here," Dhani said. "We just played all the time, not really on a schedule."

Dhani and Hana moved to the United States in February 2012 after being adopted by Lyons residents Tyson and Amber Russell.

Dhani Russell, 12, in plaid, high-fives members of the other team following a game Oct. 11 at Affolter Park. Dhani Russel's father, Tyson, follows close behind. One of Russell's players, Alex Parker, 6, is seen in the foreground. (Christopher Stark / For the Times-Call)

The new parents knew very little about soccer when they brought Dhani and Hana home. But they quickly learned that they had a star on their hands.

The Russells immediately enrolled Dhani and Hana in teams through the St. Vrain FC soccer club, where Dhani exuded sportsmanship, talent and leadership, Amber Russell said.

"It's clearly not just a sport for Dhani," Russell said. "This is a way of life for him."

When Dhani found out his sister's team would not be able to play this year without a coach, the seventh grader stepped up.

Dhani's dad is the team's coach on paper and attends every practice to assist. But, Russell said, Dhani does all of the work.

Hana doesn't mind taking orders from her older brother at practice and during games as long as he does not bring it home, she said.

The players' parents have responded well to the young, first-time coach, Russell said, and the team's energy is growing every week.

"They're getting better and better," she said. "They just won their first game last week."

The young players love having a talented mentor to look up to and listen well to the young coach, Russell said.

Dhani's role as coach has boosted his confidence and made him a better player and teammate, he said.

A few weeks ago, Dhani made the Olympic Development Program, a state team that competes against other top teams nationwide.

In September, Dhani was awarded Homegrown Player during a Colorado Rapids game for his school work, leadership as a player and community service.

St. Vrain FC spokesman Dan Jones said Dhani's work on and off the field makes him a deserving candidate for the recognition.

Besides coaching his sister's team, Dhani also organizes a donation drive that collects soccer gear and uniforms for kids in his birth country, Ethiopia.

"Helping people makes me feel like a hero," Dhani said. "It makes me feel good and excited."

After a few months of coaching, Dhani said, he plans to keep it up next year. Despite his new excitement for coaching and dedication to community service, Dhani said, there is no feeling that matches the joy he finds on the field.

"It's just fun," Dhani said. "I love it. It makes me happy to play soccer."

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com