George Coates, also known as Chef Boomer, stirs chocolate roux while getting ingredients ready to make gumbo on Tuesday, Nov. 25, 2014, at Mo' Betta Gumbo, 141 E. 4th St., in downtown Loveland. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

When George Coates was 14, he decided to mix Thanksgiving leftovers with a gourmet recipe into a turkey gumbo.

Now a professional chef at Mo' Betta Gumbo in Loveland, Coates (Chef Boomer) still believes the flavor of turkey, Cajun spices and andouille sausage is a winning mix.

"It's just an amazing meal," said Coates, who learned to cook in New Jersey from his grandmother. "It has so many things in it."

And it changes the flavor of the turkey for a totally different meal.

Thanksgiving is a time to fill the table with traditional foods in most homes across America. And after Thanksgiving is a time of turkey sandwiches, turkey noodle soup and, quite often, waste.

Year-round, Americans waste 40 percent to 50 percent of the food that is produced, according to studies from the University of Arizona and the Natural Resources Defense Council. Much of that is lost in the production process and from restaurants, but as estimated 14 percent is lost in the home.

Experts advise residents to carefully plan meals, check what they have before going to the store, compost food waste, freeze extra portions for future meals and, of course, make leftovers into something completely new.

Loveland mother and daughter, Linda Robinson and Jessica Kuhns, created a turkey tortilla soup with their Thankgsiving leftovers about six years ago because they were tired of the traditional turkey noodle soup. Their families love it and now, the creation made by melding several recipes with what was in the cupboard, is a new tradition.

Robinson still makes the broth from the turkey carcass, but now the soup is a new, fresh taste.

"It's a completely different flavor," said Kuhns.

"I would say it's more zesty than spicy," added Robinson. "It's very flavorful with the onions and peppers and all."

While Robinson, Kuhns and Coates incorporate leftover turkey with other ingredients for new meals, Big Thompson Canyon resident Laura Emerson uses almost all the Thanksgiving leftovers in a one turkey sweet potato pie.

Chef Boomer poses with a freshly-baked pan of corn bread Tuesday, Nov. 25, 2015, at Mo' Betta Gumbo that he says goes great with gumbo. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

She admits that it doesn't sound tasty. But things are not always as they seem.

"It was really good," said Emerson, who started with a recipe from Better Homes and Gardens Heritage Cookbook then modified the the ingredients significantly for her very own version, using what she has each time, once even putting in the green bean casserole.

"You do get tired of the same old thing," Emerson said. "It's a different, more savory way to use sweet potatoes."

She added, "You look at a recipe like this and think it's either really good or really awful. You've just got to find out."

-- Recipes --

Chef Boomer's Turkey Gumbo

2 onions

2 peppers

Celery

Turkey leftovers

Andouille sausage

Chicken stock

16 ounces of butter

16 ounces of flour

Cajun seasoning

Tobasco Sauce

1 bag ochre (optional)

Start a mixture called chocolate rue in advance of the gumbo, maybe even the day before. This must cook at least four hours; the longer it cooks, the more robust the flavor. On medium to high heat, mix 8 ounces of butter and equal parts flour. Cook at least four hours stirring constantly. You can lower the temperature as the roux cooks.

Just before starting gumbo, create a blonde roux. Start with 8 ounces of butter and equal parts flour and cook over medium heat just until the ingredients are incorporated.

Have both roux handy as you begin the gumbo.

Combine chopped onions, peppers and celery so there are equal amounts of each in a stock pot. Sweet them down in oil. Add precooked turkey and sausage, each portion equal to the amount of chopped onions and peppers, as well as ochre if you choose. Then add three times that amount of chicken stock, 6 ounces of tobasco sauce and Cajun seasoning

Begin cooking the gumbo on medium heat. Stir in the chocolate roux and the blonde roux before the mixture starts to boil, making sure they do not form lumps. Stir constantly. When the gumbo begins to boil, cook for two minutes then turn down heat and simmer for another five minutes.

Serve over rice.

Linda Robinson and Jessica Kuhns' Turkey Tortilla Soup

1 onion, diced

2 bell peppers, diced (your favorite color)

1-2 jalapenos seeded and dices (optional for spicier soup)

6-8 cups turkey broth (see recipe for homemade broth)

1 tbsp taco seasoning or to taste

2 cups shredded turkey

1 can black beans, drained (preseasoned with cumin and chili for more flavor)

1 can diced tomatoes

1 cup frozen corn (or 1 can)

½ cup chopped cilantro

Salt and pepper to taste

4-6 Tortillas, cut into strips (corn or flour)

1-2 Cups frying oil separated for cooking vegetables and tortilla strips

Condiments: Cilantro, diced tomato, sour cream, shredded cheese, avocado

After removing all the roasted meat from the turkey, place the carcass in a stock pot with some onions, celery, and carrots. Cover with water and simmer 2 hours to make a broth.

Saute onions and peppers in a bit of oil in a stock pot.

Add broth, turkey, beans, tomatoes and corn to the pot. Bring to boil, then simmer for 20 minutes.

In a separate pan, heat oil and try strips of tortillas in batches, salting to taste. Keep them warm in a toaster oven.

Serve soup and tortilla strips with your favorite condiments.

Laura Emerson's Turkey Sweet Potato Pie

2 tablespoons butter, melted

1/8 teaspoon ground nutmeg

1/8 teaspoon ground allspice

1/4 teaspoon salt

Leftover sweet potatoes or 1 (17 oz) can sweet potatoes, mashed

1/2 cup chopped onion

1 tablespoon butter or olive oil

2 cups diced cooked turkey

Part or all of a 10 3/4-ounce can cream of mushroom soup

1 8 3/4-ounce can whole kernel corn, drained

1/2 - 3/4 cup leftover green bean casserole

1/2 - 3/4 cup green peas

1 small tomato, peeled and diced

1/4 teaspoon salt

1/4 teaspoon dried thyme

2 - 3 tbsp chopped fresh parsley

Note: The amounts and types of vegetables can vary depending on what you have.

Beat melted butter, nutmeg, allspice, and salt into the sweet potatoes. Line a 9-inch pie plate with potato mixture, building up edges half inch high. Cook onion in one tablespoon butter until almost tender. Stir in turkey, soup, vegetables, a quarter teaspoon salt, thyme, and parsley if desired.

Bake at 350 degrees for 35 minutes until heated through.

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, @RHPamelaJ