A new survey by market analyst Gallup shows the average work week in the United States is no longer 40 but 47 hours.(Photo : Wikimedia Commons)

As Americans wrap up their Labor Day holiday by generally not laboring, a new survey by market analyst Gallup shows the average work week in the United States is no longer 40 but 47 hours.

Adults who identified themselves as full-time employees reported working an average of 47 hours per week, nearly a full workday longer than the five-day, 9-to-5 standard schedule.

More specifically, said a Gallup news release, "half of all full-time workers indicate they typically work more than 40 hours, and nearly four in 10 say they work at least 50 hours."

Still widely regarded as the job market norm, the 40-hour workweek is the basis on which many federal employment laws, including President Obama's signature legislation, the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as "Obamacare," define a full-time employee.

Yet, barely four in 10 full-time workers in the nation say they work exactly 40 hours in a given week, the lion's share of the full-timers surveyed telling Gallup they typically notch more than 40 hours each week -- whereby pushing the average number of hours worked across the country up to 47.

In fact, based on data from Gallup's annual Work and Education Survey, which combined samples for 2013 and 2014 and included 1,271 full-time employed adults, aged 18 and older, only 8 percent of all full-time employees contended they work less than 40 hours weekly.

"While for some workers the number of hours worked may be an indicator of personal gumption, for others it may be a function of their pay structure. Hourly workers can be restricted in the amount they work by employers who don't need or can't afford to pay overtime," the Gallup release noted. "By contrast, salaried workers generally don't face this issue. And, perhaps as a result, salaried employees work five hours more per week, on average, than full-time hourly workers -- 49 verses 44, respectively."

Meanwhile, the lengthening of the average American workweek may be at least partly a result of individuals who assume more than one job.

According to previous Gallup polling, 86 percent of all full-time workers have just one job, while 12 percent carry two, and about 1 percent balance three jobs or more.

Regardless, even when the study findings were limited to full-time workers claiming only one job, the average number of hours worked was still 46.

The overall amount of hours that all U.S. full-time employees say they usually work each week has remained relatively steady through the last 14 years -- except for a small drop to just under 45 hours in Gallup's 2004-2005 two-year average.

In the August 2014 survey, 43 percent of U.S. adults told Gallup they are employed full time, down from approximately 50 percent recorded in the Work and Education polls conducted each August before the 2007-2009 recession.

The percentage of those who work part time has stayed close to 9 percent through the same period.