Generation Opportunity

A cavalcade of Hummers and F-150s headed down to the University of Miami on Saturday. They contained scantily clad female models bearing bullhorns, beer pong tables and boxes of pizza.

Bros instantly materialized, got drunk and danced to the sounds of DJ Joey. And because no tailgate would be complete without a couple games of cornhole, they had a beanbag tossing competition. They posed for photos and posted Vines, so the memories would last forever. Then, Generation Opportunity, a conservative group fronted by the Koch Brothers, got hundreds of revelers to sign an anti-Obamacare pledge.

Man, to be 21 again. Makes us nostalgic for those wild, crazy college days of not giving a fuck, and being soooo drunk that we'd sign whatever was thrown in front of our faces.

If last month's "brosurance" ads were funny, this demented version of a tailgate might be even funnier. Groups who are both for and against the Affordable Care Act are trying desperately to appeal to the college demographic with bizarre tactics.

For Obamacare to be successful, about 2.7 million people need to sign up. Winning over millennials, then, is a critical component to the program's success. Many 18-29 year olds feel they are too young to need health insurance, or that they can't afford it.

Particularly unsettling about Generation Opportunity, though, is the group's mascot Creepy Uncle Sam. Check out this video in which a costumed man molests a young woman at a gynecological exam.

The group's communication director, David Pasch, couldn't be reached about who won the cornhole contest. We also wanted to ask if there's an upcoming sister ad to the one we posted above about a prostate exam gone wrong. It would be a nice tie-in to the cornhole competition, you know?

Pasch, if you see this, call us back. We were trying to give you a chance to #optout of us making the joke that the term "cornhole" could also be applied to the concept of college Republicans themselves.

Send your story tips to the author, Allie Conti.

Follow Allie Conti on Twitter: @allie_conti

Follow Miami New Times on Facebook and Twitter @MiamiNewTimes.