Eyes On Fox

2015-08-01 15:08:47 -0400

Final trip in a circle with you, Mr. Bin. Though the good news is my latest rant has fresh observations on single-payer and why it probably isn’t a good idea sure to cheese off any lib. Oh, my! ;^)



1. You kept thumping your chest on facts. Then on Pricilla’s statements being “too close for comfort” re “racism” and “xenophobia” which are EXTREMLY STRONG , NOT REMOTELY SUBLTE , IMPOSSIBLE TO NUANCE terms you keep dodging. Feelings impossible for you to substantiate even a little bit smack of a feeble attempt to discredit the messenger to weaken perception of the message. Fail.



2. You provide me a context in which Pricilla could quote the son’s views since apparently they have only or principally been made in the context of defending dad but obviously are views the son holds. If you can prove Pricilla could have easily quoted him without mentioning dad, fine, I’ll readily grant you the point though mentioning dad still doesn’t personally bother me (actually, I enjoyed it). If dad’s a creep too, publicize it! Quote grandma too! ;^)



3. I explained why I see your Medicare expansion idea as being wrong-headed so lets deep dive into those facts and many new ones you crave:



a. I plainly stated it’s a program for senior citizens with COMPLETELY different health care needs than the general population. To cite an example (again) in the context of Little Sisters of the Poor’s case, Medicare does not cover contraception. Medicare isn’t going to cover maternity benefits. Medicare isn’t going to cover pediatric-specific services. Medicaid expansion provides better coverage to a broad population and doesn’t require the massive re-write Medicare would (that will never pass Republican muster) to cover the targeted under-served, low income population.



c. I might have failed to mention last time Medicare is premium-based (begging modifications for aforementioned low income folks) but unlike traditional insurance premiums are paid not only when you’re on Medicare but workers like myself are taxed our entire career. I believe these taxes get you Part A hospital coverage for free for many or most or all (not a Medicare expert). This doesn’t fit a smooth transition as an Obamacare replacement.



d. Also, atypical of Obamacare and most private health insurance (like my employer subsidizes), Medicare pretty much requires seniors to add supplemental plans to plug holes. Part B, I believe, is premium for additional basic medical coverage. Part C is a premium option using a 3rd party (requiring insurers to develop plans for non-seniors) to fill many Part A and B holes which is more confusion and premium expense. Then there’s Part D for drugs which is a confusing mess (I know, I handled this for my elderly mother) in a thick book of extra cost drug plans which typically are non-comprehensive (unlike the drug coverage included in my employer’s plan) and are designed to be tailored to each senior’s individual needs. If a doctor changes prescriptions… well, too bad for you, they might not be covered! This all, IMHO , is too complicated and priced/billed in a way incompatible for being an easy Obamacare replacement.



e. As I said in my previous comment, I think what you and Bernie Sanders and most libs actually want is a well thought out single-payer system that meets the needs of the entire range of citizens’ needs which seniors can be rolled into (more on this later).



4. You might be totally correct on where the Little Sisters of the Poor case is going. I personally doubt SCOTUS will even bother with it but what do I know? What I’ve read on it, it’s a loser – mostly on religious sites obviously sympathetic to it. But my reading is casual and this obviously is a topic very close to your heart and you’ve put a lot of time into it.



I readily admit that the Little Sisters of the Poor and apparently SCOTUS see a difference between general fund taxes and Obamacare mandated premium payments because any Federal law merits challenge under RFRA , including presumably tax law, yet SCOTUS won’t touch income taxes (refused RFRA case in 2000 re taxes fund war). That’s the absolute hypocrisy here – as I mentioned earlier. The Little Sisters of the Poor have no apparent worries their employees’ federal income tax money going to things they find morally objectionable like Planned Parenthood which provides contraceptive services (paid for by Medicaid, BTW ). Hypocrisy I see Thomas v blah, blah, blah avoided like the plague (predated RFRA but still under Sherbert test?).



Coercive Obamacare mandates – passing SCOTUS muster – don’t matter since there’s nothing more coercive than the IRS which can send people to jail. Nor do I see them as the burden in any case. The burden is the interference the law has on upon practicing religion (more on that later).



Maybe that’s your argument here. Said hypocrisy – and that’s completely what it is – might protect a single-payer system designed to come directly out of the treasury (though note via a Medicare expansion there’d be a SEPARATE tax which right-wingers could use to sue as if it’s an insurance premium) because SCOTUS apparently sees the impracticality of addressing the can of worms of a moral objection tax expenditures entails versus paying for an insurance plan which is encapsulated. However, there’s no moral argument I can see separating the two.



So the oh-so-moral, oh-so-sincere Little Sisters of the Poor object to an accommodation that a 3rd party will (after they write a letter/fill out a form) pay for contraception on their behalf but obviously not forced to use. Yet they aren’t suing because their and their employees’ income tax money is going to, say, Medicaid which provides contraception services. Tax money is no different than premium payments in this context: It’s fungible.



Also, I’ll interject here I wholly reject SCOTUS and your apparent belief that paying for something indirectly for a service in any way interferes with my practice of religion. Certainly, I see the moral objection but in no way am I being persecuted for my beliefs; in no way am I interfered with in my worship practices; in no way am I coerced in participating using contraceptives in violation of my beliefs; and given the Hobby Lobby case I’m not even being forced to directly write a check to the pharmacy to pay for contraceptives.



Again, money is fungible and using 6 degrees of separation we can always link money to objectionable immorality. ;^)



If your argument here is similar to most right-wingers and you hope to make the Little Sisters of the Poor useful idiots to kill Obamacare, just advocate what you really want: single-payer (or the nothingness of Social Darwinism in the case of right-wingers).



However, the problem with single-payer – a liberal wet dream – is being telegraphed here: It’s a political football and thus a nightmare. Depending on who’s in power in D.C. the future of healthcare will be a constant tug of war between the left and right. If we get a Republican president and Republican super-majority in Congress, it gets gutted until the Dems get their chance. And, as we’re finding with Obamacare, it’s impossible to fix problems because the political loser will dig in their heals and hope the other side’s version fails miserably. Each rotation of political power could mean middle-class folks like myself suffer greatly, screwed by the ideologues.

commented