Topics: Editor's Picks, Medicare, Obamacare, Ross Douthat, single payer, Politics News

Here’s some good news. Jeff Zients — the guy President Obama tasked with managing the Healthcare.gov cleanup job — told reporters on a conference call Friday that Obamacare’s federally facilitated insurance marketplaces should be working well by the end of November.

The Healthcare.gov rollout has been so bad and the threat to the integrity of the law is so real, it stands to reason this isn’t just spin or wishful thinking. It could turn out to be wrong. But at this point the administration gains nothing by sugarcoating things. Quieting criticism for a month won’t have any demonstrable benefits if by the end of November the system’s still broken. They’ll have just compounded the damage they’ve done to their credibility and people’s faith in the project.

So I’m optimistic that’s not what’s going on here.

But in the unlikely event that the whole thing crashes, I want to circle back to a long post Ross Douthat wrote this week, which essentially posits that if Obamacare fails, the conservative and liberal visions of where to go next don’t overlap at all.

I agree with Ross’ broad assessment even if there are a few things I’d quibble with at the margin of his description of the liberal health care ideal. I also don’t really think a total healthcare.gov failure will put the country’s health care system at the center of a struggle between more liberal and more conservative reforms.

But here’s where I think Ross’ analysis of the left-right health care divide veers wildly off course.

[C]onservatives and libertarians (and a few liberals) … look at the European/Canadian model and say, Surely there’s a better way than that. Yes, we concede, the strictly socialized systems do seem to save money relative to our mixed, kludge-y, public-private mess. But we also think that Americans really do get something for all the extra money that we spend: Specifically, a system that appears to drive a leonine share of global health care innovation, creating the drugs and procedures and life-extending technologies that then ripple outward, improving health and life expectancy in the developed and developing world alike. And the great fear on the right is that if we, too, end up controlling costs from the top down the way other countries do, then we won’t just squeeze waste out of the system, we’ll squeeze out innovation and drive out talent as well … and worse, we won’t even know it, because we’ll just assume that the innovations that we get are the only ones there could have been.

I think the culprit here is a false syllogism: I am a conservative; I worry about the innovation loss that might accompany a single-payer health care system; ergo the core of conservative opposition to single-payer is a profound concern for medical research.

That just doesn’t comport with reality at all. In Ross’ view, the right’s approach to a post-Obamacare world — “the beau ideal for right-of-center health policy types” — would combine universal catastrophic coverage with tax advantaged health savings accounts, reflecting an approach that, in his telling, has worked out okay in Singapore. But there are two big problems here. First is that in a scenario where the right is handed the opportunity to remake the country’s health care system, this isn’t the system they would make. Conservative health policy wonks just don’t have the same kind of juice with conservative lawmakers that liberal wonks do with Democrats.