Tennessee’s U.S. Senators are poised for powerful new positions after Republicans took the majority in the Senate. Sen. Bob Corker (right) will likely head the Foreign Relations Committee. Sen. Lamar Alexander is set to lead the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee and the appropriations subcommittee on energy and water development. (Photo: File/Bloomberg )

The implications of Republicans taking control of the U.S. Senate are perhaps best embodied in the powerful positions awaiting Tennessee's two GOP senators.

Both Sens. Lamar Alexander and Bob Corker are poised to take committee chairmanships, elevating their national profile while increasing their sway in the Senate.

Corker is set to become chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations committee, described by Nashville political analyst Pat Nolan as "one of the most if not the most prestigious committees in the Senate."

Alexander is in line to chair the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, or HELP, committee and lead an appropriations subcommittee related to energy and water development.

Related: Alexander stakes course as committee head

Related: Lamar Alexander wins re-election

Related: Five takeaways from election day

Both senators are the ranking GOP members on those committees now, and both told The Tennessean on Wednesday they welcomed the new leadership roles with the new majority.

"I think the Foreign Relations Committee should be the entity that really sets the context for what is in our national interest," said Corker, who characterized the chairmanship as a "tremendous responsibility and tremendous privilege."

Corker, who also serves on the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, said he wants to have a renewed focus on the role foreign relations can play on the U.S. economy.

That's a different strategy than others deployed by chairmen in the past, said Tom Ingram, a Nashville-based Republican political consultant. Ingram said the former Chattanooga mayor looked at the Foreign Relations Committee in terms of potential financial partnerships and guessed Corker would "bring it home every chance he gets."

Corker echoed that sentiment, pointing to the international prominence of the chairmanship and what it could mean to Tennessee.

"You end up being in a situation where people around the world want to see and meet you," Corker said. "Hopefully those relationships have a direct economic impact on the state of Tennessee itself."

Repeating comments he told The Tennessean editorial board in October, Corker also stressed the need to pass authorization legislation for the state department and USAID, two entities responsible for a large amount of spending abroad. Corker said there's a need to make sure that aid is beneficial and appropriate, something that "hasn't been done in years."

Alexander has two primary education initiatives he says will be key to his chairmanship. The U.S. Education Secretary under President George H.W. Bush wants to enact changes to the oft-criticized No Child Left Behind legislation and simplify federal financial aid documents. However, the HELP committee will also have a key role in any attempt by Congressional Republicans to repeal or replace the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

"There will be a vote to repeal Obamacare, and I'll vote for it," Alexander said. "But President Obama isn't very likely to sign that, and it would take 67 senate votes to overrule that veto."

From the HELP committee, Alexander said the first bill they'll take up would repeal the "Obamacare wellness regulation." He said the legislation would make it easier for employers to offer less expensive insurance to employees who lead healthy lifestyles.

Although the appropriations subcommittee Alexander is set to lead is often overlooked, the senator argued it has a real impact on Tennessee. It oversees the billions spent every year at places like the Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the Chickamauga Lock on the Tennessee River in Chattanooga.

Alexander said his experience combined with the two chairmanships and the new majority mean he can be more effective in creating changes in Tennessee and the country.

"The advantage of a third term in the U.S. Senate is you have more influence," Alexander said. "I'll have more effect on replacing Obamacare, on defending education ... than I would as an individual senator,"

The leadership positions aren't guaranteed, and there were some rumblings nationally that conservative senators might make challenges for the Foreign Relations Committee post. But Nolan and Ingram said they thought Corker and Alexander were heavy favorites for the spots, and both senators said they anticipated taking on the new roles.

Reach Dave Boucher at 615-259-8892 and on Twitter @Dave_Boucher1.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1u1z6Yv