Some Democrats hold Mr. Obama responsible for that, saying their party’s lawmakers took the blame for the president’s aggressive and often unpopular agenda to revive the economy and adopt sweeping health care legislation in his first two years in office. Some say Mr. Obama showed indifference to the political circumstances of rank-and-file lawmakers and missed an opportunity to seize on the undercurrents of populism and anti-establishment sentiment that began coursing through the electorate after the partisan battle over health care.

“The main Democrat nationally, and the only one who could be heard, was silent on the huge structural issues that more and more Americans were facing,” said Stanley Greenberg, a veteran Democratic pollster who blames Mr. Obama for Democratic House losses in 2010 and 2014. “His silence on those things left the voters without much motivation to vote.”

Mr. Greenberg said Mr. Obama and Ms. Pelosi would be remembered for making transformative changes during 2009 and 2010, when the president confronted an economic crisis, Ms. Pelosi wielded the speaker’s gavel to corral support, and Senate Democrats controlled the 60 votes needed to overcome Republican filibusters.

“We will look at those two years as enduring,” he said. But he said Mr. Obama’s legacy would also include the political death of Ms. Pelosi’s once-powerful majority. “Part of his legacy is the off-year elections,” he said.

Administration officials reject that critique, noting the historic pattern of losses that a president’s party often sustains in off-year elections and the eight House seats Democrats regained when Mr. Obama was on the ballot in 2012. They said Mr. Obama was a prolific fund-raiser and a frequent campaigner for Democratic candidates when asked; the president hosted 17 fund-raising events across the country in 2013 and 2014, they said.

Some congressional Democrats said it was not enough — not necessarily because Mr. Obama could have done more but because there could never be enough fund-raising given the nature of modern political campaigns. “If the president had allocated 50 more of his days to raising money,” Representative Brad Sherman, Democrat of California, said at a reception to mark the start of the retreat in Baltimore, “we would have more Democratic members here.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In a speech here, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. expressed optimism if the party draws sharp contrasts. “I think we can win; I think the House we can win,” Mr. Biden said.

White House aides said they recognized the pressure lawmakers faced.

“Everybody can take pride in the very difficult and necessary votes that were taken in 2009 and 2010 to make sure the country got back on its feet,” said David Simas, Mr. Obama’s political director. “People recognized at the time that they weren’t the most popular votes they could take. But few people would look back and say that wasn’t the right thing to do.”

Mr. Simas said the president was committed to campaigning “up and down the ticket” for Democratic candidates. “That’s what we are going to do,” he said.

White House officials also insist that the relationship between Mr. Obama and House Democrats has grown stronger over the years as Ms. Pelosi and the president have worked closely to counter the Republican agenda.

Ms. Pelosi delivered the votes of a nearly unanimous Democratic caucus during budget negotiations in October, helping Mr. Obama clinch a spending deal. Ms. Pelosi personally led the effort to support Mr. Obama’s Iran policy, delivering daily lists to the president of members he needed to pressure with a call.

The House Democrats in 2015 also stood firm against Republican efforts to strike funding for Planned Parenthood, overturn the president’s immigration executive actions and curb the Environmental Protection Agency.

That cooperation will be important in the last year of Mr. Obama’s presidency if he hopes to make further progress. In an Oval Office meeting with Ms. Pelosi and Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the minority leader, on Tuesday, Mr. Obama plotted possible targets of opportunity.

The three discussed approval of the president’s Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal and agreed to push bipartisan legislation to bail Puerto Rico out of bankruptcy. They also agreed to pursue a criminal justice overhaul, as well as efforts to cure cancer, confront the opioid epidemic and improve the provision of mental health services.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But other parts of his agenda have had to be pared back, in part because of the losses in the House and the Senate.

Congressional Democrats do not dispute that they have paid a political price for Mr. Obama’s hardest-fought victories, especially passage of the Affordable Care Act, and an array of other legislation. But some Democrats said that Republicans, and their rhetoric, were a far greater factor than Mr. Obama in the current perception of House Democrats.

Representative Ben Ray Luján of New Mexico, who is chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, said Mr. Obama was working aggressively in support of Democratic candidates. “The president has helped out, and he is working hard,” Mr. Luján said.