June 13

Officers contacted a suspicious vehicle in the area of 12th and Greenwood. Jason Quackenbush, 20, was arrested for driving under denial, DUI, possession of controlled substance less than two grams of methamphetamine, possession of drug paraphernalia and open alcoholic beverage container in the vehicle. He was booked into the Fremont County Jail.

Officers were dispatched to the 600 block of Family Center Drive on a report of a domestic. Suspect Kevin Tyner, 22, had left the scene prior to officer's arrival. Officers took information for a report. Tyner was later contacted by officers, taken into custody and transported to the Fremont County Jail where he is being held on without bond for 3rd degree assault and domestic violence.

Officers responded to the intersection of Fifth and College on a report of a traffic accident. Sherry Anderson, 47, was arrested for driving under the influence of drugs and careless driving. She was transported to the Fremont County Jail.

Officer met with a female party who was reporting theft of a video game system that occurred in the 1000 block of Clover. Information was gathered for a report.

June 14

Joshua Herndon, 25, was arrested for disorderly conduct in the area of Fourth Street and Main at 2:00 a.m.

Village Inn reported that a group of people left without paying for their food. Incident is under investigation.

Advertisement

John E. Hernandez, 58, was arrested for driving under suspension in the 3000 block of U.S. 50.

An 11-year-old juvenile was reported as a runaway from the 700 block of Four Mile Parkway. He was located and returned.

Report was made of a theft from the 700 block of North 15th Street.

Officer took a report of stolen prescription medication from a party in the 1200 block of North 10th Street.

Officers took a report of a juvenile shoplifter in the 3100 block of U.S. 50.

A report was taken by an officer of jewelry stolen from a residence in the 1000 block of Rudd Avenue.

An incident of males fighting in the 500 block of North Diamond resulted in the arrest of Raymond Sheren, 29, on a warrant out of Missouri.

The victim of an assault in the 700 block of Four Mile failed to prosecute. The suspect and two other juveniles were entered as runaways.

June 15

Coy Bowyer, 25, was arrested for public indecency and obstruction of a police officer in the 300 block of Main Street.

Robert Sheren, 25, was arrested in the 500 block of North Diamond for criminal mischief.

Resident reported a rock thrown through a window in the 500 block of North Diamond.

An officer took a report from a male in the 200 block of Justice Center Road of harassment from his ex-wife's boyfriend.

A tourist reported that the year sticker was stolen off of the license plate of his rental car in the 200 block of 19th Street.

Neighbor kids confessed to breaking a car window in the 300 block of Field Avenue and officer took the report for insurance purposes.

An officer found a knife in the road at Field Avenue and Cherry Street.

Alexia Teague, 33, was arrested for felony menacing in the 700 block of South Ninth Street.

June 16

A worker reported a window had been broken out of a vehicle in the 1100 block of U.S. 50.

An officer responded to the 300 block of North Cottonwood and spoke to a party reporting harassment.

Three runaways were reported from the 700 block of Four Mile Parkway. Runaways were located and returned back to the facility.

Officers spoke to a party who reported a family member missing from the 800 block of Logan. Information was taken for a report.

Property owner reported theft of an air conditioner from the 900 block of Greenwood.

Jeanette Schmidt, 39, was taken into custody for DUI and careless driving after officers responded to a one-vehicle accident in the area of Ninth and Family Center Drive.