After magical run in 2013, Knights eager for more

Johnny Feauto understands all eyes will be centered upon him as he attempts to fill the shoes of a quarterback who put together one of the most prolific seasons in Colorado history.

It is a daunting task, yet one Feauto is uniquely suited for. Feauto, after all, filled those shoes quite capably once before for the Fairview Knights.

In 2012, projected starter Anders Hill suffered a preseason broken ankle, thrusting Feauto, then a sophomore, into the starting lineup. Last year, with Hill running the show to the tune of 3,878 passing yards, Feauto played a key defensive role during the Knights' magical run to the North Metro League title and the Class 5A state championship game.

This year, Feauto is the man under center.

Johnny Feauto has big shoes to fill as Fairview's new starting quarterback (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

"It was a really good experience — I got six games under my belt as a sophomore," Feauto said. "It was really good for confidence and knowing I can do it again. I learned a lot that year that I want to take into this year.

"(Hill) was really good at commanding the offense and he helped me a lot when I was a sophomore. He knew defenses like the back of his hand, and I know to be a good quarterback you have to know those things and not just have a good arm."

As a sophomore Feauto started the first six games and acquitted himself well, completing 56 percent of his passes (167 for 298) for 2,316 yards and 21 touchdowns. Feauto himself was the first to point out the 16 interceptions he threw in 2012 will be unacceptable as a senior, and head coach Tom McCartney remains confident Feauto's big-game experience on both sides of the ball, in addition to his role on the mound this past spring for the Knights' conference champion baseball team, will keep Feauto from succumbing to nerves.

Advertisement

"Johnny's big-time," said McCartney, entering his 22nd season at the helm of Fairview's program. "Johnny is a tremendous player. Sometimes when you replace a great one like Anders, the other guy hasn't really played yet. Since Johnny already has, we already know we're really, really good at that position. Johnny makes everyone around him better in every sport."

Despite losing such marquee athletes as Hill (Columbia University), the state's No. 2 all-time receptions leader in Sam Martin (Miami of Ohio), and another stellar receiver in Cameron Frazier (Oklahoma baseball), McCartney believes the Knights still have more than enough talent to keep their high-octane offense on the move.

Tim Ryan, another baseball standout, should slide seamlessly into the No. 1 receiver role, and fellow senior Steve D'Epagnier provides Feauto with a reliable target at the tight end spot. The Fairview offense also welcomes back senior running back Jason Harvey, who averaged 5.6 yards a carry while rushing for 884 yards and five touchdowns last year.

One legitimate concern for the Knights is the loss of all five starters on the offensive line, but several seniors who have been in the program awaiting their opportunities will be among the newcomers. McCartney also hinted that athletically gifted Carlo Kemp, a junior who is one of the premier pass rushers in the state, could make an impact at tight end.

"It's not often that a coach or team or program has an all-state quarterback that throws for all those yards, and then the guy that's returning has 2,500 yards under his belt," McCartney said. "We're super-excited about our offense and our play-makers. On defense, we have a new coordinator (Aaron Hickman) who is creating a lot of enthusiasm. The guys are flying around and we feel like we have some big-time players over there, too."

Follow Pat on Twitter: twitter.com/prooney07