By

Aurora Health Care announced plans Friday to spend $35 million to expand and renovate the Aurora Psychiatric Hospital Campus in Wauwatosa.

The health system's plan includes increasing capacity for additional patients and staff, building a new parking structure and replacing its residential substance abuse and rehabilitation facility to increase patient capacity and consolidate services spread throughout the campus.

The psychiatric hospital in Wauwatosa provides care to 20,000 to 25,000 patients a year, said Pete Carlson, president of Aurora Psychiatric Hospital and Behavioral Health Services. Most of the care is provided through outpatient services.

Systemwide, Aurora provides care to more than 40,000 behavioral health patients a year throughout eastern Wisconsin and employs more than 300 psychiatrists, psychologists, therapists, psychiatric nurse practitioners and certified substance abuse counselors.

The expansion and renovation of the Wauwatosa campus is projected to begin early next year, pending approvals, and to be completed by early 2018.

Rogers Behavioral Health System, based in Oconomowoc, also has expanded its services in the Milwaukee area. The health system, which has a hospital in West Allis, opened a hospital in Brown Deer this year that eventually could have 56 beds for patients who require acute care. Rogers, which previously had an outpatient clinic in Brown Deer, also expanded the outpatient services available at the site.

The Affordable Care Act broadened coverage for behavioral health, requiring most health plans to provide coverage similar to medical care. Historically, health plans tended to have higher cost sharing and more restrictions for behavioral health care.

"There is now money in mental health and addiction that wasn't available before," Linda Rosenberg, president and chief executive of the National Council for Behavioral Health, an advocacy group, said in an interview earlier this year.

The stigma associated with behavioral health also has lessened.

The services at Aurora Psychiatric Hospital Campus in Wauwatosa include inpatient, residential, partial hospitalization, intensive outpatient and outpatient services.

Aurora plans to add 18 inpatient beds with the expansion. The hospital now has 75 to 80 inpatient beds.

It also plans to replace its Alumni House, which provides short-term housing for as many as eight people, with a new facility.

The hospital typically has a waiting list for its substance abuse programs and for its partial hospitalization and intensive outpatient services, Carlson said.

The Aurora Psychiatric Hospitals had net income of $5.7 million on revenue of $33.4 million last year, according to information filed with the Wisconsin Hospital Association.

The $35 million project to expand and renovate the hospital comes after Aurora posted unusually strong financial results for 2014, reporting income from continuing operations of $539.1 million on revenue of $4.7 billion.

Cost cutting in recent years, several one-time payments and the expansion in insurance coverage because of the Affordable Care Act contributed to the strong profits.