After years of oppressive tyranny over the American colonies by King George III and the British crown, on July 4, 1776, our Founding Fathers, led principally by the likes of John Adams, Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin, declared independence and a new nation in Philadelphia based on the premise that “We the People” were divined by the Grace of our Judeo-Christian God to be a country of laws and not men. In so doing, they sought to insulate us from the whims of monarchs who ruled by fiat and terror.

Two hundred thirty-nine years later, the citizenry find themselves in a much worse situation, one where we have a socialist and half Muslim president (but one who gives preferential treatment to the Islamic way of life as if he were fully Muslim), Barack Hussein Obama, who rules, like King George III, by his own fiat. One of many such tyrannical examples are his executive orders granting amnesty to over 5 million illegal aliens, many of whom are Muslims who came here and then stayed illegally, some for nefarious terrorist purposes, on expired temporary visas. In another evil act, “King Hussein” has taken it upon himself to negotiate and implement an imminent deal with his Islamic brothers in Tehran, which will result in Iran having atomic weapons, which they have threatened to use to annihilate not just Israel but also the “Great Satan” – the United States.

Coupled with this presidential tyranny, we now also find ourselves with a Congress that subverts the Constitution through oppressive and illegal legislation, and in the case of the Republican Party, generally rolls over to modern-day monarch Obama for fear that they be branded as racists against African-Americans. One of a number of these so-called laws is the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare. This poorly crafted legislation was secretly written behind closed doors and then hastily enacted during the previous but recent majority rule of the socialist-leaning leadership of the Democratic Party – traitorous and corrupt politicians like then-Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid. Obamacare was designed to force Americans to pay a penalty to the government if they chose not to buy health insurance on state or federally sponsored insurance exchanges, unconstitutionally abridging their freedom of association and other sacred rights.

Our Founding Fathers conceived of and implemented a system of government which had checks and balances to prevent government tyranny. This structure included the executive, legislative and judicial branches of government. If the executive or legislative branches exceeded their authority under the Constitution, the courts were fashioned to redress the grievances of We the People. Sitting on top of the court system was the Supreme Court, comprised of justices nominated by the president and then confirmed by the Senate. The concept of life tenure was intended to insulate the justices from the influences of politics and other means to influence their ultimate decision-making.

But while our Founding Fathers were great and God-inspired men, they were not like His Son, Jesus Christ. They made mistakes. The granting of life tenure to the justices (and all federal judges) was one of their serious errors. This condition has empowered “runaway” justices, like the current Chief Justice John Roberts, to act and behave as if they were above the law. Roberts, a nominee of President George W. Bush, purports to be a conservative, but apparently is influenced less by his ideology than his desire to pander and prostrate himself to the corrupt influences of Washington, D.C. And, his perversion of the rule of law is made worse and furthered by a number of other high-court justices, mostly appointed by Democratic presidents like Bill Clinton and Obama. These justices have little to no respect for the individual liberties bequeathed to us in 1776. This is because at heart and deed they are, at a minimum, socialists who believe that government should control the near totality of our lives.

In the last few days we have seen the serious consequences of this dangerous state of affairs on the Supreme Court. Rather than serving as a check to the tyranny of Obama and his Democratic minions or the Republican cowards of the legislative branch, the Court, thanks in large part to the chief justice, has rubber-stamped this tyranny by rewriting Obamacare and taking away from the states their constitutional right under the 10th Amendment to decide whether to grant marriage licenses to same-sex couples.

While anyone of average intelligence can figure out why the socialists on the Court would go along with “King Hussein” and his Democratic enablers in Congress, of particular interest is Chief Justice Roberts. In writing the majority opinion he again strained, as he did once before, to uphold and validate Obamacare by dishonestly reading words into the statute that do not exist – such as federal exchanges being eligible to receive federal subsidies. In so doing, he has perverted the rule of law. This is because, based on hundreds of years of Supreme Court legal reasoning and precedent, when a law’s wording is clear – Obamacare says only state exchanges are eligible for federal subsidies – the legislation is not subject to the desire of judges to rewrite it. But Roberts did this anyway, and in the words of a truly conservative fellow justice, Antonin Scalia, he trashed the authority of the Supreme Court he was poorly chosen to lead.

One has to ask what caused Roberts, as he has done before, to trash his own professed conservative principles, that we are a nation of laws and not men and that no branch of government can be permitted to subvert the Constitution?

Perhaps the answer to this and a number of the chief justice’s other aberrant rulings and statements can be explained by the coercive intelligence practices of the NSA and CIA. These criminally minded agencies, as disclosed by Edward Snowden, have “harvested” the confidential secrets of even Supreme Court justices. According to another whistleblower, Chief Justice Roberts was at the top of the list.

So the big question is this: Did the NSA and/or the CIA, working in concert with their Supreme Leader Obama, blackmail Roberts into submission?

Even the potential for this to happen, given the unconstitutional surveillance of the spy agencies on nearly all Americans, underscores why the nation is again on the verge of revolution. If evil despots have compromised even our Supreme Court, the ultimate protector and “decider” of our rights, then what choice is left to us? John Adams, Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin certainly know, from their own experience with King George, and from their graves they see what now again lies ahead and what must be done to restore freedom to our shores.

Help Larry Klayman with his class-action suit against Obama’s use of the NSA to violate Americans’ rights

Media wishing to interview Larry Klayman, please contact media@wnd.com.