YOU hair: Autumn's mane event







Move over skin – hair is our new obsession. Armed with the latest technology and the A-listers’ favourite products, best-ever hair is now just a wash away

Scroll down for video





Put your best locks forward

At a time when the tresses of supermodel Gisele Bündchen (below) have their own parody Twitter account (@GiselesTendril), the Duchess of Cambridge’s mane is a national treasure and online booking service Wahanda is reporting a 233 per cent increase in demand for blow-dry appointments, it’s safe to say we’re a nation in the grip of a hair obsession. Once the ‘also-ran’ of beauty – less instantly seductive than cosmetics, lacking the golden promises offered by serums and moisturisers – haircare has now caught up with a language, look and high-tech ingredients list of its own.

So while once we simply shampooed and conditioned, now we ‘cleanse’, ‘anti-age’, ‘plump’ and ‘gloss’ with collagen, peptides and antioxidants in the hot pursuit of naturally gorgeous hair that radiates health from within.

‘In the future, we’ll see more and more hair products inspired by skincare, containing penetrating ingredients that have a natural bodyfying effect, without leaving any residue,’ says Elisabeth Bouhadana, global scientific communication director for L’Oréal Paris.



And with New York-style blow-dry bars popping up around the UK, offering speedy, affordable spruce-ups, it’s never been easier to get what catwalk guru and Redken’s global styling director Guido Palau calls the ‘no-make-up make-up effect’ for hair.



‘Women now want effortless-looking natural hair. Advanced technology means we’re able to use products as make-up artists would, to achieve a smooth, healthy look on all hair types,’ he says.













THE NEW NATURAL



Gone are the bed head and the stiff salon blow-dry. In their place is natural-looking hair that has a swing and a shine. Catwalk stylist James Pecis simply washed and blow-dried models’ locks, raking his fingers through in an S-shaped motion to create ‘virgin hair’ at the A/W Costume National show, while ‘invisible’ styling with a halo of fuzzy baby hairs around the temples was the norm at Ports 1961. You can always take a tip from Olivia Palermo’s wedding day and dishevel the tail of your pony – or cinch it in at regular intervals. If it’s good enough for Valentino and Blake Lively, it’s good enough for us.





Costume National Valentino





THE BEST BLOW-DRY AND TREATMENT BARS

■ Josh Wood Atelier, London W11 After one colour appointment with Josh, your skin will glow, your eyes sparkle – and everyone will ask what your secret is. From £85, joshwoodcolour.com.

■ Rossano Ferretti Hair Spa, London W1 His ‘method’ cut is tailored to the structure and texture of your hair. Clients include the Duchess of Cambridge and Angelina Jolie. From £85, rossanoferretti.com.

■ Hershesons Blow-Dry Bars, London The gold standard in speedy, affordable blowouts. You pick one of 12 catwalk-inspired styles and, half an hour later, emerge looking nonchalantly polished. £25, hershesons.com.

■ Pamper Me, Leeds Consistently rated among hair connoisseurs – many book in for a twice-weekly blow to avoid washing their hair themselves. From £15, pampermeleeds.com.

■ Serioxyl Treatment for Thinning Hair, L’Oreal Professionnel nationwide The latest innovation in hair thickening is a full-throttle treatment including a scalp massage, cleansing, conditioning, a reinvigorating mousse and a thickening serum, all of which together stimulate healthy, strong growth. £40, lorealprofessionnel.com.

THE A-LIST ESSENTIALS

Olivia Palermo's bridal style

For fine/limp hair When Jennifer Aniston tried Living Proof, she loved the products so much that she bought into the company. The Full Thickening Cream contains the PBAE molecule that adds ‘thickening dots’ to the hair shaft, making hair look twice as thick and smooth. £21, spacenk.co.uk.

Anti-age those locks Just as most of us start an age-prevention regime for our skin in our 20s, the latest technology means we can do the same for our hair – preventing breakage, dryness and loss of radiance. So to Julien Farel, his new Magnifique Fortifying Serum contains a unique ingredient that claims to slow down grey hair growth. £95, selfridges.com, from October.

For growing pains Stress, age and environmental aggressors not only affect your skin – your hair will take the hit too. Phylia de M contains ingredients such as aloe, lanolin, rosemary and camomile to restore your scalp and follicles to optimum health. £163 for the four-step kit, victoriahealth.com.

The cure Oribe is the private jet of haircare. The Cuban-born hair maestro counts Jennifer Lopez among his biggest fans. Containing shea butter and seaweed extract, his new Gold Lust Transformative Masque is for dry, damaged and desperate hair. £54, spacenk.co.uk.

The model must-have Like skin, healthy hair requires attention inside and out. That’s why catwalk queen Karlie Kloss never skips her dose of Viviscal vitamin and protein supplements. £49.95 for a month’s supply, viviscal.co.uk.







THE TOOL KIT

✶ The brush Try the stylists’ secret: Spornette Porcupine Rounder Brush (£8.59, amazon.co.uk).



✶ The blow-dryer Tongs and straighteners are too ‘done’ for the new aesthetic. Hershesons Ionic Professional Hair Dryer (£110, hershesons.com) is the best at smoothing and volume-boosting without causing damage.

Poppy Delevingne

✶ The bling We used to hide hair elastics; now we let them shout from the base of our pony. Pretty Twisted Spot Bow Scrunchies (£3, prettytwistedonline.co.uk) add bunny-like ears to your up-do, or simply beribbon a low, loose pony and you’ll tie in beautifully with Poppy Delevingne (right).



★ The root SOS Available in shades from Light Blonde to Dark Brown, Charles Worthington Instant Root Concealer (£9.99, boots.com) magics away greys and roots so you look au naturel.































The looks that shaped our locks

We finger-waved with boyish but glamorous 20s flapper cuts, like Fay Wray. We bouffed and pouted like Marilyn Monroe in the 50s. We cropped in the swinging 60s and struck a Twiggy-esque pose. We permed away in the 80s like Jennifer Grey in Dirty Dancing.