Northern Westchester's plan to become part of North Shore-LIJ comes amid a wave of consolidations among hospital in the Lower Hudson Valley

Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco. (Photo: TJN file photo) Story Highlights Northern Westchester Hospital move closer to deal with North Shore-LIJ as both institutions sign off

State approval to finalize the deal is expected in early 2015

North Shore is also in the midst of taking over Phelps Memorial Hospital in Sleepy Hollow.

Northern Westchester Hospital has moved closer to sealing a deal to join the Long Island-based North Shore-LIJ system.

The Board of Trustees at both hospitals have reach an agreement, Northern Westchester CEO Joel Seligman told employees of the Mount Kisco hospital in a letter.

"We are extremely pleased to report that this agreement meets all of the objectives set out by the NWH Board, acting on behalf of our community," he wrote.

Both hospitals still must sign a final agreement and state approval is also needed. Seligman said he anticipated regulators will approve the plan in early 2015.

The hospital first announced it was interested in becoming part of the North Shore system in May.

Northern Westchester's plan comes amid a wave of consolidations that is transforming the Lower Hudson Valley's biggest industry as independent local hospitals become part of bigger, out-of-town health systems.

North Shore is also in the midst of taking over Phelps Memorial Hospital in Sleepy Hollow. The Long Island network has its own health insurance plan, which it is selling on the state health insurance exchange in Westchester , part of the Affordable Care Act, this year.

Hudson Valley Hospital Center officials will ask the state Department of Health on Thursday to approve its takeover by the New York-Presbyterian Healthcare System.

The New York City hospital struck a similar deal with Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville.

Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx bought bankrupt hospitals in Mount Vernon and New Rochelle and formed an affiliation with White Plains Hospital. It is also negotiating with Nyack Hospital.

Twitter: @JaneLernerNY

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1qzh8YC