Contrary to popular opinion, Democratic administrations have proved profitable for stock market investors. Since President Barack Obama took office in January 2009, the stock market has been climbing higher in a bullish trend since March 2009, and the numbers are impressive. From the March 2009 low at 666, the Standard & Poor's 500 index climbed to an all-time high of 2,134 in May 2015, although it was pulling back even before last week's tumble.

While it may be counterintuitive, the Obama administration is not alone in its positive performance, as history shows stock market returns are nearly twice as strong under Democratic administrations.

"For the record, there have been 14 recessions and 18 bear markets under the Republicans and seven recessions and 16 bear markets under the Democrats," says Jeffrey A. Hirsch, editor of Nyack, New York-based Stock Trader's Almanac.

The stock market reflects the differing economic performance with higher returns. "Since World War II, Democratic presidencies averaged an 11.2 percent gain in the S&P 500, versus a 6.3 percent gain for the Republicans," says Sam Stovall, managing director of U.S. equity strategy at New York-based S&P Capital IQ.

Focusing on sector and stock picking, differing policy priorities could make a difference depending on who controls the White House. Here is a look at three stock sectors analysts believe could perform well if Democrats retain control of the White House in next year's election.

Alternative energy stocks. While Republicans are seen as big defenders of crude oil drilling and old-school coal energy production, Democrats are perceived as environmentalists favoring so-called clean energy, or the renewable energy sector.

Renewable energy includes solar, wind, geothermal and hydropower sources and on a percentage basis is the fastest-growing power source, according to the International Energy Agency. On a global basis, renewable energy generation is forecast to increase to 25 percent of gross power generation in 2018, up from 20 percent in 2011. Democratic policies could support this already-growing trend.

Top alternative energy stock pick: "Our favorite is SunEdison," Stovall says. SunEdison (ticker: SUNE) is a leading solar system installer. The stock carries a five-star rating and a "strong buy" recommendation from S&P Capital IQ. After a 12 percent collapse last week, SUNE stock is trading for about $11 per share, but S&P Capital projects gains over 12 months to $32.

Health care stocks. Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is the current Democratic front-runner, and if she were to win the nomination and the White House, it could prove a boon to health care stocks, analysts say.

"Hillary is truly passionate about health care reform, so the odds of significant expansion of Obamacare are fairly high if she's elected," says Hilary Kramer, hedge fund manager, equity analyst and editor of the GameChangers newsletter.

"Look for the Democrats to try and double down on the Affordable Care Act by making sure that funding supports full delivery of care – to the benefit of hospitals and managed care companies," says Brad McMillan, chief investment officer at Commonwealth Financial Network in Waltham, Massachusetts.

While Kramer says hospitals and insurance carriers have already benefited from the Affordable Care Act, a Clinton White House would help other segments of the industry. "This is a real chance to get into medical technology companies that can make universal coverage more cost-effective and actually eliminate some of the massive government waste that currently afflicts Medicare, Medicaid and other programs. We're looking at electronic patient records, preventive care, employer benefit management system providers," she says.

Top health care stock pick: Kramer likes Envision Healthcare Holdings (EVHC), an ambulance and emergency care provider company. The company beat Wall Street's second earnings forecasts with an adjusted earnings per share of 37 cents. The stock was recently trading around $42 per share.