Molly Link

Audrey Hoffman, Wade Hofmeister and Molly Link joined over 1,200 4-H members, 4-H leaders, agents and affiliates from across the nation to attend National 4-H Congress in Atlanta from Nov. 29 through Dec. 3. "Passport to Excellence" is the theme of the 92nd National 4-H Congress.

National 4-H Congress is the flagship event of the 4-H program. Since 1922, youth from the United States and its territories have participated in this youth leadership development conference. The Congress provides youth, ages 14-19, a quality, educational and cross-cultural experience that exceeds what any state independently provides. It is designed to address the needs and issues of youth while helping to develop capable, competent and caring citizens.

Wade Hofmeister

The program is built upon the Cooperative Extension System's belief that young people can be significant partners in addressing the issues that face our nation especially those affecting youth. The program combines plenary sessions, seminars, discussion groups, and a service learning experience. The nation's most outstanding community leaders, speakers, and educators present the most current and timely information available.

Community service, tours, workshops and an evening of culture fill the days and nights of National 4-H Congress. Some of the tours available to the delegates are the Atlanta Zoo, CNN Center, The Atlanta History Center, The Georgia Aquarium, Atlanta Cyclorama, The World of Coca-Cola, the Carter Presidential Library and the Martin Luther King Center.

Advertisement

Each participant, youth and adults, were asked to bring $20 and help to raise enough money to build the third "Clover House." In cooperation with the local Habitat for Humanity Chapter, 4-H members have provided the money in the past to build a "Clover House." Youth will also participate in several other service projects in Atlanta during their "day of service" on Monday.

Audrey Hoffman

Hoffman, Hofmeister and Link's trip was sponsored by the Morgan County 4-H Leaders' Advisory Committee, Morgan County 4-H Foundation and the Colorado 4-H Foundation. Hoffman received the opportunity to participate in National 4-H Congress when she won the senior grand champion award in gardening, Hofmeister when he won the senior grand champion award in sports fishing and Link when she won the senior grand champion award in foods and nutrition; all at the 2013 Colorado State Fair.

Hoffman has focused her 4-H project interests on gardening, baking, foods, consumer savvy, heritage arts - knitting and woodworking. She is a nine year member of the Lads n Lassies 4-H Club. Hoffman has had projects selected to be exhibited at the Colorado State Fair several times. She is the treasurer of Morgan County 4-H Council. Hoffman has been a State Fair teen clerk, Morgan County Fair superintendent and has assisted with Investigate 4-H Night. Her parents are Mark and Vickie Hoffman of Fort Morgan.

Wade Hofmeister is a seven year member of Snyder Pioneers 4-H Club. He has taken projects in dairy, foods, market and breeding poultry, breeding beef, market goats, breeding and market rabbits, market sheep, junior leadership, outdoor adventure, geospatial, robotics, power of the wind, wildlife, and shooting sports. He has attended Leadership Development Conference and State 4-H Conference. He also serves as a Morgan County 4-H senator representing Morgan County at state 4-H events. His parents are Brad and Cyndi Hofmeister of Fort Morgan.

In addition to foods and nutrition, Molly Link has had 4-H projects in photography, shooting sports-archery, cake decorating and home environment. Link is a six year 4-H member of Golden Clover 4-H Club. She has also participated at State Fair in the Creative Cooks Contest and attended Youth Fest. Her parents are Rod and Bridget Link of Brush.