Obamacare is facing another test in Texas, and the onus will probably fall on consumers to adapt.

With big premium increases proposed for 2016, they’ll have to shop aggressively and make some compromises — or prepare for a bigger hit on their health insurance.

Many insurers want to raise premiums at least 20 percent in the individual market, according to Texas regulators. The double-digit increase compares with an estimated hike of 5 percent for employer-based insurance.

These are preliminary figures and could be reduced by regulatory reviews. Federal tax credits will also cut the net costs for those eligible for the subsidy. Final prices will be released next month, ahead of open enrollment in November.

Still, the big requests should serve as a wake-up call to people buying insurance on their own and as a reminder that the Affordable Care Act continues to reverberate.

Nearly half of Texas residents get health coverage through their employers and aren’t affected by the proposed increases. Many others buy health plans directly, including nearly 1 million Texans who go through Healthcare.gov, the federal exchange.

Their participation has sharply reduced the number of uninsured in the state, a key goal of the health law. But the individual market has been a financial challenge. Many newly insured people in Texas had more medical conditions and used more medical services than expected, according to Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas.

The state’s largest insurer compounded the problem by lowballing the price for individual coverage.

“In all transparency, we misjudged the risk,” said Dr. Dan McCoy, chief medical officer. “But so did a bunch of other people.”

Last year, Blue Cross Blue Shield lost $400 million on its PPO for the individual market, officials said. So the company is dropping that product entirely, which will affect 365,000 Texans.

Blue Cross customers in the company’s much larger group plans and other products are not affected by the decision.

Those losing the individual PPO will have to switch to another provider or be rolled into Blue Cross’ HMO. HMOs generally have fewer doctors and hospitals in their network, along with other restrictions.

Blue Cross also wants to raise the average premium for that HMO by 20 percent. The combination of dropping a popular health plan and ratcheting up rates on the lower-priced alternative has the company bracing for a backlash.

“I believe in setting expectations: You’re hearing complaints; you will hear even more complaints,” said Bert Marshall, president of the Richardson-based insurer. “This will be disruptive — and that made it very hard for the organization to make this decision.”

Blue Cross, which has about 40 percent of the commercial health insurance market in Texas, said the PPO losses were unsustainable. Raising premiums would have made the PPO unaffordable for the individual market.

The HMO will work, the company said, in part because it has more coordinated care, controlled costs and financial predictability. And Blue Cross will continue to offer the HMO throughout the state.

Yet the move represents a retreat. As Obamacare began ramping up two years ago, Blue Cross made a big splash by offering a PPO and HMO in every Texas county. It was also a leader in recruiting the uninsured at health fairs and other events.

In employer-sponsored insurance, the company has years of data on patients and operations. Not so for the individual market.

“We didn’t know what we were gonna get when open enrollment first occurred,” Marshall said.

Blue Cross isn’t the only insurer to be surprised. State regulators have reviewed 32 filings for 2016 for the individual market, and most policyholders in that segment will face a rate increase of over 20 percent, said Ben Gonzalez, a spokesman for the Texas Department of Insurance.

Insurers cited high medical claims, including a sharp increase in prescription drugs. In addition to seeking higher rates, insurers are cutting the size of provider networks and out-of-network benefits, he said.

The higher prices aren’t a lock. Last year, Texas regulators reviewed 23 filings for increases of at least 10 percent, and nine were reduced, said Stacey Pogue of the Center for Public Policy Priorities in Austin.

But some big increases for 2016 have already been granted elsewhere. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Tennessee won a 36 percent average increase for the individual market, and the Kentucky Health Cooperative got a 25 percent increase.

They’re dominant players in their respective states, similar to Blue Cross in Texas. But average increases for premiums can be deceiving because consumers often have workarounds. They can switch providers, accept narrower networks and choose a plan with skimpier benefits.

All this depends on having competition, and Dallas has plenty of it. For 2015, it had six insurers offering 60 plans in the individual market, up from 38 plans the year before.

To gauge the impact on consumers, the Kaiser Family Foundation compares a benchmark premium rate in major cities. It looks at the second-lowest-priced silver plan for a 40-year-old nonsmoker.

By that measure, preliminary increases for 2016 were averaging 3.1 percent for 13 cities. That’s almost exactly the increase in Dallas’ benchmark rate last year.

“Average increases assume you’re going to stay with the same company and product — and that’s not a realistic assumption,” said Cynthia Cox, an associate director who studies health reform at Kaiser.

Last year, over half the customers on Healthcare.gov actively renewed their plans. And half of them selected new offers.

They’ll have to stay as active and engaged this year, especially in Texas.

On Twitter:

@mitchschnurman