SE corner of 75th and Nelson finally seeing activity after a decade

Infrastructure construction in the West Grange development is seen on Thursday. The southeast corner of 75th Street and Nelson Road has been planned for a residential neighborhood for more than a decade. Markel Homes has bought it and construction has begun. Meritage Homes, which bought 80 lots from Markel, will be the first to build housing on the 126-acre site. ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

A Longmont corner that's been waiting for residential development for a decade is finally seeing some activity.

The southwest corner of Nelson Road and 75th Street is teeming with earth movers and dump trucks preparing the ground for the first phase of the West Grange development.

"Right now we have the infrastructure going in," said Matt Janke, vice president of land for Meritage Homes, the first builder putting housing up on the site. "We expect the infrastructure to be done in August, so late summer. We'll start some models in the fall, so we'll be showing by late fall."

The developer of West Grange is Boulder-based Markel Homes. As part of phase one, his company sold 80 lots to Meritage on which it is building an equal number of single family homes, said Michael Markel, president of Markel Homes. Meanwhile, his company is building duplexes on 10 lots as its part of phase one.

"Right now we are designing the duplexes we're going to put in, and I would say we would start construction on those in the next six months," Markel said.

Planned for buildout over three phases, there are ultimately plans for 599 dwelling units on the total 126 acres, Markel said.

"They will be split 50-50 between single family and multi-family," Markel said.

The homes Meritage is building will likely start in the $350,000 range, while the duplexes Markel is building will be in the $350,000 to $400,000 range, the companies have said.

"Sizes (of the single family homes) will range from up to 700 square feet to over 3,000 square feet," Janke said.

Markel said he estimated the cost of building out phase one, which is 25 to 30 acres, will be in the $8 million to $9 million dollar range, between his company and Meritage.

At build-out, the 126-acre West Grange neighborhood will have nearly 600 dwellings, split 50-50 between single family and multi-family housing, according to the developer, Markel Homes. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

Markel said the beginning of phase two is likely about a year away. He said that in the next two phases, he plans to bring in "a group of different builders that will build in different price ranges and different product types."

The West Grange development has had its starts and stops over the years. McStain requested annexation into the city of Longmont and got it in 2004, with plans to build 600 housing units, starting in 2006. Those plans never materialized, and after the Great Recession hit McStain was forced to file for bankruptcy in 2009.

Markel said he bought the land from the investment company that bought it in the bankruptcy sale.

At the time the entire site was 161 acres. Markel said he and the former owners donated land to the city for open space and to build its next big regional park, Dry Creek Park, which is adjacent to West Grange. Certain portions of Dry Creek Park are scheduled to open this year.

"All the phases have frontage on the Dry Creek open space corridor," he noted. "We also have private open space."

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com