Medela Messenger Bag from Aeroflow Mom and Baby Aeroflow Mom & Baby is a subsidiary of Aeroflow Breastpumps, a DME provider specializing in helping women qualify for their free breastpump through insurance and the Affordable Care Act.

Aeroflow Mom & Baby, an emerging online retailer of breastpumps and breastfeeding accessories, is pleased to announce a new promotion to bring breastfeeding mothers an all-in-one breastpump bag and supplies kit at half off of the retail price. The promotion is an exciting new partnership with Living Social, the online deals site that connects shoppers with discounts on the products they want most.

The promotion features the Medela Breastbump Messenger Bag which includes a breastpump supplies kit. The kit comes complete with pumping supplies items like a breastmilk cooler and contoured ice pack, a set of tubing, two valves, two connectors, two membranes, a removable work surface and two mesh drawstring accessory bags in an attractive microfiber messenger bag that discreetly fits a Medela Pump In Style Breastpump. This $149.00 item is available for $74.99 through the LivingSocial deal which runs through April 8, 2015 and can be purchased at http://www.livingsocial.com.

Aeroflow Mom & Baby is the online storefront of Aeroflow Breastpumps, a Durable Medical Equipment provider specializing in helping pregnant and nursing women qualify for their breastpump through insurance and the Affordable Care Act. Aeroflow Breastpumps is committed to getting mothers across the country maximum reimbursement and coverage for their equipment as well as access to all the best accessory products, exactly why Aeroflow Mom & Baby has chosen to offer this convenient bag and supplies kit at a generous discount.

Medela provides technologically advanced, superior-quality breastpumps and breastfeeding accessories to nursing mothers around the world. A longtime champion of breastfeeding, Medela is the only company to develop products based on research by the world’s leading lactation experts. As a result, Medela’s breastpumps are the number one choice of healthcare professionals and healthcare facilities worldwide, including 80 percent of U.S. hospitals. Their products include hospital-grade, double and single electric and manual breastpumps; breastfeeding accessories such as pump cleaning products, breast care products and specialty feeding devices; and maternity and nursing intimate apparel.

Aeroflow Mom & Baby is a subsidiary of Aeroflow Healthcare and Aeroflow Breastpumps, a Durable Medical Equipment (DME) provider specializing in helping pregnant and nursing women qualify for their free breastpump through insurance and the Affordable Care Act. To learn more, visit http://www.aeroflowmomandbaby.com or call (844) 276-2517.