Colorado Springs police officers drove up to an apartment at 6228 Twin Oaks Dr. on the night of Monday, March 31, 2008. They were looking for 22-year-old Bekime “Becky” Elshani.

Becky’s father and friends had called 911 and said they hadn’t seen or heard from her since Saturday morning, 2 1/2 days earlier. Her parents told police she was wearing a pink and white shirt, a black jacket and blue jeans.

Suddenly, as the police officers walked towards the apartment door, they heard a single gunshot.

The apartment was where Becky lived with her 25-year-old boyfriend, Daniel Dereere.

The story of Becky’s and Daniel’s volatile relationship has since been widely reported by newspaper and TV reporters. In writing the following account of the ongoing unsolved case, I relied upon their many reports as well as what I recall of the case after writing a few stories for The Denver Post at the time myself.

Elshani and Dereere met either in 2002 or 2003 while working at a telephone call center in Colorado Springs. They dated off and on through the years. Becky became involved with another man, briefly marrying him, during a period when Dereere moved to Detroit, The Gazette reported.

Daniel returned to Colorado Springs, and he and Becky moved in together in early 2007.

Daniel Dereere wrote poetry with a possessive tone. He posted his love missives and poetry for the world to see on his MySpace page:

“I have no doubt that we are meant to be together forever, you are everything to me and without you I would be lost in this crazy world.”

A stanza of a poem he wrote, went: “He needs someone who’s faithful, only his lips may she kiss.”

When police entered the apartment of the 25-year-old man they weren’t sure what they would find but there were ample past indications of a troubled relationship between the beautiful divorcee and the young man.

Accusations had become a matter of public record after the two lovers reported violent and vengeful confrontations between each other to the police.

In May of 2007, Colorado Springs police arrested Becky for assault and harassment after she allegedly punched Dereere in the face during a fight.