Just one week after Republican presidential hopefuls put on an at-times awkward show, straining to impress at the C onservative Political Action Conference , Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu came to town and showed all of us – and all of them – what it really means to give a damn good conservative speech. I hope the GOP candidates were taking notes.





The speech was clear, simple and powerful – all the ingredients necessary to appeal to a wide and general audience, which is a good thing.





[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Republican Party]

Of course, Democrats – most notably and tearfully House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi – called the speech condescending, which is actually such an elitist thing to say. Pelosi and others know perfectly well that any open-press speech in the House chamber has an audience far, far beyond the members of Congress who happen to be breathing the same air as the speaker at the time.





If Pelosi really did have tears in her eyes that day, perhaps the real reason was a sentiment closer to regret or longing. Or even shame. Because to watch Netanyahu was to see a contrast with America’s current leadership that is painful for many of us.







What a communicator. Netanyahu opened with thanks, respect and deference, sincerely noting that he was addressing “the most important legislative body in the world” – a phrase that brought pride to my heart as an American – before spending several minutes enumerating his genuine appreciation for all that the Congress and the president have done for Israel. It was downright elegant.





[READ: Netanyahu: Nuclear Deal 'Paves Iran's Path to the Bomb']

He went on to deliver one clear, efficient line at a time. More often than not, it appeared that each of Netanyahu’s paper pages (wasn’t it fun to see someone using paper instead of a teleprompter?) contained just one sentence, maybe two – the kind of short paragraphs that make speeches easy to listen to.





Did he give a history lesson? Yes. Is the eloquent sharing of knowledge an act of condescension? Hardly. It can be a great act of leadership.





Netanyahu didn’t tell us what Israel – and the world – are up against when it comes to Iran; he showed us. He showed us with stories as well as facts, all the while weaving in finely calibrated reminders that his people know something about enemies who seek to destroy entire populations.





[SEE: Political Cartoons on Democrats]

And he did all this while sounding, well, American. His mastery of American English is proved by the fact that his word choice is not soaring, but grounded. And it is good.







This does not mean that the speech lacked poetry, by the way. Netanyahu masterfully included lines that quite intentionally appealed to the ear. Indeed, his use of repetition of words is a literary technique used by poets. For instance, there was this line:





So when it comes to Iran and ISIS, the enemy of your enemy is your enemy.





And this:

This deal won't be a farewell to arms. It would be a farewell to arms control.





And also:

If Iran wants to be treated like a normal country, let it act like a normal country.

And of course the speech’s final crescendo began with a quote from great American poet Robert Frost. To an English major from New England like myself, it was the “you had me at ‘hello’” moment. The quote from “The Road Not Taken” – one of the most famous and loved American poems – provided an important nod to our culture, the perfect bookend to a speech that was deeply respectful of our country while pressing us to change course on an important issue.





[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Congress]