US Sen. Jeff Merkley at the KOIN 6 News studio, October 3, 2014 (KOIN 6 News)

Related Coverage KOIN 6 One-on-One: Senate candidate Dr. Monica Wehby

PORTLAND, Ore. (KOIN 6) — Running for election to a second term in the US Senate, Jeff Merkley answered questions in an extended interview Friday with KOIN 6 News.

Merkley’s opponent, Dr. Monica Wehby, previously answered questions in an interview with KOIN 6 News.

The entire 22-minute interview with Jeff Merkley is at the bottom of this article.



Merkley blasted Wehby on the millions of dollars spent on campaign ads for her by the conservative Political Action Committee, Freedom Partners, controlled by the Koch brothers.

Asked about Wehby’s allegations that he is controlled by the Democratic Party, Merkley said he took on the party when they were wrong.

“I took on (President Obama) when he decided to change CPI which would change the purchasing power of Social Security,” Merkley told KOIN 6 News. “I took on the president in his initial plan to attack Syria, without a framework of authorization from Congress. I took on the president on his nominee for the Federal Reserve Board.”

OpenCongress.org said Merkely votes with the Democrats 94% of the time, and GovTrack put Merkley in the “far left” ideology category.

Merkley demurred. “Actually what those statitics mean is I’m willing to take on the powerful on behalf of working families.”

When Oregon’s other senator, Ron Wyden, endorsed Merkley, he said very few voters know about what Merkley’s done in his first term. Merkley doesn’t see that as a problem.

“The fact is you get more done if you’re interested in doing good policy than publicizing it,” he told KOIN 6 News. “The first fight I did, I did get a lot of publicity and that was taking on the Wall Street casino in which the big banks were operating as taxpayer-subsidized hedge funds.”

The sitting senator won’t take a position on legalizing marijuana in Oregon, said the Cover Oregon website was a debacle, but is proud Obamacare is getting people insurance and medical care.

He’s been vocal about keeping American boots off the ground in Iraq over the ISIS issue.

“The power vacuum was created do to the failure of the Iraqi government, the infighting and the Shiites decided not to work in concert with the Sunnis,” he said. “They have fought each other forever. If the argument is until they can get along peacefully and competently we’re going to be there, we’re going to be there forever.”

As for upcoming debates, Merkley and Wehby can’t agree. He’s accepted earlier proposals, she declined one and proposed different ones.

The election is November 4.

Stay with KOIN 6 throughout Campaign 2014.