Rams win despite missing Bejarano, continue dominance against in-state foes

Colorado State guard Antwan Scott (1) will miss the rest of the season with a foot injury that has caused him to miss all but the first four games. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

AIR FORCE ACADEMY — Colorado State was down to just eight scholarship players in its 92-87 win over Air Force on Saturday.

Among those who didn't even make the trip were Daniel Bejarano (strep throat) and Antwan Scott (foot).

After the win, CSU coach Larry Eustachy confirmed that Scott will miss the rest of the season with an injured foot that has caused him to miss all but the first four games of the season.

"They just casted him; his bone is not healing. So now he's out another four to six weeks, which is basically his season," Eustachy said. "He's got a serious situation with that fifth metatarsal. So he's definitely out for the year."

Eustachy added that the team will petition for a medical redshirt in hopes of bringing Scott back next season.

Scott transferred to CSU this summer from Grambling State, where he averaged 15.7 points, 4.5 rebounds and 3.7 assists as a junior. The point guard was expected to have a big impact for CSU this year, but never fully recovered from a broken foot he suffered last year.

No Bejarano - Saturday the Rams were without Bejarano for the first time in his three seasons at CSU. A transfer from Arizona, Bejarano had played in the past 83 games for the Rams, including 48 straight starts dating back to last season.

"We missed him a lot. That's a big piece," forward Stanton Kidd said of Bejarano's absence. "He's a big piece of rebounding, he's one of the top rebounding guards in the country. We're hoping that he gets real healthy and that he'll be able to play against Nevada."

Advertisement

CSU was also without forward Marcus Holt, who remained out with a left foot injury.

Rams own the state — Saturday's win continued the Rams' strong play against in-state opponents under Eustachy, who improved his mark to 13-3 against opponents from Colorado as the CSU head coach. Eustachy is also now 5-0 against AFA at CSU.

The Rams have won six straight against in-state foes, including five in a row on the road. The win over Air Force followed victories this year by CSU over Colorado, Denver and Northern Colorado.

CSU will go for the Centennial State sweep Feb. 21 at home against the Falcons.

Sean Star: 970-669-5050, sstar@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/seanvstar