Lowering healthcare costs ultimately leads to focusing on wellness rather than treating disease, thrusting integrative health into a more prominent role under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Past News Releases RSS Tai Sophia Institute Elects Three...

Tai Sophia Now Enrolling for New...

Maryland University of Integrative Health (MUIH), a national leader in the field of integrative health, is hosting HEALTH CARE: Critical Questions. Integrative Answers., a discussion among prominent thought leaders in this expanding area of health care on Monday, February 10, from 1:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. The event will provide a forum to define and better understand the current state of the field, identify emerging trends, and explore future opportunities. The highly accomplished and well-regarded panelists work at the forefront of healthcare reform, and have expertise in healthcare delivery, direct patient care, research, education, and government policy.

“Lowering healthcare costs ultimately leads to focusing on wellness rather than treating disease, thrusting integrative health into a more prominent role under the Affordable Care Act (ACA),” said MUIH President and CEO, Frank Vitale. “This is an important facet of the ACA that MUIH believes needs to be addressed within the health care community.”

Adele Wilzack, chair of MUIH board of trustees and former secretary, Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene will moderate the event. The panelists are:



Dr. Joshua M. Sharfstein, secretary, Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene

Dr. David Fogel, CEO and co-founder, Casey Health Institute

Jonathan Anders, chief strategy officer, 360 DigitalHealth, former CEO, Allegeant LLC

James Snow, MUIH Academic Director, Integrative Health Sciences

Dr. Janet Kahn, senior advisor and former executive director of the Integrated Health Policy Consortium Research

John Rosa, D.C., CEO, Accessible Beltway Clinics

Lyle Sheldon, president and CEO, University of Maryland Upper Chesapeake Health

Topics of discussion will include what the primary challenges and opportunities are for integrative health, how to create a viable economic model for patient-centered integrative health care, what Maryland’s plan is for financially rewarding hospitals for keeping people out of hospitals and how the Affordable Care Act impacts integrative health care. Learn more about the event here.

About Maryland University of Integrative Health (MUIH)

Maryland University of Integrative Health, formerly Tai Sophia Institute, is the leading academic institution for integrative health in the nation. For nearly 40 years, MUIH has educated practitioners in health and wellness through transformative and relationship-centered programs that draw from traditional wisdom and contemporary science. In addition to offering 18 graduate degree and certificate programs, MUIH students and faculty deliver more than 35,000 clinical treatments and consultations each year in the on-campus Natural Care Center. Visit muih.edu for more information.

Contact

Ashley Harvard

Ph: (410) 888-9048 ext. 6639

aharvard(at)muih(dot)edu