Posted on November 20, 2013

Judge Napolitano to Juan Williams: "You've Abandoned The Notion That The Constitution Means What It Says"

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

JUDGE ANDREW NAPOLITANO: Juan, fasten your seat belt. The federal government should stay within the confines of the constitution. The constitution does not authorize the federal government to have anything whatsoever to do with healthcare. So, Obamacare should be abolished along with Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security, but the people who are on those programs should be grandfathered in because they paid money to be in there and they've ordered their lives to stay there. The states should regulate healthcare because the states retain that power under the constitution.



So, if you want if you want mandatory healthcare, go live in Massachusetts. If you want the free market and you want individual savings accounts, financial money savings accounts, go live in Texas. As Uncle Ronnie used to say, you can vote with your feet. When the government attempts to do what only the free market can do, when the government says everybody has got to drive a Mercedes whether you can can afford one or not, whether you want to drive one or not, very few people will have cars and everybody will be walking to work.



JUAN WILLIAMS: Let me just very quickly ask, you say you want to do away with Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid?



NAPOLITANO: Absolutely, because the constitution doesn't authority it and it would be far better administered by the states and by private enterprise.



WILLIAMS: Did you hear what Bret Baier said about the politics? Do you think you can do away with Social Security and Medicare in this country?



NAPOLITANO: I don't think it could be done with the stroke of a pen and I don't think there is a consensus for it. But, in my world, where the government lives within the confines of the constitution, people are responsible for themselves. It's not the beltway world where you live. People don't look to the federal government to take care of them.



WILLIAMS: I think the voters would go crazy. The two of have you abandoned the whole notion of conservatism tonight.



NAPOLITANO: You have abandoned the notion that the constitution means what it says.