Northern California power ends rut in Boulder bracket play

BOULDER — The early-favorite California Sorcerer softball program rolled undefeated through 18U pool play of the Boulder bracket at the Boulder Independence Day Tournament. Still, team scorekeeper Anna DePonte and the team's northern California followers were nervous about a first-round exit.

The Sorcerer faithful had seen it happen too many times.

Then, following the Sorcerer's 5-3 win over the Illinois New Lenox Lightning on Saturday, DePonte voiced what everyone present was thinking and what each had been waiting years to hear.

"We made it through the first round," DePonte exclaimed, raising the scorebook high above her head as proof of the long-awaited victory. "The curse is lifted."

Alex Miller of the Tampa Mustangs takes a swing during the annual Boulder Independence Day Tournament (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Despite similarly strong efforts in pool play, the Sorcerer program had lost in the first round of the elimination bracket each of the past three summers. After the Sorcerer melted down in the face of a few bad bounces and exited early from the 2013 Boulder IDT, the trip home was particular dismal.

When relief pitcher Lindsey Chalmers struck out the final batter in Saturday's stressful win, the Sorcerer players all breathed a sigh of relief before reveling in their advance.

"We usually do really well in pool play at this tournament. Then in bracket play, we choke," UCLA-bound shortstop Kylee Perez said. "This team feels a little different and this week has shown how everyone has each other's backs. It's rolling and we're just trying to loosen up a little bit and keep it going."

Advertisement

Perez said the club returned to Colorado determined to snap the streak. Bolstering the northern California team's chances this summer has been the return of star pitcher Johanna Grauer, who missed last year's Boulder IDT while playing for the Swedish National Team.

Riding a .051 earned-run average to win all 27 games for Amador Valley High School her senior season, the UCLA-bound Grauer was named Cal-Hi Sports Player of the Year, East Bay Player of the Year and the 2014 MaxPreps National Softball Player of the Year.

"A bunch of us have been playing together since 14-under so we're really motivated to get it done this year," Grauer said. "Right from the beginning of the games, we've just put the gas pedal down and tried to keep it up. We're not waiting until the end to try and score and decide these games."

Before bad luck grabbed hold, the Sorcerer squad was a perennial Boulder IDT contender and even won the tournament championship in 2008. The team also claimed Amateur Softball Association national titles in 2002, 2003 and 2009 under coaching patriarch Phil Mumma, who passed away at age 73 on Sept. 24, 2013, after a battle with cancer.

In recent years, the Sorcerer program has been overshadowed while other dominant California programs have traded national titles. Sorcerer head coach Pete Aguayo is fine with quietly going undefeated at this week's nationals tune-up.

"Thirteen of our 16 are all signed or committed, they really believe in each other and we have the national player of the year," Aguayo said. "The Batbusters are the team to beat, the So Cal A's are four-time national champions and are always scary, the East Cobb Bullets, the Chicago Bandits, all those teams are amazing. We're flying under the radar a little bit but it's not about anybody's radar. We're flying on our own."

After advancing, the Sorcerer defeated the Texas Blaze 10-0 and reached the Round of 16 on Saturday evening.

Follow Brad on Twitter: twitter.com/BradCochi