Matt Rourke/Associated Press

By Lillian Rizzo

The key to health and wellness may not be in a jagged little pill, but rather in the companies that help manufacture them, at least for some private equity firms.

In January, Kainos Capital became the latest to edge into the supplements and health food space when it acquired InterHealth Nutraceuticals Inc., a developer and marketer of branded nutraceutical ingredients.

Americans have increasingly been gulping down dietary supplements including multivitamins, calcium, Vitamin D and folic acid. Research from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that half of all Americans were using some form of supplement in the middle of the last decade, up from 40% during the late eighties and early nineties.

Private equity investors have tapped into that healthy kick in a variety of different ways, through nutritional bar companies NBTY Inc. and Balance Bar Co., as well as distributors including retailer GNC Holdings and Healthy Directions LLC, a mail-order business that sells dietary supplements and skin creams.

“One of the ways we at Kainos wanted to play this trend was to find the manufacturers of the actual functional ingredients sold to these brands,” said Kainos Managing Director Sarah Bradley.

According to Ms. Bradley, there’s been double digit growth in the functional foods, sports nutrition and supplements sector. Driving that is the shift towards prevention and away from treatment, particularly among the aging baby boomer population. People want to take fewer prescription pills and are looking at their food products and reading the labels, wanting their food to do more for them, she said.

Supplements for overall health and specific areas such as digestive health, weight management and joint health are also driving the trend.

“We have the convergence of all of these trends happening at once which is creating a very favorable environment for growth,” said Ms. Bradley.

Other firms that could benefit from continued growth in the industry include Rosewood Private Investments, which backed United 1 International Laboratories, another nutritional supplement company in the formulation and manufacturing space, and H.I.G. Growth Partners, which recently recapitalized F.H.G. Corp., a supplier of ingredients to the supplement industry that does business as Integrity Nutraceuticals.

Write to Lillian Rizzo at lillian.rizzo@wsj.com