Buy Photo Health news (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

Many of us buy life insurance to provide for our families if we die. We buy health insurance in case we get sick. We buy car insurance because we might get into an accident. Doesn't it make sense to buy long-term care insurance, which helps cover the cost of care if we ever become incapacitated?

Not necessarily.

Iowa Insurance Commissioner Nick Gerhart, who knows a thing or two about insurance, has not bought a long-term care policy.

Yet everywhere you turn, someone is selling the coverage. A recent headline in USA TODAY informed readers that buying such a policy is "starting to look like a necessity."

Financial planners and insurance agents talk about how long-term care insurance offers protection from the high cost of nursing homes, assisted living centers and home care. They correctly point out that health insurers don't cover those costs, and unless you are poor enough to qualify for Medicaid, the expense can quickly eat your retirement savings.

What Iowans need to understand about this insurance may not be what those selling it want to emphasize: The policy you buy now may become unaffordable later.

A standard long-term care insurance policy does not come with a guarantee against premium increases. You have no way of knowing how much the premium will be in a decade or two decades — after you have paid tens of thousands of dollars toward the policy.

What will you do in 20 years if you can't afford a premium increase?

You will do the same thing many other Iowans have done: You will struggle to make the higher payments, agree to a new policy with reduced benefits or cancel the coverage and lose everything you paid in. Good luck finding an insurer that wants to sell an affordable policy to you when you are 20 years older.

Seven years ago, The Des Moines Register editorial board investigated long-term care insurance. We reviewed more than 50 complaints filed with the Iowa Insurance Division and interviewed scores of Iowans. They were upset about their claims being denied, unexpected changes to coverage and, most commonly, huge premium increases.

Though many of these Iowans had purchased their policies at least a decade earlier, "the potential for rate increases still exists for products sold today," said Tom Alger of the Iowa Insurance Division.

So what's happening this year with long-term care policies Iowans are now paying toward? Insurers have asked the state to approve premium increases on about 30 "policy forms" so far in 2014. Provident Life and Accident Insurance Co. wanted a 75 percent increase. MetLife Insurance Co. asked for increases of 65 to 78 percent on eight different types of policies.

The only thing standing between Iowans and the huge increases the companies are seeking is the Insurance Division. Though the average rate increase sought by insurers so far in 2014 is about 50 percent, the agency has approved an average increase of 16 percent.

But maybe an Iowan can't afford a 16 percent increase. Or another increase next year. And how much will the premium increase a few years from now?

Americans need options to protect against financial ruin if they become disabled and must rely on someone else to help them with daily activities like eating and bathing. Considering taxpayers eventually end up paying care bills for the poor via Medicaid, Washington should take an interest in this issue.

Lawmakers could expand Medicare to cover nursing services. They could revisit a provision in the Affordable Care Act that creates a new government-run insurance program that workers can contribute toward and be protected by, regardless of health.

No one wants to risk losing everything if they become disabled. But the insurance that guards against this scenario brings very real financial risks of its own.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1sdPRR5