Ongoing efforts to keep the Duck River clean resumed Saturday when local volunteers returned to the river bank.

Keep Maury Beautiful held its annual Duck River Clean Up event June 14, which boasted a large turnout of volunteers. Additional volunteers returned to the river Saturday to continue the efforts begun earlier in the month.

Max Davis, owner of Possum Holler Garage led the group down 11 miles of the Duck River from Chickasaw Trace State Park on his self-made boat, the S.S. Glen Hasse, and a towing barge which held tires and debris.

Davis built this boat in honor of the late Glen Hasse, who helped found the Duck River Cleanup in 2002 while he was working for Keep Maury Beautiful. Hasse also served as a Maury County Commissioner.

“Making trash collection and beautification a fun event for the new generation was an impetus for the creation of my boat,” Davis said. “If we can get the younger, new generation interested in taking care of the community by making it fun, we can continue the effort.”

During his 11-mile trek down the Duck River, Davis captained the clean-up voyage with Glen Hasse’s 13-year-old grandson, Alexander Hasse, Glen’s daughters, Dee Ann and Dione Hasse, and family friends, Gary and Donna Wedlake with friends of the Possum Holler Garage.

Just under 50 tires were removed Saturday along with a load of trash.

The June 14 event hosted by Keep Maury Beautiful included a kayak give-away by Higher Pursuits and canoes provided by Gremlin Canoe Rentals. Fran Richardson, director of Keep Maury Beautiful, planned and led the event. A barbecue lunch was provided afterwards from Nolen’s BBQ. Volunteers cleaned the downtown section of the Duck River.

The cleanup began in hopes of restoring the Duck River to its pristine state. Over the years, the river’s condition has improved and less litter has accumulated.

The Duck River is the longest river contained within the state of Tennessee at about 270-miles long, and is home to about 500 species of freshwater animals, more than any other river in North America, according to the Nature Conservancy’s Tennessee chapter. Additionally, the river is the sole water source for more than 250,000 Middle Tennessee residents.