Texas Take: Nov. 16, 2015

Photo: Peter Dejong, AP Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 French soldiers patrol at the Eiffel Tower which remained closed on the first of three days of national mourning in Paris, Sunday, Nov. 15, 2015. Thousands of French troops deployed around Paris on Sunday and tourist sites stood shuttered in one of the most visited cities on Earth while investigators questioned the relatives of a suspected suicide bomber involved in the country's deadliest violence since World War II. (AP Photo/Peter Dejong) less French soldiers patrol at the Eiffel Tower which remained closed on the first of three days of national mourning in Paris, Sunday, Nov. 15, 2015. Thousands of French troops deployed around Paris on Sunday and ... more Photo: Peter Dejong, AP Texas Take: Nov. 16, 2015 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

THE LEAD: The refugee crisis in Texas?

Over the weekend, the governors of Michigan and Alabama became the first in the country to say that they’d refuse any refugees from Syria who try to relocate in their states, citing the terrorist attacks in Paris on Friday. The decision for both Republican governors was made easier by the increasing likelihood that one of the suicide bombers in the attacks arrived in Europe as a refugee through Greece. Will Gov. Greg Abbott – who has asked Texans to pause at noon today for a minute of silence to honor the memory of the victims – follow their lead?

The refugee conversation also dominated the Republican presidential race over the weekend, with each candidate jockeying to have the strongest opposition to President Obama's plan to accept 10,000 Syrian refugees in the next year. Here are where things stand: Ted Cruz has said Christians fleeing violence in Syria should be allowed into the country, while Marco Rubio wants a complete ban on new refugees, and Donald Trump wants to push out the refugees who have already settled here. For her part, Hillary Clinton, in the Democratic debate on Saturday, said the U.S. should take 65,000 Syrian refugees, focusing first on the most vulnerable populations fleeing the war-torn country, like religious minorities and women, but also said they have to be heavily vetted.

THE BRIEFING

THE LATEST ON THE PARIS ATTACKS – “Heavily armed police officers wearing balaclavas descended on a Brussels neighborhood on Monday as the authorities intensified their manhunt for Salah Abdeslam, who is believed to have helped carry out the Paris terrorist attacks on Friday. Meanwhile, the authorities in France announced that they had conducted sweeping police raids around the country overnight, detaining 104 people,” per The New York Times.

— Rick Perry looks for what’s next. “His record will be back in the spotlight this week as the abuse-of-power case against him heads into a critical moment with a Wednesday hearing before the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals. Its outcome will help shape his opportunities and his clout. …

“But whether the state’s highest criminal court makes short work of the case or paves the way for a trial, Perry’s lead lawyer says he’s in for the long term, just one example of the loyalties Perry can count on as he moves forward after decades in public office capped by a record stint as governor,” writes the San Antonio Express-News’ Peggy Fikac.

— What to know as the Affordable Care Act coverage deadline approaches. “As deadlines approach for Texans to buy, renew or switch health plans offered through the Affordable Care Act’s state marketplace, consumers need to know about changes in prices, insurance product offerings and fines for those who forgo coverage.

“While experts and officials still clash over Congress’ 2010 decision to set up HealthCare.gov’s state marketplaces, there’s broad agreement that people who buy insurance on their own or who are uninsured have more choices and price information now,” writes The Dallas Morning News’ Bob Garrett.

— A test of two Republican parties in Texas. “Recent polling shows that not only are there strong factional differences between Tea Party and non-Tea Party Republicans, but also that the anti-establishment types are a sizable part of the Texas GOP. …

“One of the poll’s co-directors, Daron Shaw of the University of Texas at Austin, reads that to say that 43 percent to 44 percent of the GOP primary voters are Tea Party voters. That faction is relatively small in the Legislature, especially in the Texas House. But they’re bucking for a promotion, talking about entering enough candidates in the 2016 elections to seriously challenge the conservatives now in power,” writes The Texas Tribune’s Ross Ramsey

— There is ‘no meaningful risk’ of Christian refugees committing terrorism, Ted Cruz says. “Cruz Sunday continued to call for Muslim refugees from Syria to be barred from entering the United States but opening the borders to displaced Christians, arguing there is not a "meaningful risk" that Christians will commit terrorist acts. …

“‘It is precisely the Obama administration’s unwillingness to recognize that or ask those questions that makes them so unable to fight this enemy,’ he said. ‘Because they pretend as if there is no religious aspect to this,’” reports The Washington Post’s Katie Zezima.

A programming note: PolitiFact Texas has a new partnership with the Houston Chronicle and the San Antonio Express-News, joining the fact-checking operation that the Austin American-Statesman began in 2010. http://goo.gl/G5drs

SPEED READ

AG to decide where guns allowed at K-12 schools, Houston Chronicle

U.S. Supreme Court will take up Texas abortion law, Houston Chronicle

Van de Putte, Andrade team up for high-powered consulting firm, San Antonio Express-News

Fikac: Cruz’s ‘oops’ shows he has room for error, San Antonio Express-News

History is not on Brady’s side for sweeping tax reforms, Houston Chronicle

UT/TT poll: Mental health top cause of mass shootings, Texas Tribune

Jerry Patterson registers as a lobbyist, works on a documentary, San Antonio Express-News

Paxton’s opinion sought on daily fantasy sports, San Antonio Express-News

Texas Take: Grading Speaker Straus, Houston Chronicle

At Texas Facilities Commission, special treatment for some, Austin American-Statesman

Travis County has no rules for registering lobbyists, Austin American-Statesman

Black Lives Matter searches for its next steps in Texas, Texas Tribune

Game wardens aid on Texas-Mexico border, Associated Press

QUOTE TO NOTE

"What we need to be able to do frankly is sort out that foreign fighter flow, those who have gone into Syria and come out and want to launch attacks or those people who have connections with ISIL in Syria. At the same time, we have to recognize there's tragic victims of this conflict, there are women, and children, orphans of this war and I think we need to do our part, along with our allies, to provide them a safe haven."

– Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes on Fox News Sunday http://goo.gl/aqCIUp

RACE TO 2016

— In presidential politics, it’s about terrorism now, not taxes. “The assault on Paris has thrust national security to the heart of the presidential race, forcing candidates to scramble and possibly prompting voters to reconsider their flirtations with unconventional candidates and to take a more sober measure of who is prepared to serve as commander in chief,” writes The New York Times’Jonathan Martin.

— 8.5 million people watched Saturday night’s Democratic debate, sparking campaign complains. “The complaints are just the latest in a series of tense exchanges between the national party committee and the campaigns not belonging to Hillary Clinton. Many Democrats and Republicans have accused the party of shielding the front-runner by scheduling the debates at times — such as Saturday evenings — that are likely to draw fewer viewers than the GOP events, which the DNC routinely denies,” reports Politico’sGabriel Debenedetti.

— Rival campaigns are starting to fear Ted Cruz. “He has more cash than any other Republican candidate. He is organized in every county in the first four voting states. And he has served up one strong debate performance after the next. Now, not three months from primary season, rivals concede they have begun to fear Ted Cruz has an increasingly clear path to the Republican nomination,” reports Politico’s Katie Glueck.