Colorado voters are faced with an important decision on the November 2014 ballot. As a former Colorado commissioner of agriculture, I strongly oppose Proposition 105 and hope you will join me in voting “no.”

Proposition 105 is a complex and poorly written food-labeling proposal that would give Colorado consumers inaccurate, unreliable and misleading information about foods we buy due to the arbitrary labeling requirements and multitude of exemptions written into the proposition. It would severely harm Colorado’s vital agricultural economy, put our state’s farmers and food producers at a competitive disadvantage in the national marketplace, and increase food costs for Colorado families.

To begin with, humans have been selectively breeding and modifying crops for thousands of years, but we are now using science to produce the traits we want in our crops in a much more accurate and safe way. Modern crop varieties developed through genetic modification techniques have been crucial to advances in agriculture in Colorado and around the world. These genetically engineered (GE) crops, or so-called “GMOs,” allow our farmers to produce higher yields with less water while using fewer pesticides and less fuel to produce enough food for an ever-growing population. These crops are beneficial for our environment, for our economy and for consumers.

Proposition 105 purports to inform consumers about which food products contain GMO ingredients and which do not — but it fails. Proposition 105’s labeling requirements are so unscientific, inaccurate and arbitrary that it would require thousands of food products to be labeled as “genetically engineered” even when they have no GMO content. Conversely, thousands of other foods would be arbitrarily exempted from the measure’s labeling requirements even when they do contain, or are made with, genetically engineered ingredients.

Consumers already have reliable options to choose foods made without GE ingredients. They can select from thousands of foods labeled “organic” or “non-GMO” under existing federal labeling standards. Any manufacturer can label products as GMO-free if they meet these national guidelines. Proposition 105’s requirements conflict with these existing nationwide standards which already provide consumers a more reliable way to know which foods are made without GE ingredients.

Under Proposition 105, foods derived from GE crops would need to be harvested, transported and stored with completely separate equipment and in completely separate storage facilities because the proposition includes a zero-tolerance threshold for “co-mingling” food ingredients. While cost estimates vary, a study has shown that consumers could see an increase of up to 10 percent on their food bills due to the extensive record-keeping and identity- preservation systems required in order to comply with these extreme labeling mandates.

Food costs would increase as consumers either avoid products with special labels or manufacturers eliminate items containing GMOs by substituting higher priced non-GMO ingredients to avoid the label. In the end, this would reduce food choices for consumers and result in increased food costs. Proposition 105 would also apply to food exported from our state. Requiring a “genetically engineered” label on food exports and placing mandatory compliance burdens on our food producers that no other state requires will harm our vital export markets and put our state’s food and agriculture economy at a severe competitive disadvantage.

Lastly, Proposition 105 would increase state government costs for implementation and enforcement of its requirements with no designated funding source to pay for it. These extra expenses would ultimately cost Colorado taxpayers millions of dollars.

Proposition 105’s misguided labeling requirements would mislead consumers, increase costs for farmers, and impose higher food costs on Colorado families, especially hurting those who can least afford it. Food labeling standards should be set at the federal level so that farmers, food producers and consumers in all states are treated equally.

As former head of the department that regulates food production and labeling, I oppose this costly and ill-conceived proposition, and urge voters to look into the facts and vote “no” on Proposition 105.

Don Ament is the former commissioner of agriculture for the Colorado Department of Agriculture and also served for 12 years as a member of the Colorado General Assembly.