Theater fans can breathe a sigh of relief. The movie adaptation of “Into the Woods” is a worthy trip into the fairy-tale land from masterminds Stephen Sondheim and James Lapine, who brought the musical to the stage in 1987. With cinematic panache and Rob Marshall at the helm, the screen version gets it right and gets it dark — not as dark as on stage, perhaps, but the PG rating and feared Disney-fication haven’t hurt the tone one bit.

'Into the Woods'

Ratings explained Starring: Meryl Streep, Emily Blunt, James Corden, Anna Kendrick, Chris Pine. Rating: PG for thematic elements, fantasy action and peril, and some suggestive material.

Mr. Marshall, the director behind the Oscar-winning musical “Chicago” and the less successful “Nine,” has collaborated with Sondheim and Lapine to re-create their warped world with a lot of help from an all-star cast, led by the do-no-wrong grand dame of Hollywood, Meryl Streep. She plays the Witch who sets the fairy-tale action in motion and manipulates the familiar players — Cinderella, Rapunzel and their princes, Little Red Riding Hood and Jack and the Beanstalk — and a Baker and his Wife who have been cursed to be childless.

Ms. Streep has sung on screen before (notably in “Mamma Mia!”), and here she handles the odd cadences and boomerang emotions of Sondheim compositions with ease, gleefully hamming it up through gutsy crone makeup.

She bursts into the Baker’s shop to explain how she had cursed his father for stealing from her garden and that the curse was passed to his son. But if he and his wife (befuddled James Corden and the luminous Emily Blunt) fetch a few items within three midnights, the Witch can break the spell.

Ah, those items (hint, hint): a cow as white as snow, hair as yellow as corn, a slipper as pure as gold, a cape as red as blood … you get the idea? Oh, and Jack’s beans show up, too, in a most convenient way.

The fairy tales proceed in familiar fashion as the story begins, although from the start we see deviations from the stage musical. The most notable is the absence of The Narrator. Here, Mr. Corden’s Baker does voiceover narration, which is nicely integrated into the story.

It’s also true that the Wolf (Johnny Depp, in what amounts to a cameo) is less sexual predator and more interested in a meal in his cinematic encounter with Red Riding Hood, but her peril is no less implicit. More disturbing to my mind is that the volume seems to be at mind-numbing levels whenever Red (Lilla Crawford, a recent “Annie” on Broadway) is singing.

We also meet “Pitch Perfect” star Anna Kendrick as a reluctant Cinderella and MacKenzie Mauzy as the yearning Rapunzel, but it’s the preening princes played by Chris Pine and Billy Magnussen who make a big impression and provide a dose of much-appreciated humor. Their duet “Agony” is a hoot, and Mr. Pine, far from the heroic Captain Kirk he’s best known for, delivers one of the film’s funniest lines when his royal integrity is questioned.

“I was raised to be charming, not sincere,” he replies.

The movie takes a turn as all participants find themselves in the woods. There’s a giant on the loose, thanks to Jack (David Huttlestone, Gavroche in “Les Miserables”), and some loved ones are separated and new alliances are formed.

The special effects are minimal and often a source of humor. The Witch comes and goes quickly, often trailing a cloud of dust and the final note of a one-liner. Even the giant seems to be more a trick of perspective than CGI, the better to appreciate the practical magic of a Sondheim song such as “Your Fault.”

“Be careful what you wish for” and “no one is alone” are the themes that resonate as some characters meet their fates in awful and laughable ways. When Cinderella’s evil stepmother (the marvelous Christine Baranski) wields a sharp object, it’s not pretty, but the violence is often cartoonish here and elsewhere.

The havoc wreaked by the Witch, some of it predicated on a twisted sense of motherly love, comes back to bite her, but not before Ms. Streep’s stunning delivery of the “Last Midnight.” Parent-child, husband-wife relationships are thrown into life-altering upheaval, and characters are lost and others unexpectedly entwined.

The fairy tales we grew up with are, after all, the stuff of nightmares until the welcome arrival of happily ever afters. “Into the Woods” reminds us that not all endings are quite so tidy.

“Into the Woods” opens Christmas Day.

Sharon Eberson: seberson@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1960. Twitter: SEberson_pg.