Democrats in the Alabama Senate today said they would try to lock down the rest of the session with filibusters because the Republican majority passed a resolution opposing Medicaid expansion.

"We tried to reach out to them, letting them know this is our No. 1 priority," said Sen. Quinton Ross, D-Montgomery, the Senate minority leader.

"So why burn down the house? Why cause such a train wreck over a resolution that means nothing?"

Sen. Trip Pittman, R-Mobile, said the resolution does carry meaning -- a statement that the Legislature will not allocate funds to support Medicaid expansion.

"The reality is we can't sustain the health care we have and we sure don't need to expand," Pittman said.

Gov. Robert Bentley has opposed expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

The federal government would pay most of the cost, at least initially, to expand coverage to people making up to 138 percent of the federal poverty limit, which is about $33,000 for a family of four.

That would add more than 300,000 people to Medicaid in Alabama, including many low-income workers.

Since Bentley was reelected in November, he has said the state might seek federal approval of a plan specific to Alabama that would cover more people. Recipients would have to work.

Pittman's resolution said that the federal government has rejected other state's efforts to tie work to Medicaid eligibility.

Pittman said Bentley will be under a lot of pressure to expand Medicaid.

The Legislature passed a bill two years ago to change Medicaid in Alabama. Regional care organizations will receive a certain amount per Medicaid recipient to manage care.

Proponents say it will slow the growth in costs and improve care.

But Senate Democrats said it's a huge mistake for Alabama to leave on the table the federal money available for expansion under Obamacare.

"The expanding of Medicaid is so important in Alabama to provide insurance for over 325,000 working Alabamians who work every day to support their families and they pay taxes every day just like other folks in Alabama," Sen. Billy Beasley, D-Clayton said.

Today was the 15th day of the legislation session and many issues remain unresolved, including the two budgets, the General Fund shortfall and the governor's tax proposals.