Topics: 2008 financial crash, Citigroup, Federal Reserve Bank, janet yellen, Larry Summers, Wall Street, News, Politics News

Exactly five years after the financial meltdown that wrecked the economy and helped make Barack Obama president, former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers turns out to be one of the only people responsible for the policies that led to the meltdown to pay a serious price. The bankers he helped enrich are gobbling up more of the national wealth every day; none of the malefactors went to jail or paid fines — many in fact got federally subsidized bonuses — but Summers announced Sunday night that he was “reluctantly” withdrawing his name from consideration to be the chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank, a job he had reportedly coveted for much of his professional life.

Sharp-elbowed to the end, Summers’ supporters depicted his decision not as the result of his own considerable mistakes — from backing financial deregulation under President Clinton to opposing efforts to bail out homeowners, not merely bankers, during the foreclosure crisis – but Obama’s political competence. The problem, one of Summers’ backers told the New York Times, was that in the wake of the president’s politically unpopular call for military action against Syria, he was unlikely to have the political capital to fight for his former National Economic Council chair, even though by all accounts Summers was Obama’s top choice.

“Clearly Obama couldn’t bring his own most enthusiastic supporters to back him on an issue of national security,” one supporter told the New York Times. “How was he going to corral them for Larry?”

Maybe that dig at Obama will finally show the administration why so many in Congress and elsewhere opposed Summers as Fed chair, despite his widely acknowledged economic brilliance.

But there is a connection between Syria and Summers that’s worth noting. On both issues, progressives have shown an admirable willingness to ask tough questions of their president and challenge what appeared to be done deals. Last month a reported 20 senators signed a letter circulated by Sen. Sherrod Brown backing Federal Reserve vice chair Janet Yellen for the job. The list included Obama’s Illinois ally Sen. Dick Durbin, along with Dianne Feinstein, Barbara Boxer, Jeff Merkley, Tom Harkin, Elizabeth Warren and independent Angus King of Maine. The White House pushed back, telling Sen. Harry Reid that the president wanted the space to make his own decision, but the dissent didn’t die. When Montana Sen. Jon Tester joined the list of dissenters last week, Summers’ chances died. “By Friday it was clear the Democratic votes weren’t there in the Banking Committee,” a Senate Democratic aide says.

In his devastating “The case against Larry Summers” last week, the National Journal’s Michael Hirsh laid out the critics’ brief this way:

The Federal Reserve chairman wields such enormous power, with so little accountability, that he or she is said to be the second-most-powerful person in government after the president. Decisions are habitually made in secret. The job requires a person of great personal tact, subtlety, and self-control. It requires someone who knows how to build consensus at the highest levels for the right kind of policies—someone who possesses the maturity and character to admit error and shift course when needed. But, according to numerous accounts from those who have worked with him, Summers has often displayed the opposite attributes during his long career. Behind the scenes, he has used his power, combined with intellectual arrogance, to bully opponents into silence, even when they have been proved right. He has refused to allow his dissenters a voice at the table and adopted a policy of never admitting errors.