<p>Ohio Gov. John Kasich (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais)</p>

By Richard Locker

NASHVILLE ? Ohio Gov. John Kasich stopped in Tennessee on Thursday, 12 days before he's likely to announce he's running for the Republican presidential nomination, and said the Medicaid expansion he proposed for Ohio under the federal Affordable Care Act is working.

Tennessee lawmakers have declined so far to enact Republican Gov. Bill Haslam's alternative Medicaid expansion plan. Kasich recently won extension of his expansion program for a third year by an Ohio legislature with Republican majorities almost as large as Tennessee's. He said it has enabled Ohio to provide treatment for the mentally ill and the drug addicted to help them lead productive lives and health coverage for the working poor.

"To me it's both a moral issue and an issue of arithmetic. We manage our Medicaid program extremely well. It's growing by only 4 percent a year, which may be some of the lowest in the country, without cutting benefits or cutting people off the rolls. We consider that to be good and it gives everyone a chance to be included and be lifted," Kasich said after meeting Tennessee House Speaker Beth Harwell, R-Nashville, and Senate Speaker Ron Ramsey, R-Blountville, as part of a Southern swing before his July 21 presidential campaign announcement. Haslam is out of town but Kasich said he texted his welcome.

Kasich is already running TV ads in New Hampshire, the first primary state, and has former Gov. John Sununu as his chairman there. There are already 14 announced candidates in the GOP field.

Underscoring his reputation as a center-right politician willing to work with Democrats, he was joined for a portion of his Nashville area tour by former Democratic Congressman Bob Clement, a congressional colleague in the 1990s who said Kasich was "the best when it comes to working across the aisle to get things done. John's an exceptional person with good sense and good judgment. I've been a Democrat all my life but I consider him a special friend."

The Ohioan needs more than praise from a Democrat to win in GOP primaries that often favor candidates taking a hard-line partisan stance. Kasich, 63, spoke of his experience in the public and private spheres.

"I served 18 years on the (U.S. House) Defense Committee so I've had a lot of national security knowledge over those years. I was chairman of the (House) Budget Committee, one of the chief architects of the great '97 (budget) agreement where we actually balanced the budget, then I went out for 10 years into the private sector and then I got to be governor of one of the most important states in the country.

"We were in dire financial condition and we've gone to a state that has cut taxes more than any state in the country, we've grown 360,000 jobs by the private sector, we have a balanced budget, we're running a $2 billion surplus and we don't leave anybody in the shadows. If you're mentally ill, drug addicted, working poor, we're going to help you ? we're going to help you get on your feet and hold you responsible, of course."

Kasich said he stopped in Tennessee because as part of the "SEC Primary" ? seven Southern states planning to hold presidential primaries March 1 ? "it's obviously going to be a very important place. I've been to Georgia and South Carolina and here in Tennessee. The more serious this gets, the more visits we'll make."