A helpful feature of the Affordable Care Act is that it provides advance subsidies to help people afford their monthly premiums for coverage bought on the federally-run or a state-run health insurance exchange.

The subsidy, in the form of a tax credit, was based on the taxpayer's estimate of their 2014 income.

But the realty for many Americans is their actual income was different than their estimated income. There are assorted reasons it might be higher or lower, such as working fewer hours than expected, losing a job, or getting a raise or a new job.

Or the size of their family might have changed -- divorce, birth, death -- which could impact they size of subsidy for which they qualify.

The bottom line is that come tax day on April 15, many Americans who obtained Obamacare health insurance will either owe the government money or be entitled to a refund related to their Obamacare subsidy.

Here is an article which provides more tax-filing information related to Obamacare.

The non-profit Kaiser Family Foundation estimates that 50 percent of households that received a subsidy will owe the government, and 45 percent will receive a refund.

The estimated average repayment is $794, and the average refund is $773.

In 2014, subsidies were available to people earning between 100 percent of the poverty level, which was $11,490 for a single person and $23,550 for a family of four, and 400 percent of the poverty level, which was $45,960 for a single person and $94,200 for a family of four.

People who owe the government because their subsidy was too big will have the amount subtracted from their refund, and might have to pay an additional amount. Payment plans are available for people who can't afford to pay all at once.

Those who qualified for a subsidy that was bigger than they actually received will get a refund.

Roughly 6.7 million people obtained ACA coverage via an exchange in 2014, and the vast majority received a subsidy.

One of the troubling things found by the Kaiser analysis is that people with lower incomes -- the ones least likely to be able to easily make the unexpected repayment -- tend to owe the most.

Congress put a cap on repayments. For example, the maximum repayment for a single person earning between 100 and 200 percent of the poverty level is $300, and the cap is $600 for a family in that income range. In the 300 percent to 400 percent of poverty range, the cap is $1,250 for an individual and $2,500 for a family.

People who earned 100 percent of the poverty level face no repayment.