LOUISVILLE, Ky. (AP) - Two candidates deeply rooted in Appalachia - one a retired school teacher and state lawmaker, the other a bankruptcy attorney and political newcomer - are competing in the down-ballot campaign to become Kentucky’s next state treasurer.

Democrat Rick Nelson of Middlesboro touts his experience in the classroom and in Kentucky’s Capitol as a state representative. Republican Allison Ball of Prestonsburg says her background helping people through bankruptcies has prepared her to be a watchdog of state finances.

If elected, Ball also wants to be more assertive in a job she says has been underutilized.

“It’s really just been a rubber stamp position for a long time,” she said.

Nelson wants to reach out more to Kentuckians to promote financial literacy and reconnect people with their lost property.

“Most people will never get to go to Frankfort, so I think we need to take Frankfort to the citizens,” Nelson said.

The treasurer balances the state’s checkbook, collects and returns unclaimed property and handles other financial duties.

The office has about 30 employees and an annual budget of $3.1 million. The treasurer also serves on the state lottery board, the State Investment Commission and the Kentucky Teachers’ Retirement System board of directors.

The incumbent state treasurer, Democrat Todd Hollenbach, is finishing his second term and can’t serve again because of term limits.

Nelson and Ball won competitive primaries in the spring to set up their election contest on Nov. 3.

Their differences are generational as well. Nelson is 61; Ball is 34.

Nelson taught school in Bell County for nearly 30 years. He is a 15-year state lawmaker and chairman of the House Labor and Industry Committee. Ball is a former Floyd County prosecutor now practicing bankruptcy law in eastern Kentucky.

As part of the treasurer’s watchdog role, Ball said she would be willing to block disbursement of improperly spent funds.

“I think there are times when a state treasurer might not write a check if it’s not appropriated correctly,” she said. “I think somebody needs to take that constitutional obligation seriously.”

Ball pointed to the state’s use of $32 million from settlements with two pharmaceutical companies to expand drug treatment as an example. Ball said her complaint was with the process, not the use of money to combat drug abuse.

GOP lawmakers have complained the decision bypassed the legislature’s authority to decide how money should be spent.

The case against the drug companies was handled by state Attorney General Jack Conway’s office. Conway, now the Democratic nominee for governor, has said he was complying with a court order to spend the money for public health purposes, specifically for substance abuse treatment.

Nelson called that an “outstanding” use of the money.

“What are you going to do? Are you going to say, ‘Judge, I’m overruling you,’” he said.

As a lawmaker, Nelson has promoted efforts to emphasize financial literacy in schools and said he would continue that campaign if he reaches the treasurer’s office. Nelson said he would like to venture back into classrooms occasionally to teach high school students how to manage their money.

“Everything we can do to help our high school students with money matters, I think that’s a big deal,” he said.

Nelson also wants more of a grassroots effort to help people reclaim lost property. The state holds more than $300 million worth of unclaimed property. Ball also promised to emphasize that part of the treasurer’s job.

Ball said she wants to make it easier for people to track spending of public funds through greater transparency.

Nelson said his teaching background would bring an important perspective to the teachers’ retirement system board, as state officials grapple with the state’s teacher pension woes. “That’s right down my line of work,” he said.

Ball had more campaign cash heading into the final weeks before the election. Ball had nearly $68,000 on hand, while Nelson had $13,188, according to campaign-finance reports. Nelson spent more leading up to the final weeks.