With capital infusion from sale, Residential Home plans expansion

Residential Home Health in Troy plans to add a number of equity joint ventures with hospitals in Michigan and increase the number in Illinois over the next few years on the heels of its majority-interest sale to Graham Holdings Co.



Residential Home plans to use the financial backing and reputation of Graham Holdings — former owner of The Washington Post — to expand in Michigan and Illinois, where it also does business, said Mike Lewis, Residential chairman and CEO. Terms of the sale this month were not disclosed.



"Access to capital is really important. For hospital joint ventures, you need a large base to fully participate with partners," Lewis said. "We fully expect with this partnership to pursue acquisitions and joint ventures as we identify opportunities."



Last year, Residential generated revenue of $80 million, a 23 percent increase from $65 million in 2012, President David Curtis said.



Residential Home, founded in 2001, serves more than 3,250 home health and hospice patients in 34 counties in the Lower Peninsula and in six counties in the Chicago area. About 650 of its 825 employees are in Michigan.

Over the past several years, hospitals, physicians and such post-acute care providers as home health agencies and nursing homes have been working closely to reduce readmissions.



Residential has preferred-vendor arrangements with several hospitals, including Botsford Hospital in Farmington Hills, Metro Health Hospital in Wyoming and the Barbara Ann Karmanos Institute in Detroit.



It also has equity joint venture arrangements in Illinois with Edward Hospital in Naperville, Elmhurst Memorial Healthcare and DuPage Medical Group, Curtis said.



"Some hospitals want to do (home health services) themselves, and that is fine," Lewis said. "Where we have taken over home health, hospitals have been shocked at the financial and quality improvements."





Technology, however, is a key to home health companies being able to manage patient care.



Besides providing 24-7 nursing and administrative support for home health and hospice services, Residential Home uses mobile technologies to improve quality and reduce readmissions and unnecessary emergency department visits, Curtis said.



For example, in 2011, Residential began using a remote nurse alert system with Critical Signal Technologies Inc., a Farmington Hills-based home medical technology company, to provide home health patients with quick access to a Residential call center nurse.