Losing your hearing can be like that slow leak in the roof that eventually brings everything crashing down -- easy to ignore until you just can't anymore. For some, it's the difficult admission of weakness they want to avoid; for many, it's the unholy expense and confusion of shopping for hearing aids.

Fortunately, the Hearing Loss Association of America works to tackle both those barriers, and its Sarasota/Manatee chapter really does help consumers cut through the confusion. The chapter will offer its fifth annual Hearing Loss Expo from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Saturday, March 5, at Manatee Technical College, 6305 State Road 70 East in Bradenton.

This is a great, free opportunity to test-drive some devices that could bring relief to your family, friends and coworkers, if they're getting a little tired of you saying, "Huh?"

And if you've already taken the giant step to hearing aids, the expo can help you get more out of them. JoAnne DeVries, chapter president, is particularly excited about this year's innovation, a Technology Solution Center. Visitors will be able to sample state-of-the-art devices that work with TVs, smartphones, hearing loops and remote controls.

"Many users need more than just a hearing aid," she told me in our phone conversation. "I use four or five devices during the day. Right now, the sounds are going from my telephone right into my hearing aid -- so I can hear you, which is awesome."

DeVries said many of these devices can also help people who don't yet have hearing aids.

"The technology has changed so dramatically," she said. "Even with smartphones, there's so much people can be doing."

You may also be interested in the topic of the group's "After Hours" meeting at 6 p.m. on Tuesday, March 8: Those color-drenched, promise-everything ads for hearing aids with huge letters that are the visual equivalent of shouting.

"One of our board members will be speaking on this," at the Center for Arts and Humanity in Sarasota, 1226 N. Tamiami Trail, DeVries said. "One of the things we do at our meetings is educate people on what they need to be asking their hearing aid professional. A lot of times they see these ads for mail-order hearing aids or whatever, but they absolutely need to get with a professional who is well-educated. We want people to know that cheaper isn't always the way to go."

The chapter estimates that some 145,000 residents of this region have hearing loss, and about 116,000 are enduring isolated lives because they don't get the support they need to improve their ability to communicate. Could you be one of them?

Taxing time again

You don't need to be a member of AARP -- or even retired -- to get income tax preparation help from the AARP Foundation's Tax-Aide Program. It's free assistance from trained and IRS-certified volunteers, and no one will try to sell you anything.

To find out where to go for this service, and also what documents you need to bring, visit the website, or call 888-227-7669.

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.