PJ Smith for the The Wall Street Journal New York Police Department searches for human remains along a shoreline in College Point, Queens, on Jan. 17.

UPDATED | New York City investigators were working to positively identify human remains that were found Thursday night along an East River cove in Queens, several miles from where an autistic boy walked out of school and disappeared last October.

PJ Smith for The Wall Street Journal New York Police Department searches for human remains on a shoreline in College Point, Queens, on Jan. 17.

New York Police Department diving and canine units were combing the rocky area and choppy waters for additional evidence Friday, and so far had recovered clothing that included sneakers, jeans and other clothing that matched what 14-year-old Avonte Oquendo was wearing when he disappeared on October 4, a law-enforcement official said.

PJ Smith for The Wall Street Journal New York Police Department searches for human remains on a shoreline in College Point, Queens on Jan. 17. 2014.

The remains were sent to the Queens County morgue for identification by the city’s Office of the Chief Medical Examiner, and Avonte’s family has been contacted, officials said. Identifying the remains could take several days.

It was unclear how long the remains had been in the water, but a family attorney said investigators told him the body appeared to have been submerged long enough that it was difficult to identify the skin color.

The attorney, David Perecman, said the boy’s mother, Vanessa Fontaine was headed to the medical examiner’s office to provide a DNA sample, to compare against remains. Investigators already have a DNA sample on file from the boy’s father.

The mother has acknowledged the similarities between her son and the clothes recovered from the remains, but is holding out hope until a conclusive match is made, Mr. Perecman said.

“Her initial reaction was ‘until I hear more, and see more’…there’s been a lot of bad leads,” he said. “She’s being a mom. She’s not going to be convinced this is her son until there’s enough to convince her.”

Police received a call shortly after 7 p.m. Thursday from a woman reporting that human remains were found near Powell Cove Boulevard and Endeavor Place in the College Point neighborhood.

A 14-year-old girl had been walking the shoreline taking photos when she noticed a human arm lying on the rocks, the law-enforcement official said. The girl returned home and told her parents, who called 911.

NYPD Investigators and marine units arrived on the scene and identified the arm as human, cordoned off the area as a crime scene and alerted detectives who began searching for additional clues, the official said.

Police discovered two legs with blue jeans, white socks and sneakers about 15 feet from the arm, the official said, adding that investigators also recovered several other human remains, including what are believed to be rib bones and a pelvic bone.

The size 5½ pair black Nike Air Jordan sneakers, the Old Navy sized 16 blue jeans and the a pair of white tube socks are similar to those worn by Avonte on the day he disappeared, the official said.

Avonte, who is non-verbal and has trouble performing basic tasks, disappeared after breaking off from a group of students and leaving the Riverview School on 51st Avenue in the Long Island City through a side door on Oct. 4.

Ms. Fontaine received a call from detectives around 2 a.m. Friday morning.

Avonte’s disappearance sparked a massive, round-the-clock hunt, which involved police setting up a command center in the school. Subway workers walked along the tracks in tunnels since Avonte has a fascination with trains. Fliers were posted around the city, and a van with a speaker playing his mother’s voice combed the streets while more than 200 volunteers looked for the boy.

He was last seen on a video recording inside the school running past a safety officer, who instructed him to back to his classroom, police have said. The boy ran away, and instead exited the building through an open, unguarded door and into a nearby park, which sits along the East River.

Mr. Perecman said Avonte had a fear of water and would not have likely gone in to the water on his own. “He’s afraid of it, he doesn’t like it,” he said.

Police have cleared the safety officer of any wrongdoing. His mother, Vanessa Fontaine, took steps to sue the city.

Alison Fox contributed to this article