The new hot­ness in health care these days is pay­ing for qual­ity, not quant­ity, and now the Obama ad­min­is­tra­tion wants to ap­ply that ax­iom to can­cer treat­ment.

Right now, Medi­care pays doc­tors by what’s known as fee-for-ser­vice: They per­form a ser­vice, pre­scribe a drug, and they’re paid for it. Volume de­term­ines the cost.

But un­der a pi­lot pro­ject be­ing de­veloped through the Af­ford­able Care Act, the fed­er­al gov­ern­ment wants to com­pletely change that sys­tem, set­ting a price for doc­tors to meet when they treat a can­cer pa­tient and re­ward­ing them for beat­ing it.

The hope is that such an over­haul will do two things at once: keep costs un­der con­trol and im­prove the qual­ity of care. Those twin goals are the aim of many ef­forts to re­vamp the way doc­tors are paid in the United States, and there is reas­on to think it could work for chemo­ther­apy.

But this kind of re­form is also sure to draw con­cerns that doc­tors could be too thrifty and the ac­tu­al care might suf­fer as they try to meet their cost goals. The pub­lic dis­course is just a few years re­moved from the height of the Obama­care de­bate, and the rhet­or­ic about keep­ing your plan if you like it, and death pan­els. The stakes couldn’t be high­er when the dia­gnos­is is can­cer.

“That re­ac­tion of, ‘Oh, my God, they’re try­ing to cut can­cer care?’ It is a re­ac­tion that you hear some­times,” said Erin Smith, who worked on the pro­ject while she was at the Cen­ters for Medi­care and Medi­caid Ser­vices; she is now a seni­or as­so­ci­ate at Avalere Health, an in­de­pend­ent con­sult­ing firm.

Op­tim­ism ex­ists among some phys­i­cians and pa­tient ad­vocacy groups that the pro­ject, called the On­co­logy Care Mod­el, will lead to a bet­ter ex­per­i­ence for can­cer pa­tients by bet­ter pre­par­ing them for chemo­ther­apy and mak­ing sure they don’t end up in the emer­gency room be­cause of its side ef­fects—which should in turn keep costs down.

“It’s not that they’re tar­get­ing to cut back care for on­co­logy, but I think that what they’re see­ing in the high spend­ing that’s re­lated to on­co­logy care is waste rather than good care,” Smith said. “The goal here is if they put these prac­tice re­quire­ments in place and they trans­form the way on­co­logy care is provided, then they’re really go­ing to see im­prove­ments. So it’s ac­tu­ally go­ing to be­ne­fit the be­ne­fi­ciar­ies.”

The On­co­logy Care Mod­el would set a tar­get price for the total cost of care over a six-month peri­od, which would start when the pa­tient is pre­scribed chemo­ther­apy drugs. Prac­tices will start by re­ceiv­ing a $160 pay­ment per month for the pa­tient to help cov­er the cost of man­aging their care.

At the end of the six months, CMS will add up all the costs—that $160 care-man­age­ment pay­ment, the drugs, the tests, everything—and com­pare it to the tar­get price, which will be set based on the prac­tice’s his­tor­ic­al costs for treat­ing sim­il­ar pa­tients. If the prac­tice treated the pa­tient for less than the tar­get price, they are paid the dif­fer­ence. So if the tar­get price was $10,000 but the treat­ment cost only $9,000, the prac­tice re­ceives $1,000.

Qual­ity of care will also be meas­ured, though, so if the prac­tice beat the tar­get price but the care wasn’t as good as re­quired, they won’t keep all of that $1,000. That would hope­fully pre­vent doc­tors from skimp­ing on care just to meet their cost goals, one of the big con­cerns about the pro­ject.

“Right now, our health care sys­tem has evolved to pay-for-volume. The only way rev­en­ue comes to a prac­tice is for a phys­i­cian to do something. That gen­er­ates some per­versit­ies, and it’s not just in on­co­logy, it’s throughout health care,” said John Cox, a med­ic­al on­co­lo­gist at Texas On­co­logy in Dal­las who has ap­plied for the pro­gram. “There is a bet­ter way; I think every­body knows that.”

The pro­ject has gone through sev­er­al rounds of pro­posed rules, feed­back from in­ter­ested groups, and re­vi­sions. The ad­min­is­tra­tion is cur­rently ac­cept­ing ap­plic­a­tions from on­co­logy prac­tices that want to par­ti­cip­ate while it fi­nal­izes all the de­tails. The pro­ject is set to launch in spring 2016 and last for five years. CMS said it wants to re­cruit at least 100 prac­tices that will treat 175,000 cases over the five years.

But the dev­il, as al­ways, is in the de­tails, and groups like the Amer­ic­an So­ci­ety of Clin­ic­al On­co­logy, of which Cox is a mem­ber, and the phar­ma­ceut­ic­al trade group PhRMA have ex­pressed to CMS their con­cerns about the pro­ject. How the tar­get prices are set, what the qual­ity meas­ures will be, and what ser­vices count to­ward the cost are some of the is­sues that are still be­ing re­solved.

To an­swer one oth­er ob­vi­ous ques­tion: The $160 care-man­age­ment fee would stop if the pa­tient dies, but it would oth­er­wise be treated like a nor­mal six-month epis­ode. The agency has pledged to over­see the par­ti­cip­at­ing prac­tices with a vari­ety of meas­ures, from site vis­its to pa­tient sur­veys, to make sure qual­ity isn’t suf­fer­ing.

An­oth­er is­sue loom­ing over the pro­ject is how it will deal with newly dis­covered can­cer treat­ments. “Es­tab­lish­ing pay­ment in­cent­ives based on defin­i­tions of clin­ic­al care that do not “¦ keep pace with med­ic­al ad­vances will cre­ate sig­ni­fic­ant dis­in­cent­ives for con­tin­ued pro­gress and may lead to some Medi­care be­ne­fi­ciar­ies re­ceiv­ing a lower stand­ard of care than their co­horts simply be­cause they are a part of a mod­el test,” wrote PhRMA, whose mem­bers are the ones of­ten de­vel­op­ing those med­ic­al ad­vances, in an Oc­to­ber let­ter to CMS.

CMS has signaled it will work to ad­dress those con­cerns, per­haps by ex­clud­ing a new treat­ment when cal­cu­lat­ing what it cost to care for a pa­tient. But every­one in­volved ac­know­ledges it is one of the biggest out­stand­ing ques­tions.

“Ideally, doc­tors are go­ing to do what’s best for the pa­tients, even if it’s not best for their pock­et­book,” said Shel­ley Fuld Nas­so, who heads the Na­tion­al Co­ali­tion for Can­cer Sur­viv­or­ship.

Cox, in turn, poin­ted to the phar­ma­ceut­ic­al in­dustry, which he said some­times makes “un­con­scion­able” pri­cing de­cision for new treat­ments. Whenev­er pri­cing comes up, the in­dustry ar­gues that it needs to re­coup the cost of de­vel­op­ing new drugs so that it can re­in­vest in fur­ther re­search.

And the fact that new medi­cines that im­prove care and save lives are de­b­ut­ing all the time is un­deni­able—which is why this is such an acute is­sue for the pro­ject.

“My pro­fes­sion is be­ing re­made right now by sci­ence,” Cox said. “It’s re­mark­able.”

Des­pite all that un­cer­tainty, phys­i­cians, pa­tient ad­voc­ates, and the former CMS of­fi­cial all said that the On­co­logy Care Mod­el holds real prom­ise for can­cer pa­tients.

It would amount to little changes in the every­day ex­per­i­ence, but they be­lieve it could both im­prove a pa­tient’s qual­ity of life and cut down on costs—those twin goals of any change to the health care sys­tem.

Pa­tients would re­ceive a de­tailed plan of what their care is go­ing to look like so they know what to ex­pect. Chemo­ther­apy comes with very pre­dict­able side ef­fects, so if pa­tients are warned in ad­vance and doc­tors make sure to be avail­able to their wards at all times or even to be pree­mpt­ively check­ing in, a pa­tient feel­ing naus­eous or get­ting de­hyd­rated could be treated by a doc­tor in­stead of go­ing to the emer­gency room. That would also save money by avoid­ing pre­vent­able and ex­pens­ive hos­pit­al stays.

“The whole mod­el,” Fuld Nas­so said, “is based on do­ing a bet­ter job of man­aging symp­toms so that pa­tients don’t end up in the hos­pit­al or emer­gency room.”