SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Convicted fraudster Robert Creamer played a key role in selling the Iran deal to Democrats, according to a report by the Wall Street Journal.

Creamer, a political consultant who is intimately connected with Obama’s inner political circle, pleaded guilty in 2005 to tax violations and bank fraud. He served time in a federal prison and was under house arrest. After finishing his sentence, Creamer worked for Obama’s presidential campaign, training organizers.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

As Breitbart News first exposed in 2009, Creamer used his prison time to work on a political manual: Listen to Your Mother: Stand Up Straight! How Progressives Can Win. In it, he devised a strategy to guide a future “progressive” president. His plan included implementing “universal health care” as a first step to other radical reforms, including amnesty for illegal aliens. Obama strategist David Axelrod called the book “a blueprint for future victories.”

In the book, Creamer also warns against an effort by “Neocons” to launch a military strike on Iran to prevent it from developing nuclear weapons. Creamer also blames America for the rise of the Iranian regime: “The United States helped set the stage for the fundamentalist resurgence of Islam in Iran,” he argues, by overthrowing the Iranian government in 1953 and backing the Shah. (These same views are widely shared in the Obama administration.)

The Wall Street Journal reports that Creamer advocated for the Iran deal with the help of the Ploughshares Fund, a pro-Iran organization.

According to a transcript of the [Ploughshares] call reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, participants stressed that the Iran agreement was the most important of the Obama administration’s second term, and they needed to prepare for battle with Republicans. “The other side will go crazy. We have to be really clear that it’s a good deal,” said Robert Creamer of Americans United for Change, a liberal action group. His wife is Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D., Ill.), a close ally of the White House in selling the agreement. Ploughshares officials defended the group as nonpartisan. “Ploughshares Fund is proud of the work of our grantees and partners in support of this historic nuclear agreement,” said Joe Cirincione, its president. “We support this agreement, not any particular party or administration.” Mr. Creamer, a longtime Democratic activist, said Friday he supported the Iran deal because it was better than an any alternative, and it ensured the U.S. wouldn’t get bogged down in another Middle East war, like in Iraq.

The Journal does not report Creamer’s felony convictions, nor his past work with the Obama campaign.

It does note, however: “[Creamer’s] wife is Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D., Ill.), a close ally of the White House in selling the agreement.” (The author of this article challenged Schakowsky for Congress in 2010.)