Orange County is the fifth healthiest county in California, according to a new nationwide report that examines health measures along with economics to score everything from smoking rates to income inequality.



The report, released by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute, is yet another example of how health and wealth go hand in hand. The highest-ranking counties across the state and nation had more college attendance, lower rates of unemployment, and less overcrowded or expensive housing.



“The middle class and wealthy are more likely to have good health habits, good access to medical care,” said Dr. Sheldon Greenfield, co-director of Health Policy Research Institute at UC Irvine. “They’ll go to Hoag. They’re more likely to have fewer sexually transmitted diseases; they’re more likely to have mammograms.”



Orange County scored well for lifespan, rates of smoking and obesity, and access to places to exercise. For the economic indicators, the county did well in education, employment and rate of children living in poverty.



The rankings are calculated based on health behaviors, clinical care such as access to doctors, social and economic factors, and the physical environment, which includes commuting and air pollution. The rankings covered 57 out of the state's 58 counties.



Statewide, Marin County ranked first and sparsely populated Sierra County placed last. Locally, San Diego came in at No. 19, Riverside No. 24, Los Angeles No. 26 and San Bernarndino No. 37. When the list was first released in 2010, Orange County ranked seventh in California. A year later, it moved up to sixth. This is the first year the county has made the top 5.



Although the county consistently fares better than many other places, other reports have identified significant disparities based on where in Orange County a person lives.



The rankings looked at the county’s teen births, which at a rate of 25 per 1,000 is lower than the state rate of 34. But the nonprofit Orange County Women’s Health Project has raised concern that although Orange County has one of the state’s lower teen birth rates, some cities in the county, such as Santa Ana and Anaheim, have rates that are much higher than state and national averages.



The county’s Health Care Agency has reported that residents here have longer life expectancies than the state and national averages, but there are disparities within the county based on socioeconomics and geography.



“Now Obamacare could change a lot of that because a lot of the (economically) borderline people are going to start getting access to health care and look better on diabetes and mammograms,” Greenfield said. “Eventually, they’re going to start using emergency rooms less for care. Over time, these things will equal out.”



Contact the writer: cperkes@ocregister.com 714-796-3686