Rams get payback with sweep of Aztecs

Deedra Foss

FORT COLLINS — The third set was Colorado State saying, 'no.'

Emphatically. Like a 3-year old in no mood to give up a toy and go to bed.

Not to San Diego State at Moby Arena in front of a crowd of 4,370 on Orange Out night. Definitely not after last year.

In 2013, with the Rams riding a 27-match unbeaten streak, the Aztecs came to town and put an end to the dreams of an undefeated regular season with a five-set win after the Rams won the first two.

No. 7 Colorado State won the first two again Saturday, even if they weren't the easiest sets the team had played all year. Both teams had 28 kills when they left the floor for the break, but the Rams had been the more efficient team and the better closers.

The squad that came back to the floor was a more determined group, taking a 25-22, 25-21, 25-16 victory to move to 16-1 on the year, 4-0 in Mountain West play.

In the final set, the Rams slammed the door by winning eight of the final nine points scored.

No.

"Yeah, pretty much, " setter Deedra Foss said. "We were saying we don't want to let them think they even have a chance, so that just came out that third game and we crushed them and said, 'this is Moby. Welcome to playing here.'"

Colorado State was in front most of the night, but San Diego State was a team which refused to go away without dispute. Tough play at the end of the first two sets put the Rams over the top, but when it came to closing time, the Rams had the finishing touch they always seem to show.

Advertisement

Coach Tom Hilbert said what ailed them at times was serve-receive, which was a bit curious to him. Overall, he felt his team played well.

"We struggled with some serve-receive issues today ... I think it's a lack of composure, and I don't understand quite why that's happening, but we can fix it because we've been better than this already," Hilbert said. "Outside of that, I thought we were good. I thought defensively we played well.

"That third set is probably as good a transition game as we've had. We had 20 kills, which means we're digging balls and converting them."

He credited that ability to Foss, who finished the night with 42 assists, distributing balls to three hitters who finished with double-digit kills. Middle blocker Kelsey Snider led the way with 13, Jasmine Hanna added 12 (including the night's final point) and Dri Culbert had 10, adding 10 digs in the process.

Hanna only had five kills entering the final set, but produced seven perfect swings as the Rams hit .373 on the night. Colorado State finished with seven blocks, forcing the Aztecs to hit just .207 overall. Chaiymin Steel had 12 kills to lead them, but she was their only truly effective option.

The players said they weren't really thinking about what happened last year when on the floor, but that didn't mean it didn't feel good to get a bit of payback, either.

"I don't know if we were really focused on last year as much as they came out really wanting to play hard, and they played like a great game, and we weren't really prepared for that," Culbert said. "So we had to step up our level of play just to match theirs. Then I think the third set, because we have struggled with it a little bit this season, we just really didn't want to go with four. We wanted to be done with San Diego State here."

Contact Sports Editor Mike Brohard at 970-635-3633 or mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard