Ted Cruz, apologize to Mitch McConnell? “Ain’t gonna happen,” says the Republican presidential hopeful.

Cruz, the Texas senator seeking the White House, told CNN he won’t tell his party’s Senate leader he’s sorry for accusing him last year of lying. The Texan, who has presented himself as the candidate best poised to unite the GOP against former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in November, last year said Kentucky Republican McConnell had betrayed conservatives. He also accused lawmakers in both parties of being in the grip of lobbyists. “If the Washington lobbyists want to see that happen,” Cruz said of an apology, “they can hold their breath a long, long time.”

Contested convention almost a certainty, say insiders: If Republican insiders are right, Cruz will get his chance to try to unite the GOP not once, but multiple times. About 90% of operatives, activists and strategists in battleground states surveyed by Politico believe this summer’s national convention will require multiple ballots to select the Republican presidential nominee. The insiders said neither Cruz nor real-estate mogul Donald Trump would win the nomination on the first ballot at the Cleveland convention.

Experts on Trump’s health plans: huh? Trump’s ideas on health care are bewildering Republican experts on the subject, the New York Times writes. One, Gail Wilensky, said if the Affordable Care Act is repealed — as Trump advocates — “you’ve got to have a serious way to expand coverage to replace what you have taken away.” The administrator of Medicare and Medicaid under President George H.W. Bush from 1990 to 1992, Wilensky said: “There’s nothing I see in Trump’s plan that would do anything more than cover a couple million people.”

O’Malley won’t endorse in primary: Don’t look for former Democratic presidential contender Martin O’Malley to make an endorsement in the primary. In an interview with MSNBC, the former Maryland governor would only say he looks forward to supporting the party’s nominee. He said he would “gladly” vote for either Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders before supporting Cruz or Trump. The Hill has more on O’Malley’s remarks.

Warren, Brown want Panama Papers probe: Sens. Elizabeth Warren and Sherrod Brown are urging the Treasury Department to investigate whether any U.S. or U.S.-linked entity was involved with the law firm at the heart of the “Panama Papers,” Reuters reports. The senators, both Democrats, have written to Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew and asked for an inquiry into law firm Mossack Fonseca’s activities and its clients.

More from MarketWatch