Chelsea Hancock puts finishing touches on her chalk art Saturday afternoon during the 3rd annual Pastels on 5th event in downtown Loveland. ( Jessica Maher )

Juried winners: 1st Place: Alaina Ferguson

2nd Place: Audrie Murgelman

3rd Place: Kelly Murray People's Choice: 1st Place: Alaina Ferguson

2nd Place: Cynthia Danielle

Dion Weichers

LOVELAND -- Twenty-one-year-old Chelsea Hancock got her inspiration for her Pastels on 5th sidewalk chalk art from the flood.

"I'm making a bear with a fish in his mouth, because he's making the best of the flood situation," Hancock said Saturday afternoon as she worked on her drawing of a bear in a river with trees in autumn colors in the background.

Hancock, who was renting a cabin off U.S. 34, saw several baby bears rummaging through the debris as she moved out of her cabin, which did not get damaged from the flood. She relocated to Loveland to allow her neighbor, whose property did get damaged, to use the cabin.

"It almost looked like they were playing," Hancock said. "They were having fun."

The 3rd annual Pastels on 5th sidewalk chalk art event -- originally set for Sept. 14 but rescheduled because of the Front Range flood -- brought together artists, businesses and the community for a day of art-making, music and food.

The artists worked on 83 sidewalk squares, each one sponsored by a different business, to create a pedestrian gallery along Fifth Street between Cleveland and Lincoln avenues. Last year, 85 artists participated and 65 the first year.

"It's way brighter colors than last year, very happy colors," said Terry Selland of Loveland, who came out to see the art.

Advertisement

Some of the artists took on more than one square to substitute for artists unable to participate because of the change of date, said Marcia Moellenberg, co-coordinator of the event with Vicky Bryant. The two work in partnership with the City of Loveland Cultural Services Department to plan the event that benefits Alternatives to Violence, a nonprofit that intervenes in and helps prevent domestic violence and other violent crimes.

Moellenberg hopes the event will raise $20,000 to support ATV Victims Services and the Southern Larimer County Safehouse project.

"I think it's inspirational. It really inspires people to find creativity in themselves," Moellenberg said.

Hannah Circenis of Loveland, a student attending the University of Northern Colorado, found her inspiration in a photo of her brother and an image of a coffee cup, which she combined by placing a colorful image of her brother's face in the foam.

"I just wanted to use a mixture of warm and cool colors," Circenis said. "I use charcoal mostly in school. It's nice to use colors, because I haven't gotten to do any in school yet."

Tori Peckosh, 13, of Fort Collins, decided to draw a dragon when she arrived at the event, not planning ahead for her project. She typically draws with pencil and found chalk drawing on concrete to require a different technique, she said.

"Here, I really have to rub it into the bumps and grooves," said Tori, who had a spray bottle of water on hand as one of her tools. "The water helps carry the pastels into the grooves my fingers can't quite reach."

Ten-year-old Zoe Real drew a cartoon version of two birds.

"It's just two birds in love," the Loveland girl said. "The boy bird is going to give the girl bird a flower."

Loveland resident Dion Weichers recreated one of his paintings of a blue-faced woman with bright red hair into chalk art.

"This is the only time I use chalk," Weichers said. "It's just messy. It's hard to get pure lines with chalk, especially on the sidewalk."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.