Board member likens documentation requirements to 'herding cats'

Ralph Gregory, condo owner at the Arete in Boulder pictured in this December file photo, stands on top of the automatic barrier that would protect the complex's underground garage in case of a flood. ( Paul Aiken / Daily Camera )

The new year is dawning brightly for a downtown luxury Boulder condominium complex which has seen the daunting prospect of about a 14,600 percent increase in its flood insurance premium dim considerably.

The Arete, at 1095 Canyon Blvd., has been permitted to pay last year's flood insurance premium of $890, rather than the new $130,000 annual price-tag for coverage on which it had received notice in November.

And, the Arete also appears to be prevailing in its bid to convince its insurance provider, Wright Flood, that the building is sufficiently flood-proofed. It was Wright Flood's concerns around that issue that had triggered the skyrocketing premium figure in the first place.

"It's a good outcome," said Ralph Gregory, a board member of the Arete Condominium Association. Gregory was the point-person at Arete trying to satisfy Wright Flood, and ultimately, the Federal Emergency Management Administration, that the building was flood-worthy. "It took a lot of time and effort, but ultimately it's a good outcome."

Wright Flood is a St. Petersburg, Fla-based company providing flood insurance through the "Write your Own" program launched in 1983, in which the federal government underwrites losses, under FEMA's National Flood Insurance Program.

Gregory likened the process of amassing and relaying the necessary paperwork to satisfy Wright Flood and FEMA before the policy would have expired on Monday to "herding cats."

Advertisement

Matters in recent weeks had become "very stressful," he said, as owners of the Arete's 22 residential units began receiving letters from mortgage companies saying the uncertain status of the flood insurance was imperiling their loan status.

"As of now, FEMA has accepted the premium payment in the same amount as last year for this year (2015), pending their final determination" of the flood-proofing's sufficiency, Gregory said, "the effect of which is that the policy has remained in effect, without interruption."

Wright Flood could not be reached for comment . But Gregory provided email correspondence from G. Michael Sloane, the company's executive vice president and chief marketing officer, dated Monday, which said in part, "The chief underwriter at the NFIP recognizing the good faith in the detailed submission of documentation did agree given the near expiration to allow us to apply your payment and to move forward on an interim basis based upon the fact that all parties recognized and agreed that this is ultimately contingent upon Engineer's sign off."

Sloane's email ended with, "Our collective ... expectation would be to see the engineers sign off and we can celebrate together having this behind us."

A FEMA spokesman in Denver, Randy Welch, said he could not confirm or deny the specific status of the Arete's policy.

However, Welch said, "We're glad to hear that there may be a good resolution in the offing. The key of course in the long run is floodproofing. If the (condominium) association did that, we're glad for that and would and just encourage everyone to be keenly aware of that — which most people in the Boulder area are."

Gregory said the Arete, which features commercial space on the ground floor, three higher floors with 22-high-end residential units, plus two underground parking levels, was built water-tight in 2009. At the heart of its recent struggle was a nationwide directive from FEMA in December 2013, in the wake of Hurricane Sandy and flooding along the Mississippi River in 2011, that buildings insured through its National Flood Insurance Program be recertified as water-tight.

"The Arete is a newly constructed building, a very well constructed building, that meets or exceeds flood standards," Gregory said. "If any building can be insured, it would be the Arete. Conversely, if the Arete couldn't be insured, I don't know that any building can be insured."

With the promise of a resolution on the horizon, Gregory said, "It's been like walking through the fog; you don't know where you're going if you don't have a map.

"It was not a clear-cut process, and it wasn't a 'complete these five steps and this is what will happen.' We just had to seek, and ye shall find. We did."

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan