Photo

WASHINGTON — Three influential Republican members of Congress unveiled a comprehensive proposal on Wednesday to replace President Obama’s health care overhaul with an alternative that would halt the expansion of Medicaid and scale back subsidies for middle-income people to buy private insurance.

The plan, drafted with encouragement from Republican leaders in the Senate and the House, would retain some consumer protections in the Affordable Care Act, but would reduce federal regulation of insurance policies. States would have more authority to specify the “essential health benefits” that must be provided by insurance. As an example, the federal government would no longer require insurance policies to include coverage for maternity care.

The proposal was devised by Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, the chairman of the Finance Committee; Representative Fred Upton of Michigan, the chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee; and Senator Richard M. Burr of North Carolina, a member of the Finance and Health committees.

In documents sketching their proposal, Republicans said their “blueprint” would lower costs and rebut criticism from Democrats who say the Republicans have no ideas on health care.

Republicans said the need for such an alternative had become more urgent because they now control both houses of Congress, and the Supreme Court could upend the president’s health care law with a ruling later this year.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Their plan includes a potentially explosive proposal: Workers would have to pay federal income tax on the value of employer-provided health benefits that exceed certain annual thresholds — $12,000 for individuals and $30,000 for families. Health benefits above those levels would be treated and taxed as regular income for the employee. The thresholds would increase over time.

Employers could still take tax deductions for the cost of employee health benefits as an incentive to continue providing coverage, Republicans said. Moreover, a summary of the proposal says that “economists across the political spectrum largely agree” that the current tax break for employer-provided insurance is fueling the growth of health costs.

Employees and employers have been vocal in their objections to proposals that would limit the tax break.

Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the secretary of health and human services, said Wednesday that almost 10 million people would have coverage this year through the public insurance marketplaces created under the Affordable Care Act. Nearly 7.5 million people have selected plans or were automatically re-enrolled through the federal exchange, she said, and 2.4 million people have been signed up through state-run exchanges.

Republicans said their plan did not include a federal exchange, but would allow states to run such marketplaces if they wanted to.

The Republicans did not provide a formal estimate of the cost of their proposal or the number of people who would be covered. Democrats have criticized such plans in the past, saying that they would not achieve the coverage gained under the Affordable Care Act.

The Republican plan would repeal the individual and employer mandates under which most Americans must carry insurance and larger employers must offer it to employees or else pay penalties.

“If consumers do not want to buy coverage, they don’t have to,” according to a document describing the Republican plan.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Republicans would also repeal more than a dozen new taxes and fees, including taxes on insurance companies and manufacturers of prescription drugs and medical devices.

The government would offer subsidies, in the form of tax credits, for the purchase of “health care coverage or services,” according to the proposal. The subsidies would be available to people with incomes up to three times the poverty level (up to $35,300 for an individual), compared with four times the poverty level under the Affordable Care Act.

Lower-income and older people would receive larger subsidies, but the average amount would be less than the current subsidies, which, according to the Congressional Budget Office, are now expected to total $1 trillion over 10 years.

Under the Republican proposal, the government would provide a “capped allotment” to states to finance coverage for certain Medicaid beneficiaries. Money would be allocated according to the number of poor people in each state. The amount would increase at the rate of the Consumer Price Index plus one percentage point and would “reflect demographic and population changes.”

Republicans said Medicaid expansion under the current law was financially unsustainable.

The Republican proposal says that “no one can be denied coverage based on a pre-existing condition,” but this guarantee would apply mainly to people who had been continuously covered by insurance. For people who are uninsured, the Republican plan envisions “a one-time open enrollment period in which individuals would be able to purchase coverage regardless of their health status or pre-existing conditions.”

Republicans would still allow young adults to stay on their parents’ health care plan until age 26, but states could “choose to opt out of this provision.”

The government would allow more variation in premiums based on the age of policyholders. Under current law, insurers generally cannot charge older Americans more than three times what they charge younger people, other factors being equal. Republicans would allow a ratio of five to one, with states permitted to set more or less restrictive rules.