Reopening Alto tunnel should improve traffic

The main reason to open the Alto Hill tunnel is to relieve gridlock on local roadways.

A very small reduction in road use will improve traffic flow significantly.

This principle can be plotted on a J-curve, a type of graph used in many disciplines.

For traffic analysis, the dimensions of any given roadway can admit only a certain number of vehicles. Once that capacity is reached the penalty rises sharply when more drivers try to crowd in.

With a safe, flat path through the tunnel, many local residents will be induced to walk or bike to their destinations, leaving their cars at home.

While some new traffic infrastructure can and should be provided, the underlying assumption seems to be that despite the physical constraints of the built environment and the surrounding topography, driving alone, at will, can continue forever. This is a pipe dream.

Even Caltrans, founded some 120 years ago to develop highways, has concluded, after much study over the last 15 years, that multi-modal is now essential.

See Caltrans’ “Strategic Management Plan 2015-2020” where, on page 11, the following goals are set for 2020: triple cycling, double walking, double transit use, and reduce vehicle miles traveled by 15 percent.

When tunnel opponents find themselves stuck in traffic, I hope they will use that opportunity to consider Caltrans’ changing philosophy, and to ponder the lesson of the J-curve.

— Cindy Winter, Greenbrae

Don’t punish coach for helping students

It was with absolute disgust that I read Wednesday’s headline story regarding the College of Marin men’s basketball program and alleged “tuition and housing assistance” provided by former COM head coach David Granucci.

In a world where we are faced with unprecedented problems ranging from ISIS threats, political uncertainty, affordable health care and an ever-prevalent issue in the Bay Area of affordable housing options, I am dumbfounded by the actions of the Bay Valley Conference Commissioner Shirley Baskin.

I find it appalling that David, his father and sister are being portrayed as criminals for their acts of helping others. Where did we lose perspective between what constitutes a generous act of lending a helping hand versus a crime? How is assistance with finding housing and books a punishable act?

Since David took over the COM coaching position, he and his family and supporters made COM basketball relevant.

During the holiday season the focus is on giving. I applaud David Granucci for exemplifying that giving spirit year-round.

Advertisement

Hopefully, Ms. Baskin and the COM administrators can learn from his fabulous example.

— Malia Lyle, San Anselmo

Trails rules should put protection first

I thank John Dakin for his Nov. 21 letter in which he speaks of peace and solitude on Marin’s narrow trails, and their destruction in the presence of bicyclists on those same trails.

Our culture of today allows us few places where we can experience peace in nature. Mount Tamalpais and Marin’s open spaces provide us with that opportunity.

With the unceasing encroachment of materialism and technology into our lives, our souls need the mountains and hills in order to help us experience being at one with our essence and the earth.

However, we continue to be in danger of losing this rare refuge. As we all know, there is a significant number of bicyclists who place their desires for speed and reckless daring on our narrow trails far above the health and safety of the rest of us.

There is a Buddhist saying: “All haste is a form of violence.” Bicyclists riding on our narrow trails bring violent destruction of our peace through fear and confrontation. They also bring violent destruction of the bodies of hikers and horse riders.

I truly hope these bicyclists soon learn to see the reality of what they are doing and surrender their misguided desires to the benefit of their better natures and the rest of us.

— Larry Ball, San Rafael