Industry grows tighter as area recovers from historic storm

Jennifer Fowler,? right, is looking for a home in Erie for her parents with the help of agent Katie Brooks. ( CLIFF GRASSMICK )

Mathew Sisson has been trying to buy a home in Boulder for going on a year now.

During most of that time, Sisson encountered a market with below-average levels of inventory and rebounding sales activity.

"It's just really tough," Sisson said. "There are two to three (different) offers typically. I'm right at asking price or often above and still having problems competing with people."

Then the market got even tighter.

Following last month's historic flooding across Boulder County, rental options diminished and homebuyer ranks grew as displaced residents sought shelter; plans to list homes were temporarily shelved because of water damage; and work on new homes was set back by months for repairs and mitigation efforts.

Area real estate observers and research indicate that the flood and torrential rains may not only affect the local housing industry in the short term, but also the long term.

Studying other disasters

A week after the flood, local Realtor Steve Altermatt wanted to get a better understanding of what the Boulder-area housing landscape would look like months from now.

So Altermatt, a Re/Max of Boulder Realtor with 28 years of experience, turned to researching past disasters' effects on their respective housing industries.

To provide some context, Altermatt is examining the number of homes sold, the average sales price, median sales price and end-of-quarter inventory for the cities and markets directly affected by disasters that include the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake in the San Francisco Bay Area, the 9/11 terrorist attacks, hurricanes Katrina and Sandy, and more.

Altermatt is tracking housing data during the quarter before each disaster, the quarter of the disaster and the four following quarters.

As of last week, he still was collecting data from some of the markets and affected counties.

"It's a little too early to say what's happening," he said, adding that he still had plenty more digging to do and questions to ask.

Employees Jose Campos, right, and Peter Gustason carry a piece of drywall to a vehicle for a customer at Drywall Mart in Lafayette last week. Business has been up for the company -- which sustained flood damage itself -- as local homeowners work to repair their homes following last month s historic storm. ( JEREMY PAPASSO )

Altermatt noted that the 2007 wildfires in Southern California occurred concurrently with the recession, so it may be difficult to determine the effect of the fires as a slew of foreclosures happened in the following quarters.

However, Altermatt said he was able to glean some possible trends from the initial data he has received.

In several of the markets, the effects in the immediate quarter include drops in inventory and increases in the percentage of listings under contract, he said. During the second quarter after the disaster, home values start to rise.

"In some cases, they rise pretty dramatically," he said.

Average prices of homes sold in Joplin, Mo., for example, climbed by 20 percent in the quarter of the 2011 tornado and by another 16 percent the following quarter, he said, noting scarce inventory levels. The prices dropped down 9 percent in the second quarter after the disaster and remained at that value for the following two quarters, he added.

Altermatt plans to present his full findings in November at the Boulder Valley Real Estate Conference, but added that early local data already is aligning with what he's seen in other markets.

"Our inventory, throughout the whole year, week by week, was 50 (percent) to 60 percent of what was average," he said. "So now, since the flooding, we're at 40 percent of what we see on average."

Low inventory

Inventory levels for single-family homes and attached dwellings in Boulder are 51 percent and 40 percent, respectively, of the 8-year average, said Osman Parvez, a Boulder real estate agent and author of the "House Einstein" blog at boulderrealty.blogspot.com.

"I was really shocked," Parvez said of the current inventory levels as compared to the average levels between 2004 and 2011.

It may take a couple months for the data to show the potential effects of the flood, he said, adding that the October numbers won't be released until early November.

Additionally, the floods hit in September, which typically marks a seasonal slowdown in home sales volumes, he said. As the market thins, the statistics can become easily skewed.

Just how the floods will affect the home-buying process in the future remains to be seen, but Parvez suggested concerns related to water damage and location may sit at the top of buyers' minds.

"In the future, we're probably going to see a lot more due diligence around mold and flood damage," he said.

Prospective homebuyer Amy Gahran said her awareness about potential issues has heightened.

"It worries me as somebody who's looking," she said. "I've heard (that) some people are trying to claim that their property had no flood damage when it clearly did."

Rebuilding

Brady Burke, owner of Boulder-based Burke Builders LLC, has taken on a few flood repair jobs for his current client base and had one project stall because the mitigation process was not properly completed.

Burke has had little trouble securing materials, adding that there was an initial shortage of drywall at retailers such as The Home Depot.

"I think people were trying to make immediate repairs ... I think it's probably too fast," he said.

Lafayette-based Drywall Mart Inc. is selling a "few hundred" sheets of drywall per week, supplying roughly five to 10 basement projects per day, said Jon Melsness, general manager.

"This glut of flood-cut for basements ... there's definitely been an uptick," he said.

The boom for Drywall Mart also comes as the drywall equipment and supplies retailer is doing similar work of its own.

Waters from Coal Creek swept through the building at 1901 S. 120th St. and turned the company's steelyard into a gravel yard, he said. The flood washed away thousands of dollars worth of steel, which was "spindled like aluminum foil," Melsness said.

He estimates the company also lost several hundred sheets of drywall.

"We were literally digging out of mud at the same time our customers were," he said. "We stayed open."

Melsness also said it remained a high priority for the company to not change its prices.

"We have not gouged people," he said. "We know what it feels like being flooded."

Under construction

Michael Markel, a 40-year veteran in the local home-building industry and owner of Markel Homes, said he also has heard of instances of price-gouging. Markel said he is concerned that out-of-state subcontractors may be quoting projects for double or triple the actual cost.

"I think people have to be really alert and be careful about what they're willing to pay," he said.

Markel added that his Markel Homes' developments in Boulder County were fortunate in having sustained minimal to no damage from the floods.

While some infrastructure improvements are needed on roads neighboring some projects, the subdivisions themselves remained relatively unscathed, he said.

"We do a lot of work to make sure that the projects are engineered to handle a big event," he said. "Of course, that was a very big event."

Among those efforts were drainage improvements such as detention ponds. The ponds at Markel's subdivisions handled the downpour and metered the water out as designed.

"Some of the places filled up, but at the same time, they didn't spill over or go into people's basements," he said. "But I think the biggest surprise for me, (what) shocked me, were the areas that weren't major floodways in some neighborhoods that got devastated."

At Ryland Homes' developments in Erie, Lafayette, Longmont and Johnstown, about 25 houses were directly affected by the floods and another 25 under construction that were "not dried in" and did not yet have a roof also were delayed, said Dan Nickless, division president.

Ryland also spent more than $250,000 replacing erosion control measures, he said.

"Any of those (erosion control) efforts were completed in three to four days," he said. "Fortunately for us, it's been days, not weeks."

The physical damage taken by homes in development was fairly minimal, but some deliveries might experience weeks-long or months-long delays, he said.

Ryland workers have spent recent weeks tearing off siding and sheeting that was saturated, pumping out excavation pits that filled up like swimming pools and fully drying sites before adding fresh materials.

"We're being very careful," he said. "We're going to deliver the same house they contracted for."

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com.