Kim upsets Clark for top honors

Chloe Kim rides to a gold medal in snowboard halfpipe at the Winter X Games in Aspen on Saturday. (AAron Ontiveroz / The Denver Post)

ASPEN — The future of snowboarding is Chloe Kim.

The 14-year-old on Saturday toppled Kelly Clark's dynastic halfpipe dominance. Spinning technical combos with a pair of 900s, a switch 720 and floating amplitude, Kim's final run in the best-of-three contest earned 92 points to beat Clark's first-run 90.

Last year, Kim was the youngest athlete to win an X Games medal with her halfpipe silver. This year, her gold, earned minutes after slamming violently in practice, chipping her tooth, made her the youngest X Games rider to win gold in the halfpipe. She's still too young to compete in the World Cup circuit.

"I'm so amazed that I was able to land all that," she said, a bandage on her cheek and her lip swollen from the crash. "I can't believe it's actually happening."

Clark was hunting for her sixth consecutive X Games gold medal, looking to cement her unassailable status as the best female halfpipe rider ever.

With the only 1080 in the competition and a first-run, first-hit height of 16 feet, 11 inches setting a record, Clark seemed destined for her 74th career win and her 13th X Games medal. Rivals Hannah Teter, Arielle Gold, Cai Xuetong and Elena Hight struggled to land clean runs.

Clark, 31, who earned bronze in the Sochi Winter Olympics, is one of the oldest in the game but is showing no signs of fading, continuing to push her sport to new heights with first-ever tricks such as that 1080. But Kim, on Saturday night, pushed harder.

Advertisement

"We really liked how technical this run was combined with amplitude," said X Games head judge Tom Zikas, noting Kim's smooth pair of 900s and floaty 720.

Australian Torah Bright, who took silver in the Sochi Olympics, won bronze, her fifth X Games medal in 10 appearances.

First gold

Freeskier Emma Dahlstrom put together a solid second run on the slopestyle course to win her first X Games gold. The 22-year-old Swede had a 90.33-point second run, which was set apart by her spins through the rail section.

"In the rails I got some extra points," said Dahlstrom, who was fifth at the Sochi Games. "I am so happy to land a run that good."

University of Denver graduate Keri Herman was in second going into the final run and had a chance to knock off Dahlstrom, but the veteran Herman took a nasty fall at the bottom of the second rail feature to end the day.

Herman, 32, was able to walk off after a few minutes and claimed her third silver (2010 and 2011) in the event, which she hasn't missed since its X Games debut in 2009.