Obama continues to learn of scandals through news reports without watching the news

It’s not only Hillary Clinton who has had some moments of hypocrisy as of late.

President Obama has consistently — either by his own accord or through his press secretary — attributed his knowledge of various scandals to news reports about them, thereby excusing himself from appearing at all complicit in said scandals.

The news has sufficiently educated Obama on: Solyndra, Fast and Furious, The Department of Veterans Affairs’ fake wait lists, the NSA’s spying on Chancellor of Germany Angela Merkel, the problems with the Obamacare website, the IRS’ targeting of conservative organizations, and the Department of Justice’s subpoenas for the Associated Press, to name a few.

Obama adopted this tactic yet again over the weekend, insisting in an interview with CBS News that he heard about Hillary Clinton’s private e-mail system “through news reports.”

What’s wrong with learning about issues within your own administration via the news? Nothing, except that you — looking too much like a two-device-weilding Hillary Clinton — don’t watch the news.

“Sometimes when you’re watching the news — which I generally don’t do because I — whatever they’re reporting on I usually know about. But it can get depressing, right? It can feel as if, oh, nothing is working and everything is a crisis,” Obama said during a speech at a Democratic National Committee event last July.

“You don’t want, and I don’t think any of us should want as citizens, a White House that governs by cable news,” former White House press secretary Jay Carney said last October, explaining why the president keeps a “healthy distance” from cable news.

Obama claims he doesn’t want to be “inundated” with politics during the day, opting instead to watch ESPN.

Is “SportsCenter” suddenly covering Hillary Clinton? She sure looks like she has one heck of a jump shot. However, ESPN’s story on Hillary’s press conference Tuesday would have ran with the headline “Air ball.”

For further reminder of Obama’s love-hate relationship with the news: