Below-market leases, refusal to meet face to face are some of the red flags to check for when researching the rental market

Every so often, Realtors such as Cindy Kurtz learn that homes they have listed for sale are also listed by scammers as rentals.

"It's an ongoing problem in the area," said Kurtz, a broker with The Group Inc. Real Estate in Loveland. "It's important for people to be aware of the situation."

Kurtz put a vacant three-bedroom Loveland home on the market in early June and closed on it in July, but a scammer had the property listed on craigslist, an online advertising directory, as being for rent. In the past year, she had three of her for-sale properties listed by scammers as being rentals, she said.

Information for the rental likely was pulled from tax records and a listing service at realtor.com to obtain the address and a description of the house, Kurtz said.

"In this case, they used the homeowner's name, so the potential renter thinks they're talking directly to the homeowner," Kurtz said. "In my situation, my homeowner doesn't even have a computer, so she doesn't have access to craigslist, so that's not a possibility for her to have posted it for rent."

Kurtz learned that three Loveland residents fell for the scam and sent a nonrefundable fee of $1,700 for the deposit and first month's rent to addresses in New Mexico and Wisconsin. The residents were asked to make their checks out to the name of Kurtz's client, and the checks most likely were deposited in a fake bank account, Kurtz said.

What the residents were asked to pay for rent was below market value at $700, $500 less than Kurtz would expect for such a property, she said.

Advertisement

The low rental rate presented a red flag, as did not requiring the signing of a lease before sending the deposit and rent, Kurtz said.

"What they were told is, once we receive the rent money, we'll send the lease. That's a red flag but three people fell for it," Kurtz said.

The applicants filled out rental applications and went through some of the same processes renters go through with a property manager, making the situation seem real, Kurtz said.

"The people on the other end are really good," Kurtz said. "It sounded professional."

Debbie Hansen, a broker associate at The Group, said she encountered a couple of similar scams.

In once case, one of her properties was listed on craigslist as a rental, but the interested renter drove by and saw a sign indicating it was for sale, Hansen said.

"The only way I found out it occurred is somebody had called on one of my properties wanting to know if it was for rent," she said.

Kurtz mentioned other red flags to look for, such as checking if the property is vacant or if there is a sale sign in the yard and not meeting face to face to sign the paperwork.

"It's a newer thing," Kurtz said. "They figured out a new way to scam."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.