Sen. Jeff Yarbro, Becky Goff and Rep. Mike Stewart at a fundraiser last fall. SUBMITTED / The Murfreesboro Post

Weary of "the train wreck" in Tennessee's General Assembly, Wilson Elementary School teacher Becky Goff says she's running for the state House 37th District seat.

Unopposed as a Democrat for the August primary, Goff will face two-term incumbent Republican Rep. Dawn White in November to represent the area stretching from La Vergne, Smyrna and Walter Hill to north Murfreesboro.

"I'm that one Tennessean. I'm a woman, a teacher, I'm a Christian, I'm a mother, I'm a grandmother, I've basically had enough of the Legislature that's just a train wreck," says Goff, 58. "I'm just sick of looking at the news every day and hearing some other crazy thing that they've done."

The wife of Rutherford County Sheriff's Maj. Guy Goff, with two children, a stepchild and two grandchildren, Goff says she plans to focus her campaign on issues that concern people in the district, including health care, transportation and education.

Goff says people of every political persuasion are "disheartened" and "fed up" with the Legislature bowing to special interests, making them a priority over people.

"And what bothers me most is that we have this so-called Christian Legislature who's wasting so much taxpayer money ... pandering to look good here in the heart of the Bible Belt and then for the last two years, they've basically made a mockery of themselves by failing to pass Insure Tennessee and to follow the teachings of the book they want to honor as the state book," she says.

For two years, the Republican-controlled Legislature has refused to approve Republican Gov. Bill Haslam's health-care plan, which is designed to use more than $1 billion in taxes paid annually from Tennessee to provide market-based coverage for some 280,000 people who fall into a gap between TennCare and the federal exchange set up by the Affordable Care Act.

Insure Tennessee opponents have said they fear the federal government will renege on promises to fund the program, and others have said they want to wait and see who wins the presidential election this year because the outcome could change the nation's health insurance policy.

"There's plenty of purple T-shirts there to remind them that we have poor and oppressed and uninsured people in Tennessee, and they don't care," Goff says.

Insure Tennessee supporters have rallied at the state Capitol for two years, many wearing purple shirts. After the plan went nowhere this year, House Speaker Beth Harwell proposed a 3-Star Healthy Project to study changes to TennCare, the state's extended Medicaid program, in an effort to provide more people with coverage.

But while legislators declined to act in Insure Tennessee, Goff points out, they passed legislation in 2015 and 2016 to make the Bible the state book. Goff says she's glad the governor vetoed the measure. The House of Representatives later failed to override his decision.

Goff says she's also concerned about the "discriminatory tone" of bills such as one requiring K-12 and higher education students to use restrooms and locker rooms according to their sex at birth and another allowing counselors to decline to work with people if they object to their lifestyle, largely considered a way for people to avoid counseling gay people.

Rep. Susan Lynn, the sponsor of the transgender bathroom bill, dropped it late this session, after an outcry from businesses, saying she found out schools are handling the matter on their own already.

"The bathroom bill, where did that come from? Who has complained about that?" asks Goff, who believes it was "slipped in" to take people's attention off more important matters.

Proponents of the legislation have said they favored it because the American Civil Liberties Union threatened lawsuits against Tennessee school systems that failed to provide accommodations for transgender students.

As a teacher, Goff points out Rutherford County has two of the top school systems in the Tennessee. But she believes White, a former Murfreesboro City Schools teacher, has turned her back on public schools by supporting voucher and charter schools legislation. Charters are allowed in systems with struggling schools, but a limited voucher bill failed this session.

White has consistently said she supports local teachers but wants to give parents in other areas options to send their children to charter schools or use public dollars to go to private schools.

Teachers lost their right to collective bargaining four years ago, Goff says, and she notes White supported a bill this session prohibiting payroll deductions for teachers, many of whom use that method to make contributions to the Tennessee Educations Association, the bargaining group for many teachers.

Goff says she also wants to work across party lines to tackle the problem of mass transit in Middle Tennessee, especially with Interstate 24 from Murfreesboro to Nashville heavily congested during rush hour. Goff says she knows people who've turned down good jobs in surrounding areas because they don't want to travel I-24.

"It's got to be addressed. We've got to work together to sell it to our people. ... It's not just a transportation change. It's really a lifestyle change. It's hard to give up your vehicle, but it's easy to sit in traffic and complain about it," she says.

Tennessee's Registry of Election Finance shows White has more than $66,000 in her account to run an election this year. Goff says she believes she can raise the money needed to win.

Sam Stockard can be reached at sstockard44@gmail.com.