Four months after its sudden closure, Ships Lounge — the 62-year-old dive bar on Lowest Greenville Avenue — remains closed, despite earlier promises its shuttering would be temporary and short-lived.

Related Ships Lounge, Dallas' best and most beloved dive bar, to close this week for about month

There are signs it will return — among them, the proposed-rezoning placard out front, heralding efforts to renew the specific use permit all Lower Greenville bar owners need to remain open into the wee small hours of the morning. Ships got its SUP in December 2011, shortly after the city council passed the Lower Greenville Planned Development District Ordinance requiring city-stamped OKs for all liquor-sellers with late-night hours. Ships’ SUP was good for four years, and time’s up.

The City Plan Commission was scheduled to talk Ships last week, but pushed it to next month, when it will likely sail through. But … then what? When will it reopen?

“No idea,” says Audra Buckley, the veteran zoning consultant working with owner RGC Properties LLC and its president Stephen Schwartz.

And when it does reopen, who will run it? Same answer: Says Buckley, there’s “no new proprietor in place.” And Schwartz hasn’t returned phone calls.

The only thing certain is that longtime owner Charlie Hunt is out.

The man better known as Charlie Red, who’s owned Ships since 1980, said Friday that Schwartz “run up on the rent so high” he had no choice but to close this summer. When he last-called it a day in July, running out of beer before chasing off the pool-playing stragglers, Hunt said he thought it would be closed for about a month. On Friday he said he really believed then he wouldn’t be gone long. He even left all his stuff inside.

“Everything’s still in there, locked up,” Hunt said. “I told [Schwartz] if he made me a deal, I’d let him have some of it.”

Hunt said he’s been talking to other bar and restaurant owners about taking over and keeping the place just the same. Buckley says that whenever it does reopen, “It’s going to look the same, as far as I know.” Hunt says the owner of a very nearby indoor-but-mostly-outdoor-eat-n-drinkery is eyeing the place. That’s been the word for months. And so far, that’s all it is. But messages have been left; emails, sent.

All we do know: Ships remains closed. Charlie Red’s out. And he’s “absolutely” busted up over how it came to this.

“They had a lot of rough stuff going on around there when I took over, but within a year they got word: Don’t go around there trying to start trouble,” Hunt says. “That’s the deal — them bullies. That’s what happened on Lower Greenville for a while, they were lettin’ them dopers come in and mess up those joints. I told ’em, ‘You better go on down the road. Ain’t gonna happen.’ I can handle myself better than they thought I could. I put a couple of ’em in the hospital there, and they didn’t come back. Place ran smooth as a whistle.

“And it’s hard to walk away after 35 years. I sure hate it badly that it happened like that.”