Neal Gabler has been a formative writer for me: His Winchell: Gossip, Power, and the Culture of Celebrity was one of the books that led me to think about leaving scholarship behind and write nonfiction instead, and Walt Disney: The Triumph of the American Imagination was the first book I reviewed as a freelance writer. To me, he exemplifies the best mix of intensive archival research and narrative kick. So reading his recent essay, "The Secret Shame of Middle-Class Americans," was a gut punch: First, I learned about a role model of mine whose talent, in my opinion, should preclude him from financial woes. And, then, I was socked by narcissistic outrage: I, too, struggle with money! I, too, am a failing middle-class American! I, too, am a writer of nonfiction who should be better compensated! But the more I thought about his essay, the more I realized I’m doing just fine: I live in a Tudor-style house in a tree-lined, inner-ring suburb, and I’ve built up significant equity in it. My son goes to a great school—two of the 2016 Pulitzer Prize winners are alums. I have a house cleaner. I go out to spendy restaurants about twice a week. And I always have $400 on hand in case of an emergency.

And yet my 2015 taxes reveal that my income was $43,000. How is this possible? Because here in the Rust Belt, we writers—and the middle class—have low overhead. Americans weigh in on financial shame

Read more I live in Shaker Heights, Ohio, about two miles from the Cleveland city limits. I chose this city purposively: It has an excellent and diverse public school system. The taxes can be high, but the housing prices are not. I bought my four-bedroom house for $175,000. Because of the low interest rates of the past decade, I converted to a 15-year mortgage at 2.1 percent interest, and have built up about $70,000 in equity. Although housing values are still not increasing—my house is worth about what I paid for it 10 years ago—that equity will, once my son goes to college, allow me to move and reduce my living expenses even further. I’ve done all this while being a single mother with joint custody (and receiving no child or spousal support) for 14 years. True, some things have simply worked out in my favor. My son will go to college in 2017, but because his father has the benefit of tuition remission where he works, I will only have to pay for half of room and board. This makes me very lucky and unusual (as does the fact that I could make a down payment on my house) but it also has undergirded many of my financial and personal decisions—namely, after the Affordable Care Act was finally passed, to quit my half-time job in academia and launch a publishing business as well as write. And there have been crunch times: Twice I took early withdrawals from my retirement account to tide me over as I started my business. Sometimes my credit card balance gets too high. But, all in all, I am doing fine, and the indulgence of hiring a house cleaner seems to pay itself off in spades, because I now never lie around hating myself because I am too lazy to clean the bathroom. I realize that my “solution” to dealing with this middle-class American problem may not be one many readers of Gabler’s essay would find the least bit appealing; I imagine that many would rather be in debt than live in Northeast Ohio. And I know that there are countless people who don’t have the luxury of moving, who are stuck where they are for financial or professional reasons.