It's Wednesday, March 4 and here is your day ahead:

In local news...

WEATHER: Today will be partly sunny and unseasonably cold with high temperatures in the middle teens. Skies will become mostly clear and it will turn bitterly cold tonight, with near record low temperatures falling into the middle single digits below zero and wind chills as cold as -10 to -20. Full forecast

1. RIGHT TO WORK





Better across the border?: A Minnesota Republican says his Wisconsin counterparts are dead wrong about the right to work legislation. Rep. Pat Garofalo said in a letter Tuesday to Rock Road Costruction in Janesville that he welcomed Wisconsin companies to Minnesota where "Many Republicans in the Minnesota Legislature understand that 'Right to Work' significantly interferes with your right to set the terms and conditions of employment in your workplace." Wisconsin Republicans say the legislation says nothing about businesses doing away with unions, so they do not worry about job makers leaving for that reason. But Democrats say the letter proves Minnesota is already capitalizing off legislation that has not even passed. The Labor Committee is holding an executive session on the bill to consider Democratic amendments today. More on this story



2. BELTLINE CONSTRUCTION







Cone zone returns: Tonight, preliminary work will start on a major construction project between Whitney Way and Seminole Highway on the Beltline. And by next Monday night - weather permitting - you will see lane changes as well. It is a two-year project. This year the eastbound lanes will be completely rebuilt. That means a lane shift will occur to put all traffic where the westbound lanes are. They will maintain two lanes in each direction. All of this is being done to get the Beltline up to meet new highway safety standards. More on this story



3. WALKER ABORTION







'Open letter on life': Gov. Scott Walker said he will sign into law a ban on abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy. Walker on Tuesday issued what he called an "open letter on life" in which he stated his support for the ban, saying he expects the Republican-controlled Legislature to pass such a bill. Walker, a likely presidential candidate, also says he supports a federal ban. Putting a ban on abortions after 20 weeks is based on the assertion that fetuses can feel pain at that point, which is disputed in medical research. More on this story



4. MADISON MAYOR RACE







Debate tonight: The candidates for Madison mayor, Paul Soglin and Scott Resnick, are meeting again tonight for another debate. The Dane County Democratic party is holding the forum at the Madison Concourse Hotel at 7 p.m. In three weeks, News 3 will host a debate between the two candidates. Eric Franke will moderate the debate at the WISC-TV studio. The two candidates face off for mayor in the April 7 election. More on this story



5. MONTFORT SHOOTING UPDATE





Steady progress: Joey Slaight, 8, lost both his brother and mother two months ago in what was supposed to be a double murder-suicide. Morgan Slaight shot both her sons in the head before turning the gun on herself. Joey survived, and is making steady progress in his recovery. Deputies who first responded to the home still keep in touch with Joey. They recently made a special visit to the hospital to see him. Joey’s condition is improving steadily – the deputies say he was able to give them high fives and help put together a puzzle. It's better news than any of them could have hoped for. More on this story

In national news...



1. OBAMA VS. NETANYAHU





International spat: U.S. President Barack Obama and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu have never been buddies, but they didn't fight in public, either. Now it's getting nasty after Netanyahu challenged the White House on its approach to a possible nuclear deal with Iran. Speaking to the U.S. Congress, the Israeli leader painted Obama as naive about the dangers of the Middle East. The President slammed Netanyahu for not offering a viable alternative to the intricate nuclear talks between world powers and Iran. More on this story

2. ALABAMA SAME-SEX MARRIAGE





Back and forth: Alabama's Supreme Court has ordered probate judges in the state to stop issuing licenses for same-sex marriages. This comes just a few weeks after a federal court cleared the way for same-sex marriages to begin in the state. The bottom line of the court order: Marriage is between one man and one woman under Alabama law. "Nothing in the United States Constitution alters or overrides this duty," it says. Stay tuned. More on this story