State Farm, Blue Cross partner to sell health plans

Photo: Eric Kayne Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 A health insurance applicant receives help signing up for coverage during 2014 open enrollment. A health insurance applicant receives help signing up for coverage during 2014 open enrollment. Photo: Eric Kayne State Farm, Blue Cross partner to sell health plans 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Two big names have aligned to capture more of Texas' health insurance market when open enrollment starts under the Affordable Care Act.

Texas agents for State Farm, the nation's biggest auto insurer, will offer 2015 Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas health insurance coverage when open enrollment starts Nov. 15. Besides Texas, more than 3,300 State Farm agents also will sell Blue Cross plans in Illinois, Montana, New Mexico and Oklahoma.

"With the health insurance environment changing under the Affordable Care Act, we continue to assess our alliance relationships and products available," said Joe Monk, State Farm Mutual's senior vice president and chief administrative officer, in a written statement.

An estimated 734,000 Texas bought 2014 coverage in the health insurance marketplace during the 2010 health care law's first open enrollment. Almost 75 percent of them bought Blue Cross coverage, according to the insurer, Texas' largest.

The Texas Department of Insurance estimates 6.5 million residents are uninsured, with some able but unwilling to buy coverage.

A U.S. Department of Health and Human Services report released earlier this week indicates 77 new insurers will sell 2015 marketplace plans, while 14 are leaving. In Texas, four new insurers will sell plans, in addition to the 12 already in the marketplace. No insurers are leaving the Texas marketplace.

"When consumers have more choices, we all benefit," said department secretary Sylvia Burwell in a written statement.

Blue Cross Blue Shield's plan is to offer health plans in every Texas county.

"This alliance is an extension of our longstanding commitment of expanding access to health care insurance options in every corner of Texas," Bert Marshall, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas' president, said in a written statement.