In his letter of March 8 ("Standing with Elie Wiesel"), Barry Meriash not only disregards Israel's nearly 40-plus years' possession of operational nuclear weapons (admitted publicly in 1976 by Carl Duckett, then CIA deputy director of science and technology), but he states unequivocally that Malaysian Flight MH17 was shot down by Ukrainian "rebels" — a.k.a. Russian-instigated "aggressors."

Really? Where is his evidence?

Perhaps someone will answer the following questions:

Why was MH17 diverted into a military conflict zone hundreds of kilometers north of its scheduled flight route between Amsterdam and Kuala Lumpur?

Why have the relevant voice recordings and radar records from Kiev air controller authorities mysteriously disappeared?

Where are the flight recorders and which agency/authority is charged with analyzing and disclosing their contents?

Why was Malaysia — the primary national entity investigating this atrocity — refused authority to become part of the Joint Inquiry Group until Dec. 2, more than four months after the incident?

Why should any one of the four "inquiry group" nations, including Ukraine, have veto authority to prohibit public revelation of its unredacted findings?

Why wasn't the International Civil Aviation Organization given primary control of the investigation? MH17 was a civilian commercial flight, not a military aircraft.

Why have the USA's mainstream media been curiously silent about the atrocity for nearly eight months?

Advertisement

Both Russian and U.S. satellites were monitoring the shootdown region. Where are their data? Have they been suppressed for undisclosed reasons?

The Ukrainian "revolution" of February 2014 was unquestionably a U.S./NATO-orchestrated and financed coup d'etat. Was the MH17 shootdown part of a false flag operation designed to exacerbate the outrageous and unwarranted demonization of Russia and its leadership?

According to Russian radar/satellite data, two Ukrainian Sukhoi-25 fighter aircraft were shadowing MH17 minutes before the shootdown. Is this allegation accurate or refutable?

I'm anxiously awaiting responses to these questions.

Dave Morton lives in Longmont.