Donald Trump has catapulted to the lead in the race for the Republican presidential nomination by focusing on two popular issues:

Proposing the building of a wall along the Mexican border to stem the overwhelming influx of illegal immigration,

Attacking the Stalinesque doctrine of “political correctness” that increasingly inhibits freedom of expression in the U.S.

His approach has been very effective so far.

But it’s time for Trump to open up a new offensive front.

If I had his ear, as I have once or twice in the past, I would advise Trump to say, as the future president, he would refuse to raise the debt limit to force Washington to live within its means like every American family and business is forced to do. He should say that $18 trillion is too much, and that continued borrowing by the federal government is completely unsustainable. The only way to dig out of this hole is to stop borrowing, and, as president, he will not request or approve any future hike in the debt limit.

He should also allay fears on Wall Street that such an action will result in a default by ensuring that Washington, under his leadership, will continue to service the existing debt.

And, lastly, he should characterize this action as a great opportunity to return to constitutionally limited government by cutting government spending and programs that never should have been started in the first place.

In 2008, I gave this same advice to a Republican presidential candidate Herman Cain. He used it in a debate and established himself as a frontrunner until questions about his personal life forced him to retire from the race.

Imagine, however, the power of Donald Trump’s voice on this critical issue in 2015. He is already the unchallenged frontrunner in the GOP race. His every utterance grabs the attention of the media. And, this proposal is radical. It is as anti-establishment as his positions on illegal immigration and political correctness.

I dare say that this third major pillar in his campaign to “Make America Great, Again” would make him next to unbeatable.

I’ve been working on this anti-debt campaign since 2011, shortly after the Republicans swept into power in the House of Representatives. I called it the “No More Red Ink Campaign.” It has generated more than 1 million letters to Republican lawmakers in Washington so far. I pointed out that Republican approval was essential to Barack Obama’s plans to continue borrowing and spending without restraint. All Republicans in Congress had to do – even in just one of the two houses they control – was to say no to more borrowing. Instead, they have provided Obama all of the resources he needed to launch Obamacare, fund Planned Parenthood, grow anti-business regulatory departments like the Environmental Protection Agency, push Common Core through the Department of Education and so on.

Experience more of Joseph Farah’s no-nonsense truth-telling in his books, audio and video products, featured in the WND Superstore

Donald Trump, with the power of his platform, could make this issue a focus of national attention, propelling his candidacy forward with a new offensive front that would leave his competitors staggering.

And, the neat thing about it? It’s the right thing to do. It makes perfect sense. It’s like a magic bullet politically. It solves the seemingly unsolvable problem of runaway growth of government, which inevitably brings with it restrictions in personal freedom and subjugates the legitimate powers of the states to Washington.

I am persuaded that, if framed properly, this issue would make the Trump campaign unstoppable. He would not only increase his support among Republican voters but win over many disillusioned Democrats the way Ronald Reagan did in 1980 and 1984.

Trump has been successful to date in this campaign because he has been bold. This is no time for him to stop.

It’s time for him to expand his base by claiming the high moral ground on other big issues.

Like it or not, America’s spiraling, out-of-control debt is not only an issue the next president will have to deal with, it also represents a great opportunity for leadership in restoring the country’s heritage of constitutionally limited government. And it’s something the president can do singlehandedly – forcing Congress to make deep cuts in overspending, over-regulation and social engineering.

If you agree with me, make your voice heard by enlisting in the “No More Red Ink Campaign” today. And I’ll try to get the word to Donald Trump.

Media wishing to interview Joseph Farah, please contact media@wnd.com.