John Eisele, The DDC Group's VP of business development and resident healthcare and insurance expert, joins HSBC and Littler Mendelson to break down how the ACA will impact SMEs in coming years. "We look forward to a compelling discussion, but, most importantly, answering questions and providing clarity on the ACA to attendees."

The DDC Group, a world-leading provider of business process outsourcing (BPO) solutions, announced today that John Eisele, vice president of business development, will be a featured panelist for the BritishAmerican Business (BAB) Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Forum on Wednesday, September 17, 2014, from 8:00 – 9:30 a.m. at Littler Mendelson; 900 Third Ave., New York, NY.

The program, “Making Healthcare Reform Work for Your Company,” is part of the BAB New York SME Forum series, which is designed to assist small and mid-sized member companies looking to learn and share best practices about topical challenges facing SMEs involved in transatlantic business. DDC’s resident thought leader on healthcare and insurance, John Eisele, will ignite peer-to-peer dialogue with his insight covering the new healthcare legislation, recent developments in its rollout, and the impact it will have on employers for years to come.

The panel discussion will be moderated by Mark Luppi, executive vice president of HSBC North America, and will feature guest speaker Steven J. Friedman, co-chair of the Employee Benefits Practice Group at the largest global employment and labor law firm, Littler Mendelson. Topics of coverage include crucial features of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA); how costs will affect business management; issues surrounding the employer penalty mandate; as well as the potential consequences of certain ACA provisions including the tax credit and insurance exchanges.

“This forum will allow attending SMEs to familiarize themselves with these complex and expensive regulations, as well as the subsequent modifications to the law that affect them individually; this is imperative to understand as there is no single, generic course of action that will work for all employers,” Eisele explains.

Eisele credits BAB for taking the initiative to raise awareness about ACA provisions for SMEs: "As a key partner for transatlantic business leaders, BAB has proved its dedication to providing excellent resources and up-to-date advice to its members time and time again."

"DDC is delighted for the opportunity to collaborate with BAB for this high-caliber program and contribute to long-term growth of their members," Eisele continues. "We look forward to a compelling discussion, but, most importantly, answering questions and providing clarity on the ACA to attendees."

To register for the event, visit: http://www.babinc.org/events/803

About BritishAmerican Business

BritishAmerican Business is the leading transatlantic organization dedicated to helping companies connect and build constructive alliances between the United States and the United Kingdom, fostering global business expansion and innovation through targeted programs and events, with a membership of the world’s most prominent multi-national and middle-market companies from a variety of industries. To learn more about the BAB, visit: http://www.babinc.org/aboutus.

About The DDC Group

The DDC Group has been custom-designing and implementing business and knowledge process outsourcing (B&KPO) solutions since 1989. With operations across North America, Europe, and Asia-Pacific, the company’s 3,500 strong staff delivers services in over 20 languages with ahead-of-the-curve industry standards. By leveraging its connections with top influencers and decision makers in the Philippines and Eastern Europe, DDC’s hybrid shared service delivery model equips its clientele with strategic B&KPO solutions fundamental for each organization's future profitability. For more information, please visit: http://www.theddcgroup.com/usa.