Solano County Supervisors are ringing in the new year with a new leader on the dias and a positive outlook for 2015.

Fully supported by her colleagues, Supervisor Erin Hannigan will serve on the Solano County Board of Supervisors as the chair for the year. Supervisor John Vasquez will serve as vice chair and Supervisor Jim Spering will serve as chair pro tem.

“I too love my job,” Hannigan said. “I’m humbled and honored to serve as chair.”

Supervisor Linda Seifert served three years as chair of the board and shared Tuesday that she knows the board will be led by a woman of “great substance.”

“It’s truly been a privilege to sit among all of you as colleagues,” she said and noted that they have been through some interesting times in the last few years.

Seifert said the five board members have trusted each other and added that while each one has different priorities they’ve learned how to merge those priorities and serve all of the constituents in the county.

She also added that it’s reassuring to know that they can individually serve in different capacities with the full support of the board.

Tuesday’s meeting also was a time of reflection.

County Administrator Birgitta Corsello said 2014 has been a year of accomplishments in improving the quality of life, overcoming challenges, investing for the future and continuing fiscal responsibility.

Seifert described 2014 has a “phenomenal” and “great” year.

Corsello said that the 2014 Annual Report is but a snapshot in time and a window into what the county will be doing in the future. The full report is available online at www.solanocounty.com.

Several events happened last year that improved the quality of life in Solano.

Corsello noted that more than 25,000 residents now have options when it comes to healthcare through Covered California and the Affordable Care Act. Additionally, nearly 2,000 low-income adults and children received $1.5 million in dental care during the California Dental Association’s two-day event at the Solano County Fairgrounds.

Corsello added that the effort continues throughout the year at county clinics that offer follow up care.

Advertisement

Last year, Solano County ranked No. 1 in the state for the average compensation and pension dollars received per veteran.

Also noteworthy is the county’s ability to train for and respond to emergencies including a five-alarm fire that destroyed several homes in Collinsville and the South Napa Earthquake that rocked the city of Vallejo. There have been several emergency preparedness drills, including one with local hospitals preparing for a possible Ebola case.

Solano County’s investing in the future entails opening the Stanton Correctional Facility, a state-of-the-art jail with the capabilities to house 363 inmates at the Stanton Correctional Facility, re-opening the Old Solano Courthouse, and purchasing up to date equipment in the Agriculture Commissioner/Sealer of Weights and Measures Department.

Corsello explained that investing in the future also entails being innovative and streamlining services. At the customer’s convenience many services are now available online 24/7 at www.solanocounty.com.

Also, a recognizable improvement in the economy is the increased number of days many of the county’s parks are open to the public. A record high of 190,000 visitors took advantage of the parks and recreation sites in the county last year. Corsello explained that the county is making plans to continue expanding those services this year.

The county continues to move forward with its balanced budget of $870.2 million for fiscal year 2014-15. Corsello noted that with the recovering economy, the county can start looking at what it can do to meet the growing demand for services in a reasonable way.

In other action, during Tuesday’s meeting several elected officials took an Oath of Office as they started their new term.

Vasquez and Spering were both re-elected to serve another four-year term. Vasquez was first elected to the board in 2002. Spering was first elected in 2006 after serving as mayor of Suisun City for 20 years.

“I love the work and I love the people I work with,” Vasquez said. “It’s been a pleasure and honor to serve all of you.”

Spering, who faced a runoff in November against Fairfield City Councilwoman Pam Bertani, said that election was tough but very rewarding.

He commended county staff for the great job they do.

“It’s really very rewarding work,” he said. “The employees should be proud of what they do. They’re changing lives, that’s the true measure of success.”

Others elected to office include Assessor/Recorder Marc Tonnesen, Auditor/Controller Simona Padilla-Scholtens, Sheriff/Coroner Tom Ferrara, and Treasurer/Tax Collector/County Clerk Charles Lomeli. All of these elected officials ran unopposed last year.

District Attorney Krishna Abrams, who ran against then District Attorney Donald du Bain, also took an Oath of Office Tuesday to begin serving her elected term. She has been serving as District Attorney since last summer when du Bain opted not to complete his term.

“I’m honored to be here and humbled to be here,” she said and added that the main focus of her office is to seek justice for crime victims. She also thanked her staff for a smooth transition.