An elderly woman was rescued from her home in Shadowmoss after it flooded Sunday morning.

BY DEANNA PAN and PAUL BOWERS

dpan@postandcourier.com pbowers@postandcourier.com

MAGNOLIA RANCH — David Glover was watching Clemson beat Notre Dame when the dam broke.

Not even 150 sandbags, piled high against the back wall of his house, could keep hours of relentless rainfall from spilling inside. The tide rose. Church Creek flooded. In a mad panic, Glover and his son started carrying everything they could to the kitchen on the second floor, including his favorite game day recliner.

By Sunday afternoon, there was no distinguishing where his yard ended and the creek began. A few sand bags floated above what was once his driveway. Glover crossed his arms as he surveyed the damage from the side of the road.

“I’ve been here 18 years. We’ve never had water like this,” he said. “Thank God I’ve got insurance.”

All weekend long, torrential rains pelted the Lowcounty, from Shadowmoss in West Ashley to Tranquil Acres in Summerville, sopping garages, kitchens, living rooms and patios in sewage-strewn water the color of weak coffee, forcing people out of their homes or at the very least, to drier floors upstairs.

By 12:45 p.m. Sunday, rescuers from the South Carolina Urban Search and Rescue Task Force 1 said they had evacuated about 40 people from their homes in Shadowmoss and neighborhoods nearby.

Near the 18th hole of the Shadowmoss Plantation golf course, Debi Katsaras trudged through shin-deep water in brown rubber boots all the way to the end of her cul-de-sac. Her black standard poodle, Ilio, whined as he followed her back home.

“Welcome to my abode,” she said as she climbed over a planter box and through a window next to her front door.

A shallow pool of water covered her kitchen and dining room floor. Small worms wriggled above the floor boards. Rain had begun to seep inside her home around 1 a.m.

“I came down around 4:45 in the morning and it was all the way to the bottom step, a good six inches,” she said. “That’s when I saw my trash can floating.”

Unlike her neighbors, Katsaras and her husband are staying put. Elsewhere, evacuations in low-lying subdivisions continued through the weekend. In the Ladson neighborhood of Tranquil Acres, a creek overflowed its banks and flooded several houses. Potted plants, fallen limbs, cars, and a garden statue of St. Francis floated down Tranquil Lane as Ve Ja Manigault watched warily from her front porch.

“I’ve lived here 14 years, and I’ve never seen anything like this,” Manigault said.

Manigault and her family finally evacuated late Saturday night in a rescue boat that docked at their front porch and took them to higher ground at the end of the block. En route, she saw fish swimming in her front yard. Neighbors reported that an alligator prowled the standing water in several backyards.

In the end, Manigault only had to stay one night at her daughter’s house nearby before returning at midday Sunday to find her house mostly intact with some damage to the garage. Many of her neighbors were not as fortunate. One pickup truck floated down the street and crashed into a neighbor’s garage, fences were torn down, and at least a foot of water still stood in some houses Sunday afternoon. Manigault said that while she had purchased flood insurance for her house, many of her neighbors had not because they were not required to do so and flooding was relatively rare.

Elsewhere in the Summerville area, portions of the Evergreen neighborhood off of Bacons Bridge Road had to be evacuated Saturday and Sunday as residential streets turned into rivers. Darrell Oliver opened the back door of his apartment on Langley Drive to check on the weather at 5 a.m. Sunday, and a torrent of floodwater coursed all the way through to the front door, saturating the carpet and ruining some jewelry-making supplies for his business, SNS Jewelers.

Neighbors pitched in to help each other, bringing meals from drier ground and even making rounds in a sailboat to pick up stranded families. Firefighters and the National Guard came in boats and military vehicles to help families evacuate early Sunday.

Allison Hardy was sleeping in her family home in Evergreen on Saturday night when she had a dream about falling out of a boat. She awoke to find her bed surrounded by floodwater. With standing water throughout the first floor of the house, she and her family ran upstairs to wait for help. The flooding had reached the second step of the staircase by the time a truck arrived to rescue them.

But for all the goodwill in the neighborhood Saturday night, some took advantage of the disaster. Hardy returned Sunday afternoon to check on her house and discovered that someone had broken into her mother’s house nearby and stolen some video game equipment and other electronic devices.

“They just went in there and tore up everything,” Hardy said.

Hardy and her family members were among the 93 people who found shelter Saturday night at Summerville High School, where the American Red Cross set up cots and provided meals. Marlene Hodge, the school’s cafeteria manager, came in on Sunday around lunchtime to make sure her equipment was intact for the next school day and ended up volunteering with her husband and two sons to cook meals for the people staying in the school’s halls and cafeteria.

“It was very sad that they had not eaten, but they were appreciative, and it made me and my family glad to be able to help,” Hodge said.

In North Charleston, the American Red Cross opened a shelter in the fellowship hall at North Charleston United Methodist Church on Saturday at about 11 a.m., offering cots and meals to anyone in need. About 25 people had arrived to seek shelter by Sunday morning, according to volunteer Mike Puckett, a Charleston resident.

Pastor Wendy Hudson-Jacoby said the people seeking shelter at the church included residents of a mobile home park on North Rhett Avenue that had to be evacuated by police, as well as members of a homeless tent city who fled the storm Saturday.

Hudson-Jacoby put out a call for volunteers and donations via social media, and she said the response was “unbelievable.”

“We asked for two pairs of pants and a pair of shoes, and we ended up with an entire room full of clothes in all sizes,” she said. The Lowcountry Food Bank and local restaurants including the Junction, Iron Dog, Ragamuffin, Madra Rua, and the Orange Spot also donated meals to the shelter.

Theresa Bright, who lives in the mobile home park on North Rhett near Interstate 526, said she was certain her home was damaged by the rising creek water. It was already up to the bottom of the back door when she left at 2 p.m. Saturday.

Sunday afternoon, she stood staring across North Rhett as water gushed out of a manhole, wondering what would be left when police lifted the roadblock and let her back in.

“It’s just a little stressful to know that you worked so hard to get the things you want, and then you come home and it’s a complete disaster,” Bright said.

Reach Deanna Pan at (843) 937-5764. Reach Paul Bowers at (843) 937-5546.