Avin Edwin Tso was arrested Wednesday on suspicion of second-degree murder

The Loveland man arrested on suspicion of attempted second-degree murder this week allegedly used a butcher knife to cut a man's throat during an argument, according to an arrest affidavit.

Avin Edwin Tso, 26, was taken into custody at The Greens at Van de Water apartment complex Wednesday morning and later admitted to the act, police said.

Loveland Police officers responded to The Greens, 2900 Mountain Lion Drive, around 9:15 a.m. on Wednesday after an apartment maintenance worker reported that a man was bleeding from his neck.

Upon arrival, officers found 25-year-old Santiago James Molinar sitting against an outdoor hallway of building 2930 with a large cut to his throat. Molinar, who was transported to Medical Center of the Rockies for emergency surgery, told officers that he'd spent the night at an apartment and had been drinking when he was stabbed, according to the arrest affidavit.

Molinar was no longer listed as a patient at MCR on Friday and Loveland Police Lt. Rick Arnold was unable to provide an update on his condition.

A blood trail led to an apartment in the adjacent building, 3020, where officers reportedly observed the man later identified as Tso through the sliding glass door. According to the arrest affidavit, officers entered the apartment with a key from maintenance personnel after Tso did not respond to officer's attempts to get his attention.

Police reported that Tso appeared intoxicated and later told officers that he had cut Molinar's throat with a butcher knife during a verbal altercation. He stated that he would have killed Molinar if he could have, according to the arrest affidavit.

Advertisement

Tso also allegedly admitted to removing a bloody carpet from his apartment and hiding it to get rid of the evidence.

Police arrested Tso on suspicion of attempted second-degree murder, first-degree assault, menacing and tampering with physical evidence.

Tso is being held at Larimer County Jail on $175,000 bond. He is scheduled for his first appearance in 8th Judicial District Court at 8:30 a.m. on March 21.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Maher at or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/JessicaMaherRH.