Ladies and gentlemen, your headliners this week are Joel McHale, Bobby Lee and Michael Colyar. And now, please welcome the host of the Laugh Track column, a man whose head is in the stars ... Mike McIntyre.

Thank you! When they dropped Pluto from the planet list a while back, I had to change the mnemonic from "My Very Educated Mother Just Served Us Nine Pizzas" to "My Very Evil Mother Just Served Us Nothing." Now, two astronomers said they believe there is a true planet lurking beyond the dwarf planet Pluto. No name yet, but I am hoping to get back to the food mnemonic. Maybe a "B" name. Nine beers. Nine burgers? Right now, nine blankets would be good.



At the Hard Rock: Joel McHale, star of "The Soup" and "Community," headlines the Hard Rock Live main stage at 8 p.m. Saturday inside the Hard Rock Rocksino, 10777 Northfield Road, Northfield Park.

He headlined the famous White House Correspondents Dinner in 2014, where he famously worked for groans and laughs.

"I'm a big fan of President Obama. I think he's one of the all-time great presidents. Definitely in the top 50," he said. "Please explain that to Jessica Simpson."

He described C-SPAN this way: "C-SPAN is like one of those 'Paranormal Activity' movies. It's just grainy shots of empty rooms interrupted by images of people you're pretty sure died a few years ago. Stay tuned after the correspondents dinner for an all-new episode of C-SPAN's hit show, 'So You Think You Can Remain Conscious.' "

It doesn't sound like he's voting for Ted Cruz: "Ted Cruz proposed a government shutdown to protest the Affordable Care Act, and everyone else in Congress decided to go along with it simply to get some time away from Ted Cruz. The Tea Party is anti-socialism and anti-immigration, so it makes sense that their hero is a Cuban from Canada."

Tickets are $47.50 to $62.50, though some are listed for resale higher than face value, up to $108. Call Ticketmaster at 1-800-745-3000.

At Hilarities: Bobby Lee is an Improv specialist (he was formerly on "Mad TV") and he's an accomplished stand-up, sometimes joking about that time in his life, as he did on his Comedy Central stand-up special.

"I showed up at 'Mad TV,' and they didn't use me at all. I'd play, like, Chinese Waiter No. 2. They give me one word to say, like 'Hello.' 'Cut, Bobby, you're a wrap,' " he said. "So, over the months, I developed an eating disorder. I could not stop eating Vicodin. That [stuff] is delicious."

Bobby Lee performs at 8 p.m. Thursday ($23), 7:30 and 10 p.m. Friday ($25), and 7 and 9:30 p.m. Saturday ($28) at Hilarities inside Pickwick & Frolic Restaurant, 2035 East Fourth St., Cleveland. Call 216-736-4242.

Ryan Singer headlines at 8 p.m. Wednesday and 7 p.m. Sunday ($18) and features the rest of the week. He's a master of wordplay, as he exhibited in this description of American history, which he says he makes interesting to children by referencing snack foods:

"Hundreds of years ago, the crackers broke free from the oppressive reign of the Fig Newtons, and they moved to that magical cookie jar across the sink. ... There was one problem: The peanut butter cookies already lived there. This didn't bother the crackers, so they crushed the peanut butter cookies, leaving nothing but a trail of crumbs behind..." he says in his act. It's a lengthy bit, but there's a taste.

At the Improv: Michael Colyar performs at 7:30 p.m. Thursday, 7:30 and 10 p.m. Friday, 7 and 9:30 p.m. Saturday, and 7 p.m. Sunday ($22) at the Improv, 1148 Main Ave. next to Shooters on the West Bank of Cleveland's Flats. Call 216-696-4677.