A.J. Foyt drove a roadster to the pole for this 1965 Indy Car event at The Milwaukee Mile, no small feat considering his car had been rendered obsolete. Credit: Russ Lake Collection

By

West Allis — IndyCar drivers had a little more than an hour Saturday to see how their cars would behave at the Milwaukee Mile in their new configuration, and yes, they found some surprises.

"When you cross a car completely, you get in the wake fully.... you lose complete grip in the car, and you can actually spin pretty easy," SimonPagenaud said after the first round of preparations for the ABC Supply Wisconsin 250 on Sunday.

"So, it's very tricky."

Cars carry significantly more down force because of the "aero kits" that aid performance and differentiate between Chevrolet and Honda cars and became part of the Verizon IndyCar Series this season. But that quickly disappears in traffic.

Last year, when the cars hadn't changed, teams were able to test at the Mile. This season, IndyCar used four drivers to test possible aerodynamic configurations at Iowa Speedway, but that was the only previous time the updated cars had run on a short oval.

Pagenaud was second-fastest Saturday behind JosefNewgarden.

Given that practice speeds were comparable with qualifying last year, even with aerodynamic changes that help them stick to the track, it was clear most teams were working on race setups Saturday.

Teams are scheduled for one more practice session Sunday morning, followed by qualifying at 12:30 p.m. and then the race at 4:30.

"The biggest thing that's going to help racing here, if it happens — I don't think we all know yet how the race is going to unfold — is it could open up the lanes a little more," Newgarden said. "Generally, you're pinned to one lane.

"Maybe that will open up, and you will be able to truly run the bottom lane and Lane 2. If that's the case, I think you'll see more passing.... It felt more racy to me on new tires."

Still the man: Since winning the opener in March, JuanPabloMontoya has been the only driver to lead the standings all season.

He's as surprised as anyone. And downplays it every chance he gets.

"I think there's too many races to go," Montoya said before practice.

"You know, the point lead can vanish in one week. You have one bad race, all the work for the year goes out the window."

Through 11 of 16 events, Montoya leads teammate and defending series champion WillPower by 46 points.

Although Montoya has been on top, the season hasn't been uncompetitive.

Seven drivers have won — with ScottDixon and Newgarden the only other repeat winners — and the four drivers battling for second are covered by a total of 31 points. Even sixth-place MarcoAndretti is nearly as close to Power as Power is to Montoya.

Montoya, 39, finished second to Power last year at the Mile, and he won at the track in 2000 as the reigning champion of the old CART series before he moved to Formula One and then NASCAR.

In the house: Injured driver JamesHinchcliffe is making his second visit for a race weekend since suffering life-threatening injuries May 18 in a crash during practice for the Indianapolis 500.

After walking gingerly to the podium, Hinchcliffe spent more than 15 minutes talking about his recovery, prognosis and the agonizing daily decision of "how much time do I spend in bed vs. how much time do I spend on the couch."

Although Hinchcliffe remains restricted in his activity, he said he has had less pain and more energy and mobility on an almost daily basis, except on the few occasions he has overextended. Hinchcliffe is still about 15 pounds lighter — "the real difficult weight to get back" — than before the crash.

Hinchcliffe's recovery is ahead of his doctors' schedule, he said, and he should be ready for off-season testing. He has what he hopes will be his final surgery set for the end of July during which doctors will correct problems that resulted from the emergency procedures needed to keep him alive after he was speared in the leg by a suspension part that pierced the cockpit.

"If you had asked me how I felt compared to a year ago, I'd probably say 70%," Hinchcliffe said. "But compared to the last couple of months, I feel like I'm 90%. It's all relative, right?"

At the feet of a legend: One of the benefits for JackHawksworth of going to drive for A.J. Foyt this season is access to an unlimited library of anecdotes from a legendary career.

One of Foyt's tales is particularly appropriate to IndyFest as this is the 50th anniversary of the day Foyt put his dirt roadster on the pole at Milwaukee to lead a field that was largely made up of low-slung rear-engine cars.

"That's a legendary story," Hawksworth said. "He's told me that one. But I'd heard that one before I met him.

"And there's a really good picture somewhere of him leading the field. He's in his dirt car, and everyone else..."

Foyt's Lotus was delayed when his team had problem with the oiling system. He had raced on the dirt the night before at the Illinois State Fairgrounds in Springfield and had the car with him, so Foyt unloaded so he could at least race. Foyt led the first three laps and 15 in all and finished second to GordonJohncock.

Indy Lights: Rookie SpencerPigot led an all-American, all-newcomer sweep of the top three positions for Sunday's 100-lap race. Pigot broke the division's track record with a two-lap run averaging 150.868 mph. RCEnerson qualified second at 149.055 and KyleKaiser third at 149.988.