Longtime east end resident Vanessa Hamilton vows to stand up for seniors who "get lost in the shuffle" if she is elected to city council.

"One of my main platforms is older adults," she said. "They may not be at different tables when there’s consultations being made, so I just want to make sure that their voices are heard, too."

As part of her campaign, Hamilton met with members of the Western Manitoba Seniors Non-Profit Housing Co-operative.

"They were very concerned that council wasn’t really addressing affordable housing as it could be, and I agree," she said.

This is Hamilton’s third run in civic politics — she was a candidate in the 2013 Meadows byelection and ran for school trustee in 2010. She said even though she wasn’t elected, those campaigns were a great learning experience.

The Riverview seat will be vacated by Coun. Len Isleifson, who plans to run provincially for Brandon East MLA.

Hamilton lives in Riverview, and believes she is the right fit for the ward.

"The question I got at the doorstep was, ‘Do you live in the ward?’ … They want somebody local, they want somebody who’s down the street, their neighbour to connect with," she said.

One of the main concerns in the ward is infrastructure — filling potholes, grading back lanes, drainage issues. Hamilton said there are some safety concerns with narrow streets.

Hamilton said it will be important to ensure there are opportunities for residents to voice their concerns, and says regular ward meetings will be of "utmost importance."

Keeping property taxes reasonable will also be a top priority for Hamilton.

"Property taxes go up so much, then (property owners) have to cut somewhere else," she said. "They have to make decisions — do I have to cut on healthy food, do I not fill my prescription for a month just to balance the … budget."

When it comes to affordable housing, Hamilton said the city needs to pay attention to the amount of resources that go into developing strategies versus taking action.

"What I find is a waste of taxpayers’ money is when we spend a lot of resources … developing this document, going out and doing focus groups with residents … and not doing anything about it, and shelving it," she said.

Hamilton said an issue she would like to bring up around the council table is regulating e-cigarettes.

"I think the next council needs to look at that and devise a bylaw to protect families and children," she said.

Profile of Vanessa Hamilton

• Age: 41

• Marital status: Divorced, three children

• Occupation: Healthy living facilitator with Prairie Mountain Health

• Quote: "They may not be at different tables when there's consultations being made, so I just want to make usre that their voices are heard, too!"

» jaustin@brandonsun.com

» Twitter: @jillianaustin