Winner uses experience to claim first place; Simpson grabs victory in senior's race

On a sunny Sunday ideal for racing, Anne Donley found the perfect strategy to master the flat, fast course of the 29th annual Longmont Criterium.

Donley, 37, a Boulder resident who rides for fun and professionally, won the senior women's 1-2 pro race, relying on her experience to outduel younger riders.

Donley said she enjoys criterium racing because experience and strategy are important.

"It's not only the strongest racer that wins, and experience pays off," she said. "So being older helps because that means for myself that I have been racing longer than some of the younger girls."

Hundreds of cyclists turned out Sunday for races in various categories on the .7-mile, L-shaped course that winds around Thompson Park. The course is mostly flat, and wide, smooth streets make for fast racing.

Riding solo, Donley found the course to her liking as she edged her bike between a team of racers. Donley positioned herself perfectly on another racer's wheel and flew through the finish line first in the 50-minute race.

"This course was a flat course so it's hard for any one person to stay away," she said. "There were a couple efforts and I went out for the front in the first five laps and waited for the field to catch me, and other people did that as well, so that's the race — just making sure nobody goes up the front and you stay together and it came down to positioning at the end. I just made sure I was in a good position."

In the senior men's pro 1-2 race, 21-year-old George Simpson of Fort Collins won for his team in the 70-minute race.

Advertisement

Racing for the past three seasons, Simpson has ridden the Longmont Criterium twice and likes the course.

"I'm a sprinter and a lot of these other field sprints are my favorite," Simpson said.

Racing with a domestic elite team, Simpson travels with them and has been invited to a lot of professional events.

Simpson and his team compete in the National Racing Calendar, where they can attend a series of state races.

George Simpson wins the men's pro 1-2 race Sunday in Longmont. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Competitors from all levels and ages filled the streets of Longmont. This year's event was a Gold Rocky Mountain Road Cup event as well as the BRAC State Championships.

Another professional racer from Belgium who now lives in Boulder came out to use this race to train for his racing season.

Coming in third was Ben Berden, 40, who has been riding for 20 years and has been a professional rider for 18.

Berden did not plan to win this race but was happy with the result for his training, even though he did worry a little bit about the crowd of racers.

"This race makes me a little nervous that there were 80 or 90 people so there was a lot of elbow rubbing."

Even though the large group of competitors concerned him, Berden along with many other competitors had positive comments about the race.

Annie Mehl: mehla@timescall.com