Carly Fiorina said Thursday she does not need to win the New Hampshire primary but does need to exceed expectations in order to remain in the presidential race for the long haul.

Granite State Poll: Trump's lead grows in NH New York business executive Donald Trump not only continues to lead the Republican field, but his lead has grown significantly since late summer, with more likely primary voters than ever now saying they believe he will win the New Hampshire primary. More

What those expectations will be at the time of the Feb. 9 election remain to be seen, but Fiorina is not disturbed by her standing in the polls, either in New Hampshire or nationally.

This week’s WMUR/CNN New Hampshire Poll had the former Hewlett-Packard CEO at 5 percent, tied for seventh place.

“I’m going to do what I have to do in New Hampshire,” she said in an interview with WMUR.com. “I’m not saying I’m going to win New Hampshire. I need to exceed expectations in New Hampshire. I need to exceed expectations in Iowa, and I need to keep going because this is a long race.

“I don’t think anyone would have predicted that I would be in the top six,” Fiorina said after meeting with about 40 members of the Derry Rotary Club.

“The trajectory that I have had is unlike any other candidates. Nobody knew who I was. Nobody gave me a chance. And I’m sitting in the top six."

“And I’m sitting there while others have spent millions of dollars on television,” she said. “I haven’t spent anything, so I think I’m doing pretty good. But now it comes down to in the end, voters are going to decide, not polls.”

And, she said, polls have been notoriously wrong.

Fiorina was asked what she intends to ask GOP frontrunner Donald Trump about his controversial series of remarks about refugees, Muslims and immigrants at next the Republican presidential debate next Tuesday.

“What’s the plan?” Fiorina said. “He never has any specifics.”

She said Trump’s call to ban all Muslims from the country “is a big distraction from the fact that he has no plan.

“When he’s asked, ‘What are you going to do about ISIS?’ he says, ‘You don’t want to know what I’m going to do about ISIS.’ He doesn’t know what he’s going to do about ISIS.

“So quit throwing out outrageous statements and tell us what you’re going to do,” Fiorina said.

Fiorina said there should be a “pause” in the admission of refugees from Syria until a method can be devised to properly vet them.

She said the “fundamental problem” is on that issue is: “The government isn’t performing its job.

“People are falling through the cracks for background checks on guns,” she said, noting that the killer of nine people in a massacre at a church in South Carolina in June should not have received clearance to purchase a gun.

“And the fiancée in San Bernardino, how did they miss this? There are so many examples where, literally, the government is not doing its job. Why not? We have to get to the bottom of that.”

Fiorina noted that many Europeans have visas but do not need to go through background checks.

“A lot of these would-be terrorists, probably, are coming through on European passports.”

Speaking to the Rotarians, Fiorina reiterated her call for a three-page tax code and zero-based budgeting.

She also talked about her personal challenges in calling for the repeal of the Affordable Care Act, which she included in “a whole set of laws and regulations that are crushing this economy.”

“Obamacare is the first, but it won’t be the last,” she said.

“I’m a cancer survivor,” Fiorina said. “I’m a pre-existing condition. And at the end of a long and difficult battle with cancer, two weeks later, we buried our younger daughter, to the demons of addiction.

“I understand that we have to invest more in drug addiction treatment, for example, or the prevention of drug addiction. But I also understand Obamacare is not working."

She said it should be replaced with state management of high risk pools and true competition in the health insurance market, “and a mandate that every health care provider give you information you need, which includes the cost, the price and the outcome.

“I will tell you as a cancer survivor I had no idea whether the hospital I went to was better than the one 100 miles away,” she said.

Fiorina said politicians have been debating immigration for 30 years, “but nothing gets done because politicians don’t know how to get things done.”

She said securing a border requires “money, manpower and technology, but mostly it takes leadership.”

Taking aim at the national Democratic frontrunner, Fiorina said, “Hillary Clinton wants to run on anything but her record. She wants to run on anything but her policies. She wants to run on anything but the reality that she has gotten every foreign policy challenge wrong.

“She wants to run instead on the historic nature of her candidacy,” Fiorina said. “If I am up against her she will have to stand and be held to account for her lies about Benghazi, her email server, and on and on,” Fiorina said.

“I understand what leadership is,” Fiorina said. “It is not about talk. It is about results.”