Expectations - or, depending upon your political vantage point, anxieties - are running high for what goodies might be included when Gov. Tom Wolf unveils his first budget Tuesday.

It is expected to include double-digit increases in the state's personal income tax and sales tax rates; large cuts in school property taxes and a key business tax rate; and significant new boosts in state aid for public schools and colleges.

Add it all up, and it's safe to say Pennsylvanians haven't seen a plan this bold in scope for years - and certainly not since the 2007-08 recession.

In comments made last week to reporters, Wolf made it clear that he had little choice but to increase revenues to address the $2.3 billion deficit he inherited.

His spokesman pointed out that the state's credit rating has been downgraded five times, Pennsylvania's job creation ranking has declined vis-a-vis other states, and schools have been forced to lay off staff, cut programs and close buildings.

"Some may look to take political shots or want to maintain the status quo, but Governor Wolf knows we need a change if we are going to rebuild the middle class," Wolf spokesman Jeff Sheridan said.

"On Tuesday, the governor will announce a balanced budget that will help grow our economy, invest in education, and strengthen the middle class. As he has always said, Governor Wolf is committed to making Pennsylvania's tax system fairer and reducing the burden placed on the middle class and seniors."

Sheridan has declined to reveal specifics, but according to drafts circulating around the Capitol, a full-fledged re-engineering of the tax system is called for.

Meanwhile, Republicans, who control both chambers of the Legislature, are bracing for "massive" tax increases and spending growth that are sure to give some heartburn and may prompt them to rethink their summer vacation plans.

Through interviews with several sources who have been tracking the development of Wolf's first budget, here's what PennLive has learned about the foundations of the plan as they were set late last week:

Taxes are very much on the table.

No Grover Norquist anti-tax pledges here.

Draft versions of Wolf's revenue plan, according to sources who are familiar with the details, propose tax increases the likes of which haven't been seen in Harrisburg since the dawn of the former Gov. Ed Rendell's first term in 2003.

But Wolf has always prided himself on being a different kind of politician.

Some details remained sketchy. But at the plan's root, sources say, is an ambitious shift of school funding burdens from local property taxes to broader-based state levies.

Here's what multiple sources had reported hearing by week's end about the three pillars that will affect most Pennsylvanians in the revenue side of Wolf's roughly $30 billion plan:

A 20 percent increase in the state's personal income tax, from the current 3.07 percent to 3.7 percent. For a person making $50,000, that's an increase from $1,535 to $1,850. Drafts seen by PennLive's sources did not reference Wolf's campaign proposal to offer a standard income exemption for all taxpayers, though the current tax forgiveness program aimed at exempting low-income wage-earners would continue and be expanded, sources indicated.

A boost in the state's sales tax from 6 percent to 6.6 percent, an increase of 10 percent. It was not clear if the proposal carries changes in the current list of products and services exempted from the sales tax.

A direct offset of school property taxes on homes and farms that will be funded by much of the money raised from the aforementioned increases.

The exact amount of that property tax cut was not known, but one person intimately familiar with the plan said it would move the current $600 million pool for property tax cuts (funded by casino taxes) to well more than $3 billion a year when in full effect.

Based on current distribution formulas, that would be enough to launch the average statewide property tax cut from $182 per homeowner now, to something in the range of $1,000.

That accomplishes two primary goals for Wolf: moving more of the burden for school funding to the state and away from a locally-based tax systems that cause poorer communities to struggle; and moving toward what he believes is a fairer tax structure for the middle class.

Wolf is also expected to call for a set of new taxes on currently untaxed tobacco products including cigars, chewing tobacco and pipe tobacco and, possibly, an increase in the state's $1.60-per-pack cigarette tax.

There may be other facets revealed in the final document Tuesday aimed at specific groups like renters and seniors.

Everyone will all be expending a lot of brain power after Tuesday arrives to determine who pays more and who pays less. But as proposed, it is a certainty that Pennsylvanians as a whole will pay more.

Business taxes, too.

Wolf's plan would dramatically reform Pennsylvania's business taxes, with a mixture of rate changes, new taxes and restructuring of old taxes.

Starting with the new, Wolf campaigned hard on the notion that Pennsylvania should benefit more directly from the shale gas production occurring here, and he has already called for a 5 percent extraction tax on gas production.

But that's just the start.

Wolf on Wednesday proposed a major restructuring of the state's corporate net income tax that includes a new income reporting method designed to expose more profits from more firms to the current loophole-ridden tax.

The tax rate on those corporate profits, meanwhile, would drop in 2016 from 9.99 percent to 5.99 percent.

And finally, the governor will allow the scheduled elimination of the capital stock and franchise tax - a tax on in-state business assets - to be completed in 2016, as previously scheduled.

Wolf can be expected to sell those moves as a way to warm the climate for new business investment and job growth.

But the mix has a lot of business groups scratching their heads in advance of Tuesday's address.

Because while they're getting some things they love - CNI reduction and capital stock elimination - they are concerned about the impact of other measures like the sales tax increase, which hits businesses as well as households, and the personal income tax increase, which is the de facto tax rate for many smaller businesses.

Schools are a winner.

Increased funding for education was a major plank in Wolf's campaign and many expect he will take a giant step in his first budget proposal toward reversing the effects of the near billion-dollar cut that school districts had to absorb during the first year of Gov. Tom Corbett's administration.

Sources said Friday that Wolf's plan contains about $1 billion in new spending across the public education spectrum, from early childhood programs to local schools to public colleges and universities.

Along with that, Wolf will no doubt advocate moving to a fairer, more equitable way of distributing state aid to public schools, which is the focus of the Basic Education Funding Commission's work.

That commission anticipates offering its recommended school funding formula later this spring. On Thursday, the Campaign for Fair Education Funding released a proposed formula that it hopes will help inform the commission's work.

Any increases will be a welcome change to Pennsylvania's public universities, which have seen their state funding remain the same or nearly the same for the past three years after absorbing a deep cut in 2011-12.

Community colleges also saw a funding cut four years ago but received a small increase last year to begin to make up some of lost ground.

Does growing medical assistance do harm to this budget?

The budget for the Department of Human Services -- formerly the Department of Public Welfare -- is the biggest piece of Pennsylvania's general fund budget in any year.

One of the most interesting aspects this year will be the bottom line impact of Wolf's switch to the standard-issue Medicaid expansion provided for by the federal Affordable Care Act.

He is shifting away from a custom-made plan devised over the last year by the Corbett Administration.

Corbett said his version, which involves "high risk" and "low risk" options, would save state taxpayers $4.5 billion in costs during the next eight years by placing healthier people on the low-risk plan. But since it began on Jan. 1, critics have said people assigned to the low-risk option are being denied needed benefits.

Wolf will eliminate the low-risk option.

It might be hard to quickly decipher the cost impact, or maybe there won't be much, since the federal government is covering about 90 percent of expansion costs, as it did under the Corbett plan. Corbett also made assorted changes to the technology used to manage the Medicaid program, so Wolf's critics will be looking for any cost consequences of undoing those.

A moment for savings.

Wolf's budget address won't just focus on spending increases. Undoubtedly he will trumpet $109 million in projected savings that Wolf said this week his Governor's Office of Transformation, Innovation, Modernization and Efficiency (GO-TIME) has found.



That office was charged with assisting state agencies find $150 million in cost savings to help close the budget hole.



The projected savings will be achieved primarily through improving procurement practices, modernizing technology to manage public works projects, and consolidating and centralizing administrative services across departments.

Meanwhile, Wolf on Friday said his budget plan will expand home- and community-based long-term care for an additional 5,500 people in 2015-16. Avoiding nursing home care for that many people will save taxpayers $162 million a year, according to the administration's projections.

"Seniors have spent their lives working hard to provide for their families," Wolf said at an appearance in Philadelphia. "They've worked hard to build their communities and they should be able to enjoy their golden years in the homes that they built in the communities that they built."

The politics.

First and foremost, let's remember what Tuesday is.

Wolf is proposing a budget, not dictating it. And that is especially the case at this political moment in time in Pennsylvania, where both chambers of the Legislature are dominated by Republicans.

Just like a new car never has more value than when you drive it off the lot, the conventional wisdom is that any new governor has his maximum political capital in his first year.

So Wolf is going for it.

But the Republican lawmakers have their own priorities, like further reforms to the state's two major public employee pension systems to win long-term cost savings and privatization of the state-owned liquor store system to generate up-front money.

And generally speaking, they have reacted in recent years to broad-based tax increases as if those carry the Ebola virus.

The budget is due on June 30.

It's hard to tell right now where the push-and-pull of bipartisan negotiations will lead, but understand this - Tuesday's roll-out is really only the end of the beginning.

This post was updated at 2:00 a.m. Sunday to clarify a reference to former Gov. Ed Rendell.

Staff Writer David Wenner contributed to this report.