Jason Bridgeman (Photo: Submitted)

MURFREESBORO — Siegel High Principal Jason Bridgeman tendered his resignation Friday, Rutherford County Director of Schools Don Odom confirmed Saturday.

"Jason notified me (Friday) during a principals' meeting that he'd taken a job in another part of the state," Odom told The Daily News Journal. "He didn't say where."

Bridgeman was named Siegel's second principal in June 2012 upon the retirement of Ken Nolan. Prior to his appointment at Siegel, he served as principal at Holloway High for three years, following a four-year stint as assistant principal at the school. Bridgeman also previously served as a teacher at Murfreesboro City Schools' Bradley Academy and for Metro Nashville Public Schools.

In an email to Siegel's faculty at 9:36 Friday night, Bridgeman said he has "had a wonderful two years leading this amazing school," and congratulated teachers on this year's test results, adding the scores revealed their hard work and commitment.

Siegel: 150 students must do community service after Siegel High prank

School news: Siegel teacher faces sexual battery by authority figure charge

"That being said, I have given Mr. Odom my letter of resignation. Very few opportunities could have pulled me away from the 'Most Powerful High School,' but one developed that offers personal as well as professional benefits for my family," Bridgeman wrote. "I will truly miss each of you. I have high expectations for the Siegel family, and I hope we have the opportunity to cross paths again."

Odom said Bridgeman expressed gratitude when first sharing news of his resignation.

"He thanked me twice for giving him the opportunity. I didn't give it to him, he earned it," Odom said Saturday.

Bridgeman could not be reached for comment Saturday.

Siegel High made headlines earlier this month after a senior prank that saw about 160 members of the senior class forced to complete community service in order to participate in commencement ceremonies. Students flooded the school's amphitheater, placed goldfish in a fountain in the school's courtyard and water-logged mats used by the wrestling team.

Bridgeman required the majority of those students to perform eight hours of community service in order to participate in graduation. Three seniors were initially banned from Tuesday's ceremonies, but allowed to take part after completing 25 hours of service. Two of those students admitted to spraying cooking oil on the school floors, while a third stole the building's keys from her father, who teaches at the school.

Jason Bridgeman's wife, Chontel, is also an administrator with Rutherford County Schools. Last summer, Chontel Bridgeman was reassigned from her principal's job at Homer Pittard Campus School, where she had served since 2009, to an assistant principal at Barfield and Blackman elementary schools.

At the time, Odom said trends in testing data and teacher turnover were the key factors for Chontel Bridgeman's reassignment. She has been on medical leave this school year, but Odom said she had not notified him that she would be leaving the district.

Access to some of Chontel Bridgeman's computer and email records were the basis of a lawsuit filed against the Board of Education by Dr. Tracy Pack, a former Campus School parent and local orthodontist. The case has since been closed in Chancery Court and County Schools was ordered to pay more than $32,000 of the nearly $50,000 Pack spent on legal fees.

Contact Mealand Ragland-Hudgins at 615-278-5189 ormragland@dnj.com. Follow her on Twitter @dnj_mrhudgins.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1gT7QXD