Colorado’s two U.S. senators, Republican Cory Gardner, and Democrat Michael Bennet, on Saturday toured northeastern Colorado for their inaugural wheat tour.

Republican Wayne Allard started the wheat tour when he was elected to Congress in the 4th District in 1991. Every year, he would visit different parts of the Eastern Plains. When Allard was elected to the U.S. Senate, and Republican Bob Schaffer took his seat in the U.S. House, it became the Schaffer wheat tour. Then it was the Musgrave wheat tour after Republican Marilyn Musgrave; the Markey wheat tour after Democrat Betsy Markey; and then the Gardner wheat tour.

When Gardner was elected to the U.S. Senate in 2014, Weld County District Attorney Ken Buck took his seat in Congress.

“So now they have the ‘Buck Wheat’ tour,” Gardner said, cracking himself and others up.

“I’m amazed he’s managed to get a laugh out of that joke all day,” Bennet said.

And so it was as the unlikely duo told jokes and answered serious questions on water, wind, transportation and other issues Saturday on their tour. Gardner wanted to continue the tour after he was elected to the Senate and asked to have Bennet included, a gesture Bennet raved about. The bus trip was arranged by the Colorado Association of Wheat Growers.

As the bus rolled down the roads, Gardner had a confession.

“Don’t tell Greg Brophy I said this but I think Wray is pretty,” Gardner said, referring to the former state senator who hails from nearby Wray.

Accompanying them on the tour was Colorado’s new agriculture commissioner, Don Brown who, like Gardner, also is from Yuma. Brown said he’s still amazed that Gov. John Hickenlooper, a Democrat, didn’t care that he was a Republican, just that he was a farmer and a rancher.

“I’ve had people ask me how can you work for a Democrat?” Brown said. “I told them, ‘Well, one of my favorite people is a Democrat. My mother.'”

Brown and Bennet both share the distinction of having called Hickenlooper “boss.” Bennet served as Hickenlooper’s first chief of staff when Hickenlooper was elected mayor of Denver in 2003.

Two state lawmakers, Republicans Rep. Jon Becker and Sen. Jerry Sonnenberg, bookended the wheat tour.

Becker spoke at the opening event, at a restaurant in his home town in Fort Morgan. Becker noted when he was first elected to the statehouse, in 2010, he was elected to House District 63, the seat held by Gardner, who had successfully run for Congress that year.

“How would you like to follow this guy?” Becker said to laughter.

But legislative boundaries were redrawn after that and Becker was drawn out of his district and into Sonnenberg’s House District 65. Becker stayed out for two years, and when Sonnenberg ran for the Senate last year, Becker ran for Sonnenberg’s House seat.

“Now I’m following after Jerry Sonnenberg so I’m doing fine,” Becker said. Gardner exploded in laughter.

Sonnenberg, of Sterling, did one of his trademark laughs when he heard of Becker’s comments. Sonnenberg spoke at the final event, a tour of the Anderson wheat farms in Haxtun. (You know you’re in God’s country when the program calls the evening meal “supper” instead of dinner.)