Almost 50 rural hospitals have closed their doors since the beginning of 2010, with over half of those closures occurring in the past two years alone, leaving more Americans to trek long distances to obtain health care — sometimes with dire consequences.

Adam O’Neal, the Republican mayor of Belhaven, N.C., completed a 273-mile walk to Washington in July to shine a spotlight on the closing of his small town’s local hospital and the impact on residents, including the death of a 48-year-old who had suffered a heart attack, then died while waiting an hour for a helicopter to transport her to the closest hospital — now 75 miles away.

Certain emergencies simply won’t wait for a long drive or a helicopter flight. For example, after heart attacks, trauma and strokes, treatment must occur within the first hour to prevent loss of heart muscle and brain tissue, and troubled pregnancies often require a rapid response to deliver a healthy baby.

Colorado may soon add to this tally, with Leadville’s St. Vincent Hospital facing closure if it does not find a partner, buyer or management relationship together with an infusion of resources. Should St. Vincent close, Leadville will lose its only emergency room and ambulance service, and the county’s only nursing home. Leadville’s community of 2,600 people would be required to overcome 33 snowy, mountainous miles to reach the nearest hospital in Frisco.

What’s driving this epidemic in rural health care? Rural facilities are confronting a new landscape with full implementation of the Affordable Care Act, including reduced support for the uninsured, lower reimbursement rates for Medicare and Medicaid, increased regulatory costs and electronic health records requirements, and penalties when patients must be readmitted soon after they are released.

Together with the economic recession, tight state and local government budgets, and fewer patients being allowed overnight stays, rural hospitals find themselves trapped in a perfect storm that could force many more closures in the year ahead.

What’s the prescription for rural hospitals to survive and thrive? First, development of innovative health care delivery models that promote delivery of integrated, quality health care within budgetary constraints. Health care is moving from the classic “fee for service” model toward integrated systems that allocate a capped amount per person — and reward those who can deliver quality results within those caps. Resource sharing, integration, and joint-venture arrangements with regional partners can yield benefits without surrendering the hospital’s independence. Telemedicine also offers some hope, enabling rural communities to leverage experts and technology from afar.

As a last resort, hospitals may pursue a partnership or sale to a health care system with the financial strength, management team, and technological practices to make needed investments in the hospital and squeeze more efficiencies out of each health care dollar spent. However, many rural hospitals have difficulty attracting a suitor. To survive on their own, rural hospitals will need increased financial support. If maintaining quality care within reasonable driving distance is a community priority, the hospital and local political leadership can either tap into available funds, or ask taxpayers for greater dedicated resources, whether in the form of a mill levy, bond, or district. Finally, charitable foundations can seek out additional private support and grant monies.

Should the rural hospital’s doors close, what comes next? Perhaps a much smaller free-standing emergency room with a fraction of the bed space or an even leaner urgent care clinic, addressing only the most emergent of needs, with ambulance or helicopter support to move patients to facilities with greater expertise and support services. While some potential exists for telemedicine in a scaled-down facility, community members will need to travel significant distances for key aspects of their health care needs — including life-threatening emergencies.

Michael King chairs the Healthcare Transactional Group at Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.