By of the

Khris Davis has rediscovered his power stroke, and not a moment too soon for the Milwaukee Brewers.

The leftfielder's two-run homer to right field off former teammate Jonathan Broxton in the eighth inning proved to be the difference Sunday afternoon, as the Brewers stole a 5-4 victory from the St. Louis Cardinals at Miller Park.

It was Davis' second homer of the day, and his second two-homer game in the last four as the Brewers were able to avoid a three-game sweep at the hands of their National League Central rivals.

"I think momentum plays a huge key," said Davis, who has recorded three of his four career multihomer games this season. "When you see other guys rolling, it makes you want to step up to the next level and be along with them, have a good AB."

With the wind apparently out of the Brewers' sails after Matt Carpenter's two-out, three-run homer in the seventh off Jimmy Nelson rallied the Cardinals into a 4-3 lead, Davis' second round-tripper quickly turned things around.

The eighth started with a broken-bat, pinch-hit single to left by Jason Rogers, who was lifted for pinch runner Logan Schafer. After Shane Peterson bunted Schafer to second, Cardinals manager Mike Matheny called for Broxton to replace Kevin Siegrist.

On Broxton's first pitch, a 96-mph fastball, Davis went with it and muscled it over the fence in right. Broxton hadn't allowed a hit or run in four appearances since being traded to the Cardinals on July 31.

Davis now has 11 homers and 35 runs batted in to go with a .242 average.

"It was a fastball," Davis said. "It was just right there. It was a good pitch to hit, and I was ready."

Francisco Rodriguez came on to pitch a 1-2-3 ninth to record his 26th save in as many chances. Will Smith improved to 5-2 after pitching a scoreless eighth, and afterward Nelson was thankful for his teammates' late-game support.

"It was just tough, but KD and the bullpen picked me up," said Nelson, who allowed eight hits and four runs (earned) with eight strikeouts in a 98-pitch outing. "It was huge for those guys to come in the last couple of innings and pick all of us up.

"KD had a day, man. He was pretty locked in. He's been coming around lately. That's a nice bat to have."

Nelson appeared to have things well in hand heading into the seventh.

Holding a 3-1 lead and pitching well, Nelson opened by allowing an infield single to Brandon Moss and then a seeing-eye single to right by Stephen Piscotty to put two on with nobody out.

Tony Cruz, the No. 8 hitter, followed with a bunt that moved the runners into scoring position. Matheny lifted starter John Lackey for Mark Reynolds, who hit a comebacker off Nelson and ultimately was tagged out with the runners staying put.

That brought up Carpenter, who it appeared would be facing the left-handed Smith. But after a short chat on the mound, Brewers manager Craig Counsell elected to keep Nelson in to face Carpenter.

On his third offering, Nelson hung an 89-mph slider that Carpenter crushed into the second deck in right-center, putting the Cardinals ahead for the first time, 4-3.

"I just said, 'Make your pitches to him.' That's a tough spot," Counsell said of his conversation with Nelson. "To me, he was just so good up to that point. That inning got started on an infield hit, then a little eight-hopper that got through the right side. He made good pitches to Cruz on the sac. Made a nice pitch to Reynolds.

"I thought he was continuing to make his pitches."

The Brewers broke the Cardinals' 38-inning scoreless streak in the third, with one of the more unlikely players in the lineup doing so.

One pitch after Jean Segura was thrown out trying to steal second, Elian Herrera homered to right off Lackey.

It was the first run scored by Milwaukee in the three-game series, and the first homer allowed by a St. Louis pitcher in 62 innings. The homer was Herrera's fifth of the season but first since May 12.

The Brewers' rally continued after Nelson struck out. Peterson drew a walk, and then Davis homered to left-center to stretch the lead to 3-0.

Only one base-runner reached second base against Nelson through the first five innings — Jason Heyward on a leadoff double in the second — and he struck out seven before running into his first spot of trouble in the sixth.

With one out, Kolten Wong barely beat out an infield single, and after Jhonny Peralta flew out to right, he stole second. That brought up Heyward, who muscled a broken-bat blooper to short center to plate Wong and get the Cardinals on the board.

The play ended Nelson's streak of consecutive innings without allowing an earned run at 252/3.

Lackey was tough on the Brewers after that third, facing the minimum over the ensuing three innings while allowing only a single. He threw just 66 pitches over six innings.