Stryker Corporation (NYSE:SYK) is a medical technology company that covers three key hospital services: orthopaedics, neuro and specialty surgery. The company operates in three segments including Orthopaedics, MedSurg, and Neuro-technology and Spine. Stryker operates in over 100 countries and holds 5,300+ patents. Stryker Corporation was founded in 1941 and is headquartered in Kalamazoo, Michigan.

Revenue insights

Net sales of Stryker totaled $9.7 billion during 2014, registering an increase of 7.2% on a year-over-year basis. Most of the company’s revenue comes from Instruments with 15% of the total revenue from the product line, followed by endoscopy and knees with 14% each.

Segment wise, the company generates most of its revenue from orthopaedics, which made up 43% of the consolidated revenue during 2014. Orthopaedics TAM stands at $21.9 billion, with Stryker holding 19.2% of the market share. In terms of market-share, the company is a leader in foot and ankle orthopaedics.

Stryker generates 39% of its sales from MedSurg segment, which is a $17.8 billion market. The company holds 21.3% of the share in this specific market. Instruments and endoscopy and leading the way with 41% and 25% market share in this particular segment.

Around 18% of the company’s revenue comes from neurotech and spine, which is a $12.8 billion segment. The company’s leading product lines in this segment include neurovascular and spine with 33% and 8% market share.

Geographically, the company's products are predominantly sold in the U.S. and other developed countries; 92% of the sales come from these areas. Moreover, the company’s sales are highly diversified with no single line of products amounting for more than 15% of the total revenue.

Thesis

Stryker is one of the largest medical technology company with a history of 35+ years of sales growth. The company supports its growth through a mix of organic growth and acquisitions. It has the competitive advantage of continuous improvement and innovation. The company holds 1,900 U.S. patents and 3,400 international patents. Stryker’s focus on development is highlighted by its R&D, which grew at CAGR of 12%, around two times the average MedTech industry R&D, during 2009 to 2013. Due to its R&D intensive strategy, Stryker outperformed the peer group in terms of organic revenue growth during the past few years. Revenue of the company grew 5.1% and 5.8% during 2013 and 2014 as compared to industry’s growth of 2.4% and 2.4%. Further, the growth rate is also trending upwards. The company expects its growth rate to increase to as high as 6.5% during 2015. This indicates that the company is outperforming the peer group and increasing its market share.

Cost cutting incentives will boost the company’s bottom line in coming years. A $500 million cost cutting plan is underway, and is expected to be completed by 2017. Shared services can positively impact the SG&A spending of the company. And, recently inaugurated European headquarters entail favorable tax implications for Stryker; the company is set to achieve two percentage point tax savings from this development. Further, strong EU presence will be good for gaining market share in near future.

Stryker had acquired intelligently in the past; it has the ability to do good deals. Sonopet, an acquisition, is growing at CAGR of 78% since 2010; Sterishield is growing at CAGR of 17% since it was acquired back in 1994; Neptune has witnessed a CAGR of 31% since 2000. Overall, the company has a good track record in acquisition. It’s continuing the acquisitive strategy as acquisitions are the company’s No. 1 priority in capital allocation.

Despite a strong focus on M&As, Stryker has managed to increase its dividend 20% p.a. since 2010. Further, the company recently approved a $2 billion buyback program for the shareholders. All these factors underscore Stryker’s ability to generate cash and satisfy its capital allocation requirements. The company has an impressive balance sheet that allows it to acquire other businesses, while maintaining the company’s friendly shareholder policy.

China and emerging markets bode well for Stryker. China will be the world’s second largest MedTech market by 2020, increasing 14% p.a. until 2020. Stryker will benefit from the trend as it already has a strong presence in China. The company has 2,000 employees and three manufacturing facilities in China. Further, the company is targeting 80% market coverage by 2020, which currently stands at around 40%. On the emerging front, market penetration is low, which is a good sign in itself. The company is planning to achieve double digit growth in emerging market during the next two years.

From a macro perspective, demographics shift and obesity rates will benefit Stryker as it’s one of the leading companies in hip replacement and knee implants. Note that, in the U.S, the obesity rate in adults rose from 31.2% in 2010 to 34.9% in 2015. And, older population in U.S. is also growing, and it’s expected to reach 21.7% of the population by 2040. Other benefits for the company include the Affordable Care Act and declining unemployment.

Risks

The company is focusing on Europe to gain more sales. But, current weakness in the euro zone can weigh on Stryker’s bottom line and the company’s investment in a regional EU headquarter may not prove fruitful as expected. In such a case, bottom line will be affected.

Stryker is acquisition-oriented and is buying businesses at a fast rate. Hyper active acquisitions increase integration risks for the company alongside pressuring profit margin. Integration issues can adversely affect the bottom line of the company. Further, acquisitions are adding to the goodwill of the company on balance sheet. If some of the acquisitions fail to meet expectations, write-offs can suppress EPS and will be catalytic for stock price depreciation.

Stryker is heavily invested in China. The data coming from China is not very promising as evident from the performance of their stock market in the past few months. Due to its exposure in China, Stryker performance can be adversely affected if China’s economy fails to reignite itself.

Valuation insights

Stryker is trading on a high side. It supports a forward PE of 17.3 close to the PE of S&P 500, which is also high. Moreover, earnings are expected to grow 9% p.a. during the next five years. A multiplier of 17 seems adequate for the company. PEG at 2.08 shows that growth is not cheap. Assuming the company distributes all its earnings as dividends, the company trades at a premium to its current price. DCF also reveals that the stock is fairly priced at best. But, EVA model reveals that the stock is overpriced. See the valuation sheet below:



Focus Equity Estimates

Prudena's Monte Carlo reveals a similar valuation.



Source: Prudena

The model indicates that the probalility of SYK trading around $90 is quite low. Based on the valuation insights, SYK doesn't seem like a value investment.

Bottom line

Stryker has an impressive growth track record, and is expected to continue amid R&D intensive approach of the company. Cost cutting will provide the necessary short-term nudge to the bottom line. Emerging markets and China will benefit the company in coming years. China’s economic outlook is weak but healthcare is at the last of anyone’s list to cut expenditure from. All in all, Stryker is expected to continue its mid single digit growth. However, there are some risks including euro zone weakness, lower adoption in emerging markets, low healthcare expenditures in emerging markets and integration risks. Even if the company manages its risks effectively, a mid-single digit growth will place the company right where it is, in terms of share price. The market is already paying a premium for the consistent growth performance of Stryker. We believe there’s not much upside to the stock under current circumstances.

About the author: