ENLARGE Noma Dumezweni and Matthew Marsh in ‘A Human Being Died That Night.’ Photo: Jesse Kramer

‘A Human Being Died That Night’

BAM Fisher

321 Ashland Place

(718) 636-4100

bam.org

Performances begin Friday

In Nicholas Wright ’s play, based on the best-selling book by Pumla Gobodo-Madikizela, a black female psychologist interrogates a white political assassin serving two life sentences for crimes committed during apartheid. The production stars Olivier Award winner Noma Dumezweni and Matthew Marsh. Jonathan Munby directs.

ENLARGE Wendy Whelan and Alejandro Cerrudo in 'Restless Creature.' Photo: Christopher Duggan

‘Restless Creature’

The Joyce Theater

175 Eighth Ave.

(212) 242-0800

joyce.org

May 26-31

Former New York City Ballet principal dancer Wendy Whelan recently launched a new-works initiative. The first of these projects is a suite of four duets under the title, “Restless Creature.” The program includes Kyle Abraham ’s “The Serpent and the Smoke,” Joshua Beamish ’s “Conditional Sentences,” Brian Brooks ’s “First Fall” and Alejandro Cerrudo ’s “Ego et Tu.”

’10 out of 12’

Soho Rep.

46 Walker St.

(212) 352-3101

sohorep.org

Performances begin Tuesday

Actors Theatre of Louisville artistic director Les Waters directs Anne Washburn ’s new play, which takes place during a tech rehearsal. Ms. Washburn, who won a PEN/Laura Pels award a few weeks ago, is known for her offbeat comedic sensibility and unique settings. Her last New York production, “Mr. Burns, a Post-Electric Play,” took place in a post-apocalyptic America, where survivors bond over their fond remembrance of “The Simpsons.” A highlight of the 2013 season and recipient of a 2014 Drama League award, it has since been produced regionally and in London. After the June 16th performance of “10 out of 12,” Ms. Washburn will moderate a discussion entitled “Unsung Heroes of the Theatre!” with a props artisan, a hair and makeup designer, a former box-office manager and a senior usher of Broadway’s Walter Kerr Theatre.

REPRISED

ENLARGE Aaron Clifton Moten, Louisa Krause and Matthew Maher in a scene from 'The Flick.' Photo: Joan Marcus

‘The Flick’

Barrow Street Theatre

27 Barrow St.

(212) 868-4444

barrowstreettheatre.com

Annie Baker ’s plays “Circle Mirror Transformation,” “Body Awareness” and “The Aliens” established her as an exciting young talent, but it is “The Flick,” which won the 2014 Pulitzer for drama and is being remounted in a commercial production, that brings her work to a broader audience. The play, about a trio of employees at a run-down movie theater in central Massachusetts, features the same cast as the original: Matthew Maher, Louisa Krause and Aaron Clifton Moten. Director Sam Gold, who has won two Obies for his direction of Ms. Baker’s plays, is at the helm.