The professional hysterics at Salon—and, Lord, some of the commentary over there these days is audible only to dogs—have been warming up the old Naderization facility in the fairly reasonable assumption that Hillary Rodham Clinton will be the Democratic nominee for president.

However, people change with time and Hillary Clinton has leaned to the right (all the way to neoconservative territory) on a number of issues, especially foreign policy. I wouldn't vote for Dick Cheney, therefore I'm not voting for Hillary Clinton.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Here with an opposing view is Mitch McConnell, Majority Leader of the United States Senate.

The Senate narrowly passed a bill Thursday that would repeal key pieces of the Affordable Care Act and strip federal funding of Planned Parenthood for one year.The bill, which only needed 51 votes to pass because it was being considered using a procedure allowing it to bypass typical Senate procedures which require 60 votes to advance a piece of legislation, passed 52 to 47. The bill is not expected to become law.

Most Popular

That may be the understatement of the millennium. The House will pass this bill on autopilot. Thereupon, the president will break out the stamp and the pen to veto it, if he doesn't simply set the thing afire on the White House lawn. It then will die a quiet death on Capitol Hill, living on only as a spectral presence in a hundred television ads aimed at gulling the rubes next fall.

Let us assume, for the moment, that the president has taken leave of his senses, or is sockless drunk, and actually would sign this dead parrot. What will then occur? Right off the top, millions of women will lose not only a significant portion of their health-care, but also the uncomplicated exercise of one of their constitutional rights. As to the rest of the country, the bill kills off the federal exchanges, which help millions of other Americans get their health insurance and it 86's the subsidies that do pretty much the same thing. Millions of Americans will get tossed back into the uninsured population, meaning that they will exchange a (largely illusory) tax penalty for medical bills running anywhere from 100 bucks to a shitload of money on the economic scale.

I may be naïve, but I don't see President Hillary Rodham Clinton signing this bill, either.