Sarah Palin spent about seven minutes of Fox News airtime gushing over Donald Trump’s immigration policy, even though she couldn’t answer any of host Greta Van Susteren’s questions about it.

Van Susteren’s introduction set the pro-Trump tone for the discussion.

VAN SUSTEREN: Trump fresh off jury duty and taking no prisoners! Trump is blasting his critics who say his plan to get rid of citizenship for children born in the United States, or anchor babies, is unconstitutional. But the billionaire real estate mogul, he is not backing down!

Palin merely continued on the theme. “Heck, yeah, it’s possible” to build a wall on the southern border and get Mexico to pay for it, she told Van Susteren. Palin claimed that Trump’s “commonsense plans” are what most Americans want but “just not being able to say because we don’t have a microphone like he does.”

“The immigration plan of his, especially the wall, that’s common sense,” Palin added. “It’s a real shot in the arm to constitutionalists and conservatives who want America to be put first by our leaders.”

Of course, Greta didn’t challenge her BFF’s notion that Trump – who wants to undo the 14th Amendment – is a constitutionalist. Instead, she wondered if his plan might be “somewhat incomplete” because a lot of the illegal immigration is not via Mexico but includes a lot of people who overstay their visas. “What is he going to do, go round those people up?” she asked Palin.

Obviously, Palin had no idea. “He’s talking big picture, of course, plus specifics, thankfully,” she replied. Then she changed the subject to say that Trump’s plan is more specific than the other candidates. “It’ll be great to hear all 16, 17 of them reveal their plan!” she enthused. I'm sure she'll read all of them.

Next, Palin blamed immigrants for “decimating the middle class” and pretended that her nativism was due to concern for American minorities. Our “open borders,” Palin said, allow illegal immigrants “to compete or take American jobs and really decimat(e) the middle class, especially young black men, young Hispanic men. Where their unemployment rates are 30%, 40% and cheap labor is going to make that even worse for them.”

Van Susteren never challenged a word. Instead, she moved on to ask Palin about Trump’s desire to undo birthright citizenship, as guaranteed by the 14th Amendment. “What do we do about the children?” Van Susteren asked.

Again, Palin couldn’t answer. She said that “the children” will be used to portray Republicans as “heartless” when “nothing could be further from the truth.” She continued by arguing that preventing them from becoming citizens is the pro-family thing to do.

PALIN: A plank in our platform is pro-family and a family is a unit and I believe what Mr. Trump and probably the other Republican candidates, once they do come out with some kind of policy proposals, what they’re saying is, a family is a unit and if their parents broke the law and if they’re here illegally, well, they need to get back in line and because a family is a unit, Greta. The family sticks together and the kids have to get in line with their mom and dad.

Huffington Post notes that birthright citizenship was common law in the U.S. since its founding. When that right was suspended by the infamous Dred Scott decision by the Supreme Court, the ruling was supplanted by the 14th Amendment, ratified in 1868.

But Van Susteren never mentioned how radical a proposal denying birthright citizenship is nor did she question anything else Palin said. Instead, Van Susteren spent the rest of the segment trying to press Palin about whether or not she’s endorsing Trump for president.

Watch what passes for Fox News political analysis below, from the August 18 On The Record.