Boehner still hopes to resign at the end of the month. (Bill Clark/CQ Roll Call)

Already scheduled for a Wednesday morning meeting, House Republican leaders announced Monday they will also huddle in the Capitol basement Tuesday, after the 6:30 p.m. vote series.

The stated, on-the-record purpose of the meeting is to "discuss the October agenda." There is much to talk about. There are eight scheduled legislative days left in October before the deadline is reached to extend funding for nationwide surface transportation and infrastructure projects; there are 10 House business days left to raise the debt limit.

Also on tap is a reconciliation bill to dismantle the Affordable Care Act and defund Planned Parenthood, plus negotiations on new spending levels to avoid a government shutdown on Dec. 11.

But House Republicans also need to pick a new speaker to succeed John A. Boehner, R-Ohio, whose plan to resign at the end of October was endangered when his heir apparent, Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, abruptly withdrew his name from consideration.

Now all eyes are on Paul D. Ryan, the Ways and Means chairman and 2012 vice presidential candidate, who remains quiet about whether he will run for speaker. While he initially expressed no interest in the post, many of the Wisconsin Republican's colleagues say he is the only one who can unite the conference.

A GOP leadership aide said a House floor vote for speaker is still scheduled for Oct. 29, but Boehner has not yet said when he will announce a special conference meeting to nominate a candidate.

Discussion of any October agenda will surely include some mention of leadership elections. But members will have another opportunity for that at the regularly scheduled meeting Wednesday.

Related: John Boehner Shouldn't Pack His Bags Just Yet As GOP Mulls Its Future, All Eyes Fixed on Paul Ryan See photos, follies, HOH Hits and Misses and more at Roll Call's new video site. Get breaking news alerts and more from Roll Call in your inbox or on your iPhone.