Gary Seavert, 65, a retired postal worker and a Vietnam War vet, says, “Bunch of baloney. These pols just can’t get along. Did you see the movie ‘Lincoln’? Same crap after more than 100 years.” Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

Oak Creek — Around here, the federal government shutdown is an echo.

It's on cable television news, talk radio and the Internet.

It's a subject for discussion among friends and co-workers.

And, it is part of the country's entrenched and deep political divide, between red and blue, Republican and Democrat.

Republicans blame Democrats.

Democrats blame Republicans.

And a few people blame both sides.

Just like in Washington, D.C.

The middle-class neighborhoods on the west side of Oak Creek are neat and trim. Paul Ryan, the Republican from Janesville, represents the area in Congress. In 2012, President Barack Obama split the vote in these neighborhoods with Republican Mitt Romney.

Gary Seavert, 65, is a retired postal worker and a Vietnam War veteran. He spends a lot of time working on his yard, especially a pond flanked with flowers and sculptures of frogs.

Ask him about the shutdown and Seavert says, "Bunch of baloney. These pols just can't get along. Did you see the movie 'Lincoln'? Same crap after more than 100 years."

Seavert voted for Obama in 2012 and backs the Affordable Care Act, which most Republicans oppose.

"If it doesn't work out, they can readjust it," Seavert says.

But to close the government because of a dispute over Obamacare? Well, that makes Seavert a tad upset.

"The Republicans are trying to halt something before it even goes into effect," he says.

Scott Barnes, 56, calls himself a conservative. He has a wife and three daughters and works in health care cost control. He's no fan of Obamacare.

And he's not a fan of the president, either.

"I'm not pleased with the selective pain the White House is starting to put on things," he says.

The scenes of aging veterans having to move past barriers to visit the World War II Memorial on the Mall in Washington really upset Barnes.

"It's an open park," he says, lambasting the initial decision to close the memorial.

Kevin Laskaskie, 39, is a senior maintenance supervisor at Roundy's. He says people at work talk about the shutdown and the consensus is that both parties have to hammer out an agreement.

"Seems like a lot of games," he says of politics in Washington. "You elect them and they don't want to do anything for the people."

Laskaskie says both Republicans and Democrats are to blame for the shutdown and adds: "They're going to have to fight it out. Ultimately, they have to find common ground."

"There are people not working because of the shutdown," he says. "That's not good for the U.S. This government shutdown is a joke. All the parties need to work together to create jobs."

Carmen Tavarez, 50, a housewife, and her husband Rafael, 54, an electrician, are Obama supporters.

They say both parties contributed to the shutdown. They're incensed, too, that senators and members of the U.S. House can still collect paychecks while federal workers are furloughed.

"If the congressmen weren't getting paid, there wouldn't be a shutdown," Carmen Tavarez says.

Rafael Tavarez is upset by the Republicans.

"We don't like what they've done," he says. "They have the wrong agenda."

Amanda Doers, 31, works weekends as a nurse and runs after her two young children. In her home, "Dora the Explorer" is more likely to be on television than CNN.

Still, she keeps up with the news and is distressed by the shutdown.

"I'd like for Obama to not be in office anymore," she says. "That would be a real improvement."

Philip Rich, 60, a former software system analyst, tries to break down the shutdown from the vantage point of both parties.

Democrats, he says, are trying to inflict pain in the shutdown so that "people really hate the Republicans."

Republicans, he says, are using the budget battle to try to end Obamacare and are likely to lose.

Rich says the shutdown "is going to end the same way it started, with little fanfare."

Wisconsinites speak out

More photos at jsonline.com