Keynote speaker Leonard Pitts Jr. kicks off the 67th iteration of the Conference on World Affairs at Macky Auditorium in April. Since then, scores of panelists and community volunteers and two of three staff members have resigned or announced plans to boycott the conference. ( Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer )

I have resisted weighing in through three months of editorials, op-eds and letters to the editor on the upheaval at the Conference on World Affairs. But this week's article quoting the new CWA director John Griffin's dismissive attitude toward the loss of 85 CWA speakers has pushed me over the edge.

So, in the spirit of the CWA, I'd like to present and review some of the information as published in Daily Camera news articles, editorials and letters and then ask readers to weigh this information so they may form their own opinions about the new leadership and direction of the CWA.

Let's start with the most recent boycotting of next year's event by 85 current and former participants. Dr. Griffin responds that some of these panelists might not have been invited back or that they are not "representative of the broader group who have more of a commitment or loyalty to the conference itself."

Advertisement

So which of the 85 CWA participants who signed this editorial are the ones who don't have commitment or loyalty to the CWA? Perhaps it's Michael Stoff, a distinguished professor at UT Austin and lecturer from the Organization of American Historians who has been coming every year to the CWA for the past 25 years? Or Seth Shostak, a world-renowned astronomer who has made his spring journey to Boulder for 14 years. Which of the panelists wouldn't be asked to return? Ike Wilson (6 years), director of West Point's American politics, public policy and strategy program? Or Joe Cirincione (9 years) a world leader in nuclear weapons policy and conflict resolution? Both, when they appear on a panel, consistently fill sections of the Glenn Miller Ballroom because of their knowledge and balanced thinking.

What about fundraising? In several articles, the new CWA director has been credited for "record breaking fundraising." According to university spokesman Bronson Hilliard, CWA recorded $256,000 in private donations in 2015, exceeding 2014 revenue by $35,200. This number includes a first-time, $100,000 pledge from CU president Bruce Benson — a pledge that was made to the CWA's sister program, Athenaeum, and not to the operating budget of the CWA. Based on these numbers, from a CWA-specific standpoint, the 2015 CWA brought in $156,000, or a decrease in revenues of almost 30 percent. Also, this fundraising hit does not include the money that people have chosen not to donate, which, based on letters to the editor and comments to these letters, as well as Jane Butcher's decision to pull a $1 million donation to the endowment, appears to be considerable.

What about the exodus of staff and volunteer leadership? "It's my first year in this role, and I'm working to get my bearings and to bring energy and dedication to the role of director." Between early April, when Dr. Griffin made this statement, and today, two of the three full-time paid staff members for the conference have resigned and more than three-quarters of the volunteer community leadership posts have been vacated — which translates to some 41 volunteers, including 28 with leadership positions. Imagine if you were running a company and 66 percent of your paid employees resigned in one month. Then over 70 percent of your volunteers in leadership positions also leave. Could any company survive such a loss of talent and institutional knowledge?

And finally, Dr. Griffin's own misrepresentation of the facts: On May 23: "He added that 86 percent of participants reported that they want to come back next year." Well, not quite. In this week's article, Dr. Griffin states that it's 83 percent, but only 61 percent of panelists responded to the survey. And he is including people who say they will definitely return or "probably" return. I'd like to know why 39 percent of participants who are committed enough to come to Boulder on their own dime didn't fill out a survey. And of the 83 percent (or 86 percent) of participants who completed the survey and "want to come back next year," what percent of those said "probably" or with a contingency that leadership changes would need to occur for them to return?

There are many of us who have been lucky enough to attend the CWA — for a short time or for years. There are also a lot of people in our community who, because of full-time jobs, or kids, or busy lives, have not been able to be part of such a special forum. Whatever your experience with this conference, it is clear that it will not be the same. Some blame the old timers who didn't want change. Others think that big oil and conservative interests have interfered. But in the spirit of the conference that was, you decide.

Amy Hunsaker lives in Boulder.