The movie “Concussion” opened on Christmas Day. I haven’t seen it yet, but I will, because I’m immensely fascinated by the brain. One thing is certain — I don’t need to see the movie to know it will be a divisive film.

Football is sacrosanct in America, and there are millions of lives and dollars wrapped up in the game. In its most honorable aspects, football provides its players team-building and character development, and its fans with excitement and a sense of belonging. It is a complex game, and questions about Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy, or CTE as it has come to be known, have added to the complexity.

CTE is a degenerative disease of the brain caused by repetitive head trauma. It includes both symptomatic concussions and asymptomatic subconcussions and is associated with impaired judgment and impulse control, aggression, depression, and dementia. Brain tissue of more than 100 former football players has tested positive for CTE; some 5,000 current and former players have joined class action lawsuits against the National Football League.

Mike Webster, Terry Long, Andre Waters and Justin Strzelczyk made up the inaugural class of former football players diagnosed with CTE; Dave Duerson, Junior Seau and Richmond’s own Ray Easterling were diagnosed with it too. Frank Gifford, who recently passed away from natural causes, was found to have had CTE, just as his family suspected. In the months and years leading up to their deaths, all of them demonstrated the cognitive and behavioral dysfunction we now know to be the effects of traumatic brain injury, and they and their families suffered through the progressive deterioration of personal lives and careers.

A long-forgotten blow to the head has been misdiagnosed as a learning disability, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, epilepsy, bipolar disorder and Alzheimer’s Disease, just to name a few. Dr. Wayne A. Gordon, director of the Brain Injury Research Center of Mount Sinai says, “Unidentified traumatic brain injury is an unrecognized major source of social and vocational failure.”

In a recent study by Virginia Commonwealth University and the Department of Juvenile Justice, more than 50 percent of children remanded into the juvenile justice system over 20 months reported a history of sustaining at least one traumatic brain injury. Similar studies have shown higher rates among incarcerated adults.

We see brain injury at higher rates in the homeless, in children who have been abused by a parent, and in women who have been assaulted by a domestic partner. It is a frequent cause of job loss and underemployment.

While the General Assembly has created important sports concussion legislation and appropriated money for a limited scope of community-based supports, it’s not enough for the estimated 28,000 Virginians who will experience a trauma related brain injury this year or the more than 100,000 who are disabled as a result of brain injury.

As the 2016 General Assembly session nears, the Brain Injury Association of Virginia and the Virginia Alliance of Brain Injury Service Providers are helping legislators understand the data that underscores Virginians’ needs, and we’re asking them to support expanding core safety net services for persons with brain injury and their caregivers.

We are also going to be working to bring home individuals with brain injury who currently are being sent out of state to receive the care they require. This strategy has significant financial and human costs. It separates families for long periods of time. It creates jobs somewhere other than Virginia. It costs more to provide care where cost-of-living expenses are significantly higher. It perpetuates Virginia’s ongoing institutional bias, and it stymies development of an affordable, accessible, appropriate system of care for persons with brain injury in Virginia.

Whether you think CTE is fact or fiction, “Concussion” will shine a light onto what happens to people because of repeated so-called “mild brain injury.” It will help explain why the brain is so vulnerable, and how seemingly mild but repetitive trauma damages our amazingly fragile systems. You will begin to understand the resulting changes in behavior, physical health and cognitive functioning, and wonder why you didn’t realize any of this sooner.

I said I didn’t need to see the movie to know it would be divisive. Nor do I need to see it to know people will have questions. How many concussions is too many? Are my risks of Alzheimer’s and dementia higher because I played football or soccer, or fell off my bike or skateboard a lot? There are no clear answers to some of these questions, but there is a place to turn for information, support and resources. The Brain Injury Association of Virginia operates a toll-free helpline, staffed with people who are deeply committed to our mission of providing help, hope and healing. Our web address is www.biav.net; we can also be reached at info@biav.net, (800) 444-6443 or (804) 355-5748. We want to help; please reach out.