While Gov. Pat Quinn has touted the low premiums offered on the Illinois health insurance exchange, consumers' average total cost of coverage could be more than triple the monthly payments to carriers, according to a Crain's analysis.

The federal mandate to have insurance will push into the market many people who never have purchased policies before, particularly “young invincibles” who often skip coverage in the belief they will remain healthy. They may be shocked by the out-of-pocket costs.

For example, a 27-year-old who buys the most common, bare-minimum plan could on average spend as much as $8,710 a year on health care, or more than three times the annual premium after including co-payments and deductibles, according to a review of plans offered in Cook County. For some plans, out-of-pocket spending could be more than four times the annual premium, Crain's found. A consumer's cost depends on actual medical bills, which for young adults typically are low but can soar with a major accident or serious illness.

Outrage over the cancellation of cheaper, existing policies has forced Mr. Quinn to delay for one year some key requirements of the Affordable Care Act, following the Obama administration's lead.

Attention to cost is likely to intensify, as an estimated 500,000 consumers and small businesses enroll in the Illinois Health Insurance Marketplace, which is emerging from an avalanche of errors that crippled the federal website, where purchases are actually made. Policies that start Jan. 1 must be bought in the next two weeks.

The Quinn administration has not studied the total cost to Illinois consumers of plans sold on the exchange, officials say. Experts caution consumers to do their homework.

Story continues below interactive graphic

THE TOTAL COST OF INSURANCE Policies with low premiums require consumers to pay higher out-of-pocket costs in the form of deductibles and co-payments. Depending on the size of annual medical bills, policies with higher monthly premiums may be better bargains. Crain's estimated the total out-of-pocket cost to a 27-year-old policyholder on the Illinois health insurance exchange. The plans are divided into metal categories, with platinum plans offering the most coverage. Each line below represents one of 71 plans offered in Cook County by five carriers. To see how a consumer's share of the cost increases, select a plan and move your cursor. Aetna plan Aetna plan Aetna plan Aetna plan Aetna plan Aetna plan Aetna plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Blue Cross plan Coventry plan Coventry plan Coventry plan Coventry plan Coventry plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Humana plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan Lincoln plan All plans Platinum Gold Silver Bronze Catastrophic All plans Note: Cost-sharing between the policyholder and carrier typically varies by health care service. For simplicity, a fixed percentage is assumed. This analysis uses the inpatient physician service coinsurance rate. It also assumes that members are receiving all services from in-network providers. Source: Plans offered on the Illinois Health Insurance Marketplace $0 $20,000

Click here for the non-interactive graphic that appeared in print

“It's incredibly important that people look at the full range of potential costs for a plan,” says Jennifer Tolbert, director of state health reform at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a Menlo Park, Calif.-based nonprofit. “Having significant out-of-pocket costs can be a financial strain for many people.”

Ahead of the disastrous, nationwide debut of the exchanges on Oct. 1, the Quinn administration trumpeted the premiums in Illinois, saying they were lower than many states' and more than 25 percent lower than predictions.

Even so, premiums on the exchange are much higher than “bare-bones” plans that will be phased out in 2015.

Nonetheless, Charles Dabah, 27, says he plans to shop on the exchange. His current Blue Cross plan, which costs less than $100 a month, was canceled but can be reinstated.

“It's worth the effort to see what else is out there,” says Mr. Dabah, a North Side resident who works two part-time jobs.

To provide a glimpse into total cost, Crain's used applications submitted by insurers to the state and data posted on HealthCare.gov, the federal exchange, to analyze 71 plans offered in Cook County by five carriers. Crain's compared premiums to an individual consumer's estimated total cost, the sum of out-of-pocket spending and premiums. The maximum cost is the limit of a consumer's spending.

The plans are divided into categories based on coverage, with bronze plans, the most common, offering the second-lowest amount.

The examination focused on 27-year-olds, a key age for young invincibles, who generally range from 18 to 34. That group is critical to the economics of the exchanges, which need generally healthy young adults to counterbalance older or chronically ill customers.

The analysis does not include premium tax credits available to some consumers and assumes all care is provided by in-network physicians and hospitals.

In general, out-of-pocket spending climbs until the deductible is reached, when insurance begins to cover some expenses. Even after it is reached, many plans still require cost-sharing. That means consumer spending continues to rise, albeit more slowly, until the out-of-pocket maximum is hit.

Among the key findings:

• Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois offers the cheapest or near the cheapest average total costs for policyholders in every category of coverage. The average maximum cost for the carrier's six bronze plans is $8,066 a year.

• Because of its low premiums, Blue Cross typically has the widest gap between premiums and maximum cost.

• Aetna Inc. is on average the most expensive, at a maximum of $9,406 a year for bronze coverage.

The Illinois Department of Insurance did not analyze total costs because it would have been too “complicated,” Director Andrew Boron says. The state's role is to determine if plans meet statutory requirements, he adds.

A spokesman for Blue Cross, with 68 percent of the individual insurance market, says, “We have a lot of information to use to offer prices that we thought were going to be very, very competitive.”

Aetna is moving slowly into the Illinois exchange, a spokeswoman says. The Hartford, Conn.-based insurer is the fourth-largest individual insurer in the state, with 5 percent of the market.

While Land of Lincoln Health Inc. Co-op's premiums are high, its average deductible of $2,874 is the lowest, Crain's found. Only about a third of people with a $2,500 deductible actually reach it, says Dan Yunker, CEO of the Chicago-based startup. “We thought that we needed to offer more benefits upfront,” he adds.

Crain's analysis suggests that some consumers could pay less for health care if they shoulder a larger monthly premium, but they also should be cautious about splurging.

“Pick the level of deductible that you're able to afford,” says Steve Riedl, a Chicago-based senior consulting actuary at Towers Watson.

For complete coverage of Chicago-area health care news, visit ChicagoHealthCareDaily.com.