FT. LAUDERDALE, FL --(Marketwired - April 29, 2016) - BusinessCash announces an increase in accounts receivable factoring services for their healthcare staffing clients in the first quarter of 2016. The healthcare segment of the US staffing market grew 20% in 2015 and is projected to grow another 16% in 2016 according to Staffing Industry Analysts. The Affordable Care Act has been a major influence over the increased demand for nurses which in turn is fueling the increased business for medical staffing recruiters. This strong growth has fueled BusinessCash's nurse staffing recruiting agency clients' needs for payroll financing and related factoring services.

Travel nurse staffing agencies and their need for temp payroll funding services have seen the largest increase for BusinessCash. This sub-segment of healthcare staffing experienced revenue growth of 38% in 2015 and is projected to grow 22% in 2016 according to Staffing Industry Analysts. Medical staffing factoring companies have been an integral part of funding this segment of staffing.

Chris Curtin, BusinessCash's National Sales Manager, said, "The demand for travel nurse staffing payroll funding along with medical transcription, locum tenens, and allied health has been quite strong in the first quarter of 2016. Our receivable factoring, payroll and credit protection programs are instrumental in helping the staffing industry meet their working capital needs through periods of growth and transition."

Curtin goes on to say, "BusinessCash is also one of the few payroll funding companies that is start-up friendly. We love helping budding entrepreneurs start their own staffing company."

About BusinessCash

Since 1998, BusinessCash.com has offered solutions to tough business working capital problems including, extreme cash flow issues, rising expenses and shrinking profit margins. From wholesalers to temporary staffing agencies, from government contractors to oil and gas industry suppliers, business owners grow their companies through Invoice Factoring, AR Management, Credit Protection, Merchant Cash Advance Consolidation and Purchase Order Funding with BusinessCash.com. To get funded now, please call 866-598-4295 or visit http://www.businesscash.com.