Taken on Fujifilm Neopan 1600 with a Minolta SRT-Super equipped with a 50mm f/1.4 lens...This photo was from a recent photographers' rights rally. Photo by Brian Auer via Flickr Creative Commons

1. Injunction issued for six gangs in Echo Park (KPCC)

A judge Thursday signed off on a permanent gang injunction aimed at six rival gangs in the Echo Park area — Echo Park Locos, the Crazys, the Big Top Locos, the Diamond Street Lococs, Frogtown Rifa and Head Hunters — creating what authorities call a “safety zone.”

The "zone" perimeter: L.A. River to the north, 110 Freeway to the east, Beverly Boulevard to south and Glendale Boulevard to the west. The injunction prohibits two or more listed gang members from associating in any way in public.

2. Radioactive rods could stay at SONGS for centuries, but first they need seven years to cool down (KPCC)

During a public meeting Thursday night, the NRC discussed the cost of decommissioning the San Onofre plant, and how storage of highly radioactive waste will be managed on site. Initial preparation can take one to two years. That includes de-energizing electrical systems among other work.

Subsequent steps involve placing radioactive fuel rods into deep pools to allow them to cool. That can take seven years or more. The rods are then transferred to dry casks, where they could remain on site for centuries or longer.

3. Local haunts—Theme parks scare up Halloween inspiration (KPCC)

Knott’s Berry Farm and Universal Studios Hollywood are engaged in their annual Halloween gore-off, each dishing out terrifyingly huge sums of money into the construction of elaborate haunted mazes and hiring thousands of actors to chase guests around the theme parks.

"Haunt" happens in Buena Park at Knott's while in Los Angeles, Universal Studios offers "Halloween Horror Nights," an event that works with studios to get detailed, realistic sets and makeup based on popular movies and TV shows such as "The Walking Dead."

4. 'Young Invincibles' a key to success of Obamacare (KPCC)

The so-called "Young Invincibles" is a term long-used by the insurance industry to describe 18- to 34-year-olds who perceive themselves to be invincible and thus consider health insurance unnecessary.

As the nation prepares to enroll uninsured Americans into health insurance policies under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) or "Obamacare," a lot is riding on this demographic. If they buy insurance it will help balance the cost of caring for older, sicker people. If not, premiums could skyrocket, endangering one of Obamacare's main goals: affordable insurance.

5. It's our fault the climate is changing, says science (NPR)

Declaring that "human influence on the climate system is clear," a U.N.-assembled panel of scientists reported Friday that "it is extremely likely that human influence has been the dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid-20th century."

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which brings together hundreds of researchers from around the world, adds that "warming in the climate system is unequivocal and since 1950 many changes have been observed throughout the climate system that are unprecedented over decades to millennia."

6. Gil Garcetti celebrates Disney Hall with the ironworkers who built it (KPCC)

Most everyone who sees the Walt Disney Concert Disney Hall thinks of Frank Gehry, its architect. True, he had the dream, but without a highly trained crew of ironworkers, it'd still be a dream.

On the Hall's 10th anniversary, local ironworkers celebrated their efforts and were joined in the celebration by former L.A. County District Atttorney Gil Garcetti. After Gil Garcetti (father to mayor Eric Garcetti) retired from politics, he took up what he called his "second major career," photography.