WEST NEW YORK ― After a six-year absence as the head coach of the Bayonne High School football team, Rick Rodriguez has led his team on a gradual return to prominence over the past three seasons, trying to rekindle the days when the Bees were a team to be feared

“When I was gone, teams separated from us and we went the opposite way,” Rodriguez said before last night’s game against Memorial. “They got better and we didn’t, but we’re trying to catch up now to get back to where we were before. It’s a lot harder the second time around, though.”

If last night’s 52-12 victory over the Tigers (3-5) at Joseph N. Coviello Field is any indication, the Bees (5-3) might be further along than Rodriguez thinks. The win puts Bayonne into position to make the playoffs for the second time in Rodriguez’s second stint with the team.

While some early trickery from the home team put the Bees in a 6-0 hole, Bayonne came back with a vengeance, controlling the game on offense as well as defense from thereon.

Wide receiver/linebacker Damon Small led the Bees with four catches for 172 yards and four touchdowns, in addition to securing the interception that set up the Bees first score.

The interception, which led to a 12-yard score by senior running back Xavier Matos (148 yards, three touchdowns), was the first of two turnovers that gave the Bees favorable field position in the first quarter.

The latter came in the form of a fumble recovery on the Memorial 31-yard line. This time, Small capitalized on offense, hauling in a 31-yard touchdown reception from sophomore quarterback Zymire Gordon to put the Bees ahead 14-6. Gordon had a stellar night as well, finishing the game with 172 passing yards and four scores, while also snatching an interception that led to another Matos rushing touchdown.

Senior Josh Patrovich scooped up another turnover for the Bees in the second half, returning a fumble recovery 99 yards for a touchdown, as Bayonne took a 38-12 lead.

With their playoff hopes on the line, the Tigers started the game with a splash of innovation on offense. On the second play, senior quarterback Bobby Bailey tossed a pass out to Jorge Ortez, who reeled in the catch, and then chucked a pass of his own downfield to a wide open Marcus Vegas.

Ortez would later score on an 11-yard touchdown pass from Bailey in the second quarter, cutting the Bees’ lead to 20-12.

With their first eight games in the books, the Bees will now wait to see what seed they end up with in the North 2, Group 5 playoffs. But no matter what they’re seeded, Rodriguez feels the Bees’ schedule, which has included matchups against St. Peter’s Prep (7-1) and Sparta (6-1), has Bayonne prepared for any obstacle.

“We just play one game at a time,” said Rodriguez, who coached the team from 2001 to 2004 and guided the Bees to their only state title in 2002. "We’ve played some of the toughest teams in the state of New Jersey. Our schedule is unbelievable, it’s like a South Eastern Conference schedule, but it’s good because when we get to the playoffs, we’ll be battle tested.”

Bayonne (5-3) 14 18 13 7 – 52

Memorial (3-5) 6 6 0 0 – 12

(M): Marcus Vegas 85 pass from Jorge Ortez (kick blocked).

(B): Xavier Matos 12 run (Xavier Matos kick).

(B): Damon Small 31 pass from Zymire Gordon (Xavier Matos kick).

(B): Damon Small 46 pass from Zymire Gordon (kick failed).

(M): Jorge Ortez 11 pass from Bobby Bailey (pass failed).

(B): Damon Small 76 pass from Zymire Gordon (pass failed).

(B): Xavier Matos 11 run (kick failed).

(B): Josh Patrovich 99 fumble return (Xavier Matos kick).

(B): Damon Small 19 pass from Zymire Gordon (kick failed).

(B): Xavier Matos 16 run (Xavier Matos).