Seminar to Address Effectiveness of Obamacare

University of Illinois economist Robert Kaestner will discuss impacts of the act on jobs, bankruptcy rates, and the economy on Nov. 9

Share this article:

By Robert Parsons

RIVERSIDE, Calif. – The Affordable Care Act – Obamacare, as it is also known – is perhaps one of the most sweeping and controversial laws to be enacted to date. Robert Kaestner, a professor in the Institute of Government and Public Affairs and the Department of Economics at the University of Illinois at Chicago, will discuss impacts of the act in a lecture at UC Riverside on Monday, Nov. 9.

Kaestner, who will join the UCR School of Public Policy faculty in July 2017, will speak from 12:30 to 2 p.m. in Highlander Union Building 265. The event – titled “What Has the Affordable Care Act Done? Is it a Job Killer? Did it Reduce Bankruptcy?” – is part of the School of Public Policy Seminar Series, and is free and open to the public. Seating is limited, so reservations are requested and may be made online.

Kaestner’s research interests include the social and economic determinants of health and its demography, as well as labor and social policy evaluation.

He has published over 100 articles in academic journals, and is the recipient of an Article of the Year award in 2011 by AcademyHealth, as well as the Frank R Breul Memorial Prize in 2012 for best publication in Social Services Review. In addition, he serves as co-editor/managing editor for the Journal of Policy Analysis and Management and associate editor for the Journal of Health Economics, American Journal of Health Economics, and Review of Economics of the Household. He also serves on the editorial board of Demography.

Kaestner currently serves as a consultant for the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, research assistant for the National Bureau of Economic Research, and affiliated scholar for the Urban Institute.

He received his B.A. and M.A. from Binghamton University, and his Ph.D. in economics from the University of New York.

Archived under: Politics/Society, Affordable Care Act, economics, press release, public policy, School of Public Policy

Top of Page