Good morning. Here are some of the headlines we're following this morning:

1. U.S. Adventurer's Find 'Consistent' With MH370 Theory

The location of a piece of possible debris from Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370 is consistent with theories about where the wreckage may lie, Australia's transport minister said Thursday as victims' families called for a full search of the east African coast. The metal fragment, which could be part of the missing Boeing 777's horizontal stabilizer, was found by American adventurer Blaine Gibson in a sandbank off Mozambique. Read more in NEWS.

2. Here's How Donald Trump Would Replace Obamacare

In a seven-point plan posted to his website and publicized by a tweet, Trump says he will do away with the individual health insurance mandate, as well as allow competition over states lines for health care plans, and block grant Medicaid to the states, allowing them to follow through on his prescription to "eliminate fraud, waste and abuse to preserve our precious resources." Read more in POLITICS.

I am going to repeal and replace ObamaCare! Read more about my positions on healthcare reform here: https://t.co/WwIVhIud06 — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 2, 2016

3. How Much Is Ben Carson's Donor List Worth? Millions

Ben Carson may be about to suspend his presidential campaign, but the massive donor list lives on — and is potentially worth millions. While the retired surgeon didn't win many delegates, his campaign did convince more than 700,000 people to give money, and now has a lucrative opportunity to rent the donors' names and contact information to other candidates, political committees or for-profit data brokers again and again. Read more in POLITICS.

4. Clinton Projects Inevitability After Super Tuesday Wins

Following her strong performance on Super Tuesday, Hillary Clinton and her team projected an inevitable path to the nomination Wednesday as challenger Bernie Sanders and his campaign promised to mount a comeback. Read more in POLITICS.

Play Facebook

Twitter

Google Plus

Embed Clinton Wins Big on Super Tuesday, Turns Focus on Trump 2:26 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

5. Mitt Romney to Deliver Address on 2016 Presidential Race

Aides to the former Massachusetts governor say they expect him to speak out against Donald Trump, and praise Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz and John Kasich. Romney's comments will be focused on "the state of the race," likely echoing past criticism of Trump for failing to release his tax returns, and not decisively distancing himself from the Klu Klux Klan. Read more in POLITICS.

6. Cardinal on Abuse Claim: 'I Should Have Done More'

senior Vatican official said he should have done more to stop the sexual abuse of children in the Catholic Church, acknowledging that he was told of at least one priest "misbehaving" with boys at an Australian school. Cardinal George Pell, the Vatican's treasurer, said he did nothing when a boy at a Christian Brothers school in rural Victoria state mentioned the behavior "casually in conversation" in the mid-1970s. Read more in NEWS.

Play Facebook

Twitter

Google Plus

Embed Vatican's Treasurer: I Should Have Done More to Prevent Sex Abuse 1:11 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

7. Nina Simone Biopic Trailer Stirs Backlash

The trailer for the long-rumored Nina Simone biopic "Nina" was released Wednesday and along with it came some of the same criticism that first surfaced when the public found out that actress Zoe Saldana would be playing the renowned jazz musician and vocalist. Read more in NEWS.

8. Century-Old Ty Cobb Baseball Cards Found in Paper Bag

This treasure almost ended up in the trash. Seven century-old baseball cards found recently inside a crumpled paper bag in the south have been authenticated as rare Ty Cobb cards, a California-based memorabilia expert announced Wednesday. The seven T206 Ty Cobb cards from a 1909-1911 series are expected to be worth "well into the seven figures" altogether. Read more in NEWS.