Rep. Patrick McHenry maintains strong opposition to abortion, Obamacare

ADAM LAWSON

Staff Writer

Lincoln County’s representative in Congress is unfazed by this week’s failed attempt to defund Planned Parenthood and repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Chief Deputy Whip Patrick McHenry, who represents the county in North Carolina’s 10th Congressional District, sent out a statement shortly after a veto override attempt fell short by a 241-186 vote, pledging to try again once President Barack Obama’s term concludes in January.

“While today’s veto override vote failed, it is important to remember what can be accomplished once President Obama leaves office,” McHenry said Tuesday. “I remain fully committed to repealing Obamacare and defunding Planned Parenthood and their heinous acts. Congress has now demonstrated each of these can be achieved in a year’s time.”

McHenry, a Denver resident, has voiced staunch opposition to abortion since he first took office in 2005. While in Washington, the Republican has championed bills banning federal health insurance coverage for the procedure, voted against allowing human embryonic stem cell research, voted to prohibit transferring minors across state lines for abortions and supported barring family planning assistance that supported abortion.

Undercover videos appearing to show Planned Parenthood workers attempting to sell body parts from abortions went viral last summer. Almost immediately after they were released, McHenry and most of his fellow Republicans in Congress attempted to take action against the women’s rights and health organization.

“In light of their awful videos that exposed their abortion-for-baby-parts business, we called the Department of Justice to investigate,” McHenry told the Lincoln Times-News on Thursday. “We’re having hearings and we’re investigating this here on Capitol Hill. The fact is we shouldn’t have taxpayer funding of abortions and so we put a bill on the president’s desk that stops Planned Parenthood from using our tax dollars. That’s a huge step forward.”

In September, The Hill reported that the DOJ is supporting Planned Parenthood in Louisiana’s attempt to defund the organization. In August, an analysis confirmed that the videos were altered, and last month a Texas grand jury indicted two activists who produced the video on felony charges of tampering with a government record.

Planned Parenthood isn’t allowed to use federal funds to perform abortion services, though McHenry said it uses that money for “wrap-around services” instead.

“What I’ve sponsored for legislation is to stop this since they are the number-one abortion provider in the country,” he said. “They provide an average of one abortion every two minutes. Abortions make up 94 percent of their pregnancy services. Rather than give money to Planned Parenthood, I think we should give that money to community health clinics.”

Planned Parenthood claims only 3 percent of its services are abortion-related, and that STD testing and treatment, cancer screening and prevention and other women’s health services make up a bulk of its total services. That number was widely criticized for treating all services, regardless of cost, equally.

The 94-percent figure was derived from the Susan B. Anthony List, a pro-life advocacy group aiming to end abortion. The SBA List came to its numbers by comparing abortions to two other pregnancy services, according to the Washington Post.

The Washington Post’s Fact Checker website argues that both numbers are misleading, and that advocates and opponents of abortion rights claim between 15-37 percent of the organization’s non-government revenue comes from services related to the procedure.

Still, the longtime congressman plans on remaining a staunch abortion opponent. In a 2015 press release, McHenry called the 1973 Supreme Court verdict in Roe v. Wade legalizing abortion nationally a “tragic” decision. His campaign website refers to him as a “leader in the pro-life movement” and the National Right to Life Committee continues to give him a 100-percent grade.

“It’s been my agenda to foster the protection of human life from natural conception to natural death and I’ll continue to do that,” McHenry said. “I’ll continue to stand up strongly for the right to the life of the unborn and push back to those who commit abortion.”

In targeting Obamacare, McHenry wants to replace the Affordable Care Act with something he believes is more practical. He said Congress is working on substantial plans to replace it, and that the only thing standing in the way of progress is a new president.

McHenry said he wants to negotiate with health insurers and allow people to seek health insurance across state lines.

“Obamacare is a disaster,” he said. “It raises the price of premiums for my constituents. It makes healthcare more expensive, and the plan that I support would replace Obamacare with important measures.”

If McHenry advances past a March primary against Republican challengers Albert Wiley Jr. and Jeff Gregory, he will face Democratic financial planner Andy Millard in November’s general election.

Image courtesy of LTN File