Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

5

»

DENVER -- The Daily Camera received 28 awards Saturday — including a Best of Show honor and 10 first-place awards for best news photograph, news story, multimedia, website design for a daily, deadline news reporting, editorial writing, series, education story, use of social media in breaking news and sports event story.

The awards were presented by the Colorado Press Association on Saturday night at the Westin Denver Downtown Hotel. The Camera competed statewide in the CPA's Class 8, which is newspapers with daily circulation of 15,001 to 50,000.

Among the Camera's honors were:

Charlie Brennan and former staff writer John Aguilar won the Best of Show for Editorial Excellence, along with first place for best news story for their piece "... and the water kept RISING" on the 2013 flood.

Camera staff, first place for best deadline news reporting, best daily website design for SecondStoryGarage.com and best use of social media in breaking news for coverage of the 2013 flood.

Sports staff best sports event story.

Sarah Kuta, first place, series, for University of Colorado philosophy department in crisis, first place, education story, for CU moves to fire professor and a third place for best deadline news reporting on CU moving to fire professor.

Jeremy Papasso, first place for best multimedia, "Reflections of the Boulder County Flood," second place fort feature photograph, second place for photo essay, "1,000 Year Rain," and second place for photography portfolio.

David R, Jennings took first place for news photograph, while Cliff Grassmick took second place for news photograph, sports photograph, and third place for photo portfolio. Paul Aiken won third place for news photograph.

Former editorial page editor Erika Stutzman took first place for editorial writing.

Among second place honors:

Joe Prentice, for feature page design, the Camera staff for editorial layout and design.

Staff in website daily/community forSecondStoryGarage.com

Camera staff in sustained coverage for '1,000-Year Flood; Historic Rain,

Camera staff for editorial special section, "One Year Stronger,"

Chris Schmaedeke for headline writing.

Third place winners:

Alexandra Sieh for feature page design.

Alicia Wallace for business feature story

Brian Howell for sports story.

The Camera's sister publications also were honored Saturday.

Among them, the Longmont Times-Call won five honors, the Reporter-Herald garnered two, the Broomfield Enterprise won 12 awards, the Colorado Daily one and the Estes Park Trail-Gazette nine.