Take care of Alameda Thursday first

Sophomore Alize Marquez (left) sets up freshman Haley Lewis for a strike in Thursday's win over Alameda (Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times)

With a colossal match against Elizabeth High School coming on Tuesday, head coach Cami Weimer and the Fort Morgan Mustangs' volleyball team had a strong message leading up to the game.

Bring it on.

"We're ready to see who owns this conference," Weimer said leading up to the match. "Our girls are ready to come out and play hard. We are so excited for this opportunity we have provided for ourselves. Bring it on."

Before the game with the Cardinals, Fort Morgan had a home contest on Thursday against the Alameda Pirates during homecoming week to work on fixing and tuning up some techniques and build up some more confidence.

Sophomore Alycia Romero (left) and freshman Kelsey Shaver discuss strategy during a serve in Thursday's sweep against Alameda (Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times)

Early in set one, it was clear Thursday night would belong to the Mustangs. Fort Morgan jumped out to a 4-0 lead, then forced the Pirates to use a timeout after a 10-3 lead. With strong serves getting points and another dominant performance at the net, they cruised on to a 25-7 set win, making it look easy.

The second set would be a lot closer, in large part due to some missed hits and mistakes by the Mustangs. The Pirates traded points early, before a run helped them get ahead 17-10 in the second set. Despite the struggles and mistakes, Fort Morgan rallied with a huge run, scoring 15 of the final 18 points in the set to comeback and get a 25-20 victory.

"Sometimes you have those games, and it's only about us getting better," Weimer said about the second set. "It's tough to maintain that high level of play all the time, but I know these girls are capable of doing it, and I don't expect anything less than what I know they can do."

Set three would mirror set one, with the Mustangs jumping out to a 12-4 start and never looking back. Fort Morgan would steamroll their way to a 25-12 win, sweeping the Pirates.

"It's a great feeling, these girls have to realize that this is a huge accomplishment and we're not done yet," Weimer said about extending their win streak to seven. "I know they want more. It's a great feeling, but we're excited for more."

The Mustangs scored 16 of their 75 points on serves, with sophomore Jordyn Rivera and Alycia Romero leading the way with four each. Junior Karli Baker led Fort Morgan with nine kills, while senior Isabelle Garver was second with six. Senior Maddy Linton set up her teammates all night long, leading the squad with 10 assists.

The win moves the Mustangs up to 6-0 in 4A Colorado 7 league play, and 10-6 overall. They will now face their toughest challenge of the season against fellow unbeaten conference opponent Elizabeth, who also sits 6-0 in conference play and has their own current seven-game win streak as well.

The biggest volleyball match of the season will take place at Fort Morgan High School Tuesday, with action scheduled to tip off at 6:30 p.m.

Contact Time Sports Writer Brandon Boles at 970-867-5651 or bboles@fortmorgantimes.com