Topics: Affordable Care Act, health insurance, health insurance marketplace, Healthcare Reform, king v. burwell, Obamacare, Phil Gramm, Republicans, Supreme Court, Wall Street Journal, Politics News

The longstanding dream of Republicans in Congress has been to kill the Affordable Care Act by letting people or states opt out of its provisions. In the years since the law’s passage, the legislative landscape has been pockmarked with “opt-out” proposals: John Barrasso and Lindsey Graham introduced a 2011 bill allowing states to duck out of the individual mandate, expanded Medicaid, and coverage mandates; John McCain backs legislation allowing individuals to escape the individual mandate and the tax penalties for not maintaining minimum coverage. Typically, Republicans are up-front about the purpose of these bills. “I’m confident that if given the chance, a large number of states would opt-out of the provisions regarding the individual mandate, employer mandate, and expansion of Medicaid,” Lindsey Graham said of his bill in 2011. “As more states opt-out, it will have the effect of repealing and replacing Obamacare.”

That wasn’t exactly true – opt-out bills are all about repealing Obamacare, and have nothing to do with replacing it. They fit into the broader pattern of the GOP being endlessly creative in their efforts to scuttle the law, but completely incapable of formulating a coherent healthcare reform proposal of their own. The renewed threat to Obamacare posed by King v. Burwell has left Republicans scrambling to finally break through five years of policy inertia and come up with a plan, and former Sen. Phil Gramm thinks he’s hit on something.

Gramm calls it, amusingly, the “freedom option.” It’s another opt-out proposal that would be put in place if the Supreme Court rules that states using federal health exchanges are ineligible for federal tax credits. As Gramm describes it in a Wall Street Journal Op-Ed, the “freedom option” would “guarantee the right of individuals and businesses to opt out of Obamacare” and purchase whatever insurance they wanted at whatever price they could get on the newly deregulated market. Sounds good, right? I mean, given the option, who wouldn’t choose “freedom”?

But as Jonathan Cohn points out, all Gramm is proposing here is allowing people to return to the pre-Obamacare days of young people buying cheap, barebones coverage while the old and sick find themselves either priced out of the market or denied coverage altogether. “Freedom” is terrific, so long as you don’t plan on getting sick or hurt.