JIM PEARSON / SPECIAL TO THE GLEANER 1st Congressional District candidate Mike Pape (R) speaks during the "Measure the Candidates" forum hosted by Kentucky Farm Bureau Monday, April 11, 2016 at the Ballard Convention Center in Madisonville, Ky.

By Rebecca Walter, Kentucky New Era

First Congressional District candidate Michael Pape released his first televised campaign advertisement this week, and it's gaining attention far beyond the Western Kentucky district he hopes to represent.

The ad titled "Stop" depicts illegal immigrants coming into the U.S. as a way to show Pape supports presidential candidates Donald Trump's plan to build a wall at the Mexican border and Sen. Ted Cruz's efforts to repeal Obamacare.

Posted Wednesday, the ad had been viewed over 9,400 times by Thursday evening. It also received national media attention, with stories about it appearing on ABC News and Yahoo. Comments to the ad posted on YouTube ranged from complete support to outright distain.

"He's got my vote. Live and Die by The Wall," one person wrote, as others suggested the ad relies heavily on racial stereotypes and serves as embarrassment to Kentucky.

"I grew up in Paducah, KY which is a part of the district you are running to represent," wrote an individual identified by the screen name Samuel Whittaker. "This ad is terribly racist, and you, Mr. Pape, are appealing to the worst feelings in our area … You should be ashamed of yourself."

The ad shows three men with Hispanic accents speaking some Spanish, but mostly English, as they cut through a fence at what's supposed to be the U.S. border with Mexico.

The trio are all wearing political T-shirts with the slogans "Stop Donald Trump," "Stop Ted Cruz" and "Stop Pape" written on them.

Throughout his campaign, Pape has placed his stance against illegal immigrations at the forefront and cast himself as a "political outsider."

"Once through, we will stop Donald Trump," one of the three men in the ad says.

"Si," another responds before inserting, "Ted Cruz too."

"And Señor Mike Pape!" a third adds, to which the other two ask, "Who?"

"Mike Pape, the conservative running for Congress that will help Trump build the wall," the man in the "Stop Pape" shirt explains.

"Will this Mike Pape help Ted Cruz repeal Obamacare?" One asks for clarification.

"Si!" the man in the "Stop Pape" shirt replies.

The ad closes with the three men deciding "We must stop Mike Pape. Vamonos!" as they enter the country through the cut fence.

Pape then comes on screen and gives his verbal seal of approval, telling voters, "No one will stop me from standing up for you." It was paid for by the Pape for Congress Committee.

In a news release, Pape expanded on his position.

"Donald Trump is right — we need to build a wall. And we need to repeal Obamacare — an issue in which Ted Cruz has shown admirable courage," Pape said in the release.

He also took a shot at one of his Republican challengers.

"Establishment politicians like James Comer can't be trusted on these issues, but voters should know I will align myself with outsiders like Trump and Cruz to get the job done," Pape said in the release.

Pape, a former district director to U.S. Rep. Ed Whitfield, is running for the retiring congressman's seat.