AUSTIN — The financial troubles Texas rural hospitals have experienced during the past four years may not be over after all.

Two months after the Texas Legislature restored most of the Medicaid funding cuts made in the 2011 session — when lawmakers tackled a $27 billion shortfall — the Texas Organization of Rural and Community Hospitals says “rural hospitals remain in financial distress and more could be on the brink of closure.”

“As part of a national trend, many Texas rural hospitals continue to struggle, which is the result of cuts in Medicare and Medicaid payments over the past four years,” the organization, commonly known for its acronym, TORCH, said in a statement. “Those cuts are resulting in an annual loss of revenue totaling almost $100 million for Texas’ 171 rural hospitals.”

The $209 billion state budget for the next two fiscal years included $58 million in new money for Medicaid payments to rural hospitals, which is about $17 million below what the Legislature cut four years ago.

And though the restored funding helps, “Congress has yet to step up and address many of the damaging Medicare cuts made to hospitals,” the release said.

“Thirteen Texas rural hospitals have closed since January 2013 and a similar number could be padlocking their doors in the next year if these hospitals don’t see their full payments restored,” warned CEO David Pearson.

Although none of the hospitals closed were in West Texas, the 13 closures in the state reflect a national trend.

More than 50 rural hospitals have closed since 2010 and the majority of those health care facilities were in Texas and other Southern states, according to the National Rural Health Association.

The Leawood, Kansas-based organization represents about 2,000 small hospitals and other health care facilities in the United States, and nearly 300 of those are at risk of closing, too.

Former Lubbock County Judge Don McBeath, now director of government relations at TORCH, said, “The cuts in Medicare and Medicaid have a much stronger impact on our rural hospitals, since they often treat a higher percentage of Medicare and Medicaid patients.”

Urban hospitals may have other avenues to recover from cuts, but rural hospitals do not, McBeath said.

Moreover, about two-thirds of rural hospital patients on government-backed insurance are on Medicare, he said.

Medicare is the federal insurance program for people 65 and older, while Medicaid is the joint federal and state program that helps qualifying low-income people pay for long-term medical and custodial care.

State Rep. Four Price — who initially proposed restoring $75 million in Medicaid funding for rural hospitals before House and Senate negotiators settled on $58 million — said the plight of the rural hospitals is worrisome.

“It is very concerning to me mainly because of the environment the rural hospitals have to operate in,” said Price, chairman of a House Appropriations subcommittee that deals with health care funding.

“If it was just a matter of slow payments and they had other payment streams available to them, or they had a different patient mix, or more populated urban areas that sort of offsets the cash flow issues … I guess that would be less concerning,” Price, R-Amarillo, said. “But the environment in which they operate is very concerning to me because they have such a high population of patients who are either uninsured or indigent.”

Although it is early to say what the Legislature can do during the interim, some of the possibilities include putting pressure on Congress and holding public hearings to figure out other possible solutions, Price said.

McBeath said the executives of some the rural hospitals thought that when the Legislature restored the $58 million in Medicaid funding their financial woes would be over for a while.

But since the state’s next fiscal biennium begins Sept. 1, this means the Medicaid reimbursements may not come until October or November, McBeath said.

Moreover, “state dollars only cover about a third of the cuts,” he stressed. “Texas has tried to do its part but Congress needs to do its part.”

enrique.rangel@morris.com

• (512) 673-7553