A 25-year-old teacher biking from Maine to California was killed in Oklahoma by a female driver looking at her phone this week.

Patrick Wanninkhof was on a trip with Bike & Build, which 'raises funds for affordable housing projects,' the group's website says.

Wanninkhof's profile with the non-profit organization says he was heading to Santa Barbara.

Teacher: Patrick Wanninkhof, pictured, was biking on a cross-country trip when he was struck by a driver looking at her phone

Incident: Wanninkhof (far left) taught at Fordham High School for the Arts in the Bronx

He and 22-year-old Bridget Anderson were struck by 34-year-old Sarah Morris on Highway 152 Thursday morning, NewsOn6 reported.

Anderson is in stable condition and Wanninkhof was declared dead at the scene of the accident, the television station reported.

According to NewsOn6, which cited a report from the Oklahoma Highway Patrol, Morris said the crash took place as she looked at her phone.

'My name is Patrick and I'm a Florida native and current New Yorker,' Wanninkhof's Bike & Build profile says.

It says he graduated from the University of Florida, before he went to Fordham University for graduate school and started working at a Bronx high school through Teach for America.

Wanninkhof taught at Fordham High School for the Arts, the New York Daily News reported.

Relief: Wanninkhof was on a trip with an affordable housing group called Bike & Build

Long journey: Wanninkhof traveled 2,390 miles of the trip's planned 3,987 miles

His Bike & Build profile says: 'The middle-class ideal of meritocracy instilled me with the misguided belief that all my students needed to do was work harder and success would follow.

'This mindset was soon challenged when a student told me that she and her mom had been moving between relatives houses every week after they couldn't pay rent.

'How on earth could I expect her to give her all to Newton's Laws when she wasn't sure where she'd be sleeping that evening?'

His profile indicates he traveled 2,390 miles of the trip's planned 3,987 miles.

It also said the 25-year-old teacher raised $8,566 out of a $4,000 goal.

Father Rik Wanninkhof told NewsOk.com: 'He really was committed to the issue of affordable housing, and he was working as a schoolteacher in the Bronx where he saw the importance of housing as a part of education.'

Wanninkhof's sister Suzette Wanninkhof told the New York Daily News: 'Patrick he was my inspiration my entire life. He was just the most amazing person.'

Lt. John Vincent told NewsOk.com: 'They drew blood on the driver, and they’ll wait until the report comes back on that and they've finished up the investigation to present it to the DA's office, and she'll present any possible charges.'