East Lyme — First Selectman Mark Nickerson, a Republican, and Democratic challenger Steve Carpenteri, a Board of Finance member, are facing off in the Nov. 3 election.

Both candidates bring years of experience serving on the town's boards and commissions and say they care about the town — and readily concede that their opponent cares too.

Nickerson, who became first selectman in January after Paul Formica resigned to became state senator for the 20th District, is seeking his first full term.

Nickerson, who has spent 25 years in business with GEICO, said he brings leadership experience as the past chairman of the Zoning Commission and deputy first selectman.

Carpenteri said he's sat on three town boards, lived in town for long time and feels it's time for a "fresh set of eyes" in the town's top office.

Carpenteri has been a member of the zoning and planning commission and is the owner of the Lyme Tavern Bar and Restaurant and Rocky Neck Inn and Suites.

Nickerson said the protection of the Oswegatchie Hills is the top issue facing the town, highlighting a memorandum of understanding between the town and Landmark Development to search for alternative land to swap for Landmark's parcel in the hills.

"We'll continue to defend any applications for affordable housing or any appeals for affordable housing in the Oswegatchie Hills," said Nickerson. "On the same token, we'll continue to sit at the table and work together to try to find a different solution."

Noting his time on the Planning Commission, Carpenteri also said the Oswegatchie Hills should be protected.

"I think that the property is very delicate and should be preserved," he said.

Carpenteri said the top issues facing the town are the elementary schools project and Gateway Commons.

"This is the biggest thing the town has ever seen and probably will ever see," he said about the planned residential and commercial village. "We need to make sure it's all done according to what the town has approved."

Nickerson said the town will fully enforce the development of Gateway according to the master plan and his role is to act as a facilitator.

As the town faces a proposal to renovate and consolidate its aging elementary schools, Carpenteri said he will work closely with the Board of Education to ensure the project is both economically smart for the town and gives students the best possible facilities for education.

Nickerson said his role is to facilitate conversations about the costs of the project, as well as what would happen to property values down the line if the town didn't invest in its schools. He also said it's important to consider in conversations the town's infrastructure needs, including the town hall and library.

In his tenure, Nickerson said he initiated a feasibility study for sewers in Saunders Point, worked on the issue of the Oswegatchie Hills, and helped secure a state grant to bring restrooms to Cini Park. He pointed to economic development in town, from a lease being signed for Costco at Gateway Commons to small businesses and restaurants.

"There's investment being made in our town at every level," he said.

Carpenteri said that in his time on three town boards, he has learned about the town and seen it change and grow. While he said he is happy with the overall direction of the town, he thinks it's time to slow down and listen to what town residents want in terms of its growth.

"I'm pleased, but I think we need to watch what's going on with the growth," he said.

Nickerson said his leadership style is to empower others, lead by example and communicate with people.

Carpenteri said he's a believer in listening to what residents' want for the town and dealing with each issue as it arises.

In addition to the first selectman's race, six candidates are vying for five seats on the Board of Selectmen.

The race features Democrats Bill Henderson, Daniel Cunningham, and Rose Ann Hardy and Republicans Kevin Seery, Marc Salerno and Holly Cheeseman.

Cheeseman, a selectwoman since 2011 and the executive director of the Children's Museum of Southeastern Connecticut, said an issue facing the town is funding the services brought about by changing demographics, including the renovation and consolidation of the elementary schools and programs for seniors.

To save money, she said the town should pursue creative ideas and efficiencies, including working together with the Connecticut Conference of Municipalities and Southeastern Connecticut Council of Governments. She said purchasing cooperatives with neighboring towns and the school board will add up to savings.

Cunningham, a Niantic attorney, said the administration will be tasked with ensuring the Gateway Commons developers complete plans for the commercial component. The board will also have to strike a balance for Niantic, he said.

"I think the biggest challenge that we're going to be facing is managing and keeping the small town charm and atmosphere and still making it accessible for those who want to visit Niantic," he said. "We have to try to balance those concerns."

Hardy, an East Lyme High School teacher with three decades on the board, said it is important to retain the town's uniqueness, including by keeping small buildings on Main Street, having developments that set aside a portion of land for open space, and supporting farms on the town's historically rural north side.

She also said aquifer protection in town is a priority.

Henderson, president of the Communications Workers of America Local 1298, said he is in favor of controlling growth and maintaining the small town atmosphere in East Lyme. He said he disagreed with a recent decision to approve an additional 120 units at Gateway Commons.

"We're losing that local quality that we've had in the town," he said.

Salerno, an engineer who has served as a selectman since January and as the former Zoning Commission chairman, said it will be important for the board to balance needs, such as aging infrastructure, with fiscal responsibility.

"With increases in the grand list, we can't just spend it," he said. "We need to make sure we balance it for future generations."

Deputy First Selectman Seery, a retired state trooper, said continuing to monitor spending, keeping taxes affordable and working on the elementary schools project are priorities.

Seery said it will be important for the town to hold information sessions on the elementary schools proposal. He said the Board of Selectmen will need to make sure the plan is well-presented, well thought out and includes all the necessary information, such as its impact on taxes, before moving it to referendum to let the voters decide.

k.drelich@theday.com

Twitter: @KimberlyDrelich