The third one is usually the most least important.

But on Saturday night, the third one was perhaps the scariest for the fans watching from the stands of Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

Against the 49ers in the Broncos’ third preseason game of the season, Peyton Manning helped the Broncos to an 8-3 lead at the half but was sacked three times along the way.

The last time Manning was sacked that many times was in October 2013, when he was taken down four times at Indianapolis.

The first two on Saturday came on the same drive in the first quarter, courtesy of NaVorro Bowman, the 49ers linebacker Manning had praised two days ago for his return from a major knee injury.

The third came during the Broncos’ first drive of the second quarter, from Corey Lemonier.

Each sparked collective gasps from Sports Authority Field. And each were evident that the Broncos’ offense is still working out the kinks in Gary Kubiak’s zone-blocking system.

Manning played under center more Saturday than he did in his preseason debut against Houston. But the timing and rhythm with his receivers and tight ends were off. He overthrew Cory Latimer up the middle, and then underthrew Demaryius Thomas in the end zone on the opening drive.

And on a later drive, Manning had tight end Owen Daniels out wide, but the pass, again, fell short.

The offense wasn’t without bright spots, though. More snaps for the starters meant more time for C.J. Anderson to run the ball.

And run, he did.

In the first half, Anderson had 49 yards on 13 carries, the longest of which was 13 yards.

On the other side, the first-team defense continued to impress. Von Miller sacked Colin Kaepernick 29 seconds into San Francisco’s opening drive. Then Ware added another sack — in San Francisco’s end zone for the safety.

The first-team defense has yet to allow a touchdown this preseason. And Kaepernick failed to complete a pass in the first half.

ROSTER CHANGES

Players not playing for Broncos: Emmanuel Sanders (hamstring), Chris Harris (hamstring), Tony Carter, Lerentee McCray (multiple injuries), Evan Mathis, Jeff Heuerman (ACL), Dan Light (waiver claim), Kenny Anunike (knee).

Starting lineup changes for Broncos: Max Garcia to start at left guard for Mathis. Cody Latimer to start at wide reciever for Sanders. Bradley Roby to start at right cornerback for Harris.

Players not playing for 49ers: Cornerback Tramaine Brock, linebacker Philip Wheeler, linebacker Desmond Bishop, tight end Vance McDonald.

KEY UPCOMING DATES

• Sept. 1 (2 p.m.): Roster cut to maximum 75 players

• Sept. 5 (2 p.m.): Roster cut to maximum 53 players

• Sept. 6 (11 a.m.): Up to 10 players selected to practice squad

• Sept. 13 (2:25 p.m.): Regular-season opener vs. Baltimore at Sports Authority Field

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickijhabvala