Topics: Alaska, Climate Change, Earth Island Journal, fisheries, Global Warming, ocean acidification, Sustainability News, Life News

This originally appeared on Earth Island Journal

Keeping Alaska’s fisheries wild and sustainable is going to be a serious challenge in the years ahead as our oceans become more acidic, and that in turn, is going put many Alaskans’ subsistence way of life at risk, says a new report.

Many of the nutritionally and economically valuable marine fisheries in the state are located in waters that are already experiencing ocean acidification, says the report, “Ocean Acidification Risk Assessment for Alaska’s Fishery Sector” that was published online today in the journal Progress in Oceanography.

Photo by Meg J/Flick

The Bering Sea crab fisheries are among the most at risk from ocean acidification.

“How bad is it? The short answer is, we don’t know,” says National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration oceanographer Jeremy Mathis, one of the lead writers of the report, which was coauthored by researchers from the University of Alaska and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.

Alaska has one of the most productive commercial fishing economies in the world. The state’s fishing industry supports more than 100,000 jobs and brings in roughly $5 billion a year in revenue. Think: pollock, Bristol Bay’s famous sockeye salmon, and crab from the Bering Sea. Apart from that, about 17 percent of Alaskans (around 120,000 people) rely on subsistence fishing for most, if not all, of their dietary protein. Fishery-related tourism also brings in $300 million annually.

The state’s fisheries management model — with its focus on sustained yields and public participation in the regulatory process — is widely recognized as an example of successful natural resource stewardship. But now climate change is posing new and unknown challenges to this model.

The impact of ocean acidification is far worse in Alaska’s waters because the coastal waters here are cold, and cold water can absorb more carbon dioxide, Mathis told the Earth Island Journal. Also, unique ocean circulation patterns in the region bring naturally acidic deep ocean waters to the surface here. The study focused on assessing the impact on Alaska Native communities because “the fisheries really are the lifelines of these communities,” Mathis says. “We want to start thinking about the implications and help them figure out what they can do to prepare for what’s coming.”

The researchers say that red king crab and tanner crab — two important Alaskan fisheries — grow more slowly and don’t survive as well in more acidic waters. Which means that communities in southeast and southwest Alaska, which rely heavily on crab fisheries, and have underlying vulnerabilities — such as lower incomes and fewer employment opportunities — face the highest risk.

“If you look at coastal Alaska, all that the coastal communities have is fishing, and crabs are a big part of it,” says Steve Minor, an Alaska fishing industry veteran who was involved in helping develop the Bering Sea crab program, one of the fisheries that will be impacted. “If you take fishing away, there’s nothing left. You can’t pack up and move to the next town and work at a Wal-Mart, because there’s nothing there either.” The Bering Sea, the report notes, “directly or indirectly provides over 25 million pounds of subsistence food for Alaska residents, primarily Alaska Natives in small coastal communities.”