Update: This story has been corrected to reflect that hardened structures are allowed to maintain commercial navigation channels.

MOREHEAD CITY — A portion of Shackleford Banks could be part of a land-swap with the state so a jetty or terminal groin may be built – one of several new ways proposed for the state to keep the shipping channel here navigable for port traffic.

Shoaling in Beaufort Inlet has been a recurring problem for the state port here. Sand is filling in the channel from Shackleford Banks to the east and a near-shore dredge spoils disposal site to the west.

A bill introduced last week in the General Assembly sets the stage for the possible deal in which the state would negotiate to acquire federal lands needed for manage the navigation channel here in exchange for state-owned property. The measure doesn’t specifically name Shackleford Banks, but the county’s shore protection manager says the state may have a dual strategy.

“I can’t tell if this is codifying an attempt to move the channel footprint altogether or start paving the way for a permanent structure on Shackelford Banks. Might be a combination of both. Support nonetheless,” County Shore Protection Manager Gregory “Rudi” Rudolph wrote in an email to the News-Times. County and various town officials were also copied on the email.

Mr. Rudolph told the News-Times Saturday channel relocation appeared less likely than construction of a hardened structure at Shackleford.

Any changes involving the Cape Lookout National Seashore would literally require an act of Congress.

“When land becomes part of the National Park Service, we don’t typically give that land away,” Patrick Kenney, superintendent with Cape Lookout National Seashore, said Friday.

With the short title, “Enhance Safety & Commerce for Ports/Inlets,” Senate Bill 160, filed Tuesday, includes a provision that empowers the N.C. Department of Administration to initiate negotiations with the appropriate federal agency to acquire federally owned property deemed “necessary” for managing the deepwater channel at the N.C. Port of Morehead City in exchange for state‑owned real property. The proposed land-swapping deal is specifically aimed at keeping the Morehead City Harbor navigable for traffic at the N.C. Port.

The shipping channel is federally authorized at a 45-foot depth at mean low water, but vessels arriving or departing are currently limited to a draft of 33 feet mean high water and 30 feet mean low water, due to shoaling. Vessels with a draft of 33 feet are to only transit during daylight hours and vessels near maximum drafts may be delayed until daylight, at the pilot’s discretion.

State Ports Authority officials have discussed the possibility of using an “engineered solution” to the shoaling problem. That could mean a jetty or groin. Discussions have also included the feasibility of moving the channel slightly to take better advantage of naturally deep water. Channel relocation also requires congressional approval.

Hardened structures are generally not allowed along North Carolina's shoreline but N.C. Coastal Resources Commission rules allow structures that would otherwise be prohibited to maintain commercial navigation channels when dredging alone isn't enough to maintain safe access to the affected channel. The structure must be limited in extent and scope to be only what's necessary to maintain the channel.

The western tip of Shackleford Banks appears to be the most likely effective location of a jetty or groin, but that land is part of the national seashore.

“Congress passed a law that says, ‘This land is special and needs to be protected.’ It would take a law to change the boundaries of the national seashore to allow that to happen. That’s not a decision the superintendent makes,” Mr. Kenney said.

The bill passed a first reading on Wednesday and was referred to a Senate rules committee.

Sen. Michael Lee, R-New Hanover, Majority Leader Sen. Harry Brown, R-Jones and Onslow, and Sen. Bill Cook, also a Republican who represents Beaufort, Camden, Currituck, Dare, Gates, Hyde, Pasquotank and Perquimans counties, are the primary sponsors of the bill.

Sen. Cook was behind efforts in 2013 and 2014 to authorize a purchase or exchange of federally owned land around Oregon Inlet in Dare County.

Sen. Cook said poor maintenance of Oregon Inlet has cost the Outer Banks thousands of jobs and hundreds of millions of dollars in lost opportunities.

According to reports, the state is already negotiating with the U.S. Department of the Interior to trade land for about 600 acres at Oregon Inlet so jetties and a sand-bypassing system can be built to protect the inlet there. A state law passed in 2014 gives North Carolina power to try to condemn adjacent federal land on July 1 if those negotiations fail.

Mr. Kenney said he was familiar with the Oregon Inlet issue, but not involved. Nor would he likely be directly involved in negotiations for Cape Lookout National Seashore land.

Meanwhile, the Senate bill also creates a new Deep Draft Navigation Channel Dredging and Maintenance Fund and transfers into it $800,000. The bill also transfers $1.7 million into a special revenue fund to cover the state’s share of dredging costs associated with any project designed to keep shallow-draft navigation channels navigable and safe.

The funds consist of fees from state boat registrations and fuel taxes, but the measure also allows for money from the State Ports Authority, local governments, private companies or other “non-state” entities to be used to supplement federal funds available for U.S. Army Corps of Engineers dredge projects.

Mr. Rudolph told the News-Times he supports many of the provisions in the bill, namely those that allow non-state entities – such as the County Beach Commission – to participate in funding dredge projects that have the added benefit of supplying sand for beach nourishment.

“I think this is a good bill in general,” Mr. Rudolph said. “From a symbolic standpoint it’s an important step in the right direction because it enables us to participate.”

The measure would also allow private companies, such as port customers or investment partners, to put up money toward dredging projects. Donations could be used with state money and non-state funds become state funds for the purpose of the Corps’ 50-50 matching funds requirements simply by passing through a state account.

The State Ports Authority is using a similar provision in its effort to get the Morehead City Harbor dredged this spring. An agreement was struck earlier this year to allow the port to “piggyback” needed inner harbor dredging – a state responsibility – with the federal dredging of the outer harbor. The memorandum of agreement with the Corps allows state funds to be applied to a federal contract in this single situation.

SB-160 provides for similar agreements to be the standard vehicle for applying non-federal funding to the Corps on a perpetual basis for Morehead City Harbor, Wilmington Harbor and Oregon Inlet. “The memorandum required by this section shall be for as long a term as possible,” according to the bill language.

The bill appears to distinguish “state funds” from any money coming from the State Ports Authority and establishes a 50/50 cost share between the authority and the state. The SPA is a state entity under the N.C. Department of Transportation but it receives no state funding for operations.

The bill modifies the existing Shallow Draft Navigation Channel Dredging and Lake Maintenance Fund by allowing the 50/50 state-local cost-share formula to be waived in the case of a navigation emergency or to fully leverage Corps funding.

It also allows some or all of the proceeds from Dare County’s occupancy tax to be used for dredging-only projects in Oregon Inlet, rather than just beach nourishment-related dredge projects. This provision has created controversy in Dare County, pitting nourishment proponents against those in favor of a navigable Oregon Inlet.

Currently, those revenues go toward tourism-related expenses in Dare County and its unincorporated areas and six municipalities, beach nourishment funding and to support the Dare County Tourism Board.

Contact Mark Hibbs at 252-726-7081, ext. 229; email mark@thenewstimes.com; or follow on Twitter @markccnt.