Wichita State students are grieving after the first fatal shooting on campus in more than two decades.

Police say an international student was shot and killed early Saturday morning. They're investigating the case as a homicide after finding a man with several gunshot wounds in the Fairmount Towers parking lot.

Members from the Saudi Student Association at Wichita State say the victim was a 23-year-old Electrical Engineering major from Saudi Arabia. They're left with a lot of questions as police continue to look for a suspect.

"I think he came from prayer or mosque or something because we have a prayer in the morning at 4:30," said Abdulrahman Alotaibi, the Vice President of the Saudi Student Association.

The victim was taken to the hospital where he died. Throughout the day word of the tragedy has spread across the international student community. Alotaibi says the group is like a family.

"We are 500 students here, all of whom I know they are shocked or heartbroken with sadness," he said.

Alotaibi says the victim had only been at Wichita State for about six months.

"I don't think he was a trouble maker," said Alotaibi. "He was a good man, that's what I think about him."

Alotaiba believes the shooting was random, but that it could have been prevented.

"I'm asking where is the police department, why they were not there because that's their job, to protect our students," said Alotaibi.

While the area around Wichita State has been criticized for its crime, police say this is the first fatal shooting on WSU's campus since 1993. Moving forward, Alotaibi says students should be on high alert as police continue to search for the suspect.

"Even if I'm American and I'm studying at Wichita State University anyone who hears about that is going to get afraid because this is a human being."

Police will not release the victim's name until his family has been notified. If you have any information about the shooting, call Crimestoppers at 316-267-2111.

Wichita State University President John Bardo released this statement about the murder: "We are deeply saddened by the tragic death this morning of a WSU student. The continued safety of our students, faculty, staff and guests is a top priority."