Kelley Cleveland, left, and her nephew Dooley Cleveland, 6, look at a display filled with Lego sets Saturday as part of the Lego Christmas train event at the Rialto Theater Center's Devereaux Room in downtown Loveland. The event continues today from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. and admission is free. ( Steve Stoner )

If You Go What: A Christmas Special Event, featuring a Lego Christmas train exhibit. When: 11 a.m.-5 p.m. today. Where: The Rialto Theater Center, Devereaux Room, 228 E. Fourth St. Cost: Free.

Rome cannot be built in a day, but in just over one hour, thousands of Legos can be reconfigured into a Christmas village, an amusement park, a train yard, an airport and a burning forest.

The builders are members of DenLug, or the Denver Lego Users Group.

The construction site is the Devereaux Room at the Rialto Theater Center.

And the day is actually two, Saturday and today.

"It's all amazing," said Rose Anne Wheeler, president of Supporting Theater at the Rialto. "This is what blows me away. This evolved from the little tiles you step on barefoot."

Supporting Theater at the Rialto presented A Christmas Special Event with a Lego Christmas train exhibit all weekend and a two-show screening of "Arthur Christmas" on Saturday.

"It's got all Legos all the time. Everything is Lego," Wheeler said.

A half-dozen DenLug Lego fans built different parts of the exhibit using Lego kits for specific buildings and vehicles and custom-built sets they designed. Their work got displayed on tables forming a 15-foot by 20-foot loop and on a couple of side tables.

"A lot of it is onsite planning," said Reed Yaeger, a member of DenLug, which does four to six shows a year at places like museums, libraries and malls. "It's Lego. It's versatile. We can move it around wherever we need it."

DenLug members Mark Sturgill and Ralph Copley, both of Victor, built the Mark & Ralph Amusement Park with a Santa shop, carnival games, a cafe and a polar bear enclosure, plus an unnamed town with a craft shop, bookstore, bank and church.

Jack Hester, 7, left, and Cary Scheirer-Domingo, 6, watch as an electric Lego train makes its way Saturday around a track set up inside the Rialto Theater Center's Devereaux Room as part of a Lego Christmas event. ( Steve Stoner )

"We put in little details people have to look at to see what's going on," Sturgill said.

There are trees, plants, signal and streetlights, fire hydrants, items for sale in the different stores and mini figures, such as a robber on the side of a building and Sherlock Holmes in the cemetery behind the town church.

"We're trying to show the different uses of Legos, how you can interact with the figures and bring in what the toy is capable of doing," Sturgill said. "You can play with it, interact with it and change things around."

The Christmas village next to the town has a ski shop, post office, toyshop and money tree with gold bars on the tree, the ground and a nearby building.

"It's creating a back story the viewer may or may not figure out," said Jeremy McCreary of Greenwood Village, a member of DenLug.

McCreary, who set up a table with several boats and vessels, is a geologist by trade who loves engineering, which he applies to his building with Legos, he said.

"After I build, then I play with it a little, then it goes on a shelf because it's the chase," McCreary said, explaining that he wants to get as close to representing the real thing as he can. "If you can imagine it, you can make it in Lego."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.