Denise Doheney, left, and Edith Reichard, with her son Keegan, 5, second from left, listen to U.S. Rep. Rosa L. DeLauro, center, and state Sen. Marilyn Moore, right, during a roundtable discussion with child-care workers, administrators and parents Tuesday morning. Peter Hvizdak — New Haven Register

HAMDEN >> For Denise Doheney, it’s a choice between buying her children the supplies they need to begin the new school year or paying the rent.

The Hamden resident has worked for 18 years as a preschool teacher at Sleeping Giant Day Care, but her $12-an-hour pay isn’t enough to do both, she told a group that included U.S. Rep. Rosa DeLauro, D-3, at the Keefe Center Tuesday, where the day-care center is housed.

The group was there to support a bill in the House of Representatives calling for increased assistance to pay for high-quality child care that is available around the clock, limit the percent of income going toward child care to 10 percent and pay those working in the child-care industry a “living wage” — which, they say, is $15 an hour.

It’s always been hard surviving on the money she makes, Doheney said, but providing care for her two children when she is at work is one of her greatest challenges. She qualifies for them to attend Sleeping Giant Day Care, which is a subsidized program, but even with that help it’s hard making ends meet, she said.

Advertisement

“I love being with children; I love being the one to teach them to write their name and learn their colors,” she said. “I thought I could do this — I thought I could rub two pennies together and make a $100 bill.”

For parent Rochelle Palche, it’s a never-ending balancing act to make sure her children are cared for, either by her mother, her mother-in-law, her husband or herself, because the cost of child care is so high. Her mother-in-law’s retirement made that a bit easier, she said, but it’s still difficult for her and her husband. They both work — he is self-employed, so taking a day off means forgoing a day’s pay. They manage to make it work, but it’s never easy, she said, and she can imagine how difficult it is for those working in the field.

“We are a family that would be considered making a decent income, but child care would have taken most of our income,” Palche said, which is why they rely on family members to help.

“Child-care workers deserve a living wage,” she said. “This system is not working for any of us.”

The lack of affordable child care is at a crisis level, DeLauro said, and those working at day-care centers aren’t making enough money to survive.

“People want to work,” DeLauro said, “even though that basic concept is challenged by the U.S. Congress, who sense that people want a handout. It’s so demeaning to working women in this country.”

Ninety-five percent of those working in the child-care field are women, DeLauro said.

“This is a crisis and we need to face it as a nation,” she said, adding that one answer is to raise the wages of child-care workers to $15 an hour. “I get so fed up when people tell me that raising the wage to $15 an hour will mean the country will go to hell in a handbasket.”

DeLauro said it was the same response to the issue of requiring employers to offer paid sick days, she said. After that was implemented, there was “hardly a ripple” of complaints, she said.

“For many Connecticut families, child care is the single largest expense, larger than a mortgage or rent payment,” DeLauro said. The average cost for child care for one child for a year is $13,000, she said — $3,000 more than the tuition at a public college.

“As a nation, we don’t understand that this issue is important to our economic survival,” she said. “I hear from families all the time who say that child care eats up more and more of their paycheck, and they don’t know what to do.”

Aside from Papua, New Guinea, the United States is the only nation that views child care as a personal problem rather than a public issue, DeLauro said. “You have a right to demand more for child care, but child-care workers need to be paid more,” she said. “Most folks in the industry are women, and it’s another example of how we are not dealing with the economic challenges that face women.”

Raising a preschool teacher’s pay from $12 to $15 an hour would mean an income of $30,000 a year, which sounds good but still isn’t enough, said Sleeping Giant Day Care Director Carla Horwitz.

“In this country, that’s not really a living wage,” Horwitz said.

Many teachers attend school at night to earn associate and bachelor’s degrees, which are becoming mandatory for the job, she said.

“We say, ‘That’s great, but we can’t pay you any more,’” Horwitz said. “There is a tremendous need for subsidies from the government because we just can’t get any more from parents.”