The Health Matters conference in California will focus on increasing physical activity for adults and children.

Former President Bill Clinton asks for a photo with veteran golfer Gary Player on the first tee at PGA West's Palmer Private Course on Thursday, Jan. 17, 2013, during the first day of the Humana Challenge golf tournament. The Health Matters health and wellness conference will take place Tuesday, Jan. 14, 2014, during this year's Humana Challenge. (Photo: Crystal Chatham, The (Palm Springs, Calif.) Desert Sun) Story Highlights Health Matters conference is part of PGA Tour's Humana Challenge

Another focus will be on trying to eliminate health problems from prescription drug abuse

The conference is part of Clinton Foundation effort to impact nation's wellness and health care

PALM SPRINGS, Calif. -- Sitting in his office in a cold, overcast New York City, former President Bill Clinton laughs that at one time he didn't understand the allure of Southern California.

"When I was a kid, we had a lot of retirees in Arkansas because they liked to come down from the Midwest because it was basically warm, but we still had four seasons," Clinton recalled. "I could never figure out why people went to Southern California and Florida to retire. I get it now."

Clinton said he can't wait to get to the desert this week, both for the sunny, warm temperatures and for the activities of the PGA Tour's Humana Challenge in partnership with the Clinton Foundation. Those activities include the third annual Health Matters health and wellness conference, which Clinton hosts on Tuesday as a key part of the Clinton Foundation's effort to make a lasting impact on the country's wellness and health care.

"The people in the valley should be really proud of the fact that since we started this wellness initiative there, there are people everywhere else that read about it and asked us to start there," Clinton said in an exclusive telephone interview with The (Palm Springs, Calif.) Desert Sun. "We have a great program in Little Rock now, where my library is. We've got a great program in Jacksonville, Fla.

"Now the program is spreading to other places in the country, and it is all because of the publicity from the valley effort," he added.

Thirteen years after leaving office, Clinton, 67, devotes almost all of his time to his foundation. Clinton quickly points out the initiatives have made an impact on the Coachella Valley as much as anywhere in the country.

"We've got $11 million of investments just in the Coachella Valley in health and wellness," he said. "We believe, including the things we are doing in the schools, we will impact about 400,000 people in that valley."

“The people in the valley should be really proud of the fact that since we started this wellness initiative there, there are people everywhere else that read about it and asked us to start there.” Former President Bill Clinton, on Health Matters conference

From a conference of intriguing ideas in 2012 to a conference of some tangible results in 2013, Clinton believes the conference is moving toward bigger and more wide-ranging impacts in 2014.

"Facebook and MTV are going to partner with the Jed Foundation to try to do a real initiative on college campuses in the area to make sure that we eliminate, if possible, all the health problems associated with prescription drug abuse," Clinton said. "There are now more people dying of (prescription) drug overdoses than heroin and cocaine combined."

While past conferences have focused on nutrition and information on healthy foods, Clinton said this year an emphasis will be on increasing physical activities for adults and children through Boys & Girls Clubs and other organizations. The Aspen Institute's Sports in Society Program, Nike, the U.S. Olympic Committee and others are some of the corporate and non-profit sponsors.

Clinton says one of his favorite initiatives this year will be the 800-Calorie Challenge from the James Beard Foundation and Palisades Media, a national cooking campaign to focus on healthy eating and nutrition. Pastor Rick Warren of Southern California's Saddleback Church will share details on the Daniel Plan, which allowed his church members to lose more than 250,000 pounds.

"We've done about all we can do now to reduce the total calories and to improve the nutrition of the food (in schools)," Clinton said. "The physical activities depend in large part on what is available to the schools and what they are prepared to do. So we are working on out-of-school (programs) now. The Knight Foundation is going to help us with using digital platforms to make the right kind of knowledge available to individuals and community groups."

Having knowledge on healthy foods is one thing. Having access to that food or to health care in general is another. In parts of the eastern Coachella Valley and the Imperial Valley with higher unemployment and poverty, healthy food options are harder to come by. Clinton calls those generally low-income areas food deserts. One area with pockets of low income that is not a food desert is Manhattan, where the tradition of small, local food markets dates back more than 100 years.

“The physical activities depend in large part on what is available to the schools and what they are prepared to do. So we are working on out-of-school (programs) now. ” Former President Bill Clinton

"I am trying to study this distribution chain (in Manhattan) to figure out if there is some way to make this work economically in less-populous areas," Clinton said. "It costs a lot of money to live in New York, even for four people. But one thing you can do is, if you live within a mile of one of these markets, is get access to healthy affordable food. And it is a distribution problem.

"A lot of people who are stuck in low-income neighborhoods would take the trouble to make good food for their kids and for their parents and grandparents if they could have access to it at a price they could pay," he said.

For all the talk of the health care conference, Clinton still has his eye on the PGA Tour event, where the tour and Humana will help to promote healthy living as well as put on a high-powered PGA Tour event.

"It certainly helps to have the former leader of the free world associated with your tournament," said Bob Marra, CEO and executive director of the Humana Challenge. "He brings a lot of energy to the tournament and to the health care conference. The players and the amateurs are excited to see him each year, and the thing is he is just as excited to see them and talk to them and shake their hands and thank them for coming to the event."

Major changes have come to the tournament since Humana and the Clinton Foundation joined the event for 2012, including a decrease from five days to four and playing just three courses instead of four.

The golf and the conference are important, but for a New York resident shivering through one of the coldest winters in recent history, the Coachella Valley has other appeals for Clinton.

"We've had a 20-year cold front here in the east and I'm ready to come to California," Clinton said. "I can't wait."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eNHnoX