Advertisement - story continues below

On September 4, 2013, Wisconsin native Megan Rothbauer, 29, went into cardiac arrest and was taken to the nearest hospital. Now, fully-insured Rothbauer is facing a $50,000 bill and possible bankruptcy.

While at work last year, Rothbauer’s heart stopped beating and started “shaking.” She was taken by ambulance to the closest hospital–St. Mary’s–where it took doctors 45 minutes to get her heart beating again. She spent ten days in the hospital in a medically-induced coma, and another week in the cardiac ward.

Unfortunately for Rothbauer, even though she is fully insured by Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield, they do not have a contract with St. Mary’s Hospital, so she was not covered there. When she left the hospital, Rothbauer was facing a $254,000 bill.

Advertisement – story continues below

Blue Cross Blue Shield agreed to cover the $156,000 that her hospitalization cost, leaving her with a $98,000 bill that she worked with St. Mary’s to reduce to $9,800. However, that didn’t cover the costs of the doctors and nurses, the ambulance, or the physical therapist, among other things. When all was said and done, Rothbauer was left with a bill for $52,531.92.

What is most frustrating is that Meriter Hospital, only three-tenths of a mile down the road from St. Mary’s, does have a contract with Blue Cross Blue Shield. If paramedics had taken Rothbauer there instead, she would have had a maximum copay of only $1,500.

Rothbauer doesn’t fault the paramedics with taking her to the wrong hospital.

Advertisement – story continues below

“It was the closest hospital to where I had my event,” she said, “so naturally the ambulance took me there.” “I was in a coma. I couldn’t very well wake up and say, ‘Hey! Take me to the next hospital.’”

She knows she owes her life to the doctors and nurses at St. Mary’s, and there is the possibility that three blocks could have made the difference between life and death. Still, it is frustrating.

Rothbauer’s situation isn’t an isolated one. Meg Gaines, who runs the Center for Patient Partnership at the University of Wisconsin, said, ”My strong suspicion is that this happens more frequently than you might think.” She said it is the paramedics, not the patients, who often control healthcare decisions. “It is totally random, and it is the problem with [the insurance companies] saying, ‘Well, you know, consumers have to go to the right hospital,’ and you say, ‘Well, what if you’re unconscious?”

Advertisement – story continues below

Blue Cross Blue Shield says they have done their part in this case by paying 100 percent of its in-network rate. They blame Rothbauer’s situation on the hospital. Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield spokesman Scott Larrivee said, “Since we have no contract with this hospital, we have very little influence over what the hospital is charging in this situation.” The insurance company also points to the high prices at St. Mary’s; but the hospital says that, while they empathize with Rothbauer’s situation, they have already written off tens of thousands of dollars in costs and don’t plan to negotiate any further.

Sadly, there is not a lot Rothbauer can do. While the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare, stipulates that emergency rooms must provide services to out-of-network patients, it also says that patients are responsible for the difference between the bill and the amount the insurance company will cover. It’s called “balance billing.”

Now Rothbauer and her boyfriend, Ben Johnson, are looking at their options, trying to figure out if they will be able to negotiate further, or if they need to get second jobs, cash out retirement accounts, take a loan from the hospital, or file for bankruptcy. They want to get engaged, but don’t want to do so until they are more certain of what Rothbauer’s financial situation will be.

“It’s devastating for people who plan, who get insurance, get coverage, do everything they can and then, at 29, have a heart attack and get taken to the wrong hospital, and can’t get married, can’t do anything because they have to declare bankruptcy because they can’t afford to have gone to the hospital,” Rothbauer said. “I mean, it’s not enough to worry about having a heart attack at 29, you end up with a secondary one or a stroke because of your medical bills. I mean, it’s just ridiculous. The level of frustration is astronomical.” “My hardest issue is I had no control and I still have no control over what is my future. I don’t want this to happen to anyone else. I don’t know if this can be fixed for me at this point, but I think it’s unfortunate that it can happen to anyone.”

h/t Daily Mail

Photo Credit: YouTube