Buy Photo Gov. Matt Bevin (Photo: The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

FRANKFORT, Ky. – Gov. Matt Bevin has appointed Stephen P. Miller, an accountant and executive with the Kentucky Hospital Association, as the state's new Medicaid commissioner.

The appointment of Miller, who spent the past 24 years as vice president of finance with the hospital association, comes at a key juncture for the federal-state health plan that serves about 1.3 million Kentuckians.

Bevin has pledged to reshape the state's $10 billion-a-year Medicaid program that has expanded rapidly under the Affordable Care Act, adding some 425,000 Kentuckians to the rolls over the past two years.

Bevin, who took office in December, ran on a campaign of pledging to dismantle kynect, the state health exchange people use to shop for insurance and sign up for Medicaid. And he has vowed to seek federal approval to restructure Kentucky's Medicaid along the lines of some states, such as Indiana, to add more consumer costs including co-payments and premiums for the health plan that now is largely free.

As commissioner, it will fall to Miller to help find a way to ensure Kentuckians can continue to sign up for Medicaid and to implement any changes to the program, as approved by the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

The federal government provides most of the funding for Kentucky's Medicaid program.

Rep. Jim Wayne, a Louisville Democrat and member of the House budget subcommittee that oversees human services, said he knows Miller and believes he is capable of managing Medicaid – but he cautioned Miller will face some enormous challenges.

"Steve's a man of integrity," he said. "But he has a huge job. I'm not sure how they're going to dismantle the Affordable Care Act in Kentucky and expect to have the same number of people enrolled."

Bevin, in a statement Tuesday, expressed confidence in Miller for the job.

“As we work to redesign the Medicaid program and transition it to a more affordable, sustainable model tailored to Kentucky’s needs, it is important to have someone with a deep understanding of the health care industry leading the Department of Medicaid,” Bevin said.

Vickie Yates Brown Glisson, secretary of the Cabinet for Health and Family Services, said in the statement that Miller's experience qualifies him to restructure Medicaid "in a way that will improve health outcomes for its members and save taxpayer dollars."

Miller, a University of Louisville graduate, also has served as executive director of Ten Broeck Hospital in Louisville, chief operating officer and financial officer at of Our Lady of Peace Hospital in Louisville, and regional controller of American Healthcare Management in Dallas.

Reporter Deborah Yetter can be reached at (502) 582-4228 or dyetter@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Xg5eny