Donald Trump gives a thumbs-up as he leaves for lunch after being summoned for jury duty in New York last August. Photo: Associated Press

The Republican establishment in Donald Trump’s home state doesn’t appear quite sold on the GOP presidential primary front-runner, but it may be edging closer ahead of New York’s April 19 primary.

The New York Republican State Committee said Wednesday that it intends to welcome the “fellow New Yorker” as a “featured guest” at its annual gala, five days before the primary.

For the first time in many years, New York’s presidential primary is expected to have a meaningful impact on the race, and the Republican candidates have started to shift their attention to the state, with Texas Sen. Ted Cruz holding several events there this week. The NY GOP said it has invited all three Republican presidential candidates to attend its gala.

The state’s Republican party leadership, however, hasn’t coalesced around a candidate, and Mr. Trump’s dominance in the primary race thus far appears to have flummoxed some of the New York GOP’s leading figures.

At its annual convention earlier this month, the party failed to put forth a resolution in support of Mr. Trump or any other contender.

And New York’s top-ranking Republican elected official, state Sen. Majority Leader John Flanagan, said through a spokesman that he doesn’t expect to endorse anyone prior to the state’s primary.

“Senator Flanagan believes in the electoral process and recognizes that New York may very well play a critical role in the ultimate selection of our President,” his spokesman, Scott Reif, said. “Therefore, he has not endorsed a candidate ahead of the state’s upcoming April 19 primary, but he does expect to support the Party’s nominee this fall.”

The party’s chairman, Ed Cox, who has endured criticism from some other party leaders for not having backed the Manhattan businessman, said Wednesday that the GOP is “thrilled” to host Mr. Trump at its gala.

“This year has become one of the most exciting and vital presidential elections in many years,” Mr. Cox said in the announcement.

“New York Republicans are more motivated than ever to take back the White House, and for the first time in a long time, will play a decisive role by their votes in the April 19th presidential primary.”

More

Cruz’s Utah Win Doesn’t Derail Trump’s Delegate Momentum

Jeb Bush Endorses Ted Cruz

Sanders Now Needs Landslides to Stop Clinton