John Lott Jr., author of “More Guns, Less Crime,” speaks at a 2013 gun rights rally. (Photo: AP file photo)

In the opinion written by Senior Chief Petty Officer James Hatch (USN, Ret.) that ran in the paper on Dec. 13, he states that good guys with guns rarely stop bad guys with guns. This is absolute nonsense. I too am a military veteran. There is a monumental difference between kicking doors down and getting into a firefight with enemy combatants and being a good guy with a gun in Hometown, America. The press wants us to believe, "Wow, this guy is a gun expert that believes in the Second Amendment and even he says that a good guy with a gun rarely stops a bad guy with a gun."

Other view:The 'good guy with a gun' myth

The problem is, the complete opposite is true. Good guys with guns do in fact stop bad guys with guns literally millions of times. If you read the book, "More Guns, Less Crime," written by Professor John R. Lott Jr., you will see that it happens very often and even more when citizens are allowed to carry concealed weapons. He used FBI and CDC crime statistics to examine data from every county in the United States between the years 1977 and 2005. His study proved that crime actually went down as more guns were purchased by law-abiding citizens. Compare the volume of data he used vs. the lies made up on the spot by Mrs. "You Know." The press and politicians do not use his data because it refutes their myth that gun control will end senseless shootings and that guns in civilian hands is a dangerous thing.

Senior Chief Petty Officer James Hatch (USN, Ret.) fails to state the fact that almost every mass shooting takes place in a “gun free zone." It’s no wonder law-abiding citizens do not stop these lunatics. They are prohibited from carrying guns into these areas. The Colorado theater shooter drove by numerous theaters that allowed guns to be carried to purposely go to one that did not allow concealed carry. These mentally ill shooters intentionally target areas where they can be relatively sure that no one else will be armed. If mental health problems were entered into NICS, maybe we could stop some of these shootings. Many states do not have central databases covering these issues as liberal-minded folks do not want these records to be centralized. They have stated that it is a privacy issue.

Remember when Wisconsin was about to pass the conceal-carry law. The gun-banners said that blood would flow in the streets. It wouldn’t be safe to walk outdoors because of all the stray bullets flying through the air, and road rage would turn into running gun battles. I would love to see one of these experts be re-interviewed and asked, “What happened, where are all the gun battles on the streets?”

If the gun-banners logic were true, why is it, according to FBI crime statistics, murder rates are the lowest in years in spite of the fact that 100 million more guns have been purchased since President Barack Obama took office. This last Black Friday saw more than 185,000 gun purchases in one day. By the gun-banners logic, that alone should have ended in shooting sprees nationwide.

I am very sure that the radical Islamic shootings will continue because the president has opened our borders and allowed terrorists to enter at will. If you follow the news, people from 38 countries on the restricted list have been caught entering our country from Mexico. How many made it in?

Ask yourself, why would guns disappear because they have been banned, but drugs that have been banned can be obtained in every community in the United States. The criminals will always have access to guns. Law-abiding citizens also should.

Paul Christensen resides in Custer.

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1OoaWUf