The high-security prison where Colorado keeps gang shot-callers and inmates who kill correctional officers may soon be marked obsolete for all inmates by federal court because it offers no outdoor recreation.

Colorado Department of Corrections officials are now scrambling to find a solution to the problem just one year after shuttering its newest high-security prison.

Rick Raemisch, the department’s executive director, declined to name three specific options he says are now under consideration to solve the recreation problem at Colorado State Penitentiary in Cañon City, citing pending litigation.

Asked whether reopening Colorado State Penitentiary II, the high-security prison that was opened in 2010 and was closed two years later, is one of the possible solutions, Raemisch said his staff is looking at virtually all options.

“I have kind of the old Marine Corps philosophy that everything we have gets used,” Raemisch said.

However, reopening the $208 million prison may not address the recreation issue for solitary-confinement inmates because it, like CSP, was built without outdoor recreation facilities, according to a DOC official in a recent deposition, said attorney Amy Robertson of the Civil Rights Education and Enforcement Center.

The gravity of the problem DOC faces is underlined by a 2012 decision by U.S. District Judge R. Brooke Jackson. He ruled that CSP violates the Eighth Amendment prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment by not providing outdoor recreation. His decision came in a case filed by DU’s law clinic on behalf of former CSP inmate Troy Anderson.

DOC addressed the issue by transferring Anderson to Sterling Correctional Facility, Robertson said. But she added that shuffling one or a few inmates from prison to prison won’t solve the problem because all CSP inmates are in the same position. That is why student and faculty attorneys at the clinic filed a second lawsuit against DOC last week, seeking class-action status, she said.

If certified as a class-action, the lawsuit, which names three inmates as plaintiffs, will represent the interests of all 630 administrative segregation inmates at CSP. The lawsuit says inmates are given an hour of exercise per day in a cell with a barred window only 6 inches wide.

“The design is the problem,” Robertson said. “It was unconstitutional when built.”

Raemisch said he hopes proactive moves by his staff will make the CSP lawsuit a moot point.

In the four months that he has been in office, DOC has revamped its administrative segregation program with the goal of removing all mentally ill inmates from CSP. The number of mentally ill inmates has already been reduced from 140 to eight since 2011, he said.

His staff is revamping the entire solitary-confinement criteria in ways that will dramatically reduce the total number of inmates in solitary and how long they stay, Raemisch said. Inmates will be told how long they will remain in solitary confinement when they are first sent, he said.

Putting inmates in solitary confinement for long spans of time “multiplies or manufactures mental illness,” Raemisch said.

“It’s really time that we take a whole new look at this,” he said.

Raemisch and Robertson said Friday they would prefer to resolve disputes about outdoor recreation at CSP through negotiation, rather than in court.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, kmitchell@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kmitchelldp