Politics Louisiana’s Last Woman In Statewide Office Loses Her Seat CREDIT: Alice Ollstein

NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA — A crowd of supporters in the packed ballroom of the posh Roosevelt Hotel Saturday night chanted “Mary! Mary!” as their senator of 18 years, Mary Landrieu, took the stage with her family to concede the runoff race to Rep. Bill Cassidy (R-LA).

In her speech, Landrieu highlighted accomplishments of her three terms, such as securing federal dollars for coastal restoration and passing the Affordable Care Act, which she said will live on even after she leaves the Senate.

“We’ve always known that we’re fighting for a stronger state, a state that’s more committed to justice, openness and opportunity, regardless of where you were born, what zip code you were born into, or the color of your skin,” she said. “We may not have won tonight, but we certainly have won some extraordinary victories.”

As the last Democrat and the last woman in statewide office, Landrieu’s widely-predicted loss will have a major impact on Louisiana and the nation, giving Republicans a 54-46 majority in the Senate next year.

Jody Gates and Marilyn McConnell, a couple from New Orleans who are both retired healthcare workers, told ThinkProgress that they fear Cassidy’s opposition to women’s equality and reproductive rights, citing his votes against the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act, the Violence Against Women Act and the Affordable Care Act.

“It’s going to be terrible, and if I had young children, I would live in fear,” Gates said.

Landrieu supporters Jody Gates and Marilyn McConnell. CREDIT: Kira Lerner

After the general election in November, national Democratic groups pulled back spending and advertising dollars from Landrieu’s campaign as the odds of her reelection dwindled. Still, the race shaped up to be the most expensive in the state’s history, with Cassidy ultimately drawing more support from outside groups in the final stretch.

Landrieu raised and spent several million dollars more in the race, funded by major donations from Exxon and other fossil fuel corporations.

But money was not the only factor at play in the race. Democratic party strategist James Carville, who attended Landrieu’s election night party, told ThinkProgress the outcome was “obviously part of a trend nationally” of voters turning against President Obama and his party, a trend he says he doesn’t understand.

“My state, the state that I love, has done a colossally dumb thing, here,” he said. “This week we’ve had unbelievable news on the economy, health care, the deficit is shrinking. We’re insuring more people for less money. For the life of me, I wish people would tell me what they’re mad about.”

Though most analysts have focused on the rising anti-Obama sentiment that drove several long-serving Democrats out of office in the South, several voters complained to ThinkProgress that Cassidy and Landrieu were too similar when it came to energy and the environment.

As she lagged in the polls in the final weeks of the campaign, Landrieu threw herself behind a single goal—forcing approval of the Keystone XL pipeline before the State Department finished its determination of whether the project is in the US’ national interest. Not only did the bill fail, the move alienated voters concerned with the impact of the oil and gas industry on the coastline and the climate.

Steve Estopinal, the president of the Southeast Louisiana Flood Protection Authority, which is currently embroiled in a lawsuit against a number of major oil and gas companies over the degradation of the coastal wetlands, said neither candidate is on his side when it comes to holding the industry accountable.

“The other party was just as much in bed with the oil industry as the Republican Party,” he told ThinkProgress. “I don’t think it’s a party thing.”

Greg Lemons, the mayor of the city of Abita Springs, agreed. “You’ve got a Democrat running, a very seasoned, good person who’s done a lot of things for Louisiana,” he said. “But she’s all oil and gas. Then you’ve got a Republican who in his ads says he wants to ‘unleash’ the oil and gas companies. It’s not a matter of unleashing, it’s a matter of controlling.”