Buy Photo Arlene Richard, right, and her family from Houston Texas didn't let a little rain stop them from passing a good time Saturday at the Step-N-Strut Trail Ride being held this year on the grounds of the Yambilee Building in Opelousas. (Photo: Freddie Herpin)Buy Photo

Rain and the absence of horses did not stop thousands of cowboys and cowgirls from the "granddaddy" of trail rides, Step-N-Strut, throughout the weekend in Opelousas.

The annual trail ride was originally set for Zydeco Park in Plaisance. Last week, organizers announced it would relocate to the Yambilee Building and St. Landry Parish AG Arena because of bad weather over the Halloween weekend and the potential for more this weekend.

In recent years, the event outgrew locations in Leonville and the acreage surrounding Evangeline Downs Racetrack and Casino in Opelousas.

With the move inside the city limits of Opelousas, the trail ride portion of the event was suspended. The 16 zydeco and R&B bands scheduled to play were reduced, but there was still barely any room to park a regular-sized vehicle and the omnipresent smell of barbecue seeped into your nose Saturday on the grounds.

Whether they were inside their campers or outside under a tent, the trail-riders came to party.

"We come every year," said Arlene Richard from Houston. "We all take our vacation at the same time each year for this."

Richard said they knew about the recent changes to the event, but it didn't matter. They were actually a little happy.

"We were coming anyway," she said. "We deal with horses every day. If we can go somewhere without horses, we're happy. It gives everyone a chance to mix and mingle and not have to worry about keeping up the horses."

Richard said her family is from St. Landry Parish and she has been attending trail rides for the last 54 years. She said she and her family have never missed Step-N-Strut.

"This is the super ride," Kwantessa Chambers who also lives in Houston. "We still have fun whether it's raining or not. As long as we're together, we have a great time. Rain or shine we will show up."

Bands, which included J.J. Callier & The Zydeco Players, Leroy Thomas and Lil' Nate & The Zydeco Big Tymers performed Friday and Saturday. The event wraps up Sunday with more musical performances and the "krunkest" wagon contest.

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/news/local/2015/11/07/thousands-show-up-step-n-strut-despite-rain/75328740/