FORT WAYNE, Ind. (WANE) – A Kokomo baseball stadium is the reason FEMA has stopped millions of federal dollars from coming to Indiana, including nearly $2 million dollars earmarked for Fort Wayne and Allen County.

FEMA has suspended hazard mitigation grants worth $5.5 million because Kokomo officials built the stadium on a part of a floodplain. FEMA officials told developers in late 2014 to not build the stadium on the part of the floodplain.

Fort Wayne was earmarked for $1.1 million to buy homes in flood-prone areas. Rodney Renkenberger, Maumee River Basin Commission’s executive director, spent most of his Monday morning talking to homeowners who have been waiting for a few years for their homes to be bought out with those federal dollars.

“I’ve spent my morning so far trying to call the people who are participants in the Fort Wayne grant application and letting them know that this is what’s happening,” Renkenberger said.

Renkenberger said the timeline on when homeowners could get their money is still uncertain.

“It may be six months, it could be a year. We don’t know,” he said. “That’s the difficult part and because a lot of these flood victims have been waiting for two plus years to be bought out.”

The city also applied for part of a more than $1.5 million FEMA grant for more property acquisition.

As far as the $1.1 million, those funds could still be available depending on how long the issue with Kokomo continues. When it comes to the partial $1.5 million grant, if the issue isn’t resolved by April 1, those funds will no longer be available.

NewsChannel 15 reached out to Kokomo officials about the issue. They released the following statement:

“We firmly dispute FEMA’s assertions that the eight parcels in question are not in compliance. We believe that the redesign plans are fully compliant with the deed restrictions placed on the parcels; that is why we filed suit against IDHS on January 26.

FEMA has not provided the City of Kokomo with any actionable, specific instructions for how to align the design with their demands. We have offered several alternative designs yet they provide no guidance for how we can address their concerns. They offer no explanation for their position.

We are in continued talks with IDHS regarding this issue and our related lawsuit. We know the state understands the overreach of the federal government; Governor Pence and his departments have actively fought, or filed suit against, federal government overreach on the Affordable Care Act, Immigration Reform, Education Policy and other issues. IDHS has indicated a willingness to concur and support Kokomo’s position in recent discussions.

We are evaluating FEMA’s current position and are open to discussing what change, if any, is needed to the project in order to bring finality to it. This political and bureaucratic interference may cause a delay, but we are committed to completing Kokomo Municipal Stadium.”