Majority has taken a more open approach to growth, development

Boulder City Councilwoman Suzanne Jones, right, who was re-elected last week, watches results with Elephant Journal's Waylon Lewis, center, at Shine Restaurant and Gathering Place on Tuesday night. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

The outgoing Boulder City Council has been divided on the most contentious growth and development issues, with a five-person majority on the nine-member council supporting a more open approach.

That majority voted to move forward with the creation of a comprehensive housing strategy, despite opposition from some neighborhood groups who fear more density, and supported using the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan update to address big-picture questions about the city's ultimate size and form, rather than holding a separate community visioning process.

Boulder City Council election results The Boulder County Clerk and Recorder's Office counted 28,845 votes from residents of Boulder through Wednesday morning. There are as many as 1,117 remaining ballots — overseas voters, those who need their signatures verified, etc. — that will be counted Thursday, when final tallies will be recorded. The top four vote-getters receive four-year terms on the City Council. The fifth-placer finisher wins a two-year term. Bob Yates: 12,081 Suzanne Jones: 11,122 Lisa Morzel: 10,629 Aaron Brockett: 10,080 Jan Burton: 8,855 Cindy Carlisle: 8,703 Michael Kruteck: 8,688 Tim Plass: 8,013 Leonard May: 6,591 Jyotsna Raj: 6,313 Don Cote: 5,726 Bill Rigler: 5,575 Julianne McCabe: 3,916 Cha Cha Spinrad: 1,964 Edward Jabari: 1,807 Jared Kaszuba: 1,496 Comrade Keith Percy: 874

And though there was no vote because Councilman Sam Weaver withdrew his proposal, that majority also opposed asking voters to put a requirement for subcommunity planning into the city charter.

In a competitive election where growth and development issues defined the differences between the 17 candidates seeking five open seats, it appears that majority is not likely to change, and the council as a whole may be somewhat more centrist and open to concerns from the business community.

Incumbents Lisa Morzel and Suzanne Jones, more cautious of development even as they want to see more housing choices, won re-election last week. Former Level 3 Communications executive Bob Yates and Planning Board Chairman Aaron Brockett, a software developer, also joined the council.

The fifth seat, which carries a two-year term instead of a four-year term, appears likely to have been won by Jan Burton, a former high-tech executive turned tiny house entrepreneur.

The three newcomers replace George Karakehian, Macon Cowles and Tim Plass, all members of the majority. Karakehian and Cowles chose not to seek re-election. Plass lost his seat with an eighth-place finish.

More votes to be counted this week

Boulder City Councilman-elect Aaron Brockett, left, and outgoing Councilman George Karakehian look over vote tallies at an Election Night party at the Boulderado Hotel that was sponsored by One Boulder and the Boulder Chamber. (Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer)

Reflecting the broader divisions in the community, former University of Colorado regent and ex-councilwoman Cindy Carlisle, a skeptic of growth's benefits who supported ballot questions 300 and 301, sits within 152 votes of Burton. (And Carlisle is 35 votes ahead of Michael Kruteck, whom she leap-frogged late in the vote counting.)

There could be as many as 1,117 ballots still to be counted in Boulder: ballots that require signature verification, ballots that could come in from overseas voters, and more than 200 normal ballots that the Clerk and Recorder's Office holds in reserve to protect the anonymity of ballots in the other categories.

But those ballots would have to be significantly different than the voting patterns of the 28,000 already counted to close the gap.

Burton has been in fifth place through every update of the vote totals, beginning with the first election returns that were released at 7 p.m. Tuesday.

The last votes will be counted on Thursday. The threshold for a recount is one-half of 1 percent — 44 votes in this case.

'Took most of the oxygen out of the room'

Brockett said on Election Night he doesn't anticipate a radical change, with development continuing to be focused on in-fill around transit corridors. Yates also struck a conciliatory note, stressing the need to listen to the large minority that supported the charter amendments.

Brockett has called for subcommunity planning to give neighborhoods more of a say in land-use decisions, an approach supported by Weaver, Jones, Morzel and council member Mary Young.

If Carlisle had taken the fifth seat, it would have shifted the council majority toward a more cautious approach on growth and development.

In contrast, Burton, when asked about the upcoming discussion on development impact fees, said it's important to remember "there is no free lunch," and fees will get passed on in higher costs for tenants and buyers.

PLAN-Boulder County, the organization of land-use activists long considered a power player in Boulder municipal elections, didn't see any of the newcomers it endorsed — Carlisle, Planning Board member Leonard May and neighborhood activist Jyotsna Raj — win election. PLAN-Boulder County also endorsed Jones and Morzel.

"Obviously it's disappointing to us, but I didn't sense that people had focused very much on the council race," said Ray Bridge, PLAN-Boulder's co-chair. "One thing I noticed is that the 300/301 controversy took most of the oxygen out of the room."

Plass, endorsed by PLAN-Boulder in 2011, did not win the group's backing this year, and became the first incumbent to not win re-election in Boulder since 1997, despite endorsements from Better Boulder, Open Boulder and the Sierra Club.

'More critical thinking'

Better Boulder, an organization led by former Mayor Will Toor that supports a more urban Boulder to advance environmental and transportation goals, saw the election of three of its candidates — Jones, Yates and Brockett — as did Open Boulder, which endorsed Yates, Brockett and Burton.

Open Boulder supports economic vitality, workforce housing and access to open space. It was started after the 2013 election, which saw most of PLAN-Boulder's endorsed candidates win, with a goal of electing more business-friendly candidates, increasing turnout among previously unengaged voters and changing how Boulder is governed.

Andy Schultheiss, executive director of Open Boulder, said the turnout was "a little disappointing," with 28,845 ballots cast in Boulder this year, up slightly from 27,001 in 2011 but down from the 32,704 who voted in 2013.

Nonetheless, he said he was happy with the three newcomers elected to the council.

"I don't know if it's going to be an ideological change, but the three people who are new people are all pretty moderate, and I think you're going to see less group-think and more critical thinking," he said.

(Boulder Mayor Matt Appelbaum strongly rejected the charge of "group-think" on election night, pointing out that the current council has been as divided on growth issues as the community.)

'In the front of their minds'

Bridge downplayed the significance of the outcome. Opponents always have overstated the influence of PLAN-Boulder County, he said, and municipal elections have frequently swung back and forth over growth issues.

Bridge said he expects the next council to be more sensitive to neighborhood concerns in the wake of issues 300 and 301, just as the City Council rolled back portions of the "right-sizing" project on Folsom Street in response to a community outcry.

"I think most of the council is well aware of the amount of concern aroused, so it will be right in the front of their minds," he said.

But Toor said he hopes the council moves forward with changes to rules around housing co-ops and accessory dwelling units that have hovered just out of reach for decades.

"There has been some talk about maybe we could do something in some neighborhoods, but nobody has done anything," he said. "I think just making some of this happen will be really positive. People always fear change, but there are lots of places that do a lot more to allow co-ops and accessory dwelling units. Once it happens, people will realize it's not so scary."

Weaver said subcommunity planning should be part of the city's regular planning process and would reduce political fights over occupancy and accessory units by identifying areas where change is more appropriate.

The City Council retreat in January will provide an opportunity to learn more about where the new council stands, he said.

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere