Capitol Digest provides an inside look at what happened in state politics this week. These quick reports offer insight into campaigns, committee meetings and other goings-on and give an overview of the coming week's events.



JINDAL FINISHES UP TRIP TO ASIA

Gov. Bobby Jindal held the last meetings of his economic development trip to Asia on Friday, when he sat down in Tokyo with executives from the Japanese chemical companies Shin-etsu and Sumitomo Corporation.

Both companies have operations in Louisiana, with the latter recently acquiring Edgen Group Inc., a Baton Rouge-based specialty products and services company, for $520 million. Moreover, the U.S. subsidiary of Shin-etsu, Japan's largest chemical company, recently announced it would invest $500 million in its Louisiana operations in Plaquemine and Addis, expanding production of PVC, chlor-alkali and vinyl chloride monomer.

Jindal also met with representatives from two other companies while in Tokyo on Friday. As in the governor's Korea stop, the identities of these firms were not divulged for competitive reasons.

Few details were released during Jindal's Asian economic development tour. Press was not allowed to accompany him on the week-long trip. He is scheduled to return to Baton Rouge on Saturday.

DARDENNE'S OFFICE TO AIR MARDI GRAS ADS

Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne announced his office would be rolling out a series of print and web ads aimed at getting tourists to visit New Orleans during Carnival this year. The ads, part of the Office of Tourism's "Only in Louisiana" tourism theme for 2014, will air in multiple markets, including Austin, Houston, Jackson and Little Rock.

"We want to make sure people understand the different ways they can experience (Carnival) throughout the state," Dardenne said in a prepared statement. "2014 is the perfect year to promote Mardi Gras because it falls late enough for us to advertise after the holidays but with enough advance notice so people can still make plans."

The ads were created by New Orleans-based advertising firm Trumpet, and can be viewed here.



MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION DISCUSSION SET FOR TUESDAY

State lawmakers will discuss the "feasibility and effectiveness" of legalizing marijuana in Louisiana at a committee meeting in Baton Rouge on Tuesday (Jan. 21). The meeting is open to the public.

The meeting is timely, as state Rep. Austin Badon, D-New Orleans, pre-filed legislation this week to dramatically lessen penalties for simple marijuana possession. A raft of other marijuana-related bills are also expected to be filed ahead of the 2014 session, which begins March 10.



NEW ORLEANS LAWMAKER WANTS DISCUSSION ON SOLITARY CONFINEMENT

It's time for state lawmakers to have a discussion about the now very-public practice of solitary confinement in Louisiana's jails and prisons, says state Sen. J.P. Morrell, D-New Orleans.

Amnesty International and other groups, which have long advocated for an end to Louisiana's practice of long-term solitary confinement, had requested a meeting of Morrell's Judiciary B Committee that takes up criminal justice bills in the state Legislature.

Morrell scheduled a meeting for Thursday (Jan. 16), but soon learned Corrections officials would have been absent due to multiple ongoing legal disputes over the issue.

"We were not confident we would get participation from all parities so we deferred it," Morrell said this week. It was unclear when, or even if, the meeting would be rescheduled.

The practice of solitary confinement in Louisiana's jails and prisons has been in headlines many times this year, mostly due to developments in the cases of the Angola 3, a group of inmates housed in solitary for decades at the Louisiana State Penitentiary.

The first, Robert King (formerly Wilkerson), was incarcerated in solitary confinement for 29 years before he was released in 2001 after agreeing to a plea deal. Herman Wallace, the oldest of the three, died of liver cancer in October just three days after being released from a correctional center near Baton Rouge after his sentence was overturned.

The last, Albert Woodfox, is seeking release after 42 years in solitary. His case is currently pending before a three-judge panel in the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans. Wallace, King and Woodfox were all locked up on murder charges, which they said was retaliation for their involvement with the Black Panthers.

Louisiana law does not make mention the practice of solitary confinement, which correctional officials call "closed-cell restriction." Thus, every aspect of the practice is up to the discretion of the warden or sheriff.

"I'm on the side of 'if we're going to have this practice, which I find pretty abhorrent, we need to have a detailed definition of what's allowed and what's not,'" said Morrell. "It's an issue I'm interested in. It's an issue that's not going to go away."

EDWARDS SUPPORTERS POLL 6TH DISTRICT

Political allies of former Gov. Edwin Edwards have commissioned a poll to look into his chances of success in the race for Louisiana's 6th Congressional District, according to a report by LaPolitics.

Pollster Verne Kennedy performed the poll at the request of former Edwards aide Bob d'Hemecourt, among others. The results were not made public.

Louisiana's 6th Congressional District encompasses a wide swath of the southeastern quadrant of the state, including parts of Baton Rouge and the River Parishes. The seat will be vacated when U.S. Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, steps down to challenge Democrat Mary Landrieu in November for the Senate seat she's held for three terms.



COMMUNITY COLLEGES ANNOUNCE FINALISTS FOR SYSTEM PRESIDENT

The Louisiana Community and Technical Colleges System (LCTCS) announced the seven finalists vying to replace Joe May as system president. May left the post to take up a job as head of the community college district in Dallas County.

The finalists are: Chancellor of the State Center Community College District in California Deborah Blue, former Chief Operating Officer and Provost of Higher Colleges of Technology in the United Arab Emirates Marshall Drummond, President of West Virginia University at Parkersburg in West Virginia Marie Gnage, Chancellor of Bossier Parish Community College in Louisiana James Henderson, Chancellor of the Yosemite Community College District in California Joan Smith, Dean of the College of Business for San Jose State University in California David Steele and Chancellor of Delgado Community College in Louisiana Monty Sullivan.

The seven candidates will be interviewed Tuesday (Jan. 21) at the New Orleans Airport Hilton in Kenner. The public is welcome to attend. A second round of finalists will be recommended after this first round of interviews.



LSU HOSTS CAMPAIGN STRATEGY SYMPOSIUM

Interested in how campaigns work? Always wondered how, where and why politicians employ certain tactics in certain markets? The Academy of Applied Politics seeks to answers to these questions, and more.

The eight-week seminar is hosted by the Reilly Center for Media & Public Affairs and the Manship School of Mass Communication, and will feature talks from top politicos and policy wonks, including Charlie Cook of the Cook Political Report, Manship Chair Bob Mann and many more.

Classes are held every Thursday between March 6 and April 24 from 6 to 8 p.m. Applications for the program can be submitted here. The program cost is $550 and the class is capped at 30 students.



NEW HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSIONER HIRED

Korey Harvey is Louisiana's new Deputy Commissioner of Health Insurance. A Louisiana native and LSU graduate, Harvey has been the Louisiana Department of Insurance's Health Insurance Attorney since 2012. He takes over the position from Emma Fontenot, who is retiring.

Harvey has been closely involved with the roll-out of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, in Louisiana and worked on the BP-Deepwater Horizon oil spill case for the Long Law Firm before his time at LDI.

MEETINGS and EVENTS



Legislative committee meetings for the week of Jan. 20 can be found here.



Friday, Jan. 17 at 6:30 p.m. -- Herman Cain joins Paul Dietzel II for official kickoff of the latter's congressional campaign (Renaissance Hotel, 7000 Bluebonnet Blvd., Baton Rouge)



Monday, Jan. 20 at 11:30 a.m. -- Gay activist and businessman Joe Traigle will address the Press Club of Baton Rouge on the topic of "Steps Toward Great City Status." Lunch is $12 for members and $15 for nonmembers. (Iberville Room, Belle of Baton Rouge, 102 France St., Baton Rouge)

Tuesday, Jan. 21 at 8:15 a.m. -- LCTCS holds a public meeting to interview finalists vying for system president position (New Orleans Airport Hilton, Calcasieu Room, 901 Airline Dr., Kenner)

Tuesday at 12:30 p.m. -- The Pelican Institute hosts an environmental policy luncheon, featuring Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority Chairman Garret Graves and U.S. Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge (Juban's Restaurant, Baton Rouge)



Tuesday at 6:00 p.m. -- Americans for Prosperity-Louisiana kickoff dinner, featuring State Reps. Julie Stokes, R-Kenner and Scott Simon, R-Abita Springs and former U.S. Rep. Jeff Landry. Email PJoffrion@afphq.org for more info (Pontchartrain Center, 4545 Williams Blvd., Kenner)

Tuesday at 6:00 p.m. -- U.S. Rep. Bill Cassidy holds town hall meeting (Walker City Hal, 10136 Florida Blvd., Walker)

Wednesday, Jan. 22 at 9:00 a.m. -- Board of Regents holds their monthly meeting. Live-stream available here (LSU Health Sciences Meeting, School of Medicine Zadeck Conference Center, Room G-221, 1501 Kings Highway, Shreveport)

. . . . . . .



CORRECTION: This article originally stated Herman Wallace was released in October on humanitarian grounds. It has been changed to reflect that Wallace was indeed released because his sentenced had been overturned.



Lauren McGaughy is a state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. She can be reached at lmcgaughy@nola.com or on Twitter at @lmcgaughy.