LITTLE ROCK — Despite receiving approval in last week’s special session, Gov. Asa Hutchinson’s plan for the future of the state’s Medicaid expansion program continues to hang in the balance as legislators prepare to convene Wednesday for a session devoted to budget issues.

The three-fourths hurdle

One of those budget issues will be an appropriation for the state Medicaid program, including Arkansas Works, Hutchinson’s reconfiguring of the Medicaid expansion program that has been known as the private option. More than 267,000 low-income Arkansans have obtained government-subsidized private health insurance under the private option since it launched in 2013 as an alternative to the expansion of Medicaid rolls envisioned in the federal Affordable Care Act.

Hutchinson has said that while he opposes the Affordable Care Act, continuing Medicaid expansion is the best path forward for the state. The program is projected to save Arkansas $757 million over the next five years and help rural hospitals stay afloat.

Thirty House members and 10 senators, all Republicans, voted against the bill to create Arkansas Works last week. Their objections include concerns about the national costs associated with the Affordable Care Act, philosophical objections to expanding social welfare programs and complaints that the reforms in Arkansas Works, such as referral to voluntary work training for unemployed recipients, will not do enough to encourage recipients to work and ensure that only the truly needy receive benefits.

The opponents’ votes were not enough to stop the legislation from passing during the special session, but they would be enough to block an appropriation bill. Most appropriation bills in Arkansas require at least a three-fourths majority vote in each chamber for passage, or 75 votes in the 100-member House and 27 votes in the 35-member Senate.

Uphill battle for opponents

The Arkansas Works appropriation is expected to be included in a bill containing the entire Medicaid budget, so defeating the bill would block funding not only to Arkansas Works but also to the traditional Medicaid program as well. Sen. Bart Hester, R-Cave Springs, said last week that opponents hope to present an alternative budget bill that would fund all of Medicaid except Arkansas Works.

Could that approach work? It’s doubtful, according to Senate President Pro Tem Jonathan Dismang, R-Beebe.

“For the opponents that are against appropriation, it’s an uphill battle in the other direction,” he said, noting that an alternative budget bill also would require at least a three-fourths majority vote.

“At some point, 75 percent of both chambers are going to have to agree to move forward. At this point, a significant majority … wants to move one direction; the minority does not,” Dismang said.

Hutchinson said the Legislature does not need to vote separately on Arkansas Works during the fiscal session.

“That vote has been taken,” he said. “We have voted on Arkansas Works, and it was adopted by a majority of both parties in both chambers.”

Hutchinson said that “a minority should not derail the expressed will of the majority” and said he does not want a Washington-style government shutdown “under my watch.”

Hester said he is willing to defund all of Medicaid if that is the only way to stop Arkansas Works, but he said he believes some sort of deal will be reached to avoid that possibility. He also said there is nothing wrong with a minority exerting its power in the appropriations process.

“The constitution says if we’re going to spend the people’s money, 75 percent need to agree, and we don’t have 75 percent agreeing on spending it that way,” he said.

Let’s make a deal

It is unclear what kind of deal could prevent an impasse on the issue. Some have suggested the governor could yield on his proposal to let a private company or companies manage parts of the traditional Medicaid program, a proposal that Hutchinson dropped from the agenda for the special session at the last minute because of resistance from some lawmakers.

Asked Friday if he might use the issue of managed care as a bargaining chip, Hutchinson said that “I have a lot of tools in my pocket” but said that is not the way he works.

“I deal pretty straightforward with folks,” he said. “I make the case on its merits. I try to separate the issues.”

Yielding on managed care likely would not be much help to Arkansas Works anyway, according to Dismang and House Speaker Jeremy Gillam, R-Judsonia.

“Those concerned about the federal deficit are the ones I think are more inclined to look in that direction” and support managed care, Gillam said.

Rep. Bob Ballinger, R-Hindsville, one of the opponents of Arkansas Works, said that “I’ve been promised there will be no deals offered from the other side, and I have nothing to offer.”

“The real thing is going to be, how are you going to deal with this with your constituents?” he said.

Several other legislators who oppose Arkansas Works also said they are thinking about their constituents.

“If you put this before a vote of the Arkansas people, it’d go down in flames. I’ll vote what my people tell me,” said Sen. Terry Rice, R-Waldron.

The House and Senate will convene at noon Wednesday.

————

Dale Ellis contributed to this report.