Tim Tebow’s fervent religious beliefs have received strong support from rocker (and reality TV star) Gene Simmons.

KISS frontman Simmons, the co-owner of an expansion Arena Football League franchise called — what else — the LA KISS, could be Tebow’s new boss. The new team has extended a three-year contract offer to Tebow to become its signal caller when it takes the field in 2014. The New England Patriots released the former University of Florida Heisman Trophy winner on August 31 after he failed to make the NFL team’s 53-man roster.

In an interview, Simmons made his feelings clear about Tebow’s Christian values:

“He’s got a religious passion, as well he should, we’re in America.He’s proud to be a Christian, what’s wrong with that? And yet, with sports media and pop culture media, they make fun of his religion. Really? In America? If he was wearing a burqa, they wouldn’t dare say anything. But if you’re a Christian, you get to be picked on? What the hell? The guy’s got family values. I never saw the media picking on Michael Vick for torturing dogs. Or this other football player, who’s alleged to have killed, committed murder. That’s ‘cool.’ But a guy who guy who’s religious and has got family values isn’t ‘cool?’ He’s cool to me.”

“… I think religion is good for mankind. Without the Ten Commandments — Jews gave you that — Without that, there’d be chaos…”

The KISS bassist also said in the radio.com interview that he and team execs will be meeting in person with Tebow soon about the arena gig and noted that the quarterback would receive the respect “that he didn’t receive in the NFL.”

Back in June, Patriots owner Robert Kraft also expressed admiration for Tebow’s faith-based background. “For me personally, having Tim Tebow on this team he’s someone who believes in spirituality, he’s very competitive and works hard and has a great attitude and he’s a winner. So having him as part of our franchise is great but he has to compete just like anyone else. We’re blessed to have a lot of people like that, but the fact that spirituality is so important to him is very appealing to me.”

Tebow — who currently does not have a job with any NFL team — is probably well aware that playing in the Arena Football League worked out for Kurt Warner, who went on to win a Super Bowl with the St. Louis Rams.