SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Walt Weiss wrote his “A” team on the lineup card Saturday at Salt River Fields, with a player roster that will look largely the same for opening day April 4.

The springtime Rockies are finally solidifying into a regular-season squad.

“It’ll probably be pretty close,” Weiss said.

Shortstop Trevor Story batted in the second slot, after leadoff hitter Charlie Blackmon and before Carlos Gonzalez. Putting Story at No. 2 protects the rookie behind a base-stealer and in front of a slugger. Second baseman DJ LeMahieu hit eighth, where he excels at turning over a lineup. LeMahieu’s .301 batting average and .358 on-base percentage led Colorado last season.

Left fielder Gerardo Parra hit fifth behind Nolan Arenado, followed by catcher Nick Hundley and first baseman Ben Paulsen.

Rockies bullpen update:

The Rockies’ bullpen remains open. Chris Rusin, who made his first spring appearance Saturday after coming back from a finger injury, moved toward winning a job. He allowed four hits and one run on 32 pitches in 1 innings. He will pitch three more innings Tuesday.

Colorado’s bullpen sets up with lefties Jake McGee and Boone Logan and right-handers Jason Motte, Chad Qualls, Jason Miller and Christian Bergman. Jon Gray is injured, so the Rockies may need Bergman as a fifth starter. Rusin would then be the long reliever. If the Rockies leave camp with four starters, they likely would use an eight-man bullpen. That would leave Miguel Castro and Scott Oberg battling for the final spot.

“It all depends on the design of the bullpen. If we break with eight or we break with seven,” Weiss said.

Jorge De La Rosa to start opening day:

Jorge De La Rosa will start opening day at Arizona, but Weiss is undecided on a pitcher for the Rockies’ home opener April 8. “There is some debate there,” he said. Tyler Chatwood, Jordan Lyles or Bergman are possibilities. The Rockies will have extra rest days for Chatwood early in the season to protect him as he comes back from Tommy John surgery.

Nick Groke, The Denver Post