Posted on December 11, 2013

Rand Paul On Ryan-Murray Deal: "Worse Than A Continuing Resolution," "Status Quo"

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

NEIL CAVUTO: Well, I think what he was saying and what others said, what Paul Ryan has said, Senator, I could be wrong, he said, 'Look, whatever the government brought and whether the media fairly covered or not, we got the blame for it and we don't want to cross that bridge again. So let's focus on getting a deal, keep the attention on Obamacare.' That was the method to their madness. What do you make of that?



SEN. RAND PAUL (R-KY) But it's sort of a separate question because I'm not talking about shutting down the government, nor was I in favor of it. But what I would say that when we had the shutdown, the Democrats wanted to do a continuing resolution. This budget deal is worse than a continuing resolution because it actually increases spending by $60 billion in the first two years and we know the history of Congress is that they lie. They don't keep their word. So after two years, no budget deal is worth the paper it's written on, it's only worth something in the first year or two and, mark my words, they'll go back on this deal also after a year or two and they don't like it. So we should increase the spending cuts.



NEIL CAVUTO: I think it is an example of the type of deal -- maybe I'm wrong, I don't want to put deals in his mouth or head -- that a Chris Christie would come up with where they get deal done, it might not be perfect to either side but it keeps moving the ball forward. What do you think of that?



RAND PAUL: But here's the problem, it doesn't. It moves it backwards. It is worse than the status quo. The status quo will spend $60 billion less than the budget deal over the next two years. They do some ledger domain and do some shell games and they want to say that there's less addition to the deficit, but over ten years, this deal will add $7 trillion to the deficit. It does not significantly alter our course. We're still on a course for disaster.