Guests look over plans for the project, as well as past works created by the artist, at the kick off event for the Tall Stacks Tree Art project at Steamboat Park in Jeffersonville’s Port Fulton Neighborhood on Saturday. (By Jenna Esarey, special to The Courier-Journal) July 25, 2015

An eyesore will become art as a damaged tree in Jeffersonville’s Steamboat Park is being transformed into a representation of steamboat stacks.

The Tall Stacks Tree Art project kicked off Saturday with a picnic and meet and greet with the artist in the park in the Port Fulton Neighborhood at the intersection of Chestnut and Division Streets.

Mayor Mike Moore, city council members, Public Art Director Dawn Spyker, and the artist, Joe Autry, were on hand with images of the concept art for the project and examples of Autry’s previous projects.

The Port Fulton Neighborhood Association provided barbecue, chips, and watermelon for guests at the event kickoff.

Autry works with wood, stone, bronze and ice, participating in ice sculpting competitions in Russia multiple times.

In 2012 Autry completed a project at a residence along Jeffersonville’s Utica Pike, turning a dead tree into a stylized totem.

Using everything from chainsaws to delicate chisels Autry will transform the two trunks of the large tree into steamboat stacks, complete with belching smoke and a number of steamboat related images.

Working Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, Autry expects the project to take up to four weeks. The Jeffersonville Art Commission’s Facebook page will update the progress regularly and post when Autry is working. “I expect I’ll be here by 9 a.m. and work about four hours unless the weather is really nice and I’m really in a groove,” Autry said.

Visitors are welcome to watch the work in progress. A safe viewing area has been set up and the public is invited to bring chairs or blankets to spread out under a large, shady tree to watch Autry at work.

The $8,000 project is funded by grants from the Indiana Art Commission and a Redevelopment Neighborhood Grant given to Port Fulton Neighborhood Association. The Jeffersonville Public Art Commission chipped in as well.

“We focused on downtown early on because of the walking bridge,” said Nathan Samuel, city council member and leader of the Jeffersonville Public Art Commission. “Now we need to look at other areas.”

The Port Fulton Neighborhood is only about a mile from the Big Four Bridge and sees a lot of bicycle and automobile traffic. “We’d like to make everything in the park art related,” said city council member Mike Smith, a life-long resident of the neighborhood. “We want people to say, ‘have you seen that place?’.”

Steamboats played a significant role in the history of Port Fulton. Originally a separate town, Port Fulton was formed in 1835 and named after the inventor of the steamboat, Robert Fulton.

The Howard family, owners of the Howard Shipyards, built their mansion, now the Howard Steamboat Museum, in the town in the late 1800s. The small town was also home to Jefferson General Hospital, the third largest Civil War hospital in the country. Jeffersonville annexed the area in 1926.

Autry lived in the neighborhood for a few years as a child and is excited to create a project there. “I have fond memories of this place,” he said. “I popped my first wheelie on the sidewalk right over there. This neighborhood had a huge impact on my life.”

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1S1Hcho