Mark Milligan of the Victory celebrates after scoring from a penalty against Brisbane Roar. Photo: Getty Images

Only the most neurotic of pedants would now deny that Melbourne Victory has achieved its first goal of the season – winning the Premier's Plate.

Victory's 1-0 triumph over Brisbane Roar at Suncorp Stadium on Saturday night, courtesy of Mark Milligan's penalty in the dying moments of the first half, all but assures them of their first silverware in six seasons, a richly deserved reward for a campaign in which the Melbourne side has displayed enterprise and adventure at every turn.

In Fahid Ben Khallfallah, Victory has fielded the most exciting foreigner in the league this season, and in Besart Berisha, Gui Finkler, Kosta Barbarouses and Archie Thompson coach Kevin Muscat has consistently deployed a battery of offensive firepower that ensures a torrid night for any defence trying to keep them at bay.

The navy blues have approached each game with an attacking mindset, home or away. The fact that they have scored 53 goals in their 26 games, an average of more than two a game, speaks volumes about the philosophy Muscat, a tough and ruthless defender in his playing days, brings to his coaching.

Advertisement

In his first full season as coach (he took over four rounds into the 2013-14 campaign when Socceroo boss Ange Postecoglou quit to take over the national team) Muscat has done something that Mehmet Durakovic, Jim Magilton and Postecoglou himself could not: won a trophy for the presentation cabinet at AAMI Park.

As a club Victory craves success, but the loud and voluble fan base that have made it the best supported and biggest club in the land demand success with style.

In the club's early days its chairman Geoff Lord used to declare that it was his aim to make Victory the Manchester United of Australia. Under Lord and his then coach Ernie Merrick, that boast had some substance as the club won two Championships in three years and played off in another grand final a year later.

But while they were subsequently successful enough in regularly making the play-offs and reaching the penultimate week of the season, they never reached another grand final and looked on as first Brisbane stole their thunder on the field and then Western Sydney Wanderers threatened to usurp their status as Australia's most popular team during that club's fabulous first two seasons.

Under Lord's replacement as chairman, Anthony Di Pietro, Victory has grown as a business. It now has some 22,000 members, consistently averages crowds of well over 20,000 and will make a profit of around $1 million this season. In contrast the rest of the league is struggling to break even or is posting losses and most clubs could only dream of attracting average gates the size of Victory.

Di Pietro has presided over off-field growth, but has badly needed something to show for all the club's efforts these past five years on the pitch.

It was early in his reign that Merrick was axed, a decision which ushered in a period of instability during the spells when Durakovic and then Northern Irishman Magilton were in charge.

He pulled off a great coup when he lured Postecoglou south and back home to Melbourne to take charge at Victory for the 2012-13 season, but was frustrated and disappointed to lose him when he did to the national team. Di Pietro will be hoping that the Premier's Plate is merely the first part of a double, with the grand final and Championship next.

Kevin Muscat's side can enjoy their coronation at home to Central Coast Mariners at AAMI Park next Sunday afternoon secure in the knowledge that it would need a monumental upset for them not to take the spoils.

Victory sits atop the standings with 50 points from its 26 games and a goal difference of plus seven. The only side who can catch it is Sydney, but that is purely in the minds of the most speculative of mathematical speculators.

Sydney lies second on the ladder three points adrift and plays third placed Wellington Phoenix in Wellington next Sunday. Graham Arnold's side would need Victory to lose to the Mariners and for them to beat the New Zealanders by anything up to six goals for them to take the Premiers Plate.

It's not going to happen. The best the Sky Blues can probably hope for is to win or draw that match so they at least finish second and gain a home semi-final. If they could do that then they would at least have a chance to host the grand final by winning their semi-final if Victory were to slip up by losing theirs.

Victory officials were, in time honoured fashion, "keeping a lid on things" after the win over Brisbane. They are hoping to build up the anticipation to ensure that AAMI Park is full to bursting point for the visit of the Mariners next Sunday, when the Premiers Plate will be unveiled.

The win came thanks to a rather fortunate penalty. Still, what goes around comes around. Muscat and his staff have complained on numerous occasions this season when they did not get the rub of the green over controversial decisions, none more so than the incident against Sydney when Seb Ryall went to ground to earn the Sky Blues a spot kick in that incendiary 3-3 draw.

Sydney is in pole position to take the second spot given that it is a point clear of Wellington, but it is no certainty to do so. It has to travel across the Tasman to face Merrick's men, who have been the revelation of the campaign. The Phoenix have massive motivation, knowing that if they do finish second they too would have the chance to host the grand final.

Adelaide United's loss on the road to Western Sydney Wanderers on Saturday means they will probably finish fourth, although they could take third place from Wellington at the last moment.

For that to happen they will need to beat Melbourne City next Saturday and hope Sydney can beat Phoenix.

City will finish fifth and, with the disgraced Perth Glory excluded, Brisbane will get sixth place. Both will have to travel on the first week of the finals and their opponent will be determined by the final placings for Sydney, Wellington and Adelaide.