Render Label Group

Jamie Jones might not be a household name, but that’s about to change. The Arkansas-based country singer has released a song, “Pissed Off Rednecks Like Me,” that has quickly gone viral via social media — for better or worse.

The song airs many of Jones’ frustrations with the way things are in America right now: “And don’t try to tell my children when and where to pray / We ain’t that far gone, we’re still standing on / The land of the free and the home of the brave,” he sings at the beginning of the tune.

Jones goes on to rail against immigration, Obamacare and welfare, ending each verse with the line, “This is coming from real America, son / Pissed off rednecks like me.”

“While Mrs. Jones is gone to the gym, I thought I’d do a little songwriting,” Jones wrote on Facebook when originally sharing the song. “If it offends ya….middle finger!!!!”

Plenty may agree with Jones’ sentiments, but his label, Render Records, has found themselves fielding some angry feedback.

“We appreciate and respect those views and opinions. That’s what is great about our country, the ability and freedom to agree and more importantly disagree with subject matters such as these,” Render Label Group President Steve Freeman writes on Facebook. “Our job as a record label is to make our artists’ music available and to promote it, not to agree or disagree with the art or its content politically or otherwise. We as a label believe in letting our artists say what’s in their hearts and on their minds. We are all individuals and we will never completely agree on these types of subjects, but I encourage everyone to be respectful of others opinions as their right to express them.”

“Pissed Off Rednecks Like Me,” which was recorded on Jones’ iPhone, may be part of an upcoming album, which was recorded at Reba McEntire‘s Starstruck Studios and includes a song by James Otto.

“Pissed Off Rednecks Like Me” is available for download on iTunes.

Listen to Jamie Jones, “Pissed Off Rednecks Like Me”:

NEXT: Top 10 Censored Songs in Country Music