SANTA MARIA, Calif. -

If you're looking for a good paying job with upward career growth potential and job security, the local healthcare industry is where you should start.

Related Content Slideshow: Healthcare Leading Job...

There are plenty of opportunities locally that offer excellent pay and benefits.

But it also requires education, dedication, sacrifice and the absolute willingness to want to help people, according to those in the field and those pursuing a career in healthcare.

Allan Hancock College nursing student Victoria Mora has spent the past several years of her life preparing for a career as a registered nurse.

"I want to eventually be an ER nurse", Mora says, "but I’ll probably be starting on Med-Surg just like the rest of us."

Vocational Nurse Joe Griffin moved from Portland, Oregon to pursue a RN career through Allan Hancock College's competitive nursing program.

"There’s a definite need for nursing, there’s always going to be sick people in the world", Griffin says, "I got my vocational nursing up in Portland, Oregon and was working on getting all my nursing prerequisites done, you throw your name in the hat and I got my number called right before school started so I was just happy to throw on my nursing shoes and head on down the road."

Cuesta College nursing students Andrew Miller and Katherine Moody know there's a good-paying job waiting for them when they finish their classes.

"I think its interesting, its driven by science, everything is evidence based, there’s a lot of critical thinking involved, which I think is stimulating, I enjoy it", Andrew Miller says, "it seems like you’re always having to learn new things, the field is constantly changing, you have to stay up to date on everything new that comes out every year."

"It would definitely have to be in labor and delivery either that or pediatrics", Katherine Moody says about her career ambitions, "I love children and I love babies and I know that’s where I’m going to end up no matter what so whatever it takes to get there I’m going to get there."

In its annual survey, U.S. News and World Report cites federal Bureau of Labor Statistics data in listing nursing as among the top healthcare jobs in terms of opportunity and compensation from 2016 to 2024.

"The new grad situation is very bright right now", says Marcia Scott, Director of Nursing at Cuesta College, "our graduates from 2014 and 2015 were employed within 6 months, many of them locally, well over 75 percent got hired within the first 6 months."

"There wasn’t quite as many positions for the new graduates say three, four years ago but it has picked up and forecasting is that all of our new grads will be hired", Scott says, "there’s a very significant need for graduates and experienced nurses in the workforce, many of them will work in community settings, in preventative care, RN’s will continue to be a main force in the hospital acute care setting and long-term care."

"There’s just a wide range of opportunities", says AHC nursing instructor Joann Bellrose, "everything from Hospice, the hospitals, long-term care facilities, home-healthcare, its just very vast."

"I’ve never been out of a job, absolutely never", Bellrose says, "I’ve had the opportunity to work in all sorts of different facilities, hospitals, home health, I’ve taught, so I’ve taught all sorts of different programs as well, there’s always opportunities where you can use your knowledge and pass that on to others to make their life better."



Local healthcare industry jobs extend far beyond nursing, many do not require extended education or clinical training.

"I’m much more optimistic now than I have ever been", says Jay Hardy, co-founder of Hardy Diagnostics in Santa Maria, "we all know we have aging baby-boomers and they need help, so it’s a very good industry now to be in."

Hardy Diagnostics employs hundreds of people in its medical laboratory supply business and continues to grow.

"There is so much happening its hard to keep up", Hardy says, "just the technology of healthcare is advancing very quickly and we want to be on the forefront of that as well."

With more people having access to healthcare along with the technological advances in the industry, job growth in a variety of healthcare-related fields is forecast to remain robust for several years.

"Right now with the Affordable Care Act there’s a lot more opportunities to do things in the community", says AHC Nursing instructor Larry Manalo, "do something in the clinics, something in research, do something in health prevention, the Affordable Care Act opened a lot of opportunities for nurses to venture into other roles and jobs outside the hospital, outside the clinics."

Central Coast hospitals remain major healthcare employers.

"Sierra Vista has been growing over the past year", says Sierra Vista Regional Medical Center Human Resources Director Kristin Flynn, "we’ve hired more employees in 2015 than I’ve ever seen before."

"Radiological technologists, laboratory technologists, those types of positions but technology in general will always impact healthcare", Flynn says, "I think its impacting us positively because as we are able to bring better technology here to the Central Coast and offer new services to our patients, we are able to employ new types of staff and bring people with different qualifications and different skill sets to our hospital."

"I would highly encourage young people to get involved with the healthcare industry", Jay Hardy says, "it’s a great career path, you’re guaranteed a job, you can work most any place that you want to, not only that, it’s a service to other people, you’re doing something good for people, helping them out, you get to pay it forward."

Future healthcare professionals at Allan Hancock College and Cuesta College agree, but they caution those considering the same career path only for the money.