EFSC: Titan Men Blank Broward 2-0 In Region 8 Opener

By Mark DeCotis // September 26, 2015

BREVARD COUNTY • MELBOURNE, FLORIDA – Eastern Florida’s men’s soccer team rose to the occasion on defense and offense on Friday in scoring a 2-0 victory over Broward College at the Titan Soccer Complex on the Melbourne Campus.

The victory moved the consensus No. 2-nationally ranked Titans to 5-0-1 and more importantly 1-0 in the Florida College System Activities Association/Region 8 race to the postseason.

Broward, ranked 20th nationally, dropped to 4-2-1 and 0-1.

Eastern Florida continues FCSAA/Region 8 play on Sunday hosting ASA Miami at 6 p.m. at the Titan Soccer Complex. The match will be televised live on WEFS-TV and streamed live at www.efsctitans.com

Eastern Florida, Broward and ASA play each other three times each to determine which team advances to the NJCAA postseason. The Titans are seeking their third trip in their third year as a program.

Friday’s victory came courtesy of a first-half corner-kick header from sophomore Shahri Sepehri with 5 minutes and four seconds to play, and a second-half goal from leading scorer and sophomore Yannick Koffi with 18:05 to go, and thanks to a stellar defense and solid, smart goalkeeping from sophomore Kekuta Jatta.

It also:

• Ran Eastern Florida’s home record to 16-0-1.

• And gave the Titans their first clean sheet of the season which had been something head coach Oliver Twelvetrees had been seeking since the season-opener.

“We’re really happy to get a clean sheet when we really needed to get that clean sheet against a top-quality offense,” Twelvetrees said. “I thought collectively and individually, from the goalkeeper across the back four we were very, very good tonight.”

Twelvetrees had special praise for defensive center back sophomore Wilfred Williams and the ironman, tower of strength midfielder sophomore Micah Smoak.

“He was absolutely fantastic,” Twelvetrees said of Williams who shadowed and shut down Broward’s leading scorer freshman Elijah Larin. “I think we showed tonight we can defend.” As for Smoak: “He’s a 90-minute player,” Twelvetrees said. “We don’t want to take him off the field. As long as he continues to lead this team and emotionally and physically on the pitch we are going to get a lot of wins.”

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free