Topics: aol_on, flint, Flint water crisis, Michigan, Rick Snyder, News, Politics News

If you caught any of Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder’s press briefing about the Flint water crisis on Thursday morning, you saw a man who looked as if his brain had not yet caught up to his increasingly dire situation. Snyder still appeared to still be processing the fact that his administration’s decision to enact a cost-saving measure forcing the city to use the hideously polluted Flint River as its sole source of drinking water resulted in high levels of toxic lead poisoning of the residents. Oops.

The next time some idiot wearing a Donald Trump t-shirt and a sneer tells you that we need leaders who will run the government more like a business, kindly direct their attention to Snyder. A business executive and CPA with no prior experience serving in government, Snyder was elected in the wave election of 2010 that swept Tea Party conservatives into office at the state and federal level. He immediately set about trying to run the state like it was a division of Gateway, the computer company where he was an executive during the 1990s. He crushed unions and made Michigan a right-to-work state, cutting services, and replacing the business tax with a flat tax while eliminating tax breaks on pensions, thus putting more of the state’s tax burden on the poor and working classes.

The result? Michigan now ranks a whopping 36th in per capita income and just spent a year and a half poisoning 100,000 people with water so polluted, a local General Motors engine plant stopped using it because it corroded the factory’s machinery.

Snyder is not the only Republican governor swept into power during the Tea Party wave of 2009-10 who used his state as a lab experiment for the type of conservative governance the GOP has been pushing for decades – lower regulations, lower taxes, slashing government services, and generally screwing over everyone not in their socio-economic class through austerity budgets and a boneheaded, stubborn refusal to adjust their policies in reaction to changing events. How is that working out for some of the other governors? You’re probably already well acquainted with the disasters of the Scott Walker and Chris Christie administrations. But let’s review some of the others.

Rick Scott – Florida’s answer to the question, “What would happen if you put a giggling, amoral vampire with a checkered career as a business executive and venture capitalist in charge of your state?” The result has been a man who generally looks like he is in way, way over his shiny, clean-shaven head. He has flip-flopped on accepting Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion enough times that Floridians could probably set their watches by it. Job growth has been not bad, but still well below what Scott promised, and many of the jobs created on his watch have been low-paying. The state now ranks 29th in per capita income, which is several slots shy of mediocre.

Scott’s crowning achievement might be his continued denial of climate change being a problem that humans might be able to address, even while rising oceans are already beginning to drown parts of the state. I hope Floridians are growing gills. They might need ‘em by the time Scott’s second term is up.