Published Oct. 12, 2014 at 5:19 a.m. Tweet

For the eighth straight year, October is Dining Month on OnMilwaukee.com, presented by Locavore, the newest restaurant at Potawatomi Hotel & Casino. All month, we're stuffed with restaurant reviews, delectable features, chef profiles and unique articles on everything food, as well as the winners of our "Best of Dining 2014."

Milwaukeeans take food seriously. And many of us are thrifty folks. So not surprisingly, we know the best all-you-can-eat buffets in town. At least the Social Circle does. here are their favorite local buffet joints and feel free to adds your via the Takback feature.

Nicole Acosta: "Jing's in the Marshall Building."

J.A. Arenas: "It used to be my mother's house, until she moved out of the city."

Stephen Bloch: "Fushimi and Royal India. Used to love King & I when I worked downtown a LONG time ago. Returned to the office to nap every time."

Jeanette Schroeder Cable: "Casablanca."

Rick Charlie: "Tazino's is good."

Celeste Contreras: "Mekong Cafe. $8.95. Small, Clean, vegan, real Thai, real Laos, real Vietnamese. All in one spot!"

George Darrow: "Hubbard Lodge weekend brunch."

Lindsay Evans: "Casablanca and The Pfister Sunday brunch buffet."

Laura Fefferman: "Potawatomi crab legs Wednesday."

Kat Froelich: "Brunch at the Packing House."

Chris Haworth: "Fushimi on Farwell. If you have a kid that likes sushi / Asian, you can more than get your money's worth!"

Natali Heuss: "I will always have a soft spot for Maharaja."

Dan McNamara: "Brunch at the Iron Horse."

Ed Macon: "Chic Cafe and Southern food brunch buffet! Ashley's Que brunch buffet."

Yo Meegs: "Casablanca for lunch."

Thomas Mosley: "Royal India. have not been there in ages, but it's great."

Greg Postles: "Hands down, the Marquette University Jesuit Residence."

Russ Pracieduz: "St. Francis Brewery has a popular brunch buffet."

Laron Taylor: "Jimmy Buffet?"

Tim Taylor: "Vanni's Kitchen, Greenfield off of Highway 100. Good southern Indian food. Shahrazad is good for a change of pace as well."



Lisa Carini Turecek: "China Gourmet. Yum. Yum. Yum."