Topics: African American, African Americans, American History, Argo, Ben Affleck, Civil War, finding your roots, Henry Louis Gates, History, Jr., Movies, PBS, Race, Racism, slavery, U.S. History, Entertainment News, News, Politics News

So Ben Affleck didn’t want to talk about his slave-owning ancestor on TV with Henry Louis Gates Jr. Or rather with “Skip,” the nickname Affleck repeatedly used for Gates in his hilariously blithe and altogether too revealing non-apology on Facebook, whose central point was to reassure us that, misunderstandings about American history aside, Affleck was still the same cool guy we know and love. Mistakes may have been made, at some point in the past! But not by him.

My first response to Ben and Skip’s Bogus Journey was that Affleck’s initial impulse to whitewash less savory aspects of his family history (“The very thought left a bad taste in my mouth”), and then his tone-deaf response to the ensuing media kerfuffle, were generated by the edifice of caution and cowardice that surrounds Hollywood stardom. Anything that might ruffle the surface of the star’s manufactured persona, or compromise the integrity of the brand, must be repelled. I still think that’s a good starting point, but I also suspect that the willful delusions of the Hollywood star economy, writ large, can be found throughout American culture and American history, and that the legible meanings of Skip-gate go well beyond the banality and incuriosity of Ben Affleck.

Despite Affleck’s distant indie roots and his veneer of bland hipness (or is it hip blandness?), his post-Bennifer reinvention as an actor-director has obeyed the inflexible dictates laid down by generations of agents and PR wizards. His movies are built around the time-honored Hollywood principles that you always “protect the star,” on screen and off, and must flatter and reassure the audience rather than challenging it. In other words, an ancestor who fought in the Revolutionary War is awesome; one who owned humans as chattel, much less so. Consider how the true story of the Iranian rescue mission behind “Argo” was fictionalized for the movie: First it became a tale of American derring-do with Affleck’s character, CIA agent Tony Mendez, as its hero (talk to Canadians about that one), and then it became a flattering fable about the patriotism of the film industry.

How does Affleck’s reluctance to discuss his personal connection to the slave-owning past make him different from 200 million or so other white Americans, who seem overwhelmingly and suspiciously eager to consign that entire topic to the historical oubliette, the category of Stuff That Doesn’t Matter Anymore and Maybe Never Did? A great many people, including those who profess undying fealty to the Founding Fathers and favor a fundamentalist reading of the Constitution, prefer to view slavery as a weird anomaly that lies outside the central current of American history and is “not implicated in U.S. growth, success, power and wealth,” in the words of Cornell scholar Edward E. Baptist. It’s an omission that distorts and falsifies the whole picture; we might as well discuss British history without mentioning the class system, or medieval Europe without the Church.

If you’re composing an angry email about liberal guilt and victim mentality and how nobody living today is responsible for hypothetical bad things that happened long ago and how the real racists are those who insist on dwelling in the past, let me save you some time. None of that is anywhere near the point, and it’s far less painful to face the historical facts than to keep on pretending they don’t exist or don’t matter. First of all, the question of who did or did not own slaves is irrelevant to the question of who benefited from the slave economy. Even in the plantation states of the antebellum South, less than one-third of the white population were slave-owners; given all the immigration of the last 150 years, the proportion of living Americans with direct ancestral connections to slave ownership or the slave trade is fairly small. It’s a proportion that apparently includes Ben Affleck, and also includes me.

I would say to Affleck, in all seriousness, that nothing is more liberating than learning the truth, and that the interconnections of American history are marvelous and various, and become more so when faced in full. The only responsibility he inherits from his slave-owning ancestor – who, for all we know, was a lovely and well-meaning person who believed it was a deeply immoral institution, like the prominent plantation owner who became our first president – is the responsibility not to turn away. That’s precisely the responsibility he has abdicated. The discovery of a genetic relationship to a 19th-century American who owned other humans as property tells us nothing about Ben Affleck as an individual. His desire to banish that fact to the memory hole, because it left a bad taste in his mouth and he felt “embarrassed,” tells us somewhat more.

Slavery was a global phenomenon, and my connection to it lies outside the United States. On my mother’s side I am descended from a prominent maritime family in the French port city of Nantes. In the 18th and 19th centuries, some of my direct ancestors apparently owned ships that transported manufactured goods from Europe to West Africa, where they were exchanged for human beings who had been taken captive by local chieftains or abducted by slave-traders. That human cargo was then taken to the West Indies and sold into slavery, mostly to work the sugar plantations of Saint-Domingue (now Haiti).

I don’t know how many slaving expeditions my ancestors financed and operated, or how much money they made from this business, but Nantes was by far the busiest port in the French slave trade and tremendous wealth was amassed there. In just over 100 years, before abandoning the trade abruptly in 1830, the city sent out 1,714 slave-trading expeditions that transported more than 550,000 captive Africans to the French colonies of the Caribbean. I learned that from the website of the Memorial to the Abolition of Slavery that the city government recently built along the banks of the Loire, at the spot where the slave ships once embarked. I feel a strong urge to go there and see it, but I don’t think that feeling has anything to do with guilt.

Some of my ancestors also went to Saint-Domingue as sugar planters (before moving on to New Orleans), and according to the cousin of mine who did this research we may be related to Toussaint Louverture, the Haitian revolutionary leader who was born a slave. That might sound paradoxical or bizarre but of course it’s not unusual at all. I don’t think I need to explain how that might have happened. As for “white guilt,” well, owning slave ships, rather than just slaves, is heavy-duty historical crime, but I didn’t do it. I have never heard anyone, outside the God of the Old Testament, argue that the sins of our forefathers are visited upon us in any literal sense. If white guilt even exists, it’s a useless and self-indulgent phenomenon. Those who believe they see it everywhere on the left, if you ask me, are projecting their own fears and anxieties – their unwillingness to think clearly about what really happened – onto others.

How much did slavery warp and twist the American narrative at its roots, the way it twisted the tormented conscience of Thomas Jefferson, the magnificent rhetorician, prophet of democracy and nightside visitor to the slave quarters? How much has our reluctance to confront the true role of slavery as a central and defining element of our nation’s cultural and political and economic history turned that narrative into a disabling fiction, a burbling, idiotic fantasy of endless jingoistic superlatives and slo-mo commercials of Chevy trucks pulling things out of the mud and all-you-can-eat shrimp at Red Lobster?

American history in its popular form is more effective propaganda than anything devised by Orwell’s Ministry of Truth, whose maxim that “Freedom is Slavery” describes our current predicament with an eerie precision Orwell could never have imagined. In the American context, “freedom” is understood an essential national quality, woven into the flag and seeded in the soil. It is never precisely defined (for good reason) but is always under attack. As you may have heard, freedom isn’t free; in fact, its price is excruciatingly high. “Freedom” is the totem used to enslave us to a false consciousness, and to a decaying economy that long ago revealed its inability to produce universal prosperity. “Freedom” is the ideological clue that binds us to an oligarchic regime whose imperial power and democratic legitimacy are fading, but whose ruling elite has accumulated wealth on a scale never before seen in human history. “Freedom” is the all-purpose excuse for all of America’s misdeeds of the past or present or future, especially those that might otherwise look suspiciously like attacks on freedom.