Advertisement - story continues below

Ted Cruz is hitting back hard against a mainstream media smear that mocked his daughters in an editorial cartoon — and he’s making new headlines doing it.

The controversy started over the weekend, when the Cruz campaign released an advertisement of a comical video segment showing Cruz reading politically themed children’s books to his two young daughters.

The books made fun of Democrats — and Republicans who’ve cooperated with the Obama White House: “How Obamacare Stole Christmas,” “Rudolph the Underemployed Reindeer” and “Frosty: the Speaker of the House” (an implied reference to Paul Ryan’s complicity in passing the massive Omnibus spending bill).

Advertisement – story continues below

Another book, “Auditing St. Nick” was a blow to Lois Lerner and the IRS decision to target conservative organizations for IRS scrutiny. “The Grinch who Lost Her Emails” was a reference to Hillary Clinton’s refusal to comply with committee requests to expeditiously turn over emails from her private server.

The video segment showed the whole Cruz family sitting together on a couch while Cruz read to his wife and children.

Cruz’ use of his own children in his campaign for the presidency apparently gave the implied green light to critics to judge Cruz for doing so, and Ann Telnaes of the Washington Post saw the opportunity and pounced.

Advertisement – story continues below

Telnaes is a Pulitzer-prize winning artist who drew a caricature of Cruz as Santa the Organ-Grinder using his two daughters as monkeys to go around soliciting votes and donations. The Washington Post ran the cartoon on Wednesday. The caption under the drawing read, “Cruz uses his children as political props.”

The cartoon got a rise out of Cruz, who put out his own cartoon portraying the Washington Post and The New York Times as lapdogs for Hillary Clinton.

And he forcefully declared that his children are off limits.

Advertisement – story continues below

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

“It used to be for a long time the rules across the board that kids are off limits…That should be the rules. Don’t mess with our kids,” he told an audience in Oklahoma.

“Don’t mess with my kids. Don’t mess with Marco’s kids. Don’t mess with Hillary’s kid. Don’t mess with anybody’s kids. Leave kids alone. And if the media wants to attack and ridicule every Republican, well that’s what they’re gonna do. But leave our kids alone.”

Do you support Ted Cruz? Like the page:

Fred Hiatt, editor at the Washington Post, accepted responsibility and said he failed to look at the cartoon before it was published. He immediately ordered it taken down from the paper’s website.

For her part, Telnaes is unapologetic for drawing the cartoon and blames Cruz for causing the controversy in the first place by making his children political pawns in his campaign.

Telnaes tweeted, “Ted Cruz has put his children in a political ad – don’t start screaming when editorial cartoonists draw them as well.”

Cruz didn’t scream. He just hit back.