Joshi, who works for the "Kein Bock auf Nazis" campaign ("Finished with Nazis") says his job usually puts him in a good mood. He volunteers as a counselor for young people who stand up to right-wing extremists. But at the moment, he's not smiling.

The young man (photo above, at center) with the bleach-blond hair, sporting a T-shirt with the words "Refugees Welcome" written on it in yellow, is shocked by the latest wave of right-wing violence. Neo-Nazis have been staging marches in front of refugee homes, with some setting them ablaze almost nightly. Germany's Interior Ministry has recorded more than 340 attacks on refugee shelters this year alone. "We've had enough," says Joshi. "Something has to happen."

Sending signals

That's why the "Kein Bock" alliance, together with the refugee organization Pro Asyl and well-known musicians, has called for more protection from neo-Nazi violence for refugees. Joshi says that advocates of the "Time to Act" campaign want decent accommodation for refugees and more support for people who spend their free time helping migrants, often to the point of exhaustion - and for those who stand in the way when neo-Nazis march against refugee shelters.

Joshi doesn't want the Heidenau episode to be repeated, saying he feels that police didn't get the neo-Nazi riots in front of the refugee home under control. Police then wanted to ban the welcome party for the refugees, and a complete ban on assembly was imposed in Heidenau last weekend, also affecting the newcomers and their helpers.

"This is unacceptable," said Joshi, disgusted, adding that supportive volunteers, of all people, should be encouraged and thanked for their spirit.

Right-wing extremists have demonstrated in Heidenau against refugees

Rock for refugees

Among the people who have signed the appeal are 24 famous German bands, including the Toten Hosen, a band who has worked against right-wing violence for years. Last Saturday, the band played in Jamel, a town in Germany's Mecklenburg region which "has been systematically taken over by neo-Nazis," as guitarist Michael Breitkopf (photo above, at right) describes the situation.

With their appearance, the Toten Hosen backed an artist couple, the Lohmeyers, who are also opposed to right-wing extremism and have thereby been met with hostility. Recently, the barn in the couple's yard was set on fire.

"People who promote democracy are left completely alone; right-wing offenders are still being handled with kid gloves," criticize the musicians. There are more and more places in Germany where "the state monopoly on the use of force has been completely forfeited." That must change, they say.

One of the appeals is addressed to the police, calling on them to stop right-wing perpetrators of violence and protect refugee shelters.

Toten Hosen performed in Jamel in support of the campaign against right-wing violence

Not just a private matter

The fact that so many volunteers have come out to help refugees has impressed Bernd Mesovic, who works for Pro Asyl (photo above, at left). It's "awesome," says the deputy general manager of the refugee agency. But civil society alone cannot compensate for the failures of politics - and there are many, according to Pro Asyl. Although it was foreseeable that more and more refugees would come to Germany, the necessary precautions were not taken.

One example is affordable housing in large cities, especially for locals and for refugees. "We need a complete change in social housing policy, otherwise we won't make it," says Mesovic. He estimates that 40 percent of the refugees also need therapeutic care, which means massive governmental action is necessary. Volunteers cannot perform all these tasks, he says. "We need a program in which we can count on politics on any level."