Aron Martinez waits to catch a snowball thrown at him in the Chautauqua parking lot during the Monday afternoon snowfall. It was the first time most of a group of friends visiting from Texas had seen snow. ( Paul Aiken / Daily Camera )

Five-day forecast Check out what weather is in store for the Boulder County area

National Weather Service See what the National Weather service is predicting

24-Hour satellite Watch NOAA's 24-hour satellite image Real-time conditions See what Boulder's weather is like now at the National Center for Atmospheric Research Check out what weather is in store for the Boulder County area here See what the National Weather service is predicting here Watch NOAA's 24-hour satellite image here See what Boulder's weather is like now at the National Center for Atmospheric Research here

It looks like Boulder will be getting a white Christmas after all.

After some mild conditions today, a winter storm is expected to move into the area on Thursday, dumping up to 8 inches of snow on the city by Christmas night, according to the National Weather Service.

Today's forecast calls for cloudy skies with a high of 46 and winds 9 to 11 mph with gusts as high as 17 mph. The overnight low is expected to be near 28.

The forecast on Christmas Day calls for partly sunny skies with a high of 41 and winds 5 to 10 mph with gusts as high as 16 mph.

Advertisement

But by mid-afternoon, snow is expected to begin falling, with the weather service calling for a 90 percent chance of snow with 4 to 8 inches of accumulation expected.

Local meteorologist Matt Kelsch said the cold front could make driving tricky on Christmas night along the Front Range.

"With falling temperatures and the possibility of some brief moderate to heavy snowfall rates, road conditions may deteriorate rapidly near or after nightfall on Christmas," Kelsch wrote in an email. "Accumulation should be lighter out on the high plains, but blowing snow will likely be a hazard there. To the west, winter travel conditions are likely to develop on Christmas Day, especially at the passes."

The National Weather Service has also issued a winter storm watch for Boulder County from 6 p.m. Thursday to 8 a.m. Friday.

Temperatures are expected to plummet on Friday as the snowfall continues, with the forecast calling for cloudy skies with a high of 22 and a 60 percent chance of snow before noon. The overnight low is expected to be near 7.

Mitchell Byars: 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars.