'That's life and sometimes it isn't fair'

Those seeking to honor the memory of Wesley Quinlan and Wiyanna Nelson are asked to donate to the following: Contributions in Wesley Quinlan's honor may be made to the Wesley Wayne Quinlan Scholarship Fund for students pursuing a career in film at Centaurus High School, 10300 South Boulder Road, Lafayette, CO, 80026. Contributions in Wiyanna Nelson's honor may be made to The National Multiple Sclerosis Society, 900 S. Broadway, Suite 200, Denver, CO, 80209 and should be labeled "In memory of Wiyanna."

Following poems, prayers and eulogies dedicated to the two teens on Saturday, Wesley Quinlan's aunt, Annette Santiago, sang the Spanish-language song "Amor Eterno" in honor of the love shared by her nephew and his girlfriend, Wiyanna Nelson.

The young couple lost their lives during the flooding that ravaged Boulder County earlier this month. They were returning from a friend's birthday party late the night of Sept. 11 when their car became stuck in a mudslide on Linden Drive just west of Boulder. The pair, along with friend Nathan Jennings, got out of the car. Jennings made it to safety. Wesley and Wiyanna were swept away by the floodwaters.

Wesley graduated from Centaurus High School in the spring, while Wiyanna was just starting her senior year there. Both were 19.

Mourners comfort each other after a memorial service for Wiyanna Nelson and Wesley Quinlan that was held at the National Center for Atmospheric Research on Saturday. (CLIFF GRASSMICK)

Wesley's aunt, Tammy Quinlan Emerich led a memorial ceremony which drew upwards of 375 people to the National Center for Atmospheric Research on Table Mesa Drive. In introducing the performance of "Amor Eterno," Emerich said all those who had spent time with the young couple could see how much they cared for each other.

"The song is about the deep love shared by two people, where one person is morning the loss of the other and they are expressing the desire that they will be together again to continue sharing their eternal love," Emerich said.

"Amor eterno, e inolvidable, Tarde o temprano estaré contigo, Para seguir amándonos," Satiago sang. "Love eternal and unforgettable. Sooner or later I will be with you, to continue loving each other."

Both Wesley and Wiyanna were described as creative, passionate, kind-hearted people. Music and poetry were important elements to the ceremony.

Friend Clara Pruess fought back tears as she read a poem written by Wiyanna.

"I know life is difficult. I know this better than a lot of people my age. I myself have gone through shocking tragedies that don't make any sense at all beyond: 'That's life and sometimes it isn't fair,'" Pruess read.

"However, I aspire to be alive. I aspire to believe in life and living through the things I have lost throughout my existence and gaining perspective through them and remaining positive because life really is too short to look at the glass half empty."

Wiyanna's cousin, Lizzy Schleuing, delivered her eulogy.

"Some people are like flowers. They blossom from seemingly nowhere and radiate beauty. Wiyanna was like that for all that knew her," Schleuing said. "She was free spirit who loved freely and fiercely."

Cousin Sandi Atencio eulogized Wesley, telling stories and detailing memories provided by the many members of his large extended family in attendance.

Enamored with movies from a very early age, Atencio talked about the many short films he made. She also spoke of his fondness of stopping by stores to shop for cheap costumes for his next movie, whether he was in Colorado or visiting family in New Mexico and elsewhere, enlisting his cousins as actors.

Wesley had recently been accepted to the Colorado Film School, and Atencio said his family was very excited to see him taking the next step in his life, while also having found a kindred spirit in Wiyanna.

"How wonderful it was to see Wes with yet another plan. A direct one to fulfil his dreams," she said. "He was going to attend film school to start working toward his dream of becoming a great director, a dream he had since grade school."

Antencio also spoke of Wesley's knack for connecting with people and attracting the "avant-garde" crowd.

The number of friends with whom he and Wiyanna had made deep bonds was apparent .

"Wes will always be with us in spirit," Atencio said. "Wes was the most stubborn, creative, intelligent, social and loving being you will ever meet."

Among those who paid tribute to Wesley and Wiyanna in song was friend Emily Briggs. Briggs was riding in the car with the couple when they stepped into the water. She stayed in the car and was later rescued.

Briggs sang the Neutral Milk Hotel song, "In the Aeroplane Over the Sea."

"What a beautiful face I have found in this place that is circling all round the sun," she sang. "And when we meet on a cloud I'll be laughing out loud. I'll be laughing with everyone I see."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328, rubinoj@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/JoeCarmenRubino.