CALHOUN COUNTY, Miss. (WCBI) — A Vardaman High girls softball coach is arrested for inappropriate contact with a student last month.

Billy Dill, 36, waived a show-cause hearing this morning and was arrested on charges of sexual battery, fondling and enticement of a child. The incident occurred March 16 on school grounds.

Calhoun County Circuit Court Judge Kelly Luther set Dill’s bond at $240,000 — $80,000 per charge — and he is not to have any contact with the victim, her family or any students at Vardaman High

He faces an April 20 arraignment. Sheriff Greg Pollan says the case is being presented to the Calhoun County Grand Jury, which is in session, today. The Grand Jury report likely will come before the end of the month, if not sooner, and Luther said he could see the case going to court in November.

Dill’s attorney Marty Haug, of Starkville, would not comment on why the decision was made to waive the probable cause hearing allowed teachers and law enforcement, when allegations of a crime are leveled at them. He said he anticipated his client pleading cot guilty.

Pollan said the incident was reported to an assistant teacher, who told school personnel, who contacted law enforcement. He and others would not release the age of the victim or what year she is in school.

Calhoun County Prosecuting Attorney Tina Scott would also not comment on details of the case.

Pollan said he did not know why the lag in reporting the incident to authorities. The alleged victim came forward April 2.

“Our investigation is continuing and these are very serious charges,” said Pollan. “Anytime a person of authority has these kind of allegations brought up it upsets the community and there is a lot of speculation…we don’t know if there are other victims out there. We are asking anyone with information about this case or possibly another incident to contact our office immediately.”

Dill has been on administrative leave since early last week when the allegations first were reported to school and law enforcement officials. Dill has taught and coached at the school for more than seven years. He was at Hamilton prior to that.