The website that was supposed to be give millions of Americans access to health coverage through Obamacare is "excruciatingly embarrassing" and dogged by technical problems, according to a former senior aide to the president.

Two weeks after the launch of healthcare.gov , the web portal at the heart of Barack Obama 's plan to insure millions of people, the site is still wracked with glitches that prevent applicants from signing up.

While the White House initially insisted that the site's problems were caused by its popularity even some of Mr Obama's most loyal supporters have admitted major technical flas.

"This is excruciatingly embarrassing for the White House and for the Department of Health and Human Services," said Robert Gibbs, the former White House press secretary who was tasked with defending the law as it made its rocky passage through Congress in 2010.

Mr Gibbs disputed claims that high traffic was the issue, telling MSNBC: "I hope they fire some people that were in charge of making sure that this thing was supposed to work."

The White House has so far refused to say how many people have successfully signed up for healthcare through the website, saying it would release monthly totals.

A Telegraph reporter was able to create an account on the website but when they tried to log in on Tuesday morning were repeatedly greeted with an error message and were unable to make it through to the list of possible insurance plans.

Unlike many frustrated Americans, the reporter was able to get through on the telephone helpline and speak to an operator who said the website was struggling "because a lot of people are visiting".

The operator, though friendly, was unable to solve the log-in problems and after suggesting a password reset advised the reporter to "give it a couple of hours and try logging back in".

Jonathan Gruber, an economist who helped design the healthcare law, said that the website's struggles were for now a political issue but could begin to have an impact on the law's success if they persisted.

"Right now it's a PR problem but if it's not fixed by the end of November it becomes a legitimate problem," he told The Telegraph.

The site is only used for those applicants in states where the local government has not set up its own website. Texans would apply through the flawed Obamacare while Californians would use a California-specific web page.

Applicants can also apply on the phone and by post and have until mid-December to ensure that they are covered by January 1.

Those who can afford healthcare but remain uninsured face a potential fine under the law, which is designed to encourage more people into the health insurance market.

No one answered at the Department of Health and Human Services, the department in charge of implementing the law, to several calls requesting comment.