Golf Advisory Board recommends changes in response to complaints about pro shop, other issues

Golfers try to sink their putts on hole 5 at the Olde Course at Loveland on Aug. 28, during the Avago Tech and United Way golf tournament in Loveland. From left to right are Mitch Kido, David Leary, Dan Jolliff and Lynn Dungan. The city of Loveland is considering taking over operation of the course. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The city of Loveland will take over operations at the Olde Course at Loveland, including the pro shop, if City Council approves a recommendation by the Golf Advisory Board.

And although rumors and questions were floating around about whether this move meant the end of the girls golf program, run by Kim Stiner, officials have said the program is there to stay.

City Councilor Troy Krenning who serves as the council liaison to the Golf Advisory Board said at the board's Aug. 26 meeting that "change is probably imminent," but he doesn't see the proposition as win or lose, rather one that works for everyone involved. His concerns stemmed from what he called the dissension in the community about the issue of the girls golf program, which a lot of came from rumors, he said.

However, Krenning said, the board members are the experts on the operations, and he would advocate whatever decisions they voted to approve when the issues came before City Council.

The Olde Course, located at 2115 W. 29th St., is facing some changes after board members have heard repeated complaints about its operations, especially in the pro shop, which is contracted out — the contract expires at the end of the year. The board's recommendation is for the city to instead take it over as it has for its other courses.

Advertisement

Changes that the board voted for unanimously in late August are staffing two people during peak hours at the course, including in the pro shop; upgrading pro shop selection and fixtures; holding adequate inventory levels into the fall; controlling the tee sheet; extending and improving supervision during evening hours and implementing all you can play twilight at the course; allowing for gift certificates to be used at any of the city's three pro shops; and providing consistent service at all three shops.

The board, in collaboration with staff, also wants to add an assistant pro at the course to oversee operations. Jim Dargis, the city's PGA pro at the Cattail Creek Golf Course, would serve as the head at the Olde Course as well.

Board member Jim Whitenight said at the meeting that he knows Gale and Kim Stiner (who run the pro shop) very well, "but it boils down to what's going to be good for the long haul."

Other board members pointed out that the negative comments they hear about the Olde Course they don't hear about Mariana Butte or Cattail Creek, and that the changes recommended are for the better.

And they say it's a matter of business — from that standpoint, sometimes changes have to be made that people don't like but that are for the better.

The discussion about the Olde Course operations was split into three separate meetings for each of three topics: pro shop operations — discussed Aug. 26; concessions — likely to be discussed next month; and programs.

Staff liaison Steve Southard said at the meeting that the city would retain rights for concessions and programs as well and contract those out. The Stiners, like other vendors, could apply for specific portions.

The day following the meeting, Krenning, sent an email to councilors following up on the issue of the girls' golf program, which he said had been "favorably resolved."

In Krenning's email, a forwarded email from Kim Stiner stated, "We just wanted to announce that we had a great meeting with Parks & Recreation Director Elizabeth Anderson, Golf Operations manager Steve Southard and Councilman Troy Krenning. It is final that our LPGA-USGA Girls Golf program is staying at The Olde Course and is considered a valuable part of this community. Additionally, I will be allowed to follow my passion and teach golf full time at the Olde Course. Gale and I want to THANK everyone who has showed us love and support and we are looking forward to a great future."

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050, ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH