Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) are one of the more popular topics we write about on our blog. Here's a look at our top five articles on HSAs in 2014 that includes changes, tips, and other important things to know.



This article outlines the Health Savings Account (HSA) rules and requirements for 2015. The HSA 2015 contribution limits, minimum required HDHP deductibles, and out-of-pocket maximums have been increased from 2014. Click here to read more.

There are numerous acronyms used when discussing non-traditional health benefits options. Two popular "account" based options are HSAs (Health Savings Accounts) and HRAs (Health Reimbursement Arrangements). Even though they both have the same basic idea, there are a few key differences how HSAs and HRAs work in 2014, and beyond. Click here to read more.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has impacted many areas of healthcare and health insurance. As such, the rules for account-based health plans, including Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) have changed. This article discusses how healthcare reform and the ACA have impacted HSAs. Click here to read more.

Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) are on the rise. And yet, many people are confused about how HSAs work, and how to get the most out of them. HSAs are more than just a way to pay for medical expenses tax-free. Used correctly, they can be a valuable retirement savings tool. Click here to read more.

U.S. health insurance costs are rising steadily. To combat growing healthcare costs, employers are adopting account-based health plans (ABHPs) as a strategy to lower the cost of healthcare without reducing coverage for employees. Two popular forms of ABHPs are health savings accounts (HSAs) and health flexible spending accounts (FSAs). This article compares these two types of ABHPs. Click here to read more.

What types of articles on Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) would you like to see in 2015? Leave a comment below with ideas, requests, or HSA trends you're seeing with employee health benefits.