Weather Alert

"Air Quality Alert" ...Air quality alert in effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday... The New York state department of environmental conservation has issued an air quality health advisory for the following counties... Richmond...Kings...Queens...New York...Bronx...Westchester... Rockland...Nassau...Suffolk. In effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday. Air quality levels in outdoor air are predicted to be greater than an air quality index value of 100 for the pollutant of ground level ozone. The air quality index...or aqi...was created as an easy way to correlate levels of different pollutants to one scale. The higher the aqi value, the greater the health concern. When pollution levels are elevated...the New York state department of health recommends that individuals consider limiting strenuous outdoor physical activity to reduce the risk of adverse health effects. People who may be especially sensitive to the effects of elevated levels of pollutants include the very Young, and those with pre-existing respiratory problems such as asthma or heart disease. Those with symptoms should consider consulting their personal physician. A toll free air quality hotline has been established so New York residents can stay informed on the air quality situation. The toll free number is 1 800 5 3 5, 1 3 4 5. 1105 PM EDT Wed may 25 2016 ...Air quality alert in effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday... The New York state department of environmental conservation has issued an air quality health advisory for the following counties... Richmond...Kings...Queens...New York...Bronx...Westchester... Rockland...Nassau...Suffolk. In effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday. Air quality levels in outdoor air are predicted to be greater than an air quality index value of 100 for the pollutant of ground level ozone. The air quality index...or aqi...was created as an easy way to correlate levels of different pollutants to one scale. The higher the aqi value, the greater the health concern. When pollution levels are elevated...the New York state department of health recommends that individuals consider limiting strenuous outdoor physical activity to reduce the risk of adverse health effects. People who may be especially sensitive to the effects of elevated levels of pollutants include the very Young, and those with pre-existing respiratory problems such as asthma or heart disease. Those with symptoms should consider consulting their personal physician. A toll free air quality hotline has been established so New York residents can stay informed on the air quality situation. The toll free number is 1 800 5 3 5, 1 3 4 5. 1105 PM EDT Wed may 25 2016 ...Air quality alert in effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday... The New York state department of environmental conservation has issued an air quality health advisory for the following counties... Richmond...Kings...Queens...New York...Bronx...Westchester... Rockland...Nassau...Suffolk. In effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday. Air quality levels in outdoor air are predicted to be greater than an air quality index value of 100 for the pollutant of ground level ozone. The air quality index...or aqi...was created as an easy way to correlate levels of different pollutants to one scale. The higher the aqi value, the greater the health concern. When pollution levels are elevated...the New York state department of health recommends that individuals consider limiting strenuous outdoor physical activity to reduce the risk of adverse health effects. People who may be especially sensitive to the effects of elevated levels of pollutants include the very Young, and those with pre-existing respiratory problems such as asthma or heart disease. Those with symptoms should consider consulting their personal physician. A toll free air quality hotline has been established so New York residents can stay informed on the air quality situation. The toll free number is 1 800 5 3 5, 1 3 4 5. 341 PM EDT Wed may 25 2016 ...Air quality alert in effect until 11 PM EDT this evening... ...Air quality alert in effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday... The New York state department of environmental conservation has issued an air quality health advisory for the following counties... Richmond...Kings...Queens...New York...Bronx...Westchester...Rockland ...Nassau...and Suffolk. In effect until 11 PM EDT this evening and also in effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday. Air quality levels in outdoor air are predicted to be greater than an air quality index value of 100 for the pollutant of ground level ozone. The air quality index...or aqi...was created as an easy way to correlate levels of different pollutants to one scale. The higher the aqi value, the greater the health concern. When pollution levels are elevated...the New York state department of health recommends that individuals consider limiting strenuous outdoor physical activity to reduce the risk of adverse health effects. People who may be especially sensitive to the effects of elevated levels of pollutants include the very Young, and those with pre-existing respiratory problems such as asthma or heart disease. Those with symptoms should consider consulting their personal physician. A toll free air quality hotline has been established so New York residents can stay informed on the air quality situation. The toll free number is 1 800 5 3 5, 1 3 4 5. 341 PM EDT Wed may 25 2016 ...Air quality alert in effect until 11 PM EDT this evening... ...Air quality alert in effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday... The New York state department of environmental conservation has issued an air quality health advisory for the following counties... Richmond...Kings...Queens...New York...Bronx...Westchester...Rockland ...Nassau...and Suffolk. In effect until 11 PM EDT this evening and also in effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday. Air quality levels in outdoor air are predicted to be greater than an air quality index value of 100 for the pollutant of ground level ozone. The air quality index...or aqi...was created as an easy way to correlate levels of different pollutants to one scale. The higher the aqi value, the greater the health concern. When pollution levels are elevated...the New York state department of health recommends that individuals consider limiting strenuous outdoor physical activity to reduce the risk of adverse health effects. People who may be especially sensitive to the effects of elevated levels of pollutants include the very Young, and those with pre-existing respiratory problems such as asthma or heart disease. Those with symptoms should consider consulting their personal physician. A toll free air quality hotline has been established so New York residents can stay informed on the air quality situation. The toll free number is 1 800 5 3 5, 1 3 4 5. 341 PM EDT Wed may 25 2016 ...Air quality alert in effect until 11 PM EDT this evening... ...Air quality alert in effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday... The New York state department of environmental conservation has issued an air quality health advisory for the following counties... Richmond...Kings...Queens...New York...Bronx...Westchester...Rockland ...Nassau...and Suffolk. In effect until 11 PM EDT this evening and also in effect from 11 am to 11 PM EDT Thursday. Air quality levels in outdoor air are predicted to be greater than an air quality index value of 100 for the pollutant of ground level ozone. The air quality index...or aqi...was created as an easy way to correlate levels of different pollutants to one scale. The higher the aqi value, the greater the health concern. When pollution levels are elevated...the New York state department of health recommends that individuals consider limiting strenuous outdoor physical activity to reduce the risk of adverse health effects. People who may be especially sensitive to the effects of elevated levels of pollutants include the very Young, and those with pre-existing respiratory problems such as asthma or heart disease. Those with symptoms should consider consulting their personal physician. A toll free air quality hotline has been established so New York residents can stay informed on the air quality situation. The toll free number is 1 800 5 3 5, 1 3 4 5. -- Thursday May.26 16,05:48 AM