IT was billed as a breakthrough - putting the abortion pill RU486 on the pharmaceutical benefits scheme and slashing the cost to as little as $12.

But four months after the drug was listed on the taxpayer-subsidised PBS by Julia Gillard, the majority of Australian women are still paying nearly $500.

In many private clinics, the PBS-approved abortion pill is more expensive than a surgical abortion.

"It's a minimum $500 for early medical termination, before seven weeks. It's higher, up around $700 in regional areas,'' explains Children By Choice's Cait Calcutt.

"The cost is a shock to women. It's also a shock to other health professionals as well who may be calling on behalf of their clients. They thought it would be cheaper."

And the hope that GPs would train to offer the service, particularly in rural and regional areas where women can travel thousands of kilometres for treatment has hit a roadblock.

Australia's major medical insurer wants to charge doctors administering the abortion pill the same amount they would be charged if they were performing a surgical abortion. So if GPs want to offer the service they need to pay $5000-a-year extra for their insurance.

Abortion provider Marie Stopes, which distributes the drug in Australia and register the details of GPs prescribing the drug will not even reveal how many GPs have signed up citing privacy laws. The Health Department refers this question to Marie Stopes.

The problem has thrown a new spotlight on the fact that abortion services are largely privatised in Australia, outside of Adelaide and Melbourne. The result: most women face an out-of-pocket fee of $400 for an abortion in Australia.

It may surprise you to learn that while women in Victoria and South Australia can have a surgical abortion for free at publicly run Pregnancy Advisory Clinics, women in NSW and Queensland will pay $480 or more for the same procedure from a private provider. In South Australia, the first state to liberalise access to abortion in 1969, the stand alone publicly run abortion clinic was opened in 1992 amid some controversy. Twenty years on, South Australian women have access to something the majority of Australian women do not: a safe, legal abortion without paying hundreds of dollars.

Why are private providers charging $500 for a pill that costs $12 for concession card holders on the PBS? As Marie Stopes points out, the private clinics are charging not simply for the abortion pill but a treatment plan. So, while the abortion pill itself costs $12 for low income women and $70 for other women on the PBS, the total cost for treatment includes ultrasounds to determine gestation. With an estimated failure rate of up to 10 per cent for RU486, a second ultrasound is required a week after the procedure to ensure the woman doesn't require a surgical abortion after all.

The Australian Medical Association's president Dr Andrew Pesce, who is also a Sydney obstetrician, is concerned that the current treatment model passes any problems to public hospital's emergency department.

"I don't agree with giving a woman a prescription and saying "See how you go and if there's a problem to go to emergency,'' he says.

"You go into (Sydney's) Westmead Hospital on a Friday night and you will be there for eight hours.

"But it's a very good and sensible treatment as long as the after hours care is there.''

Like any drug, RU486 is not without risks. Since it was introduced, there is one recorded death after a doctor administered RU486. The case occurred in 2010 and the woman is believed to have developed a streptococcus A infection and died of sepsis. But the main side effects are nausea, vomiting and painful cramps. Many women prefer a surgical abortion. But around one third of abortion provider Marie Stopes' clients now opt for RU486.

With the cost of an abortion up around $500, it's no surprise to learn that Queensland's Children By Choice spends a lot of time trying to help women who simply cannot afford an abortion.

Their clients have included a 14-year old refugee who was raped, a woman hospitalised by a violent partner, a 17-year old with an intellectual impairment who was sexually abused by a stepfather, a woman with pulmonary embolism.

What's worse - the gold standard of medical care - offering a woman who chooses an abortion the option of a long-lasting contraceptive solution at the same time such as Mirena IUD or Implanon - is simply another cost on top of an abortion that these women can't afford at a private clinic.

It's early days, but the hope that women RU486 would deliver Australian women an affordable alternative to a surgical abortion have not yet been realised.