Business Roundup: Lancaster General Health Joins Penn Medicine

LG Health, which generated nearly $970 million in revenue last year, and the University of Pennsylvania Health System have agreed to merge. "There is no financial transaction," says LG Health's CEO. "This is a matter of being incorporated and consolidated."

Lancaster General Health has finalized negotiations with the University of Pennsylvania Health System and will become a member of Penn Medicine, the two nonprofit systems have announced. The agreement caps more than six months of discussions, and is now subject to state and federal regulatory approval. Until then, the two systems will remain unchanged and independent.



Thomas E. Beeman

Thomas E. Beeman, president and CEO of LGH, told reporters at a media availability that healthcare reforms are pushing the industry toward consolidations.

"Scale is going to be necessary to be able to take out costs in healthcare," Beeman said. "Just as an example, the Affordable Care Act's impact on LG Health over about seven years is close to $250 million worth of costs that we had to just take out to stay even. In order to do that you need the scale to be cost effective in the way we deliver care. That is what precipitated us looking for scale. We were fortunate to have someone like Penn located so close by."

Asked to put a price tag on the deal, Beeman called it "incalculable."

"There is no financial transaction," he added. "This is a matter of being incorporated and consolidated."

He said any reserve funds now held by LG Health will remain "unequivocally" with the health system "under the auspices of the local board, and we have provisions long-term to ensure that it stays here."

LG Health generated nearly $970 million in revenues last year. The system includes the 533-bed Lancaster General Hospital and Women & Babies Hospital, outpatient and physician offices, urgent care centers, and the Pennsylvania College of Health Sciences. The system employs more than 7,300 people.

Penn Medicine generated close to $4 billion in revenues last year and employs nearly 19,000 people at facilities that include the flagship Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, three other hospitals, and the Perelman School of Medicine.

The two health systems have collaborated on cancer care for decades, and in 2014 the formed a collaborative that gives LG Health patients access to specialty services at Penn Medicine.

Beeman says the LG Health board began to evaluate its options five years ago.