For Federal Reserve watchers this Wednesday, “dots” could become the new “thresholds.”

If the Fed alters its current method of forward guidance in its March 19 policy statement, the public may rely more heavily on the central bank’s fed funds projections to gauge when the first rate increase might occur, analysts say. These rate projections are delivered alongside the policy statement at 2pm, often referred to as the “dots.”

These dots anonymously map out where each Fed official sees the policy rate over the coming years — and they could soon become the clearest way investors and economics can gauge the timing of the first rate hike.

The current forward guidance is clear cut, but not expected to last. The Fed currently uses “thresholds” to explain it won’t consider raising rates until the unemployment rate hits 6.5%, so long as inflation expectations remain under 2.5%. But with the jobless rate at 6.7%, many Fed official agree the current communication tactic needs revamping — likely to a broader, more-qualitative assessment of the economy.

“It will place the onus of forward guidance squarely on the Fed” and its projections, says TD Securities’ rate strategy team. “The appeal of this approach is basically the flexibility it affords policymakers in adjusting their Fed funds expectations without unduly confining that view to the performance of a single indicator.”

TD expects the Fed this Wednesday to drop its 6.5% jobless-rate threshold and link future policy more closely to the median projection of the dots.

So where are the dots? As of December, two Fed officials projected the policy rate being increased some time in 2014. Goldman Sachs believes St. Louis Fed President James Bullard represents one of those dots, and will likely shift to the 2015 camp. The firm believes Chicago Fed President Charles Evans was in the 2015 camp, but will move his dot out to 2016.

Goldman also believes new Fed Chairwoman Janet Yellen holds one of the 2016 dots, which if true, could persuade some of the Fed governors to shift from 2015 to 2016.