HARRISBURG — On the eve of her state Supreme Court hearing to try to clear herself from possible criminal charges, Attorney General Kathleen Kane appeared at a budget hearing to ask lawmakers for $97 million to run her agency.

Kane's funding request to the House Appropriations Committee on Tuesday amounted to a 5 percent increase over the current budget and more than Gov. Tom Wolf has proposed to allocate as part of his $33.8 billion budget.

Lawmakers asked Kane about agency finances and programs combating heroin, prescription drug abuse and veterans outreach. But Kane didn't escape the 80-minute hearing without answering one question about Wednesday's Supreme Court hearing or listening to a passing reference to how Philadelphia District Attorney Seth Williams managed to charge public officials with bribery in an undercover sting case she dropped.

"Have any of the funds appropriated to your office been used or will be used in dealing with those investigations and actions against you?" asked Rep. Glenn Grell, R-Cumberland.

"This is probably the quickest answer I've said all day," Kane replied. "None."

Put aside the Supreme Court issue and the Philadelphia sting case, Rep. Mike Vereb, R-Montgomery, told Kane, "and you are doing a great job."

"Thank you, Rep. Vereb," she replied.

Afterward, Kane, surrounded by security and other staff, declined to answer questions.

Kane only said she will be in the courtroom when the Supreme Court hears oral arguments from her lawyers on why the grand jury case should be thrown out.

She did not answer a question on whether she regrets dropping the sting case, which allowed Williams to resurrect it and charge a Philadelphia city traffic court judge, ex-Rep. Harold James and Reps. Ronald Waters, Vanessa Lowery Brown, Michelle Brownlee and Louise Williams Bishop, all Democrats.

Williams charged James, Brownlee and Bishop on Tuesday; the others previously.

Kane's budget request for the 2015-16 fiscal year includes extra money to pay for rising retirement costs and to hire 20 new employees. Of the new hires, one would be added to the criminal prosecution section, another would be added to the charitable trusts wing and 18 would expand the agency's Medicaid fraud section, documents show.

The extra Medicaid staff members are needed to bolster audits now that the state has moved forward with expanding the Medicaid program for more poor adults under the federal Affordable Care Act, according to documents.

During her presentation, Kane stressed how her agency acts as a state revenue source. She said the attorney general's office has returned $100 million in restitution and fines to the state. Kane also highlighted how her agency saved Pennsylvania $180 million by fighting an arbitrator's ruling that would have severely cut the state's allocation from the multi-state tobacco settlement fund used to fund research, anti-smoking programs and hospitals' uncompensated care.

Rep. Ron Marsico, R-Dauphin, lauded the success of the mobile street unit Kane started to help local police with drug investigations. He said he watched during a ride-along with law enforcement how her agency worked with Harrisburg police to conduct investigations and make drug arrests.

On Wednesday, Kane will face a different audience: five Supreme Court justices. They will hear oral arguments on the legality of a judge's appointing a special prosecutor to look into whether Kane or someone in her office leaked grand jury records to the Philadelphia Daily News to discredit her critics. The justices could also clear up a discrepancy in state law as to when and how judges can appoint special prosecutors.

Kane's lawyers contend a 1962 state Supreme Court decision precludes a judge from appointing a special prosecutor. That decision said a judge could not "unilaterally select and appoint a special prosecutor to conduct an investigating grand jury." Kane's lawyers also say a judge has no right to appoint a special prosecutor because the state's special prosecutor law expired in 2008.

Montgomery County Judge William Carpenter has argued that precedent allows the judiciary to appoint special counsel to look into whether grand jury secrecy law was breached. Carpenter points to special prosecutor investigations conducted in recent years in Dauphin and Lackawanna counties.

In the meantime, the justices have ordered Montgomery County District Attorney Risa Ferman not to prosecute Kane for perjury and other charges based on the grand jury's presentment.

steve.esack@mcall.com

Twitter @sesack

717-783-7305