Jennifer Aniston, actress and Living Proof spokeswoman, puts you to the test, revealing her hair secrets, like washing it every three days.

Jennifer Aniston, actress and Living Proof spokeswoman, puts you to the test, revealing her hair secrets, like washing it every three days. livingproof/YouTube

Hollywood actress Jennifer Aniston is known for her healthy tresses, especially during her Friends years, where she famously chopped her hair and created “The Rachel” hairdo. Now, after a bad reaction to a keratin treatment last fall, the starlet sports a new short style that has led her to a “low-maintenance approach” to hair. She's also become the spokeswoman for Living Proof hair products. In an interview with Parade magazine, as ABC’s Good Morning America reported, Aniston revealed her hair care secrets. She also tests viewers' hair IQ as part of Living Proof’s new ad campaign, shown in the video below.

The 45-year-old admits in addition to her simpler hair approach, she also washes her hair every other day or every three days. During her “Rachel,” days, Aniston confesses Chris McMillian, her best friend and hairstylist who came up with the hairdo, would style her hair regularly so it would be great. It was one of the hardest hairstyles to maintain. But now, Aniston finds relief and simplicity in her hair routine, which of course includes Living Proof hair products.

“I don’t get a lot of product build-up with Living Proof and my hair doesn’t get dirty straight away. I wash my hair with No Frizz Shampoo and Conditioner. And with PHD Styling Treatment I can air-dry and style my hair in 10 minutes, when it used to take 25 minutes,” she told Good Morning America.

Aniston and Living Proof, have launched a campaign where the actress asks hair care questions to Eric Spengler, Living Proof scientist, to test “your hair IQ.” The one-minute plus video on Living Proof’s YouTube channel, gives true or false responses to the most commonly asked questions about hair but does not provide in-depth answers, since Spengler is a scientist, not a stylist.

The duo addresses one of the most plaguing questions for women to wish to reach Rapunzel length locks: “True or false, cutting your hair makes it grow faster?” Aniston asks in the video. Spengler responds: “That’s false. Cutting your hair has no impact on hair growth.” Although Living Proof’s scientist is correct, the answer is much more complex than meets the eye.

Hair growth, just like hair loss, is based on age, genetics, hereditary male and female hair patterns, according to Healthline. Hair on the scalp grows at a rate of about half an inch a month, or six inches per year, and although cutting hair won’t necessarily help it grow faster, it does help maintain it healthier. Going to the salon regularly for trims will help you to avoid split ends and from cutting off a good amount when the splits run up high.

The secret to Aniston’s luscious locks lies in a simple hair IQ test that will surprise you about what you may not know about your hair.