If babies do not get proper nutrition from the time they are conceived to two years after their birth, they risk irreversible mental and physical damage. For former first daughter Barbara Bush, CEO of Global Health Corps, this is a call to action – both abroad and in the United States.

Bush has been actively involved in global health efforts since she co-founded the organization five years ago. "It’s a pretty devastating thing to realize that the first years of a child’s life can impact them so completely," Bush says. "But I think the good news is knowing that means there can be very targeted programs."

The organization employs young people to work for a year at a public health nonprofit organization or government agency in the United States, Burundi, Malawi, Rwanda, Uganda or Zambia. "When people hear 'global public health' they think this refers to problems of another country, continent, people. But there are issues here in the U.S.," Bush says. The approach works similar to that of Teach for America, which sends young people to teach in public schools around the U.S.

[READ: Few Depressed Americans Seek Care]

The Global Health Corps initiative will address nutrition deficiency in low-income communities. Funded by DSM, which supported the United Nations World Food Program in Africa, two Global Health Corps fellows will work in Newark at the Boys and Girls Club and at Covenant House to support efforts to fight undernutrition.

"If you can reach kids you can usually reach their parents and their entire families," Bush says.

The issue, called "hidden hunger," affects low-income communities in cities like Newark. It occurs when people have plenty of food to eat calorie-wise, but the food they eat does not provide adequate nutrients. Lack of access to a grocery store that provides healthy and affordable options is often to blame. "Our notion of food has to do with quantity in caloric terms," says Hugh Welsh, DSM North America president."With that focus you get fast food, delivering high calories at low price."

Bush says she has spoken with families who need to take three buses to get to the grocery store. Coupling the initiative with her work overseas, she explains the differences in "hunger" in the U.S. and around the world. "The challenges of malnutrition are the same, but there issues present themselves differently," she says. "When we think of hunger we think of starving children in UNICEF ads, but in the U.S. it doesn't look like that – it looks like kids or people who are obese. They are consuming food, but not the nutrients they need to grow and thrive."

In Rwanda, the corps is working to add more nutritional components to the country's diet, which mostly is comprised of potatoes and maize. The vast majority of the world's hungry people live in developing countries, where 13.4 percent of the population is undernourished, according to the World Food Program. Around the world, half of deaths in children under age 5 are caused by poor nutrition.

[ALSO: Malaria Kills Fewer People, But Ebola Is a Threat to Progress]

In America, more than half of all children do not get the average requirement of essential vitamins for healthy development, recent studies by the Journal of Nutrition show. Undernourished children are more likely to suffer from illness and, as a result, are less likely to perform well in school, according to DSM. "That child is forever at a disadvantage physically and cognitively," Welsh says. "We think this is an issue of public health equity."

One in three U.S. adults is obese, as are 18 percent of children, says the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Most recently available data show that the associated with obesity totaled $147 billion in 2008. Policymakers and health officials have started to pay attention. The Affordable Care Act mandates better nutritional guidelines and calorie labeling, and First Lady Michelle Obama has built a "Let's Move" platform aimed at tackling childhood obesity.

"When you look at the disease situation in the U.S., a lot of it is lifestyle related," Welsh says. "We can mitigate or prevent so much of the disease."

Healthy eating ​helps prevent high cholesterol and high blood pressure and helps reduce the risk of developing chronic medical issues like heart disease, cancer and diabetes. Lack of proper nutrition also can lead to osteoporosis, cavities, iron deficiency or obesity.

[MORE: Can the Paleo Diet Heal Mental Disorders?]

Though some experts disagree on which diet is best, the dietary guidelines from the U.S. government encourage regular physical activity coupled with food that is rich in fruits and vegetables, whole grains, and fat-free and low-fat dairy products. It recommends avoiding a diet high in salt, saturated fats, trans fats, cholesterol, added sugars and refined grains.

"I think everyone should have an opportunity to access fresh fruits and vegetables," Welsh​​ says. "That doesn't mean it has to be organic. We can also fortify food and encourage multivitamins."

In recent years, Bush says, Global Health Corps has received more requests to work in the U.S. rather than abroad. She says she thinks this is happening because of awareness of U.S. health care policy, such as the Affordable Care Act. "It opened our eyes to the fact that we can build a better health system," she says.

Bush practices what she preaches: She never misses a day of working out, even though she spends 70 percent of her time traveling. She participate in yoga or dancing classes when she is in the U.S., she says, and she runs in foreign countries or pops a workout DVD into her laptop. " Every single one of us can do something to ensure that we are healthier," she says. "I realize that it’s important for me to play my own part in being healthy ... I can be more effective with my work if I make conscious health choices."

Bush says Wendy Kopp, TFA's founder, has been a mentor to her. She reflected on five years at Global Health Corps and how she got started. "It was exciting to me that we could have an AIDS-free generation," she says. "We've seen the needle move on preventable and treatable deaths." The corps started with 22 fellows, and this year has 150. Bush says she is electrified by the people she works with, who have seen an injustice they want to change, or have personally been affect by a lack of access.