SHARE Contributed Photo "Black Hole," by Michael Pearce. Contributed Photo "I Want the World ...," by Michael Pearce. People mingle during "The Clouty Tree, The Devil and Me" opening at the Kwan Fong Gallery of Culture and Art on the campus of California Lutheran University on Saturday evening. Howard Schmitt (left) and artist Michael Pearce speak about the exhibit during "The Clouty Tree, The Devil and Me" opening Saturday evening at the Kwan Fong Gallery of Culture and Art on the campus of California Lutheran University.

By Amy Bentley, Special to the Star

In countries with Celtic roots like Britain, Ireland and Scotland, a tradition that began in ancient times endures today: the clouty tree.

Clouty trees, also called clootie trees, are trees that grow beside holy wells or springs and are decorated with rags, strips of cloth, religious symbols and trinkets that act as prayers and charms. These trees are symbols of long life and health and are thought to have magical healing properties. Sometimes pilgrims visit the trees and make offerings, hoping to have an illness cured.

Many old clouty trees remain standing today and are cherished symbols to Michael Pearce, an art instructor at California Lutheran University who grew up in England. Pearce pays homage to his native country and this ancient tradition in his new exhibit at CLU, in which he built three, 20-foot-tall clouty trees.

Pearce's exhibit, "The Clouty Tree, The Devil and Me," is on display through April 7 in the Kwan Fong Gallery of Culture and Art at the CLU campus in Thousand Oaks. The exhibit by Pearce, an associate professor of art at CLU, features three 20-foot-tall clouty trees made from wood, sticks and ragged cloth. Each one of Pearce's clouty trees also holds one of his paintings meant to be offerings in the sky. He built the three trees from recycled wood and sticks purposely, he said, explaining, "These things are meant to be ramshackle and rickety."

To engage visitors, Pearce is inviting guests to the exhibit to tie their own rags, trinkets or pieces of cloth to the trees. Pearce has left pieces of cloth and pens at the gallery in the hopes that visitors will add their own thoughts, wishes or trinkets to his clouty trees.

"I'm encouraging people to write their poems and leave their prayers and rags on the trees," said Pearce. He said engaging others to participate in the exhibit fits perfectly with the clouty tree tradition. "It's an evolution of that tradition."

Pearce was born in England and grew up in various parts of the country The clouty trees he's seen in England have photos, trinkets and images on them, as well as pieces of cloth. His favorite is an old willow tree in Avebury, in Wiltshire, about 10 miles from where he grew up. The large, old tree arches over a natural spring and creek.

"These are traditions that have been there for so long," said Pearce, who came to the United States in 1990. "They are real. They are so simple and honest. Water comes out of the ground. It's a miracle and then a tree grows out of it."

Pearce began teaching painting and drawing at CLU part time in 2001 and became a full-time faculty member in 2005. A Thousand Oaks resident, he also has experience as an installation and theatrical scenic designer, and he is the curator of the Kwan Fong Gallery.

Pearce said he's dreamed of putting on this exhibit for years, specifically at the Kwan Fong Gallery of Culture and Art. The gallery has a balcony and is the perfect place to display his 20-foot-tall trees because visitors can see his paintings in the trees from the balcony, he said. The paintings displayed in the exhibition are part of a collection Pearce has been working on over the last six years called "The Secret Paintings," based on medieval images originally used for moral instruction during a time when most people were illiterate. The collection will have 22 paintings eventually, all with a message and a medieval focus, he said.

"I really like old medieval emblems because they're useful art," said Pearce. "It's art you can look at and contemplate."

IF YOU GO

What: “The Clouty Tree, the Devil and Me,” a free art exhibit by CLU professor Michael Pearce

When & Where: Through April 7

Where: Kwan Fong Gallery of Culture and Art, CLU, Soiland Humanities Center, 120 Memorial Parkway, Thousand Oaks. The gallery is open to the public from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. Monday through Saturday.

Information: Visit CalLutheran.edu/kwan_fong.