Editor's note: Talk of the County is a reader-generated column of opinions. If you see something you disagree with or think is incorrect, please tell us. Call us at 312-222-4554 or email talkofthecounty@tribpub.com. For a continuously updating blog of Talk of the County comments, visit newssunonline.com/talk.

Do your job

In response to the article "Sheriff drops out of 2016 state's attorney race." He needs to quit being a sheriff also. He better make a choice whether he's a cop or a priest. We elected him to enforce all the laws that are on the books, which includes illegal aliens in the county. It's very apparent, Curran, that you can no longer fulfill your duties as sheriff because a conflict of interest exists with your faith and the duties that you are required to perform. Do us all a favor and resign and join the priesthood so we can get someone willing to do the job that you were elected to do.

Check Medicaid Recovery Act

This is in response to "Obamacare better than Medicare." You may want to look into the Medicaid Recovery Act that has become federalized for states accepting the Medicaid Expansion. What is being spent on beneficiaries over the age of 55 has to be repaid. There are 29 Filial Support states as well.

Country is in trouble

In response to the writer who thinks Republicans are in a fantasy land. I have a big news flash for you — this country is already in big trouble. President Obama has driven this country into the ground with his liberal agenda and giveaway programs.

Geared up

The policemen on the front page from Wisconsin look like soldiers ready for battle. By the time they get all their gear on, the criminal would be long gone. I can understand policemen wearing bullet-proof vests, but these guys look like Army men.

Non-union teachers?

This comment is regarding the teachers' unions. If the teachers don't want to join a union and get the benefits that are under the contract, they should be able to bargain directly with the schools. I would like to know what the school districts would pay the teachers if they weren't organized.

'Discretion is the better part of valor'

My mother used to say to me, "Discretion is the better part of valor." That means it's harder to keep your mouth shut sometimes but it's smarter if you do. It may be gratifying to have someone like Donald Trump who says whatever he wants, something you may want to say to world leaders. But when the people at the top have a fight it's called a war and it's not their sons and daughters who get killed, it's ours. Being able to keep your mouth shut in the face of an insult isn't weakness, it's strength. It's the ability to put the good of others before your own feelings. It's the ability to think before you speak and consider all the possible ramifications before you act. Trump would sure give them heck, but we'd be the ones who would get it.

Fox Lake investigation

In regards to the investigation in Fox Lake over the death of Lt. Joe Gliniewicz. Don't you get it? The police are trying to spin this in favorable light, regardless of what happened.

Answer on page 1

Why isn't there anything in the paper about Illinois and Wisconsin receiving the Ramsar Award for the Lake Plain, which involves the shoreline between Waukegan and Kenosha? It is an international award that recognizes pristine wetlands and those who are attempting to save wetlands. There are only 37 sites in the U.S. This new designation in Illinois and Wisconsin ranks alongside the Florida Everglades. Congratulations to Illinois and Wisconsin, and the several conservation groups including the Lake County Forest Preserve District.

Twitter @newssun

Editor's note: Talk of the County is a reader-generated column of opinions. If you see something you disagree with or think is incorrect, please tell us. Call us at 312-222-4554 or email talkofthecounty@tribpub.com. For a continuously updating blog of Talk of the County comments, visit newssunonline.com/talk.