Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

From this morning’s LBO Wire:

Varsity Healthcare Partners provided growth capital for a recapitalization of medical practice Colonial Family Practice.

Health care-focused firm Varsity and Colonial Family also formed holding company, Family Care Partners, which will aim to consolidate primary care practices in South Carolina and centralize management functions.

Colonial Family, of Sumter, S.C., is a medical practice that provides services for family medicine, urgent care, pediatrics and other areas of care. The company lists five locations under the Colonial Family Practice name on its website, as well as seven other facilities, including locations dedicated to neurology, pain control and sleep.

More stories available to LBO Wire subscribers:

Falcon Investment Advisors secured $720 million in commitments for the first close of its latest mezzanine fund in December, putting it more than halfway to its target…TPG Growth said it invested $75 million in Precision for Medicine, a company that helps pharmaceutical and life sciences companies develop and market products…And Comvest Partners and Crystal Financial LLC, backed by business development company Solar Capital, said they provided a term loan to Crest Financial Services LLC, a financier of retail purchases for customers without credit.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere on the Web:

Baring Private Equity Asia is looking to purchase all shares of Interplex Holdings, valuing the Singapore-listed metal components and precision-engineering company at 450 million Singapore dollars (about $320 million), P.R. Venkat and Gaurav Raghuvanshi write for The Wall Street Journal.

The Dutch government is set to tighten rules on the tax deductibility of debt used in leveraged buyouts, Yolanda Bobeldijk reports for U.K. sister publication Private Equity News. (Subscription required.)

Berkeley Energy is raising a new $250 million fund to back renewable energy projects in South and Southeast Asia, according to DealStreet Asia.

After years of economic difficulties, the Philippines is once again starting to appear on the maps of some private equity firms, reports the Nikkei Asian Review.

Write to David Smagalla at david.smagalla@wsj.com