Kansas Medicaid Expansion Forfeit Surpasses $1B

The Kansas Hospital Association estimates that about 150,000 Kansans who would have been eligible for coverage under Medicaid expansion make too much for Medicaid, but can't afford private coverage.

The state of Kansas this month stumbled across an inauspicious threshold.

Since Jan. 1, 2014 the state has forfeited an estimated $10.75 per second with its decision to reject Medicaid expansion under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

Cindy Samuelson

Those forfeited federal dollars can add up, and according to a live ticker at the Kansas Hospital Association's website, the total of could-have-been funding surpassed $1 billion sometime over this past weekend.

"That is very tangible money going out the door," says Cindy Samuelson, vice president for political fundraising and public relations at KHA. "It has affected not only individuals in Kansas and the folks who could be served by those programs, but also the communities that serve them, which are businesses, healthcare providers, and hospitals. The whole economic impact that healthcare has in our state is large, so there is an impact broader than just the population being served."

KHA estimates that about 150,000 Kansans who would have been eligible for coverage under Medicaid expansion have now fallen into the coverage gap. Even though they're working poor, they make too much for Medicaid, but they can't afford private coverage.

"Many of these are working Kansans that work sometimes more than one job, but who don't make enough money to be part of the exchange," Samuelson says. "These are low-income folks, dishwashers, daycare providers, health aides, construction workers, fast-food service workers; people who are working hard in our state, but who don't have an opportunity for coverage."

The loss of funding has also made life difficult for the state's hospitals. A report this month from iVantage Analytics identified 31 rural hospitals in Kansas as vulnerable, almost twice as many as the 17 Kansas hospitals flagged the last time the iVantage study was done in 2014.

KHA estimates that the state's 84 critical access hospitals will lose an average $255,469 in funding in 2016 from the non-expansion, while 16 rural, non-CAH hospitals will lose $913,418, and 28 urban hospitals will each lose $6.2 million on average.

Critical Action Needed for Critical Access Hospitals

"It may be a lot smaller for critical access hospitals than the dollar amount for urban hospitals, but it has a huge impact on the bottom line in the communities they serve," Samuelson says. "It would make a big impact because they are struggling with so many different things now and this is just one factor that has been a harm versus a help."