Skiers may love it, but for travelers on Colorado’s roads and those hiking or skiing in the backcountry, conditions could be treacherous over the next day, the National Weather Service said.

“A good portion of the state’s high country is in a winter storm warning,” said Kyle Fredin, a National Weather Service meteorologist in Boulder.

The metro area could get socked as well, with a 70 percent chance of up to 3 inches of snow beginning after 2 p.m. on Thursday and continuing into Thursday night.

In its Wednesday afternoon update, the weather service issued a winter storm watch for the Front Range beginning Thursday afternoon and said total snowfall could range from 3 to 6 inches, with 5 to 10 inches in the foothills and locally heavy bands of up to 12 inches.

Avalanche danger is also expected to be high in the mountains, according to the Colorado Avalanche Information Center, which issued an avalanche watch through Thursday morning.

“If the weather forecast is correct, the avalanche danger will rise to high on Thursday. High avalanche danger means that both natural and human-triggered avalanches are likely. Avalanches could break into old snow layers, creating large and dangerous slides,” according to the CAIC.

The winter storm warning is in effect until 5 a.m. Friday, and northern and central Colorado could see 14 to 24 inches of snow and high winds.

The fresh fall of snow could reach 30 inches in some areas.

A high wind watch is in effect in areas between 6,000 and 9,000 feet, with winds from 20 to 40 mph and in some places gusts higher than 70 mph.

“This is going to cause some travel headaches on all mountain routes, there is so much snow, and wind with it,” Friden said.

The high wind watch is in effect through late Wednesday night.

The storm is normal for this time of year, Frieden said. “This is how that portion of the state gets the moisture it wants. This type of storm is what we like to see this time of year and that is normal.”

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee