Please enable Javascript to watch this video

LITTLETON, Colo. -- Open enrollment for health insurance coverage is going on now through the end of January.

Searching for health insurance coverage can be a daunting task, especially when you’re worried about others besides yourself like new parents Richard and Jessica Koch.

“Yesterday I tried signing up for health insurance all by myself and I literally spent the whole day doing it to no avail,” said Richard.

For the Koch’s, the health and welfare of each other and their young son is a constant worry.

“If something did happen or if we got sick, we want to be able to use our insurance just cause we are normally pretty healthy people,” he said.

“You do ask yourself the what-if question a lot so you want to make sure you are prepared just in case,” said Jessica.

Prepared with the right health insurance coverage for their family but what that looks like raises many questions the Koch’s couldn’t answer themselves.

“I don’t think you can put a price on your health you know,” said Richard.

By attending Doctors Care and Connect for Heath Colorado’s “Are you Connected?” event in Littleton Saturday, the Koch’s had the hard questions answered.

“It was just a mess trying to go through all the websites and it was just really helpful to have someone guide you through that rather than try and do it yourself,” said Richard.

At the event health guides and insurance brokers guided people like the Koch’s through different plans, explained what might work better for certain people and explained the meanings behind higher and lower deductibles and tax credits.

Walking away covered by insurance for the upcoming year, the family leaves at least one worry behind.

“I’m thankful that I can rest a little easier,” said Richard.

“Just the relief of knowing that we have good coverage and that Issiah will be taken care of and we’ll be taken care of,” said Jessica.

The penalty for not having health insurance will nearly double next year.

A person without health insurance will be fined close to $700 or 2.5% of the household income, whichever is greater.

If you missed the event but need help looking for a health insurance plan that works for you, visit DoctorsCare.org/areyouconnected or call 720-458-6185.