Kandiyohi County Housing and Redevelopment Authority to repair Lakeland and Highland apartments

Highland apartments, located at 115 Becker Ave. Southeast in Willmar, will get a $3.6 million make-over. Completion is expected in September. The Kandiyohi County Housing and Redevelopment Authority owns the low-income apartments.

Beneath the carpet, flooring in apartments and hallways was breaking up, especially along seams in the sub-floor. (TRIBUNE/Rand Middleton)

Kira Peterson, building manager, and Jill Bengston, director of Kandiyohi County Housing Redevelopment Authority, pause in one of Highland’s 78 apartments scheduled for a makeover, the first since the Willmar building between Becker and Litchfield avenues, Southwest, opened in 1978. (TRIBUNE/Rand Middleton)

WILLMAR — Water leaks from worn-out copper pipes in the Lakeview Highrise apartments got so bad that the office staff had to protect the copier and computer with waterproof barbecue grill covers before leaving for the night.

“There have been leaks that have destroyed a copy machine that was only about a year old. We just can’t replace it again,’’ said Jill Bengtson, executive director of Kandiyohi County Housing and Redevelopment Authority, the agency that owns Lakeview, a low-income apartment building on Seventh Street Northwest in Willmar.

The severity of the leakage in the copper plumbing throughout in the 44-year-old building is the main reason the HRA received a $2,257,000 safety and energy efficiency improvement grant in February from the Minnesota Housing Finance Agency.

The grant will help pay for a $2.5 million plumbing replacement project set to begin this coming fall or winter and be completed in 16 months.

The Lakeview grant was among nearly $18 million in grants awarded by Minnesota Housing for repairs to 35 low-income public housing developments statewide; most were built in the 1970s with federal government financing.

Bengtson said 2014 was the third time that the Minnesota Legislature set special money aside for housing authorities to repair public housing projects, and this was the first time that Kandiyohi County HRA applied for and received a grant.

“We’re really thankful for it,’’ Bengston said. “We did a 20-year capital improvement plan. We had just finished it two months before the request for proposals was released. The water pipe (problem) was a big-ticket item in our capital improvement plan. We were able to document to really show the need. We had an architect that completed the plan for us.’’

The seven-story Lakeview building has 127 one-bedroom units and a two-bedroom caretaker unit. It is home to a variety of college students, singles, elderly and disabled people. Bengtson said tenants will notice new bathroom vanities and plumbing fixtures in their apartments. No other changes are planned.

Major changes are underway, however, at Highland Apartments, 115 Becker Ave. S.E., where the HRA has begun a

$3.6 million remodeling and renovation project. Completion is expected in September.

“It will be a big makeover,’’ said Dale Slagter with the HRA rehab program. Demolition and construction are already underway and include redoing the north and south parking lots, new landscaping, new steel roof, new 16-foot by 40-foot addition for common areas, and new windows, kitchens, flooring, bathrooms and painting.

Bengtson said this is the first major rehab since the apartment building was constructed in 1978. The building is owned by a limited partnership and Kandiyohi County HRA is general manager.

The three-story building has 78 units and is home to low-income seniors and disabled individuals. In addition, Minnesota Senior Care has an office there and provides assisted living services to some households.

The construction cost is part of a $6,396,000 package that includes refinancing existing debt and financing costs.

Planning for the project began about two years ago. The HRA applied for and was awarded federal low-income housing tax credits funneled through Minnesota Housing Finance Agency to pay for the project.

Housing tax credits provide a dollar-for-dollar tax credit for affordable housing investments. It was created under the Tax Reform Act of 1986 that gives incentives for the use of private equity in the development of affordable housing aimed at low-income Americans.

“Southwest Minnesota Housing Partnership wrote the funding application for us and is providing construction management oversight during the rehab of the building,’’ Bengtson said.

Renovation is taking place in sections of six to 10 apartments per section. Each section will take three to four weeks to complete. While their apartments are being renovated, residents are being temporarily housed at Suite Liv’n, an extended stay residential business on Business 71 North.

Bengtson said the HRA contracted with Suite Liv’n to provide temporary housing. Bengtson said residents were anxious at first about moving. “Change is big deal for them and a different routine for them. Now it’s a little bit quieter,’’ she said.

Highland apartments