Is anti-gun movie producer Harvey Weinstein a hypocrite when it comes to his opposition to the National Rifle Association?

Avowed gun foe and Obama fundraiser Weinstein generated a lot of buzz this week when he told Howard Stern that he is making a movie that will cause the NRA to wish they weren’t alive, which perhaps is an odd way to put it for someone who claims to be against violence.

Said Weinstein: “I never want to have a gun. I don’t think we need guns in this country, and I hate it, and I think the NRA is a disaster area… I shouldn’t say this, but I’ll tell it to you, Howard. I’m going to make a movie with Meryl Streep, and we’re going to take this head-on. And they’re going to wish they weren’t alive after I’m done with them.”

Weinstein may not be aware that there are plenty of law-abiding gun owner or non-owners who aren’t fans of the NRA either, yet are fans of the Second Amendment which protects the right of citizens to keep and bear arms.

According to Mediate, the NRA actually should be sending Weinstein “who has glamorized gun violence on the big screen for decades” chocolate and rose because his planned film “will only greatly enhance gun sales and NRA enrollment.”

In a CNN interview that is due to air tonight, Weinstein supposedly vowed to not make any more movies glamorizing guns.

As a Hollywood mogul, Weinstein to date, however, has made millions from violent movies such as Reservoir Dogs, Pulp Fiction, Kill Bill, Django Unchained, and many other popular action films.

Multi-millionaires like Weinstein and other entertainment celebrities also tend to live and work in low-crime, high-security areas and are often accompanied by bodyguards.

Weinstein’s campaign against the NRA may be roughly equivalent to the celebrities who are out there promoting Obamacare, even though they have lavish insurance coverage and the wealth to pay any out-of-pocket expenses such that they are insulated from the “ill” effects of Obamacare.

The Five panelist Dana Perino likened Weinstein’s hypocrisy to “a pimp who thinks he’s helping women in the workforce.”

After the horrific events in Newtown, Conn., a group of A-List celebrities filmed a public service announcement (“demand a plan to end gun violence”) that was supposed to galvanize public sentiment in favor of more gun control, but most of the actors had appeared in shoot-em-up films.

Following the Newtown tragedy, additional federal gun control legislation failed to gain traction in the US Senate, while gun sales apparently surged in 2013. New York and Connecticut enacted new gun regulations, but those measures aren’t expected to have any effect on gun violence in the real world. Two state legislators who voted for Colorado gun restrictions were recalled, and a third quit to avoid a recall.

Again, you don’t have to be a gun owner, a gun “nut,” or ever touched a gun or want a gun – and never even worn a camouflage vest for that matter — to believe that celebrities should avoid using their megaphone to intrude on constitutional rights, especially in this instance when their own content is “weaponized.”

Ironically, Weinstein has a future movie project about Jews who used guns to defend themselves against the Nazis during the Holocaust. The Washington Times noted that “Mr. Weinstein does not seem to know that the Nazis were able to confiscate the guns that the Jewish people owned based on Germany’s government registry.”

Criminal Minds star Joe Mantegna has a different view on guns than Harvey Weinstein: “It’s part of our culture our entire existence, without firearms we wouldn’t have won the Revolutionary War, we wouldn’t even have this country, or a lot of other countries wouldn’t exist. You have to separate the fear people have that is unjustified, based on a word or news article, people have misused firearms throughout history, this is one instance that turns people off.”

Added Mantegna: “I find it amusing sometimes, the people with the most negative feelings [about guns] and then something happens, a negative situation or crisis and all the sudden, say if someone rattles their doorknob at night, I get a call the next day saying ‘you gotta get me a gun.’ ”

Setting aside whether the NRA is a good or bad organization, the American public obviously wants an end to gun violence and criminality and generally would support reasonable measures in that regard provided they don’t serve to disarm law-abiding citizens.

Do you think Harvey Weinstein’s anti-NRA movie will change anyone’s mind on guns?

[top image credit: David Shankbone]