Illustration: Jim Pavlidis.

In February 2013, I spent two days in the sun-drenched art room of Kerobokan prison with condemned man Myuran Sukumaran and artist Ben Quilty. Prison authorities gave me full access to interview, photograph and film the pair as they wrestled with art practice and talked about purpose and distraction and self-discovery –anything but the death penalty.

The story and video I produced then sank more or less without trace. On social media – the way we now judge public responses to our journalism – it was shared a few times then promptly forgotten.

Until recently, the dominant reaction in Australia to anything written about Sukumaran and his prison-mate Andrew Chan was indifference. Unlike their celebrity neighbour, Schapelle Corby, they appeared to evoke few passions – positive or negative. When people could be bothered to express an opinion, most said something along these lines: "They're drug-dealers; they knew the risk they were taking; they deserve what they get."

Andrew Chan Photo: AFP

Two years later, social media, not to mention the streets of Sydney and Melbourne, are suddenly clogged with people standing for mercy. They talk about hope and justice and their feelings of sadness. A petition pleading for clemency has attracted 200,000 signatures and Ben Quilty has become the spear carrier and inspiration for a big movement of Australians. He must welcome the company after working assiduously and largely unseen with Sukumaran for more than two years at a time when nobody else much cared.

Advertisement

The vigils are admirable. They give great comfort, I'm sure, to both prisoners, and even some hope. Indonesia's President and Attorney-General last week postponed the move of the condemned men to the prison island of last resort. No explanation was offered, but it's either a needlessly cruel delay, or a sign that the Indonesians' resolve is wobbling. Any reprieve for Chan and Sukumaran will not come with a great, humiliating announcement of a backdown, it will come with a delay here, a rethink there, followed by another delay while the issue begins to die down.

Perhaps the campaign on the streets of Melbourne and Sydney has had some effect, even if only to give moral support to Australia's politicians and diplomats and businesspeople as they meet their Indonesian counterparts and push for mercy. But, while the attention of the Australian public is a good thing, it does prompt the question: why only focus when the death knell is, almost literally, sounding?

Two years ago, five years ago, Chan and Sukumaran were no less on death row. Their struggle with their fate, their guilt, their fear of pain and death, their feelings of vulnerability and loneliness, were as real then, and perhaps even bleaker for being apparently unending and unacknowledged.

We all know, of course, the answer to my question. People have busy lives and many calls on their time and their conscience. They've been marching for Jill Meagher or one-punch victims or asylum seekers. For Chan and Sukumaran, until now, there has been no deadline. Clemency applications were afoot. There was nothing to focus the mind. Without that, few of us were ever prompted to imagine what it was like living with a sword hanging over them. We did not make the mental effort to put ourselves in those terrible final moments, when one man who works on his art and another who preaches in the prison church will stand alone in the pre-dawn hush in front of a foreign firing squad, hear the barked order, and then the thunder of a dozen guns.

I remember when another Australian drug convict, Van Tuong Nguyen, was about to be executed in Singapore. I'd never heard of him until a few weeks before the fatal day. Then suddenly I was, we all were, appalled at the imminent hanging of a stupid kid who, from what we read, had changed into a virtuous man during his time on death row. Our concern made no difference.

Then, as now, I wondered why I hadn't heard or paid attention, and whether it was all too late, if something more could have been done.

Dame Susan Mary tweeted on January 23, the day it was reported that Tony Abbott had met the family of Chan and Sukumaran: "Too little too late. Wouldn't expect other behaviour @TonyAbbottMHR."

It's a strain of criticism that holds the government responsible for not doing enough. It's true they have said very little in public over the years. I recall asking then foreign minister Bob Carr about it in Bali a couple of years ago and he said he would raise "the usual consular issues" but would make no public comments.

That was probably the right response. And Australian governments almost certainly were genuinely lobbying behind the scenes (though we can't be entirely sure). Government officials from the consulate in Bali have been regular visitors to all Bali Nine members and Corby during their time inside.

But what is too little too late is the attention of the Australian public. The infamous Roy Morgan poll-via-SMS for Triple J, which in January found 52 per cent support for the execution of (unnamed) Australians if they break foreign laws, may actually have reflected Australian attitudes in the weeks before the mercy campaign made that view unfashionable. It certainly impressed the Indonesians. And it did not surprise me.

Australia should be against the death penalty in all circumstances. It's too much to ask us to care about Indonesian, Brazilian, or American death row prisoners. But surely it's not too much to ask that we pay attention to those few Australians facing the ultimate penalty, and to be more consistent in our advocacy on their behalf. The failure here is not the government's, it's the Australian people's. And it's quite likely that that failure has made things worse for two men now trying to endure what may well by their final days.

Michael Bachelard is investigations editor and a former Indonesia correspondent of The Age.