The latest head of the Taliban is promising that the militant group will not rest until Afghanistan is a fundamentalist Islamic state, according to The Associated Press

Mullah Akhtar Mohammad Mansour vowed his organization will fight on in an audio recording released Saturday.

“The jihad will continue until we establish the Islamic government in our country,” Mansour said in the clip, AP reported.

ADVERTISEMENT “This is a big responsibility for us,” he told fellow Taliban fighters. “This is not the work of one, two or three people.”

“We should keep our unity,” Mansour added. “We must be united – our enemy will be happy in our separation.”

Taliban spokesman Zabiullah Mujahid released the tape recording to news outlets Saturday morning.

It could not independently verify that Mansour is speaking in the half-hour clip.

Mansour called on Taliban forces to remain faithful to their interpretation of Islam in the message.

“Whatever happens must comply with Sharia law, whether that be jihad, or talks, or an invitation to either,” he said of further conflict or peace talks with Afghanistan’s government. “Our decisions must all be based on Sharia law.”

Mansour’s remarks follow the confirmed death of Mullah Mohammad Omar, the Taliban’s first leader, earlier this week.

The White House verified that Omar is deceased in a statement Friday evening.

“While the exact circumstances of his death remain uncertain, it is clear that his demise, after decades of war and thousands of lives lost, represents a chance for yet more progress on the path to a stable, secure Afghanistan,” the Obama administration said.

Omar’s death presents Mansour with major leadership challenges, given the Taliban has never had any other chief commander.

He called on Taliban members to remain cohesive.

“We shouldn’t be suspicious of each other,” Mansour said. “We must accept each other.”

Mansour was reportedly named Omar’s successor during a Taliban gathering in Quetta, Pakistan, on Thursday.

“The shura held outside Quetta unanimously elected Mullah Mansour as the new emir of the Taliban,” a spokesman said.

The Taliban has appointed Siraj Haqqani, head of its powerful Haqqani militant faction, as Mansour’s deputy.

The Islamist group also revealed it is postponing its next round of peace talks with Afghanistan following confusion over Omar’s death.