Topics: David Brooks, Indiana, Media Criticism, New York Times, Religious Freedom, News, Politics News

This week, proponents of today’s “religious freedom” acts in Indiana and Arkansas seemed bewildered by the harsh national backlash against them. But for anyone who seriously believes (to cite New York Times columnist David Brooks’ example) that allowing an evangelical wedding-cake baker to refuse to bake for a same-sex couple will strengthen evangelical Christianity, the lesson from America’s Constitutional history of religious freedom is this: be careful what you wish for. They might just weaken religion instead.

In 1783, James Madison was back in Virginia from a three-year term in Congress, and serving as a delegate in the General Assembly. Then, as now, Christian churches were worried they were under threat, with their numbers dropping dramatically during the Revolutionary War.

Virginia’s canny and opportunistic former governor, the Revolutionary hero Patrick Henry, saw a ripe political issue in the churches’ collapse. He proposed a new tax that would fund Christian churches. Madison was appalled by the breach of the church-state wall, and resolved to fight. He jotted down an outline of attacks on the tax, which he delivered, first in a speech, then in a letter several months later.

In a sweeping series of assaults, he charged that states had fallen precisely where church and state were mixed. He challenged Henry’s assumption that moral decay was caused by the collapse in religious institutions; “war and bad laws,” he said, were instead at fault.

He declared that religion belonged to the realm of conscience, not government. Men, considering only the evidence “contemplated by their own minds,” could not be forced to follow the dictates of other men. Religion therefore was unreachable by politics, by the state. In other words, the statecould not support religion, because religion’s strength depends on men’s minds, reason, and conscience.

Madison’s letter sparked a petition drive that ultimately generated over 10,000 signatures, swamping Henry’s bill. Madison’s speech against Patrick Henry’s religious tax went on to become his Memorial and Remonstrance against Religious Assessments, perhaps the Western world’s most famous declaration of the doctrine of the separation of church and state.

His approach to true religious freedom went back to an instance of real religious intolerance, which today’s supporters of religious freedom should look at for a contrast with their own political posturing.

As a recent college graduate back home in Virginia, the Father of our Constitution, James Madison, learned that a sect of Baptists had been imprisoned in nearby Culpeper for preaching without a license. Their captors were giving them only dry crusts of rye bread and water. One tormentor stood on a stool and urinated into the cell.