Getty

The competition is heating up between Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, and after Hillary attacked Bernie for his unrealistic universal health care plan during the Democratic debate, he’s the one feelin’ the burn. Here’s what she said.

The gloves are coming off in Hillary Clinton, 68, and Bernie Sanders‘ fight for the Democratic nomination. At the Feb. 4 Democratic debate, Hillary totally slammed Bernie for his universal health care plan. She says it would completely “dismantle” Obamacare! Here’s what happened.



Now that Martin O’Malley is out of the running for the Democratic nomination, Hillary and Bernie have turned all of their attention to each other. While this has been a pretty civil race so far, all bets were off in the Feb. 4 Democratic debate. The final results of the Iowa caucus were perhaps a little too close for comfort for Hillary, winning by just 0.3% of the vote. Maybe that’s why she lashed out at Bernie when the subject of health care came up.

Hillary is incredibly attached to the Affordable Care Act, as she repeatedly admits it was “Hillarycare” even before it was “Obamacare.” Bernie has his own ideas for health care, with his “Medicare For All” plan that would make healthcare free for everyone. That’s what got Hillary riled up. She said it would be a “great mistake” to “dismantle” Obamacare. On top of that, she says Bernie’s enthusiastic plan was unrealistic, and had “very little chance of succeeding.”

Join Amazon Prime For Free – Thousands of Movies & Shows Anytime

Hillary and Bernie have sparred before over Wall Street. Hillary took a swing at him when she said Wall Street should be more afraid of her than Bernie, despite that being one of his biggest issues: “I’m the only candidate who’s said I will not raise taxes on the middle class… and yeah, that will also come out of Wall St.,” Hillary said during the debate. We’ll see what the public believes when they go head-to-head at the New Hampshire primary election on Feb. 9.

HollywoodLifers – do you think Hillary’s comment was fair and accurate? Let us know in the comments below and CLICK HERE for some cool videos.

JavaScript is required to load the comments.