“Join the Revolution.”

That’s the slogan for Minuteman Health, a Massachusetts-based insurance provider that recently announced it will enter the New Hampshire marketplace in 2015.

Harvard Pilgrim Healthcare of Massachusetts will also enter the same year, after its application to enter the exchange is approved, according to state insurance officials.

Minuteman is a small nonprofit company, but it’s unique in Massachusetts and New Hampshire due to the fact it is a co-op, governed by its members. This also means that whatever profits the company earns will go back into its health plans, with the goal of lowering cost, according to its website.

Co-ops are a small but growing segment of insurance providers in the United States. Maine Community Health Options and Healthy CT in Connecticut are the two other co-ops in New England, and there are 23 co-ops nationwide. All are being funded with nearly $2 billion of federal money, part of the Affordable Care Act.

This is a vastly different model than the one currently provided by Anthem, a much larger insurance company and the only one currently in New Hampshire.

Minuteman’s expansion signals that Anthem’s monopoly in New Hampshire’s insurance market will end next year. That’s welcome news to many consumers and hospitals across the state.

“Most people consider it a good thing,” said Tyler J. Brannen, health policy analyst for the N.H. Insurance Department. “I think that’s particularly true given the situation in the market.”

Asked to describe the current condition of New Hampshire’s market, Brannen said, “Expensive.”

The narrow network of hospitals and doctors provided by Anthem Blue Cross has already caused frustration for consumers and providers.

Minuteman CEO Tom D. Policelli said the current monopoly is the reason his company decided to expand into New Hampshire.

“The New Hampshire market is dominated by one carrier,” Policelli said. “We saw the market need as very large.”

Two more companies in the market will mean more coverage for more areas, and more price competition, according to Brannen.

He also said he anticipated the move will lower prices for New Hampshire consumers.

Brannen said he believes Minuteman could meet Anthem’s prices. However, the company has not yet released information on prices for its plans in Massachusetts, because its rates are currently awaiting approval from the Massachusetts Division of Insurance.

But the provider has signed up 26 hospitals and about 7,500 physicians in Massachusetts so far.

Anthem said earlier this year it will not participate with 12 New Hampshire hospitals in the state, and this has left coverage gaps. Many hospitals have been left grumbling about the changes; Frisbie Memorial Hospital in Rochester has even sued Anthem over its exclusion.

Cheshire Medical Center/Dartmouth-Hitchcock Keene does participate with Anthem, but Monadnock Community Hospital in Peterborough has been left out.

In an email statement, Monadnock Community Hospital CFO Richard Scheinblum said his hospital welcomes Minuteman and Harvard Pilgrim’s announcements.

“We are hopeful that increased competition in the insurance marketplace will mean increased access for people in our primary service area to receive care locally,” Scheinblum said.

Scheinblum said the main issue with being excluded from Anthem’s network is the disruption for patients who have established their doctors at Monadnock.

“Some of our patients will no longer be able to receive care from physicians they have seen for years and developed strong relationships with,” he said. “Hopefully this will change in 2015.”

Policelli said Minuteman’s goal is to offer coverage statewide.

“The real problem in New Hampshire is having affordable access to care everywhere,” he said. “Anthem is being very narrow. It’s puzzling.”

Policelli specifically mentioned the lack of Anthem coverage in the North Country, where hospitals in Littleton, Berlin and Colebrook have been excluded.

“The north is empty right now,” Policelli said.

Anthem spokesman Christopher Dugan did not address the entry of the new providers into the N.H. marketplace, but said in an email that his company’s focus was serving their customers and the market in 2014.

“As the state’s longest standing carrier and the only health insurer who has chosen to participate in the exchange, we have a unique responsibility to those we serve and new members who may choose us for coverage in 2014,” Dugan wrote.

Policelli said his company has received plenty of communication from New Hampshire hospitals, encouraging Minuteman to enter the marketplace.

“We got letters of support from over half the hospitals,” he said. “Since then, we’ve had some phone calls from others. People are calling us.”

Brannen said he thinks Minuteman has a leg up on the New Hampshire market.

“I think they’ve got some people involved … in New Hampshire,” he said. “All things considered, they’re in a much better place than another company.”