People Moves of the Week: Haynes and Boone, K&L Gates, Squire Patton Boggs

Haynes and Boone hires IP specialist; K&L adds former LipoScience VP; Squire Patton Boggs enlists David Schnittger, deputy chief of staff to U.S. House Speaker John Boehner

Alvarez & Marsal — The Dallas office of the financial advisory firm hired Gary Van House as a senior director. Van House will advise hospitals, independent physician organizations and other physician entities on strategy and performance improvement. He joins the group’s hospitals and health systems practice from Minneapolis-St. Paul-based Park Nicollet Medical Center and Columbia Park Medical Group. He also led St. Louis University Physicians as CEO.

Capital One Bank — William Gates has been named head of syndications for Capital One. Gates will oversee loan syndications and lead business growth and development initiatives. Prior to joining Capital One, he was a managing director for the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), responsible for the underwriting and distribution of loan transactions in the Americas. He worked previously at UBS AG, Merrill Lynch and Lehman Brothers, where he was a founding member of the defunct investment bank's loan syndicate group.

Gibson Dunn & Crutcher LLP — Stephen Gillespie is set to join the firm's London branch as a partner. He was co-head of global banking at Allen & Overy LLP from 1991 until 2006, when he joined Kirkland & Ellis, also in London. There, he served as a senior partner focused on European debt finance.

Haynes and Boone LLP — Dennis Gallagher joined as counsel in the Orange County, California, law firm. He will be a part of the intellectual property transactional practice. Gallagher made the jump from Conexant Systems Inc., where he was vice president, legal and general counsel since 2011.

K&L Gates LLP — The Raleigh, North Carolina office of global law firm has added Kathryn Twiddy as a partner in the corporate/M&A practice. Twiddy joins K&L Gates from LipoScience Inc., where she served as vice president, general counsel and corporate secretary.

Squire Patton Boggs LLP — The Cleveland law firm tapped David Schnittger, deputy chief of staff to U.S. House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) to its Washington office as a senior policy adviser. At this post, Schnittger will advise on global communications and legislative strategy, working with former Sens. John Breaux and Trent Lott. Schnittger, who is slated to start in January, has been a member of Boehner's congressional staff since 2006. Before that, he was communications director for the House Committee on Education and the Work Force from 2001 to 2005.

Turnspire Capital Partners— The New York private equity firm has hired a slate of manufacturing specialists. Joseph Bondi, Mark Borseth, Neil Minihane and Val Shtraks have joined as operating partners. Bondi previously spent 25 years at financial adviser Alvarez & Marsal Holdings LLC, while Borseth most recently served as CFO of Constar International, a maker of plastic food and beverage containers. Minihane is the founder of restructuring firm Turn Works LLC and Shtraks is a co-founder of Bath Authority LLC, a maker of shower doors and tubs.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: