Police testing knife found nearby, still investigating

Secundino Martinez (Longmont Police Department)

Longmont police arrested a 20-year-old Frederick man early Sunday morning on suspicion of fatally stabbing a Lafayette man and seriously injuring two others during a fight at a home at 712 Francis St.

Secundino "Dino" Martinez was arrested on suspicion of one count of first-degree murder and two counts of attempted first-degree murder. Longmont Police Cmdr. Jeff Satur said investigators are withholding the identity of the three victims pending additional investigation.

About 20 people between the ages of 16 and 21 attended on Saturday night a party that included the use of both marijuana and alcohol at the home. An 18-year-old man hosted the party at the home while his parents were out of town, Satur said.

Officer David Bonday consoles a man at the scene of a fatal stabbing in Longmont Sunday morning. The man was described as a relative of someone at the party were the multiple stabbings occurred. (Paul Aiken The Longmont Times-Call)

An argument escalated into a fight that spilled onto the front lawn. Police were called to the home at 2:07 a.m.

When officers arrived, they found the three victims. One man died at the scene and two others, ages 17 and 18, were taken to Longmont United Hospital, where they underwent surgery.

As of Sunday evening, one victim was in a medically induced coma, while the other had just been through a second surgery. Police said both remained in very serious condition.

"They're both in pretty bad shape, but we're hopeful," Satur said.

Martinez initially fled the scene on foot, but police believe he stole a mountain bike at some point to try to get away, Satur said. Police arrested him at the Walmart store on Colo. Highway 119 in eastern Longmont.

A search on Sunday turned up a knife on the 1000 block of Francis Street that investigators suspect may have been the one used in the fight. Satur said testing will be done on the knife to confirm that it was the weapon used, but investigators would like anyone who finds any other knives to report it."If someone finds a knife in their yard that doesn't belong to them, we'd like a call," Satur said.

Longmont police believe murder suspect Secundino Martinez stole this mountain bike after fleeing from the scene of a fight and fatal stabbing at 712 Francis Street on the morning of Jan. 12, 2014. Investigators are looking for the owner. (Longmont Police Department)

Martinez is due to make a first appearance in Boulder County Court at 2 p.m. on Monday. Court records show he pleaded guilty to driving under the influence in 2008 and has two subsequent cases for driving with a suspended license. He does not have a violent criminal history, according to records.

Police are still investigating whether Longmont students were involved. The fight was not gang related, Satur said.

Neighbors woke Sunday morning to crime scene tape and the Longmont police Mobile Command Center parked on Francis Street just blocks southeast of Longmont High School.

A woman ventured out of her home nearby to check out the activity.

"It's been going all night," she said before retreating back into her home.

Another couple watched through the front window of their home as police continued their work.

Longmont Police Officer David Bonday consoled a man who stood outside of the crime scene on Sunday morning. The man told police he was related to someone in the home.

"You don't want to talk to me," he said. "I don't know anything."

Annette Haagenson, who lives north of the scene, said she didn't hear anything overnight. In fact, she said, her German shepherd didn't even bark. She said she has lived in the neighborhood for 22 years and it is very quiet.

"When I got up this morning I saw the police car," she said after hearing about the stabbings. "This is so sad to be so angry and have that happen."

As late as 4 p.m. Sunday, officers were leading police dogs around the chilly and silent neighborhood in search of the weapon. Four teams from Front Range Rescue Dogs assisted for about four hours.

Police are also seeking the owner of the yellow mountain bike. Anyone with information is asked to call the Longmont Police Department at 303-651-8501.

Francis Street was closed to traffic between Carolina and Longs Peak avenues during the investigation, but was reopened just after 5 p.m.

Times-Call reporter Scott Rochat contributed to this report.

Pierrette J. Shields can be reached at 303-684-5273 or at pshields@times-call.com.