The journal is a place where policy wonks discuss big ideas for health care reform. New editor for Health Affairs

Key elements of the Affordable Care Act were first previewed in the journal Health Affairs. It’s where policy wonks kick the tires on big ideas for reforming Medicare, Medicaid and most every aspect of health care in the United States — before those proposals find their way into legislation on the Hill.

On Monday, a new editor-in-chief takes charge of the publication, considered unique among peer-reviewed journals for channeling new research into health policy debates with political immediacy.

Story Continued Below

Alan Weil is the first lawyer to lead Health Affairs, which has been run by journalists since its launch in 1981. Figures from the tight-knit health policy community in Washington and beyond say he gets the key challenges facing the country’s byzantine, costly and underperforming health care system.

( CARTOONS: Matt Wuerker on Obamacare)

“He knows the nuances state by state, he knows the arguments and he knows the people,” said James Tallon, president of the United Hospital Fund in New York. “As an editor, Alan is going to be a great traffic cop.”

Weil’s career has spanned both politics and policy, a background that will be a boon to the publication, said Karen Davis, former president of the Commonwealth Fund and director of the Roger C. Lipitz Center for Integrated Health Care at the Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health.

“What makes him ideal at Health Affairs is a combination of practical political experience, as well as being a real researcher,” Davis said.

A Harvard-trained lawyer, Weil oversaw Colorado’s Medicaid program and served as health policy adviser to Gov. Roy Romer when Romer was chairman of the National Governors Association in the early 1990s. At the Urban Institute, he directed a research project — Assessing the New Federalism — that led to a decadelong stint as executive director of the National Academy for State Health Policy, his most recent position.

( PHOTOS: 25 unforgettable Obamacare quotes)

“I’ve always been a voice for the importance of states,” Weil, 50, said in a recent interview. “I do think the Affordable Care Act has elevated that even further: States are responsible for the Medicaid program, they have right of refusal on exchanges, they regulate commercial insurance. The big policy changes in the Affordable Care Act center around state activity.”

Health Affairs was originally funded by Project HOPE, a nonprofit that works on global health issues. These days it reaches a broad audience, with its website drawing more than 200,000 unique visitors monthly from 140 countries. Its subscribers include academicians, corporate and hospital executives, clinicians and government officials. Unlike the New England Journal of Medicine and the Journal of the American Medical Association, Health Affairs focuses exclusively on health policy, not medical research.

“The articles have always been closely related to issues that Congress considers,” said Joe Antos, a health care scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, who contributes to the journal. “And there’s always been a big emphasis on drawing health policy conclusions. Not more research is needed, but what can you get out of it?”

( PHOTOS: The 8 GOP governors who said yes to Medicaid expansion)

Founding editor John Iglehart led Health Affairs for its first 25 years. In 2008, fellow journalist Susan Dentzer took over and helped bring the publication into the era of new media, adding blog analyses of federal regulations and policy announcements to the research articles.

“John had a great sense of the kind of thing that would be attractive to the audience we’re talking about,” Antos said. “It’s now ingrained in all of the editors. Susan has it, and Alan obviously has it as well.”

Dentzer left in April 2013, with Iglehart serving as interim editor since then and leading the search for a new editor.

Weil says he’s looking forward to “being in the middle of the conversations” at Health Affairs and plans to build on the monthly journal’s “core strength” of peer-reviewed health policy research to expand its footprint. He’s anticipating areas that aren’t traditionally viewed as health care but are increasingly connected to it.

“Health policy affects and is affected by so many other sectors,” Weil said in the interview, citing architecture and urban planning as two fields with strong tie-ins. “What I’m most excited about is developing more of an awareness of the journal and the content in some new communities.”

Authors: