Senior will move to point guard to help others get involved

Senior Kyle Leahy is shifting from shooting guard to point guard for his final season with the Erie Tigers. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

Kyle Leahy understands he is pure scorer. He knows he'll contribute plenty to the scoreboard this season.

The senior also is acutely aware that, for the Tigers to make a push for the Class 4A state tournament, it's going to have to be more than just him putting the ball in the basket.

"You definitely can't win games by yourself," said Leahy, who has moved to point guard this season. "We're going to need everyone to contribute and do what they do best to help us win."

With Dylan Brink and his 18.8 scoring average now graduated, Leahy clearly is the Tigers' keynote piece on the offensive end. He enters the season needing 131 points to crack the 1,000-point plateau. Undoubtedly, there will be games when opposing defenses devote their resources to stopping him.

That's where the auxiliary production becomes important. Leahy wants to foster that production, and that's where his move from a shooting guard/small forward to the point will expedite the process.

"We're trying to figure out the younger pieces," Erie coach Tim Leahy said. "Yeah, we have Kyle back and that's a big piece. He's been on varsity four years and can pass and can score. I think the key will be who we can find to be other consistent scorers."

The Tigers are morphing from a smaller, guard-oriented group to one that figures to cause matchup problems in the post with an abundance of height. That means the complementary scorers could come from inside.

Six-foot-6 forward Andrew Campbell returns, and his younger brother, sophomore William Campbell (6-4), also is in the mix. And the Campbells aren't even the biggest guys on the team. Sophomore center Cameron McCurry is 6-8 and already possesses good hands and runs the floor well.

"I think our size is going to surprise some people," Tim Leahy said. "We'll have a big lineup, it's just whether or not we can defend people and find some people to take some pressure off of Kyle."

Kyle Leahy averaged 15.5 points as a sophomore, a total that dipped to 11.8 last season as Brink ascended as a scorer and Leahy became a more well-rounded player (he also corralled 7.4 rebounds a game).

It is Leahy's final hurrah on the hardwood, as he is signed to play baseball at Colorado Mesa next season. Despite the new dynamic of the Tigers, he believes his senior season could be one to remember.

"It's coming together," he said. "I mean, it's a work in progress through the whole year. Hopefully by the end of the year we'll be playing our best. But it's still early and we're optimistic."

The Tigers got a taste of two different styles in scrimmages last week, speedy and pace-pushing with Skyview and physical and deliberate with Silver Creek.

While the Tigers' influx of big men most stands out, guards Bobby Bledsoe and Alex Goodell also boast good size and will have an increased role on the perimeter. Guard Triston Berringer, who dislocated his kneecap during the football season, is recovering and probably won't be at full strength until after the holiday break.

While the Tigers aren't quite sure how it will all mesh, they are eager to use the pre-break portion of the schedule as a litmus test.

"The younger guys bring some serious size with Cameron and Will, and with me sliding up to the point guard spot we'll be a lot bigger than most teams," Kyle Leahy said. "I'm hoping to get everyone else involved and, at the same time, try and score when I'm needed to."

Follow Paul on Twitter: twitter.com/PaulWillis21