Cynthia Pasky (Photo: Bizpeople) Story Highlights Strategic Staffing Solutions CEO Cynthia Pasky says Obamacare is creating opportunity.

The health care industry is a major source of growth for Michigan, Pasky says.

Cynthia Pasky, CEO of Detroit-based Strategic Staffing Solutions, which has more than 2,700 employees, recently spoke to the Free Press about Michigan's outlook in 2015.

Excerpts from that conversation, condensed for brevity:

Free Press: What are the key factors driving your business in 2015?

Cynthia Pasky: We're very focused on some specific industries and we always have been: the financial industry, energy, insurance, particularly insurance on the health care side.

We're busy because either our customers are doing well and they need to invest and enhance, or we're busy because they're regulated and they have to deal with changes. In many instances we're busy because they need to reduce costs but they still need to get work done and we can come to them with a solution to help.

Free Press: Is the fact that Obamacare is taking full effect providing opportunity?

Pasky: Sure it is. It's driving need for regulatory changes, system changes, the ability to process, track, implement, record. Every customer — even if they're not in the health care insurance industry — they still have to make sure all of their suppliers are accountable, that everything's in place. So it's creating a lot of work and changes. In many instances that creates opportunity for us.

Free Press: In Michigan, the governor is often talking about the need for more job retraining and technical education because we have tens of thousands of job openings that we can't seem to fill. What does that say about the workforce in Michigan?

Pasky: I think we have a really talented workforce. When an economy improves, you're going to have more opportunity than you have workforce. That doesn't mean you don't have talent.

Part of our workforce does need to have the opportunity to add or change their skill sets because what they used to do is no longer available. Some people would look at that as a negative. I look at that as a positive. You just have to have the right plan to get them the skills that align with the opportunities that are available.

Free Press: There's a trend toward more contract positions and temporary jobs. Is that a good thing or a bad thing?

Pasky: In most instances it's a good thing. You've got temp labor, you've got contractors. Most of the corporations are doing well, so they're looking to invest and do more work.

In some instances they'll use the contracting labor as a way to fill their permanent needs. Then in some instances it is going to be because of regulations, whether it's health care or the energy industry, that they have to meet. But more than not, it's not because they have to cut back. It's in addition to. And that's a good thing.

Free Press: What are the hot jobs in 2015?

Pasky: I love to talk about the jobs in the health care industry. We're really strong in that arena in Michigan. They run the whole gamut.

Think of all the different types of people you need in a large medical center — from someone to greet you when you walk in the door to the heart surgeon. Not all of those jobs require degrees. To become a lab tech, you have to be certified but you don't have to go to a university to do that. So I think if we continue to invest and recognize how important that industry is, we have a window of opportunity to provide a variety of people with a variety of skills and in some instances shorten the retooling of their skills.

There's always going to be IT jobs and a certain level of engineering jobs.

Free Press: How do you think the resolution of Detroit's bankruptcy will affect the city's economy?

Pasky: It's incredibly positive. I've personally lived in the city since 1986, our business was started here and has always been headquartered here since 1990. It eliminates the unknowns. The message to the rest of the world when we're looking for investors, when we're looking for companies to move divisions here, for individuals to come here to take positions here — that's a huge success.

It happened in an appropriate, organized manner that can be explained. Now everybody wants to know how we did it and how they can be a part of what's happening next.

Free Press: Will you be hiring next year at your headquarters?

Pasky: Oh, absolutely. In October we'll celebrate our 25th year of doing business. We've grown every single year and we anticipate the same thing this year.

Free Press: What is on your wish list for Lansing for 2015? What do they need to accomplish for the economy?

Pasky: Anyone who knows me knows I think very highly of the governor and that I supported him. So my wish list for Lansing would be that both parties are supportive and work with him to drive the agenda we need for Michigan.

Free Press: He's talking a lot about tech education. He says not everyone needs to get a four-year degree. What do you think?

Pasky: Absolutely not. I don't have a four-year degree. I think he's spot on. If you can get someone in a starting job in a health care facility, they can get benefits and tuition reimbursement and work 40 hours a week. Then it lets them decide to go back to community college in the evenings to become a nurse's tech and then they can go to become a nurse. You get them back into the workforce in a meaningful way and they can go from there.

Free Press: How does your program for hiring military veterans work?

Pasky: We have a group of individuals who represent every branch in the service. They source and find candidates for all of our recruiters to fill our positions for our customers. We're also designated as a military employer, as a military spouse employer. We have access to all the military bases to go in and recruit.

When we're looking to staff internally, the very first place we look is to make sure there isn't a military person that will fill that role. Because if all the individuals doing the recruiting are from the military, they can (show veterans) here's how you need to present yourself to be considered for this job so you won't be rejected. But it does take an extra step.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1BBLgdE