Interest surges for Illinois health insurance exchange

Interest allays fears that carriers would walk away from offering coverage under the Affordable Care Act in 2nd year

The surge in interest in the Illinois exchange allays widespread concerns that carriers would find the prospect of offering coverage under the Affordable Care Act too risky and unprofitable because of sicker-than-expected pools of patients, causing them to walk away.

Eight insurance companies are seeking approval to sell 504 separate health plans next year on the Illinois health insurance exchange, a noteworthy increase from 2014, Illinois said Thursday.

The state did not say which carriers submitted plans, which include 306 policies for individuals and 198 for small groups.

“The significant increase in the number of carriers and the number of plans they are offering represents good news for Illinois health care consumers,” said Jennifer Koehler, executive director of Get Covered Illinois, the state’s health care expansion enrollment arm. “It means consumers will have even more good options to choose from next year.”

Last year, just six insurers offered 165 policies in Illinois — 120 individual plans and 45 for small groups. That was far below the state’s initial projections that at least 250 policies would be offered.

In total, eight companies will offer plans under 10 so-called “issuers,” compared with six companies that sold plans under eight brand names last year.

Notably absent in Illinois in 2014 was the state’s second-largest insurer, UnitedHealthcare, which opted to sit out amid uncertainty in the market. The company confirmed Thursday that it plans to offer policies on the marketplace in 2015, as previously reported by the Tribune.

“This is a first step that will help inform our final participation decision, and we look forward to continuing our conversations throughout the approval process,” said Kevin Shermach, a United spokesman.

The Illinois exchange, an online marketplace where consumers can compare and purchase private health plans is hosted at HealthCare.gov. It is a key pillar of the Affordable Care Act, the landmark 2010 health law that expanded coverage to millions of Americans, including about 566,000 Illinoisans, this year.

Through April 19, just more than 217,000 gained private coverage offered through the exchange, a market dominated by the state’s largest insurer, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois.

Blue Cross said it enrolled about 200,000 people on the Illinois exchange in the first year, good for about 92 percent of the market. It plans to sell exchange-based plans again for 2015. .

Its dominance left little for other carriers, including the start-up Land of Lincoln Health, a co-op nonprofit funded in part with a $160 million federal loan that was able to sign up about 3,500 customers in its first year.

Land of Lincoln has said it plans to participate again in 2015. As will Health Alliance, the Urbana-based insurer that offered plans throughout the state in 2014 aside from in Cook County.