Since 1999, the state Supreme Court has rejected petitions, issued orders and imposed deadlines in an effort to get the latest round of affordable housing rules put in place in New Jersey.

RECORD FILE PHOTO The N.J. Supreme Court

Now, at the beginning of 2015 — three months after the court ordered the rules adopted — the Council on Affordable Housing is still deadlocked and has no plans yet to try to come to a consensus.

It has left members of the state’s highest court, which is now poised to decide whether certain towns will still be protected from affordable housing lawsuits, expressing their frustration aloud.

“What more do we have to do?” Justice Barry Albin asked one attorney involved in the case, during a lengthy hearing Tuesday in Trenton. Later, with another attorney before the bench, he asked: “How much longer do you want the poor people of the state wait until they get affordable housing?”

The question has lingered over New Jersey since 1975, when the Supreme Court ruled in a landmark case known as the Mount Laurel decision that municipalities cannot shape their land-use laws to discriminate against the poor, and that developers had a right to build affordable housing.

The first and second rounds of housing regulations were in place by 1999. But since then, the third round has been stalled by legal action, an attempt by Governor Christie to disband the council and, now, an impasse on the final vote. The six-member council voted 3-3 in October.

All the while, municipalities have no clear direction with regard to their affordable housing obligations, potentially exposing the towns to lawsuits.

The council, commonly referred to as COAH, has not taken any action since its deadlock vote and has no plans to meet, said Geraldine Callahan, an attorney for the council.

Callahan and six other lawyers in the case appeared before the Supreme Court to make their case for what the court should do next, including deciding whether municipalities should be protected from lawsuits, as afforded by the council’s administrative process for municipalities in the affordable housing certification process. Roughly 300 of the state’s 565 municipalities are in some stage of certification.

In a nearly four-hour hearing that was scheduled for two, attorneys spent much of their time focusing on the granular points of the administrative process.

Because the council has not acted on the court’s order to issue the latest regulations, some argued that municipalities should no longer be protected from lawsuits alleging exclusionary zoning, commonly known as builder’s remedy suits. Kevin Walsh, attorney for the Fair Share Housing Center, an advocacy group to end exclusionary housing, argued that the lawsuits should be moved into trial courts to decide on a case-by-case basis, “so that they have to prove why there is a need for immunity” from litigation.

But Jonathan Drill, who represents six towns, suggested municipalities at least get temporary immunity from lawsuits because they are going through the motions to be certified by the council.

“Give municipalities a soft landing, not a hard landing,” he said.

Jeffrey Surenian, representing Atlantic Highlands in Monmouth County, argued that the court should order the council to reconvene and provide periodic reports to the court on how it intends to break its deadlock. Stripping immunity from municipalities trying to meet their affordable housing obligations, he argued, would then open them up to costly builder’s remedy lawsuits.

“Municipalities shouldn’t be responsible for COAH’s failure,” Surenian said.

Judge Mary Catherine Cuff, assigned temporarily to the Supreme Court, replied: “If COAH is not doing its job, what other choice do we have?”

Edward Buzak, a lawyer for the New Jersey League of Municipalities, laid out a five-point set of recommendations for the court, and he urged that the court “should not jettison” the work of the council to this point.

Buzak, speaking well after the lunch hour had passed and with justices seeming eager to wrap up, also noted that the council had approved a final round of regulations in 2004, but an appellate court later ruled that they did not comply with the Mount Laurel doctrine and the Fair Housing Act, the 1985 law requiring the council to adopt affordable housing regulations.

“Coulda shoulda woulda,” Albin said. “Here we are. Now we have to do something.”

Email: racioppi@northjersey.com