On Dec. 9, Jacobia Grimes, 34, was confronted by the manager of a New Orleans Dollar Store for trying to steal candy. Grimes emptied his pockets of $31 worth of candy before police arrived to arrest him. Grimes was charged with a felony, which could immediately mean up to two years in prison. However, because Grimes had been convicted of five thefts in the past, he is subject to Louisiana’s unique and particularly harsh habitual offender laws. As such, it is entirely possible Grimes will face at least 20 years behind bars, and may even spend the rest of his life there.

The lawyers representing Grimes say he’s pleaded guilty in the past to thefts of less than $500 at Blockbuster Video, Rite-Aid, Save-A-Center and Rouses. Grimes last spent four years in prison after shoplifting socks and pants from a Dollar General store. This time, however, Grimes has pleaded not guilty in the hopes of being spared Louisiana’s habitual offender sentencing laws.

The judge who heard Grimes’ not guilty plea did not shy away from criticizing the very real possibility of a 20 year sentence. “Isn’t this a little over the top,” Judge Franz Zibilich asked. “It’s not even funny.” Why, if even the judge overseeing Grimes’ arraignment can see the lunacy of imprisoning someone over $31 of candy, is this likely to be Grimes’ fate?

In the 1970s, the federal government and many states adopted mandatory minimum sentencing laws. At the outset, the intention was to discourage sentencing discrepancies that might result from a bias. The mandatory minimum sentencing fad turned out to be more than a passing notion — such laws still exist all over the U.S.

Unfortunately, despite well-meaning intentions, minimum sentencing laws have prompted the rise of the legal monsters sometimes referred to as habitual offender laws. Both have taken much power out of judges’ hands — all too often, judges merely read from a law during sentencing, rather than providing any input.

Some states have taken steps to limit or end this type of legislation, among the most common being the “three strike” laws, as in California. Louisiana, though, has taken the opposite approach, arguably playing host to some of the U.S.’s most draconian and baffling habitual offender laws. RS 15:529.1 details in convoluted legalese the way in which, using a calculus, repeat offenders are sentenced, distinctly different from “three strike” laws.

Not all repeat offenders in Louisiana are tried under these laws; it’s up to the prosecutor’s discretion, either way. If habitual offender laws are applied, then that’s called getting “multi-billed.”

Speaking to the Minden Press-Herald, Webster District Attorney Schuyler Marvin explains this process. After being sentenced “you have to have another trial to prove he is who you say he is, and that these prior convictions are for (the person) charged. So you would call (to the stand) a fingerprint expert or a probation officer to say ‘I know for a fact that he’s guilty of possession of cocaine or possession of Schedule III, and I know that because I was his probation officer, and I supervised him for those offenses.’”

Once this is done, the prior sentence is often expanded, depending on the number and type of prior convictions. Even second-time convictions can result in sentences being doubled. Because of the highly undesirable nature of that type of outcome, the threat of getting multi-billed will almost always land the prosecutor a guilty plea deal.

In Jacobia Grimes’ current case, Orleans Parish District Attorney Leon Cannizzaro chose to push for multi-billing. In 2010, Cannizaaro was responsible for serving Grimes a four-year sentence after also pursuing multi-billing for Grimes’ second offense.

Within the U.S., Louisiana has the special distinction of being the undisputed king of incarceration rates: Nearly nine in every 1,000 Louisianans are doing at least one year in state prison. (Compared that to the national rate of less than five per 1,000.) In 2011, the state’s prisons were holding almost 40,000 inmates. Given Louisiana’s heavy-handed habitual offender laws, this should come as little surprise.

The rationale behind habitual offender laws centers on the thought that some people will simply continue to commit crimes regardless, so the best thing is to lock them up. Unfortunately, this more often than not becomes a first, not a last resort. Lawyers for Grimes say he has problems with drug use and has only a ninth-grade education.

It should seem obvious to anyone looking at Grimes’ situation, he needs help, not punishment. Someone who steals $31 worth of candy or a pair of pants is not a danger to society; he is someone who needs to find a reason to stop doing those things. If he were getting rehabilitated and educated in employable skills, would Grimes be filling his pockets with candy bars?

It will cost Louisiana $18,800 every year — that’s $376,000 over two decades — to keep Grimes in prison. Does that seem like a rational use of taxpayer money and a human life?

Photo Credit: sakhorn38 / Thinkstock