Mark Mobius, executive chairman of Templeton Emerging Markets Group: Frontier markets’ “long-term potential is incredible.” The Wall Street Journal

Frontier markets have attracted attention in recent months because of their robust economic growth rates. A quick tour of the WSJ’s Frontier Markets map gives an inkling why: In a world where the major developed markets have been struggling to raise their economic output, the 11.7% growth in Mongolia or the 9.7% climb in Ethiopia’s GDP begin to look extremely appealing.

Even frontier-market fund managers, though, caution against investors assuming that companies in a country enjoying rapid economic growth will necessarily outperform those in slower growing nations. So are investors misguided if they focus on countries with sharply growing economies?

Not necessarily, says executive chairman of fund giant Templeton’s emerging markets group, Mark Mobius: “If you have high economic growth in a country, obviously there will be many companies that have good earnings-per-share growth,” he says in a video interview with WSJ Frontiers. “If you look at the history of prices of securities around the world, earnings per share are very important. The growth of earnings is really a key factor.”

In a nod to the skeptics, though, Dr. Mobius warns that investors should not assume a rising tide will lift all the boats: “There will be a lot of duds, a lot of companies that are not doing very well, so you have to really pick and choose and do your research,” he cautions.

In common with many frontier and emerging-market fund managers, Dr. Mobius focuses heavily on financial services companies. The reason? Banks have a wide exposure to a variety of industries and the economy in general,” he says.

Recent research has shown that frontier markets as a group have been less volatile than emerging markets over the past decade. Analysts attribute the lower volatility partly to the fact that frontier economies don’t tend to move in lockstep with other regions and markets because their economies are not connected as tightly via trade or financial instruments.

According to Dr. Mobius, another key factor ensuring frontier markets are less affected by global turmoil than larger emerging markets is the fact that, in many of them, domestic investment is driving economic growth. And he expects that factor to grow in significance: “My bet is that, more and more it will be the local investors” driving growth, Dr. Mobius predicts.

While frontier markets as a group have proved less volatile than many had expected, individual countries can provide a bumpy ride. Dr. Mobius points out, though, that he looks for opportunity in market turmoil.

Perhaps not surprisingly, given Templeton has over $40 billion in assets under management, which includes $3.9 billion in frontier markets, Dr. Mobius strongly urged investors who don’t have the time or the expertise to conduct effective company-level analysis to invest through a diversified mutual fund.

In the long term, the growth prospects for frontier markets and the companies operating in them are extremely positive, says Dr. Mobius: “There will be volatility, there will be too much money going into some areas … but the potential is incredible,” he says.