Rammell’s 10th Amendment fight

By David Louis

dlouis@rawlinstimes.com

RAWLINS — During his presidency, Barack Obama has placed more than 265 million acres of land and water under federal protection, more than any other president in history.

Late last week, President Obama added to the acreage by designating three new national monuments in the California desert, encompassing nearly 1.8 million acres of land.

Criticized by many conservatives as a unilateral action that disregarded local wishes, it symbolizes the centerpiece of why Rex Rammell, 55, of Gillette is running for U.S. Rep. Cynthia Lummis’ (R-Wyo.) seat in November.

As a public lands candidate, if elected, Rammell’s war in Washington D.C. would center on the 10th Amendment and a strict adherence to what land the federal government has authority to control.

The 10th Amendment

Q; What exactly is your position on the 10th Amendment?

A: It’s pretty simple. Article 1, section 8, clause 17 enumerates the powers that were given to government, and everything not on that list belongs to the states. Most of what the federal government is doing right now is not on that list. One of the big things is that the federal government was never to own 50 percent of the west, or one-third of the United States. They reserved the ground through the Forest Reserve Act in 1891 that gave the power to the president to reserve ground, which I believe was unconstitutional.

Because of this act, the western states didn’t enter the union on equal footing than states that had already been admitted. Since then, we have been at a disadvantage because we have been dependent on the federal government to allow us to mine coal, or graze in the mountains, log in the forest or whatever. We have been subject to the federal government’s will.

Q: How do you get Wyoming land back from the federal government?

A: I think there’s power behind the states. There is a movement. You don’t have to stand alone to fight the federal government. Let the western states use their power. A state has much more power than a group of individuals.

It’s one thing for a state or multiple states to pass legislation demanding the land back. The federal government is not giving states’ demands any attention at all. The Federal government’s attitude is, pass any legislation you want, you’re not getting the land back. So, we’ve got to ratchet up the fight. This is a question that needs to be answered and it will be.

There are four ways this can be solved. It can be solved through executive order, a U.S. Supreme Court challenge, congressional act and state nullification where governors say they don’t recognize the federal government’s authority any longer.

Second Amendment

Q: How do you balance public safety against the right to bear arms?

A: Number one is you can’t argue with the 2nd Amendment. An argument can’t be justified, it can’t be discussed, it’s a right. Unless it’s removed from the Constitution through an amendment, we have the right to bear arms.

All of the gun control laws that try to make an argument that if we don’t have guns, or we should do more background checks, these arguments die at the Constitution. I think what is happening is that society is breaking down. I think there is a lot of pressure on people. I feel it’s more a cultural issue than a gun issue.

Shootings will continue, but we can do things like put security guards in schools and it wouldn’t surprise me that all major places someday will have metal detectors before you enter. I think this is the direction we need to go.

I’m from the school that background checks, registration and permits are not part of the Constitution. I’d like to find someone who can read this into the 2nd Amendment for me. Taking away our guns and limiting our 2nd Amendment right to carry is not the answer.

Coal

Q: With continued regulations on coal-fired power plants and following the latest decision by the Department of Energy to place a three-year moratorium on new coal leases, what do these actions mean to Wyoming and to the country?

A: This is where I break from the other eight Republican candidates in this race. They’re all talking tough, saying lets send a strong voice to Washington. We keep nibbling, fighting this regulation or that regulation, but we never solve the problem.

My answer keeps coming back to this one single thing and that is the federal government has no jurisdiction to be doing these sorts of things. If we take the land back, federal government agency overreach dies.

The EPA will be gone, the BLM will be gone, the Forest Service, Parks and Wildlife, National Parks Service, all gone.

When we win the 10th Amendment battle, all of the other issues will be gone as well — WOTUS, the Clean Power Plan, wolves, the list goes on and on and one. They will all fall. If I go to Washington this will be 90 percent of what I will fight for. I will work night and day to bring title back to Wyoming on Wyoming land.

I guess you can say I’m a single-issue candidate, but it involves so much more. If we win the biggest states’ rights battle of them all, then a lot of the other states’ rights battles will fall, including gun control, same-sex marriage, Obamacare mandates, Common Core, abortion hopefully — all of these things are wrapped up in the 10th Amendment battle for me.

Healthcare

Q: The ACA is becoming so entrenched is it possible to repeal it without throwing the healthcare industry into chaos?

A: I separate myself here from a lot of other people, the Republican Party in general to be quite honest. I believe that healthcare should be left to the free market. It drives me crazy that the Republicans in Washington want to repeal Obamacare and replace it with something else. No. You repeal it but you don’t replace it with anything. This is not the role of the federal government.

Yes, make it portable to buy coverage in another state, create a fair playing field for insurance companies and let them deal with it. They will come up with the best solutions at the best price.

This is where I stand on Obamacare and pretty much everything else.

Education

Q: Wyoming is one of a few states, which devotes a great deal of its general fund budget toward education, including revenue to pay for 100 percent of school construction. Does this investment create a level playing field? Does funding insure everyone receives a good education?

A: I just went to a legislative forum and the representative from Campbell County said Wyoming spending is either first or second in the nation at $18,000 per student. Idaho $7,000, Utah $7,000 and Idaho and Utah both have higher graduation rates than Wyoming.

The point is, money doesn’t fix the problems. We are spending way too much for what we’re getting back.

We get a good chunk of change from the federal government as federal education money in exchange for implementing Common Core principals.

I know you’re getting tired of hearing this, but if we had our land and the trillion of dollars of nature resources that lay in the west we’d have all the money we need to do whatever we want.

Do I think that putting more money into education is the solution? No. We are one of the highest in the nation with other states putting in half what we do and getting better results.

We turn to government every time we have a problem, and that may be the problem. I think this is really the case. The more we try to make it fair the less fair it is. We need to get our children in a position where they can actually learn.