Vanessa Valentine Creel and Ryan Creel are seen in this handout photo from Sept. 25 getting married at the Longmont Home Depot parking lot where Team Rubicon is stationed. (Courtesy of Team Rubicon) ( Courtesy of Team Rubicon )

LONGMONT -- Team Rubicon volunteers and veterans Vanessa Valentine Creel and Ryan Creel traded in their mud-covered work clothes for cake crumbs and splattered champagne during their wedding last month.

The pair have been working with Team Rubicon, a disaster relief group made up mostly of veteran volunteers helping with cleanup efforts in Longmont and Lyons, for about three weeks and were so inspired by the community coming together, they decided to get married.

"It sort of started out as a joke with one of the other volunteers who just happened to be an ordained minister," Creel, 32, said. "After a couple of beers, we decided 'let's do it' and the whole community came together to help us make it happen in less than 24 hours."

On Sept. 25, the couple, who were already engaged, were married at the Team Rubicon relief center in the Home Depot parking lot in Longmont with hundreds of volunteers and community members present and family watching online.

"Obviously, we would have loved to have our families here but they got to see it all online," Valentine Creel, 36, said. "My grandmother was able to watch it online and she probably wouldn't have been able to come out for it anyway, so it worked out great."

Valentine Creel, an Air Force veteran, and Creel, an Army veteran, said fellow vets have become their family since they retired from the military. The couple met volunteering and they run a nonprofit that helps wounded veterans from their home in Woodland Park.

Advertisement

Guests sat on rows of upside-down orange buckets.

The bride wore a clean pair of jeans, a new white shirt and combat boots. The groom didn't have time to change so he added a brand new bow tie to his mud-splattered work clothes -- fitting attire for the couple that thrives on helping others.

Since swords were not available for a traditional honor guard, volunteers used shovels to create a tunnel honoring the veteran couple as they walked down the aisle for the first time as husband and wife.

Community members donated a cake and bouquet. Home Depot provided the bucket seats and plants for decoration. A fellow volunteer performed the ceremony, which cost the couple next to nothing.

"It actually turned out really pretty," Valentine Creel said. "I would have liked to have worn a dress, but I think it ended up being fitting and I'll have other chances to dress up."

Volunteers also pooled their money to reserve a local hotel room for the newlyweds the night of the wedding, which was a bit more luxurious than the office space where 30 or more volunteers are bunking on air mattresses on the floor during cleanup.

Valentine Creel said she they are looking forward to a honeymoon once Team Rubicon is done helping with flood relief.

Whitney Bryen can be reached at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.