When Florida’s Department of Children and Families hired Karlos Barnes to handle child abuse investigations in 2013, the agency thought it was getting an experienced investigator who had left his job at the Division of Alcoholic Beverage and Tobacco after a successful run.

What the child welfare agency didn’t know: it hired an investigator to help children in southeast Florida who was forced to resign his old job under a cloud of accusations, including bribery, according to a review of hundreds of pages of state records by the Tribune-Scripps Capital Bureau. The agency overseeing alcohol and tobacco investigations wanted to keep its inquiry into the allegations quiet, state records show, and apparently didn’t follow procedures.

Last week, after a series of questions about the hiring from the Tribune-Scripps Capital Bureau, DCF dismissed Barnes as an investigator for the agency, noting it was not aware of the allegations made against him while he worked for the alcohol and tobacco division. The agency, which has a policy requiring review of public personnel files before hiring, finally reviewed the file after being contacted earlier this month by the Tribune-Scripps Capital Bureau.

“DCF decided not to retain Karlos Barnes ... past his probationary period,” agency spokeswoman Alexis Lambert said Thursday. “This decision was made based on information obtained from (the agency that previously employed Barnes), which indicates he may not be suitable for a position of such special trust and responsibility.”

Barnes’ year-long probationary period was set to conclude this week.

Barnes, in an interview, said the allegations made against him when he worked for the alcohol and tobacco division were “completely untrue.” No charges were filed in that investigation, which was halted without explanation in 2010.

He said he’s not mad about losing his job as a child abuse investigator and that he and respects DCF employees.

“I guess it was a perception thing,” he said. “They just wanted to cut their losses to avoid a PR nightmare.”

The story behind Barnes’ troubles at the alcohol and tobacco division, and how he lost his job at the child welfare agency, reveals failures at both agencies, including:

♦ Bad publicity for a state agency under intense media scrutiny in 2010 was more of a concern than the proper handling of allegations that a top investigator was bought off by a strip club owner.

♦ Improper handling of a state inquiry leaves unclear whether an alcohol and tobacco investigator was compromised or was unfairly targeted by others, including those he investigated.

♦ The state agency charged with protecting children hired an investigator without performing a complete background check on the applicant, despite a policy requiring public personnel records to be reviewed.

The state agency that oversees alcohol and tobacco oversight, the Department of Business and Professional Regulation, responded to allegations that Barnes accepted bribes from a strip club owner and assaulted a woman by launching an internal review. But it did not inform the agency’s inspector general, as required.

DBPR was trying to keep the year-long investigation “quiet,” according to a hand-written note scribbled on an email by Stan Branham, the department’s former inspector general. After being kept out of the loop, Branham said he believed the department’s top brass wanted to circumvent him to avoid publicizing the investigation, which was led by Lt. Jeff Yonce.

“I was later advised by Yonce that he was conducting a criminal case on Barnes that the Secretary knew about, but they did not tell the OIG because they wanted to keep it quiet,” read the undated note. “Barnes was terminated. Case closed.”

Charlie Liem, who was DBPR secretary in 2010, said he vaguely remembered the case, but recalled no specifics. He did not return follow up calls Friday asking specifically about the department’s handling of the investigation.

Yonce, who led the investigation, said he updated Liem “two or three” times throughout the process, and was “floored” when told by Tribune-Scripps of the note showing the department’s inspector general was not notified.

“I could not have imagined the secretary would keep him out of the loop like that,” he said.

In an email, agency spokeswoman Beth Frady said that under normal department protocol, the inspector general’s office is “responsible for complaints of criminal violation(s) by an employee in the scope of employment.” Frady declined to discuss specifics of Barnes’ case, and it’s not clear why the inspector general wasn’t notified of the complaints made against Barnes.

Sometime between November 2010 and January 2011, the department ended its investigation into Barnes, but exactly when, or even why the department dropped the investigation, is unclear. The department has no formal record showing the case is closed, and no formal explanation for why it was called off. When asked for that information, the department provided Branham’s hand-written note.

Barnes was forced to resign in October 2010 after using a state database that includes law enforcement information to lookup information about others for non-state purposes. His resignation came as law enforcement and legal staff were subpoenaing his personal records and executing search warrants as they pursued allegations that Barnes used his state job to benefit a South Florida strip club owner. The investigation, which was described in 2010 media reports, also included allegations that he assaulted a private investigator hired to follow him.

“I never like to leave anything hanging,” Yonce told the Tribune-Scripps. “But I didn’t make the decision at my level. The decision was made for me.”

He said when the decision was made to end the investigation, he was pushing to empanel a statewide grand jury to seek testimony from those involved.

❖ ❖ ❖

It was December 2008, and Barnes was seated in the Cheetah Club, a Hallandale Beach strip club.

“Want to go in the back?” a stripper asked.

“What goes on in the back?” he shot back.

“Anything you want,” she quickly replied.

That was Barnes’ account of the encounter, detailed in a 61-page emergency order suspending the liquor license of the Cheetah Club, a strip club he and other ABT agents had been investigating for nearly two years. That investigation resulted in the suspension of the club’s liquor license and its closure for roughly two years.

With the investigation complete, the Broward County State Attorney’s office was preparing a case against the club, but the file documenting the drug and prostitution investigation went missing.

The investigative file was found in Barnes’ trunk after his forced resignation, according to a search warrant prepared by Yonce. The missing file led to a series of events that prompted a larger investigation into bribery, sexual battery and public corruption.

Barnes, who said the file found in his trunk was a copy of the original that later went missing, blamed the missing file on Mike Fisten and Pat Roberts, two former ABT agents who also worked on the Cheetah Club investigation. According to a search warrant Yonce prepared, Barnes said the file was taken by the two former investigators, who took jobs with the law firm Rothstein Rosenfeldt Adler, which represented the Cheetah Club.

In June 2010, the firm’s founder, Scott Rothstein, was sentenced to 50 years in federal prison for running the largest Ponzi scheme in Florida history, which was unrelated to the ABT investigation. His law firm has since gone belly-up.

Barnes says their ties to Rothstein are proof enough that Roberts and Fisten were never credible.

“They were with one of the biggest crooks in Florida, that’s what Rothstein is,” said Barnes, who said Fisten and Roberts made untrue accusations against him in an effort to ruin his reputation.

In interviews, both former ABT agents defended their decision to join the firm. Roberts said his hiring had nothing to do with helping the Cheetah Club.

❖ ❖ ❖

A flirtatious “hi” from an attractive woman at a bar in 2009 is how it started.

A few minutes after that brief encounter, Barnes approached Lori Patrick to ask if he could join her. They were at Weston’s Club Fresh, an establishment owned by Jamie McDonnell, a well-known South Florida club owner.

Patrick was a private investigator hired by Rothstein to dig up dirt that he hoped would prove Barnes lied about Roberts and Fisten taking the file.

She invited him to sit at her table. McDonnell soon followed. She noticed a watch on McDonnell’s wrist that she said was “beautiful.”

“Barnes remarked that he had one like it that McDonnell had given him,” according to her account of the night in state records. “She said that McDonnell cut his eyes at Barnes and gave him a look that said, ‘Shut up.’”

The exchange came as Barnes was still working as an alcohol and tobacco agent. He led the investigation into the Cheetah Club, which was one of McDonnell’s competitors.

At the time, state investigators were still looking for the missing case file. As part of that review, it reached out to Roberts and Fisten, who were employed by Rothstein. It’s at that point the two told state investigators that Barnes may have been receiving bribes from McDonnell while investigating the Cheetah Club.

Yonce, the alcohol and tobacco lieutenant, used those claims as a basis for starting his own official investigation. Because their knowledge was “second hand,” he never took sworn statements from Fisten and Roberts, but did take sworn statements from Patrick.

In May 2010, Yonce began reviewing FDLE records, and one month later reached out to the attorney general’s statewide prosecutors office for help in the Barnes investigation. The bribery allegation against Barnes hinged on the idea that he was taking gifts from McDonnell to use his state position to pressure the Cheetah Club to sell.

“Barnes is suspected of working for the owner of an upscale club in S. Fla to coerce another club (Club Cheetah) into selling to him by initiating an investigation into prostitution and narcotics at the Cheetah Club,” according to a summary filed with the statewide prosecutors office.

Even after Barnes was forced to resign in October 2010, Yonce and other state investigators pursued claims that he took bribes from the strip club owner. They got a search warrant for his Weston apartment, hoping to find the watch that Patrick said Barnes bragged about receiving as a gift from McDonnell.

They never found the watch. And eventually, the investigation was shut down, a decision that Yonce said he opposed.

“I would have liked to have gone on with the investigation,” he said. “I wanted to talk to the statewide prosecutor’s office about a statewide grand jury, but it ended before we could do that.”

The case was closed by the statewide prosecutor’s office on Jan. 27, 2011.

Despite ample public records outlining the allegations in Barnes’ file, the state’s child welfare agency never asked to review it before deciding to hire him in its southeast regional office, which covers a six county area that includes Palm Beach and Broward Counties. Barnes was hired about three years after Yonce’s investigation was shut down to serve as a child protective investigator. He was assigned to “work protecting children and working with families to conduct investigations of alleged abused, abandoned, neglected or exploited children.,” according to the child welfare agency’s job description.

On the day he lost that job last week, Barnes said he does not hold any bad feelings towards anyone, including Roberts or Fisten, his two former colleagues whom he said worked to ruin him.

“I don’t have anything to say, I pray for all of them. Karma is real,” he said. “They know what they did. I don’t believe in dirtying someone’s name.”