MELVILLE, N.Y. & MINNEAPOLIS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--May 12, 2016-–Comtech Telecommunications Corp. (NASDAQ:CMTL) announced today that it will be attending the ATA 2016 Annual Conference and that it has released a new version of its VirtuMedix® virtual care delivery platform, a telemedicine application. VirtuMedix enables healthcare practitioners to offer efficient, secure virtual patient care anytime, anywhere and on any device. This upgrade provides an enhanced user interface and experience (UI/UX) for patients who can now register and validate their price group ahead of the consultation. The Doctor interface has also been enhanced to indicate if the doctor has logged into the system from a mobile device. Furthermore, the Administrator interface now allows the Administrator to see and complete the patient and doctor profiles adhering to the requirements under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).

With an increase in demand from new patients as a result of the Affordable Care Act, providers and caregivers need a viable, cost-effective alternative to traditional care models. The VirtuMedix virtual care platform is an efficient and seamless way to provide care to new and existing patients. VirtuMedix was designed by clinicians with a focus on simple user interfaces and best-in-class platform security.

“We are excited about this upgrade to VirtuMedix which will enable our physician groups to provide telehealth consultations directly to consumers as well as employer groups with specifically contracted price options. Additionally, it allows patients to take advantage of incentives such as “consultation coupons,” said Dr. Stanton Sloane, President and Chief Executive Officer of Comtech Telecommunications Corp.

Dr. Bobby Park, MD, a Clinical Advisory Group Member for VirtuMedix, also stated, “Employer outreach is crucial and has become a key driver of successful telehealth offerings. Towers Watson projects that 71 percent of employers will offer online urgent care services by 2017. Physicians need to partner with local companies and build a clientele base. This will in turn increase the flow of patients, bolster revenue, and extend their reach to offer services statewide.”

VirtuMedix will be exhibiting at Booth 1715 at the ATA 2016 Annual Conference and Trade Show from May 14-17, 2016 in Minneapolis, Minn. To schedule an appointment for a demonstration, please visit www.virtumedix.com.

About The VirtuMedix® Product

VirtuMedix® provides caregivers and practitioners a highly secure and reliable telemedicine platform that delivers virtual health services anytime, anywhere, and from any device. Launched in 2014, VirtuMedix leverages Comtech’s advanced technologies, including over a decade of cyber security, wireless, and mobile application innovation, into a telehealth solution that integrates easily into healthcare networks, databases, and reimbursement models. In addition to providing expanded patient outreach, VirtuMedix reduces clinical and user healthcare costs while improving patient care. For more information on VirtuMedix, please visit www.virtumedix.com and on Twitter @VirtuMedix.

About Comtech Telecommunications Corp.

Comtech Telecommunications Corp. designs, develops, produces and markets innovative products, systems and services for advanced communications solutions. Comtech sells products to a diverse customer base in the global commercial and government communications markets. Comtech believes it is a leader in most of the market segments that it serves.

Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements

Certain information in this press release contains statements that are forward-looking in nature and involve certain significant risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from such forward-looking information. The Company's Securities and Exchange Commission filings identify many such risks and uncertainties. Any forward-looking information in this press release is qualified in its entirety by the risks and uncertainties described in such Securities and Exchange Commission filings.

PCMTL