Choice is simple, but very important.

Senator Jeff Sessions has penned an editorial endorsement of Donald Trump that really lays the issues bare for voters. The choice between the two presumptive presidential candidates has never been more clear.

LOS ANGELES, CA (California Network) - Senator Jeff Sessions (R-AL) has written an endorsement of Donald Trump, published in the USA Today. The endorsement is powerful and persuasive and lays plain the differences between Trump and Clinton.



We have copied his letter below and hope everyone will read it to gain some clarity on the choice we will face in November.



Take the Bible Quiz now!

Sen. Sessions: Election offers a simple choice



For the first time in a long time, this November will give Americans a clear choice on perhaps the most important issue facing our country and our civilization: whether we remain a nation-state that serves its own people, or whether we slide irrevocably toward a soulless globalism that treats humans as interchangeable widgets in the world market.



In Donald Trump, we have a forceful advocate for America. Trump has said that our trade, immigration and foreign policies must be changed to protect the interests of American workers and our nation.

In Hillary Clinton, we have a committed globalist. Clinton was an ardent supporter of the Trans-Pacific Partnership - which surrenders American sovereignty to an international union of 12 countries - and has clearly left the door wide open to enacting the pact if elected.



There is only one sure way to defeat the TPP, and that is to defeat Hillary Clinton.



Meanwhile, Clinton's immigration platform is the most radical in our history. Freezing deportations. Ending detentions. Halting enforcement. She'd expand President Obama's illegal amnesty decree, effectively creating open borders.



Clinton's extremist proposal economically targets our poor African-American and Hispanic communities whose wages and job prospects are being steadily eroded by the huge influx of new foreign workers.



Yet some Republicans persist in saying that they don't know whether Mr. Trump is a "real conservative." This charge misleads in two ways. First: Mr. Trump's cautious approach to mass migration, transnational trade commissions and nation-building are, by definition, conservative.



Second, the divide between Trump and Clinton on the role of government could not be more stark. Consider just a few of the things President Trump would do after taking the oath: repeal Obamacare; nominate constitutionalist justices; replace Obama's radical Cabinet appointments; reduce taxes and regulations; produce more American energy; rein in the out-of-control EPA; and cancel Obama's illegal amnesties.



The choice is a simple one: Do we want a country that serves our people, or not?



Find Daily Reading videos here-SUBSCRIBE

---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.