Curtis “50 Cent” Jackson performs on ABC’s “Good Morning America” in Central Park Associated Press

Intel CEO Brian Krzanich wants to play a major role in wearable devices. But the chip giant can use some help on the style front, so it is turning to a company with celebrity connections.

That would be SMS Audio, the company launched by rapper 50 Cent that has basketball star Carmelo Anthony as an investor. It is announcing plans to launch a new line of fitness-oriented earbuds based on a concept that Krzanich demonstrated in January in a keynote speech at the Consumer Electronics Show.

The earbuds are designed to work with a smartphone app to measure the wearer’s heart rate, using an optical sensor. The biometric data is sent over the same wire that sends music to the listener’s ears, which simultaneously helps charge the device, the companies say.

Intel and SMS Audio are collaborating to develop earbuds that can measure a user’s heart rate. Intel

Not that there is any shortage of biometric monitoring gadgets on the market, including smartwatches and other wrist-worn fitness bands. But one of Krzanich’s key messages is that people often don’t want an extra device–they want more functions in devices they have already.

“A lot of people who exercise are wearing earbuds anyhow,” said Mike Bell, who is point person for the wearables push as vice president in charge of Intel’s new devices group.

“The ear provides a great platform for doing this kind of measurement,” he added. “It’s not moving around a lot.”

There’s no Intel chips inside, Bell said. But the company helped design some of the key circuitry and software.

SMS seems to draw on the fame of its backers in ways reminiscent of Beats Audio, the company led by Dr. Dre and Jimmy Iovine that was recently purchased by Apple.

SMS President Brian Nohe said the product line formally called SMS Audio BioSport In-Ear Headphones powered by Intel will be available in the fourth quarter. The Florida-based company is not disclosing pricing yet.

“The price point will be acceptable by consumers,” Nohe said. “It’s not a crazy price point.”

SMS earbuds now sell for $79 to $399.

Related: WSJ’s Lee Hawkins talks with 50 Cent about SMS Audio.