Health spending growth still slow

OUT TODAY: ALTARUM's HEALTH INDICATORS — The latest batch of data from Altarum Institute finds that national health spending growth in January 2016 was 4.9 percent, the second straight month that health spending grew at less than five percent.

Why that matters: It's a signal that after health spending ticked up in 2014 and into 2015, sparking concern that the sector's historically low growth had come to an end, perhaps the spending slowdown isn't over quite yet. See Altarum's indicators here: http://bit.ly/1Ujrn4G

Story Continued Below

One interesting nugget: Health care prices in January 2016 were 1.6 percent higher year-over-year, which is the highest rate since December 2014.

Altarum says it's premature to conclude that the era of low price growth is over, but notes that the uptick could continue: The distorting effect of the ACA's Medicaid "pay bump" — that temporary boost for primary care docs — has run its course, and there's price inflation across the economy. At the same time, prescription drug price growth is sloping downward, partly because of the scrutiny on that industry.

How health care powers the economy, redux

Since the recession began in December 2007

— Health spending has increased 24.0 percent

— GDP (excluding health spending) has increased just 6.5 percent.

THANK GOODNESS IT'S FRIDAY PULSE where we were amused to learn that at Republican debates, Ted Cruz is more likely to promise to "repeal every word of Obamacare" than say "if I am elected president." Tell PULSE: What would your first priority be, if elected president? Answers and tips to ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

WEDDING BELLS — Send good wishes to ace Pro reporter Sarah Karlin, who takes a break from covering the pharma beat to celebrate her marriage to Max Smith this weekend. When you've got love, who needs other drugs?

WAR OF WORDS OVER TRUMPCARE — PolitiFact has a new post that concludes a Ted Cruz attack ad oversteps by saying that Donald Trump wants a government-run health care system. "That ad relied on very selective editing of an interview Trump had on CBS News," PolitiFact concludes. "We rate this claim False."

… Washington Examiner's Philip Klein disagrees. He argues that PolitiFact misread the CBS interview. "It's clear from the context that Trump was actually referring to Republicans as only wanting to cover the bottom 25 percent," Klein writes, "a view that he disagreed with in favor of covering everybody."

— Where Trump stands on health care has shifted over time, and POLITICO's Paul Demko traces his evolution from proposing dramatic changes to now spouting GOP boilerplate. ICYMI: Paul's story.

— We watched; no health news at last night's debate. Trump did reference his goal to require drug companies to "bid" for Medicare — an idea that, interestingly, Trump left out of his new health plan last week.

MACRA GETS A CHECK-UP — The House Energy & Commerce Commitee's Health subcommittee scheduled a March 17 hearing to review the payment reforms in the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act, which passed in April 2015. Expect CMS to be grilled on how it's implementing the law's value-based payment changes, and we'll be keeping our ears pricked for any early grumbling from docs worried about how they'll fare under the new rule.

CALIFORNIA SMOKES OUT YOUTH SMOKING — Major moment in public health: California's set to raise the smoking age to 21. The state Senate cleared the bill on Thursday, after a companion measure passed the California Assembly last week. The legislation, which also regulates e-cigarettes and opens the door to new tobacco taxes, is now waiting on a signature from Gov. Jerry Brown.

MASSACHUSETTS HOSPITALS SPLIT OVER BALLOT MEASURE — The SEIU is pushing a ballot measure to level out payments to the state's hospitals, based on the prices they charge. It would be a dramatic change in how hospitals get paid, and is only the latest effort to scrutinize Massachusetts providers' market power. http://bit.ly/1pAiZSS

— If the measure goes through, Partners HealthCare would lose $440 million in payments. But Steward HealthCare — the lone hospital system to support the proposal — would gain $21 million.

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

THE CHAMBER: DON'T LET UP ON CADDY TAX REPEAL — Employers continue to make significant changes to employee health benefits in an effort to avoid the ACA's Cadillac tax, Sean Hackbarth writes at the Chamber of Commerce's blog. He cites a Wells Fargo study that more than half of surveyed firms think they'll exceed the Cadillac tax, which is one reason why they're hiking premiums and increasing employee cost-sharing now.

"While the tax has been postponed two years, "simply delaying it won’t protect the employer-sponsored health plans millions of Americans rely on," Hackbarth concludes. "Only repeal can do that." http://uscham.com/1Xgqb1b

CAPPING OUT-OF-POCKET SPENDING ON DRUGS: BAD IDEA? — That's what the Manhattan Institute's Yevgeniy Feyman argues in a new report. He notes that several presidential candidates have proposed out-of-pocket caps, but concludes that they wouldn't help most Americans and could even lead to a hike in insurance premiums.

Feyman's proposal: "policymakers should take a multipronged approach that harnesses market forces, treats drug spending as investment, and offers tax credits to the most burdened." http://bit.ly/1TytbaV

CMS SHIFTS ON MEDICARE ADVANTAGE, AND STOCKS CLIMB — Cigna saw its market capitalization go up by more than $500 million on Thursday after CMS pardoned the company's Medicare Advantage plans from major cuts to its bonus payments, Bob Herman reports. http://bit.ly/1UXhn1s

THE STORY OF THE WEEK … is Ezra Klein's podcast with World Bank president Jim Yong Kim on diversity, poverty and so much more. Highly recommended. http://apple.co/1pAG0Fd

AROUND TOWN — The Bipartisan Policy Center at 11 a.m. hosts a discussion on how the U.S. can work with international partners to combat the Zika virus. In attendance: Harvard's Ashish Jha, the BPC's Anand Parekh, Karl Hofmann of Population Services International and Liz Schrayer of the U.S. Global Leadership Coalition.

UP IN BALTIMORE — HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell will be touring a local health clinic and making an 11:30 a.m. announcement about new investments in care for the opioid epidemic.

COMING UP NEXT WEEK — It'll be a busy week on the Hill, beginning on Monday, when the House Energy and Commerce Committee looks into concussions. And HHS Secretary Burwell will be back on Tuesday for her sixth — and probably final — time to talk her agency's budget in front of the House Education and Workforce Committee.

FROM RANDOM PHARMA GUY TO GUY FAWKES? — Martin Shkreli became the "face" of protesters, who donned masks of the notorious pharma investor at a demonstration in London. The group was protesting a United Nations meeting over lack of access to HIV medication, Mashable reports.

"Martin Shkreli has become a supervillain that everybody loves to hate," said Tabitha Ha, coordinator of Youth Stop AIDS. "But he’s a product of a broken system."

189.75 DOLLARS — That's how much it cost to give birth in 1956, including a four-day hospital stay, according to a photo posted by the retired surgeon who goes by the pseudonym Skeptical Scalpel. http://bit.ly/1Xh1tha

4,215.00 DOLLARS — That's how much it cost in 2011 on average, according to a recent Health Affairs study.

WHAT WE'RE READING

NARAL CEO Ilyse Hogue and Democratic Rep. Bonnie Watson Coleman co-authored an op-ed attacking the House Select Investigative Panel on Infant Lives — a panel that Watson Coleman serves on. http://bit.ly/1TQam3z

The price of a cancer drug called Gleevec has inexplicably crept upward every year — from $26,400 to more than $120,000 now — and Carolyn Johnson explores why. http://wapo.st/24Uc8E1

Both California and New Hampshire are making inroads into helping consumers price-shop for health care, Jordan Rau writes. http://bit.ly/1pjJD2z

At Academy Health's blog, Austin Frakt explores what happens if Medicare cuts payments — and why it might not be as dire as hospitals make it out to be. http://bit.ly/1pjJtIA

Tennis star Maria Sharapova failed a drug test because she was using meldonium. Bad news for Sharapova. But good news for the company that makes the drug! Or so says a spokesperson. http://bloom.bg/1YEsNqW

NOW AVAILABLE: HARD TO ACCESS CAMPAIGN DETAILS - POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premium solution for policy professionals offers Campaign Pro. Get breaking news and analysis about this season’s most competitive races. You’ll also have access to the Campaign Pro Race Dashboard, providing you with important campaign details in one, convenient place. Beyond 2016, you’ll continue to receive a behind-the-curtain look at potential races, including insight about candidate/consulting firm partnerships and about fundraising efforts. Request your Campaign Pro demo today.

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **