Macklemore and Obama have joined forces this week to address the nation's growing problem with opioid addiction in a conversation about addiction.

Thursday's sit-down marked the first time a non-administration official has ever joined Obama for his weekly address from the White House.

The Grammy-winning rapper visited the president for a talk that will be part of his one-hour MTV documentary about opioid abuse that will air later this summer.

Obama introduced Macklemore to those in his audience who 'don't share the same love for hip-hop that I do' and explained the rapper was also an advocate 'giving voice to a disease that we too often just whisper about - the disease of addiction'.

Scroll down for video

Macklemore and Obama have joined forces this week to address the nation's growing problem with opioid addiction in a conversation about addiction

Thursday's sit-down marked the first time a non-administration official has ever joined President Obama for his weekly address from the White House

'I'm here with President Obama because I take this personally,' Macklemore said in the beginning of his address. 'I abused prescription drugs and I've battled addiction.'

'If I hadn't gotten the help I needed when I needed it, I definitely would not be here today.'

'And I want to help others facing the same challenges that I did.'

Obama explained that drug overdoses now take more lives in America every year than traffic accidents, with opioid overdoses tripping since 2000.

'A lot of time they're from legal drugs prescribed by a doctor,' he explained. 'Addiction doesn't always start in some dark alley. It often starts in a medicine cabinet.'

The president cited a recent study's finding that 44 percent of Americans know someone who had been addicted to prescription painkillers.

'I didn't just know someone, I lost someone,' Macklemore said. 'My friend Kevin overdosed on painkillers when he was just 21 years old.'

This isn't the first time Macklemore has publicly discussed his friend Kevin. The rapper wrote an entire song dedicated to him for his most recent album This Unruly Mess I've Made.

'21 years old, an angel was lost here / Wings clipped by the group of 80 milligram sniffs of ocycontin', one of the lyric reads.

The devastating song talks about Macklemore's experience losing Kevin and their descent into addiction as young men.

'Now he's wrapped in plastic,' another lyric begins. 'First dealer was his mom's medicine cabinet.'

Obama explained that drug overdoses now take more lives in America every year than traffic accidents, with opioid overdoses tripping since 2000

'Addiction is just like any other disease, it doesn't discriminate,' Macklemore said in his address with Obama.

'It doesn't care what color you are, whether you're a guy or a girl, rich or poor, whether you live in an inner city, suburb, or rural American.'

'This doesn’t just happen to other people’s kids or in some other neighbourhood, it can happen to any of us.’

Obama's budget calls for a new $1.1billion investment to expand treatment.

'Just talking about this crisis isn't enough,' the president said.

'My administration is working with communities to reduce overdose deaths, including with medication. We’re working with law enforcement to help people get into treatment instead of jail.'

'And under Obamacare health plans in the marketplace have to include coverage for treatment.’

Obama said he has also asked Congress to expand access to recovery services and 'give first-responders the tools they need to treat overdoses before it's too late'.

'I'm here with President Obama because I take this personally,' Macklemore said in the beginning of his address. 'I abused prescription drugs and I've battled addiction'

'The doctors need more training about the power of medication they prescribe, and the risks those pain medications carry,' he said.

Macklemore credited recovery and the 12 step program with saving his life, and both he and Obama hope to help to make the conversation about addiction a public one.

'Shame and the stigma associated with the disease keeps too many people from seeking the help that they actually need,' Macklemore said.

'Addiction isn’t a personal choice or a personal failing, and sometimes it takes more than a strong will to get better. It takes a strong community and accessible resources.'

'The good news is there’s hope,' Obama added. 'When we talk about opioid abuse as the problem it is, more people will seek the help that they need.'

'More people will find the strength to recover, just like Macklemore and million of Americans have. We’ll see fewer preventable deaths and fewer broken families.'

'We all have a role to play, even if we haven’t fought this battle in our own lives,' Obama concluded.