Wednesday’s City Council meeting began with a steady flow of testimony and calls to action from Roseville’s Friends of Linda Creek, a group of concerned citizens who live near and along one of the city’s important natural waterways. Meanwhile, city officials insist the severity of the drought is leaving them with limited options.

The federal government has classified Linda Creek as a “perennial creek” — meaning one that should flow steadily year round — though California’s three-year drought has left it with several dry spots.

“The surviving wildlife is stranded in ponds that are going stagnant with no oxygen or fresh water,” said Donna Wilson, spokesperson for Friends of Linda Creek. Wilson owns a home along the water, or what’s left of it. The Friends of the Creek group has corresponded with the city since June, in most cases communicating directly with Environmental Utilities Director Richard Plecker.

Plecker spoke before Roseville City Council Wednesday evening, attempting to clarify the city’s obligation to the creek.

“It’s important to say that the city, for the better part of 30 years, has released water into Linda Creek as part of an agreement with Placer County,” Plecker explained.

The City of Roseville traditionally releases clean, un-recycled water into Linda Creek from May until winter. Due to water conservation efforts, the city opted not to turn on its water flow to the creek this past May.

“In our agreement (terms) provide for Stage 3 drought conditions, that the city ceases releasing water into the creek, so we did that,” Plecker said. “Water was flowing in the creek for some time after that, up until the Fourth of July or so.”

Roseville did begin its seasonal contribution to Linda Creek on July 14, following weeks of correspondence with Friends of Linda Creek, in hopes of restoring “about half the flow (it) once provided, even considering the drought conditions,” according to Plecker. City officials believe they were able to surpass that 50 percent objective and provide about 70 percent of Linda Creek’s normal water supply.

However, the depleted state of the creek has created circumstances under which it will take several weeks for the flow to be consistent in all parts of the waterway. This is partly due to the fact that some water has been diverted by agencies along the creek holding specific water rights.

“We found out that Tree Lake had retained (the water) to do cleaning of their ponds,” Wilson pointed out. “They had weeds and debris from lack of water. It took two weeks for that process…July 31, Tree Lake started releasing water over their dams. We still don’t have water, it’s moving slowly.”

Plecker said it’s the duty of California officials to act on situations such as the Tree Lake development.

“They should have received a cease and desist order from the state board to stop diverting water, if they were doing so,” Plecker commented. “That’s not something the city really gets involved in.”

Plecker also mentioned that in Roseville’s most recent findings, several natural springs that typically contribute to local creeks have also suffered during the drought.

“At this stage, given where we’re at with our water supply, Folsom Lake and all the various complaints that we’re faced with, I just really can’t recommend that we increase the flow rate,” Plecker told Roseville City Council members. “We’re very concerned about what’s gonna’ happen at Folsom later this year. A good part of our strategy moving forward relies on hope for some rain in October. I’m not sure we have any more water to give at this particular point.”