Team USA probably needs to beat or tie Germany on Thursday in order to advance into the knockout stage of the World Cup, and it could be a daunting task.

Germany is a soccer superpower, winning the World Cup three times. Only Brazil (five) and Italy (four) have won more. Germany reached the championship game seven times, a record it shares with Brazil.

One of those finals inspired one of the most memorable lines in sports journalism. Before host England faced West Germany in the 1966 World Cup final, when resentment still existed between the two countries because of two world wars, English journalist Vincent Mulchrone wrote in the Daily Mail: “West Germany may beat us at our national sport today, but that would be only fair. We beat them twice at theirs.”

For the record, England won that day, but that is its only World Cup title.

Every team wants to win the World Cup, of course, but Germany might be more restless about it than most. It hasn’t won since 1990 when Jürgen Klinsmann, now Team USA’s coach, was a key player. Germany lost the final in 2002, its third runner-up finish in the past eight World Cups. It lost in the semifinals in 2006 when Klinsmann was its coach.

Seven of Germany’s 23 players play for Bayern Munich, the New York Yankees of German soccer with 23 Bundesliga titles (no other team has more than five). One of them is Thomas Mueller, who won the Golden Boot at the 2010 World Cup for having the most goals and assists when he was only 20 years old. Mueller netted a hat trick in the opening game of this World Cup against Portugal.

Miroslav Klose, 36, came off the bench in the 69th minute last Saturday with Germany trailing Ghana 2-1 and scored two minutes later, securing a tie and tying him with Brazil’s Ronaldo atop the all-time World Cup scoring list with 15 goals.

National soccer teams tend to reflect national character, so it’s no surprise that German soccer is known for industry, technical precision and systematic efficiency.

“The Germans, they’re very hard-working people, not only soccer, but the culture, making cars, industrial things,” said Rapids forward Edson Buddle, who played for the German second-division club FC Ingolstadt 04 in 2011-2012. “That (spreads) into sports. They care about skill, but they’d rather see hard-working guys fighting for each other, trying to win.”

Germany has a development system that produces abundant talent, and Klinsmann has taken advantage of it. Since taking over as U.S. coach in 2011, he has recruited European players with dual U.S. citizenship, and five of the 23 players on the U.S. World Cup roster — John Brooks, Jermaine Jones, Fabian Johnson, Timothy Chandler and Julian Green — are sons of American servicemen and German mothers. They have accounted for two of the four U.S. goals in the tournament, including Brooks’ game-winner against Ghana in the 86th minute. Four of the five play for club teams in Germany.

Thus there are apt to be stylistic similarities in Thursday’s game, especially because a tie will advance both teams to the knockout round. Conspiracy theorists have speculated about the possibility of collusion, especially because Germany coach Joachim Loew was Klinsmann’s assistant when Klinsmann coached Germany.

Collusion isn’t necessary to produce that result, though. Both coaches might decide sitting back in a defensive posture rather than attacking — which leaves teams vulnerable to counterattacks — might be wise. A 0-0 tie might be boring but would get both teams through.

But winning the game — and thus Group G — would mean playing the second-place team from Group H in the first game of the knockout stage. Finishing second would mean facing the winner of Group H. Currently Belgium leads Group H, with Algeria in second place.

Buddle, who played in the 2010 World Cup for the U.S., predicts both teams will try to win for that reason — and for pride.

“Families are watching, people are watching and you don’t want to expose yourself,” Buddle said. “Everyone on both teams is competitive, so they’re going to want to win.”

John Meyer: 303-954-1616, jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer