Remember the huge, free health-care clinic in Seattle in late October? Well, the engine pushing it forward was Julia Colson, whose job is putting on events at Seattle Center where she works as a manager in the productions office.

I got a note praising her from one of the health-care officials involved, Dr. Tao Sheng Kwan-Gett of the University of Washington School of Public Health, where he’s director of the Northwest Center for Public Health Practice. “Guess the professional background of the person who brought together the dozens of nonprofits, businesses, and health-care organizations for the event? Not medicine, public health, social work, or corporate management — but dance,” he wrote.

Even though the Affordable Care Act has made it easier for more people to get care, there are still far too many Americans who aren’t getting the care they need. Like Kwan-Gett (who’s also a friend), I was struck that in this instance it took, not a health-care insider, but a dancer to mobilize a response.

A preliminary tally shows that more than 1,400 volunteers, including care providers and supporting staff, helped at least 3,400 people at the four-day clinic in KeyArena.

I paid Colson a visit and asked how she pulled it off. She said it was all about collaborating, and that’s true, but someone has to conduct the orchestra. She was a good fit because she’s a workaholic who loves figuring out tough problems, and she also knows how to work with people.

Her office, Seattle Center Productions, is charged with developing free and affordable events for the public. Often it’s something artistic, but not always.

Last year, center director Robert Nellams challenged the staff to use the facilities and their expertise in new ways, Colson said. And he specifically asked if they could do something health-related.

Colson was primed for that. She and her immediate boss had both seen an episode of “60 Minutes” years before about clinics put on by the nonprofit Remote Area Medical, and they’d wanted to do something like that for the center’s centennial celebration but hadn’t been able to.

So now, they contacted Remote Area Medical about helping put one on here. RAM was started to help people in poor countries, but now much of its work is focused on poor people in the U.S.

The center staff knows how to stage events, but this was something different.

They looked for individuals and organizations to partner with, including the UW public-health program. They started with dental and vision-care specialists because there tends to be lots unmet needs in those areas. Then medical doctors came on board.

Someone who works in emergency medicine helped them figure out how to set up the clinic. They found outside help with communications to be sure they would reach people who needed free care.

After three or four months of recruiting partners they arrived at a turning point. People started calling asking what they could do, and it became clear they could actually make the clinic happen.

The project became a broad-based community effort. Close to 80 organizations participated.

I asked how she manages working with so many individuals and organizations. “It’s important to listen everyone’s thoughts and ideas,” she said, and also to be attentive to their fears even when they might go unstated.

Colson said in her work she has to be and be open and adaptable. She has been both in making her way to her current job.

She earned a degree in math and education because she wanted to teach middle-school students. “I loved math because it was like a puzzle,” she said. I’m someone who likes to figure out the ins and outs of things.”

And she worked hard at ballet, even going on to graduate school to study dance.

Right out of graduate school, she joined the faculty of the University of Oklahoma teaching dance. She staged performances and learned about the administrative side of dance, working behind the scenes rather than on stage — experiences that come in handy now.

Then she met her future husband, who lived in Southern California, where she had grown up. She didn’t like the sunny, hot climate, so they looked for a place where they could both be happy.

About that time, she saw an opening with the Washington Academy of Performing Arts in Redmond. The job fit her well but eventually the money dried up, and a year later, in 2006, she landed a job at Seattle Center.

Kwan-Gett said, “The clinic simply would not have happened without Julia’s tireless energy, enthusiasm, charisma, and organizing skills.”

Her fellow city of Seattle managers think highly of her work, too. She’s receiving an award for leadership in community service from the Seattle Management Association on Thursday.

Kwan-Gett said the School of Public Health used the event to teach its students about the disparities in health care in this community. Maybe Colson has helped spark something larger than a one-time event.

Jerry Large’s column appears Monday and Thursday. Reach him at 206-464-3346 or jlarge@seattletimes.com