ASPEN — Jens Voigt has been cycling professionally for 33 years, longer than he has been married (11 years), went to school (12 years) and his oldest son, 19, has been alive.

Now, the German rider is calling it a career: He re- affirmed Sunday that the USA Pro Challenge would be his final professional race.

“I had some great moments,” said Voigt, known for his humor and witty observations. “I met some of the greatest people in the world. I am thankful for the sport of cycling and what it gave to me.”

Voigt won a stage in the Tour of California in 2013 and got a gutsy stage win in the 2012 Pro Challenge into Beaver Creek after an early breakaway. In the Tour de France, he has three stage wins.

“He always came to every single race willing to win. He was always great for the team, and the whole team will need that special push — and somebody who brews the coffee for us,” said German rider and teammate Frank Schleck, smiling.

So, why choose to end it all now? First, Voigt wanted to end on his terms, not when teams decided they no longer wanted to offer him a contract. (He will turn 43 next month.) And he wanted to do it in Colorado, a place he called “beautiful” and “good for your soul.” He even went fly-fishing with his team, Trek Factory Racing.

“I think I have a pretty good fan base in the U.S.,” Voigt said, “and it just felt right to end my career here.”

Fewer World Tour teams in Colorado. Five World Tour teams are competing in this year’s Pro Challenge, down from seven last year, and the fewest since the race started in 2011.

Race CEO Shawn Hunter attributes that to the difficult Tour de France in July. Numerous crashes, injuries and difficult stages, along with unfavorable weather, forced some of the teams’ top riders to drop out.

World Tour teams are mandated, according to UCI, the sport’s governing body, to field teams in all three World Tours — the Giro d’Italia, the Vuelta a España and the Tour de France.

And that meant many riders — the ones healthy, at least — needed to be racing in Spain for the Vuelta, which starts Saturday.

“Some teams didn’t feel they could put together a competitive roster of eight healthy riders to compete at this elevation,” Hunter said.

New start time. The start time for Stage 1 is being pushed back by 30 minutes to 2:40 p.m. to accommodate NBC’s schedule. The delay should help with TV’s ratings, an all-important measure of the event’s success. The race will broadcast from 3-5:30 p.m. on NBC Sports Network, with a recap show from 9-10 p.m. featuring highlights.