Actor Vince Vaughn is a libertarian and not shy about voicing his opinion, which is usually counter to the liberal mantra of Hollywood, on controversial issues.

Recently during an interview with British GQ magazine (ironically), Vaughn expressed support for law abiding adults to carry firearms into schools and explained the reason why Americans have the right to keep and bear arms in the first place.

"I support people having a gun in public full stop, not just in your home. We don't have the right to bear arms because of burglars; we have the right to bear arms to resist the supreme power of a corrupt and abusive government. It's not about duck hunting; it's about the ability of the individual. It's the same reason we have freedom of speech. It's well known that the greatest defense against an intruder is the sound of a gun hammer being pulled back. All these gun shootings that have gone down in America since 1950, only one or maybe two have happened in non-gun-free zones. Take mass shootings. They've only happened in places that don't allow guns. These people are sick in the head and are going to kill innocent people. They are looking to slaughter defenseless human beings. They do not want confrontation. In all of our schools it is illegal to have guns on campus, so again and again these guys go and shoot up these f***ing schools because they know there are no guns there. They are monsters killing six-year-olds," Vaughn said. "You think the politicians that run my country and your country don't have guns in the schools their kids go to? They do. And we should be allowed the same rights. Banning guns is like banning forks in an attempt to stop making people fat. Taking away guns, taking away drugs, the booze, it won't rid the world of criminality."

Amen, brother.

Naturally, the anti-gun left is freaking out over Vaughn's proposal that children should be protected in schools by adults carrying firearms.

Speaking of gun-free zones, be sure to check out Outdoor Channel's most recent documentary on this topic -- Safe Haven: Gun Free Zones in America.