An investor's guide to the US hospital Industry (Part 4 of 16)

(Continued from Part 3)

Understanding industry drivers

Analyzing the impact of various external and internal factors on hospital revenue growth will help you better understand the industry drivers.

Economic factors affecting hospital revenues

Out-of-pocket spending isn’t a major payer for the hospital industry, yet the state of the economy affects public spending policies, which indirectly influence hospital revenues. Hospitals display muted revenue growth when new laws are implemented. New provisions lead to a change in hospitals’ reimbursement policies.

Major hospital systems like HCA Holdings (HCA), Tenet HealthCare (THC), Community Health Systems (CYH), LifePoint Hospitals, Inc. (LPNT), and Universal Health Services (UHS) displayed reduced revenue growth rates in 2010. You can directly attribute this reduction to the change in external environment resulting from the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (or ACA), or “Obamacare,” on March 23, 2010.

Social factors affecting hospital margins

U.S. national spending on healthcare is the highest in the world—both in dollar terms and also as a percentage of GDP. Public healthcare spending in the U.S. is almost double Norway’s. Norway has the second-highest dollar spending on healthcare in the world. This difference is a result of a shift in the demographic mix in the U.S. as the Baby Boomer population continues to age. People are afflicted with chronic diseases such as diabetes and heart conditions, mainly due to lifestyle choices like irregular food and exercise patterns.

Pharmaceutical drug pricing mechanisms also differ in the U.S. and Europe. Prices in Europe are regulated by governments. However, in the U.S., pharmaceutical companies negotiate with payers to fix prices that turn out to be higher than regulated prices. Changing demographics, coupled with the high prices of drugs, are expected to lead to a further increase in U.S. healthcare spending.

Continue to Part 5

Browse this series on Market Realist: