The organization wants to see changes to how the ACA affects multi-employer plans. | John Shinkle/POLITICO AFL-CIO demands changes to ACA

The AFL-CIO has approved a resolution calling Obamacare “highly disruptive” for some union health plans and seeking changes to key provisions of the health law that affect these plans, known as Taft-Hartley plans.

AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka said the resolution raises the issue of whether “low- and moderate-income union members and their collectively bargained health care plans will be able to benefit from the same premium support that big insurance companies will receive and if they will have to pay fees to subsidize big insurance companies,” a statement on the AFL-CIO site reads. “There also are concerns that smaller employers will be able to get away with taking health care away from workers while paying no penalty.”

Story Continued Below

The resolution says that “contrary to the law’s intent, some workers might not be able to keep their coverage and their doctors because the federal agencies’ current implementation plans will be highly disruptive to the operation of Taft-Hartley multiemployer plans.” It says it could affect millions of workers and their families.

Some unions have demanded that the subsidies available to those buying insurance on the exchanges also be provided to those who receive insurance through multi-employer plans, even though those plans already receive the same tax breaks that other employer-sponsored plans do. These plans are particularly key in the construction, retail and transportation sectors.

Some unions also object to the law’s penalties that they say are compelling employers to limit workers’ hours to less than 30 per week, eroding the traditional 40-hour week.

The AFL-CIO was a strong supporter of the health reform effort in President Barack Obama’s first term, and the resolution also reaffirmed the unions’ commitment to the “goals” of the Affordable Care Act including reducing health care costs and expanding coverage.

The House Education and Workforce Committee sent out a statement Thursday saying, “It’s encouraging to see those who strongly endorsed the health care law finally recognize its fundamental problems.”

Authors: