We can’t let those who respond with violence win.

Clay Bennett, Chattanooga Times Free Press (Photo: Chattanooga Times Free Press)

It should go without saying that we stand up for the victims of the attack on the French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo. But we need to say it anyway.

We stand up for our fellow journalists. We stand up for free speech.

We denounce those who killed in their opposition to free speech, in the name of religious extremism.

Nous sommes Charlie. We are Charlie.

Charlie Hebdo has been a frequent target. Its office was firebombed in 2011. Its editor, who was killed Wednesday along with nine other journalists and two police officers, lived under a constant threat — and with police protection.

Some commentators have said that the newspaper crossed the line with its satire, that it wasn’t tasteful — or smart — to continue to poke as it did at Islam, or any other religion. The view isn’t quite “they asked for it” but it’s pretty close.

It’s also clear that much of what Charlie Hebdo published wouldn’t see the light of day in an American publication. It would be considered inappropriate or obscene.

But the concept of free speech must allow it. The quote “I disapprove of what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it” — attributed to Voltaire but actually written by his biographer, Evelyn Beatrice Hall — is cited so often that it has almost become a cliche, but it’s still valid.

We fight offensive ideas and words with other ideas and words, not with bullets.

The attacks aren’t limited to Charlie Hebdo. Around the world, journalists and commentators are under threat — by radical Islamic extremists and by other groups and individuals who seek to intimidate and enact a twisted sense of revenge through violence.

In the end, we stand with our colleagues who, under much more difficult circumstances than we face in America, are simply trying to do their jobs, armed with the freedom of speech and freedom of the press that are unalienable rights.

We will defend those rights.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1BP2x3b