President Obama in Michigan on Thursday. (Photo: SAUL LOEB, AFP/Getty Images)

New political times, new presidential rhetoric — but there were still signs Wednesday of the same old friction between President Obama's White House and congressional Republicans.

Obama didn't even mention the new Republican Congress during his first stump speech of the year, instead telling members of the resurgent auto industry that the American economy is back on track.

"The auto industry has proved that any comeback is possible," Obama said at a Ford plant near Detroit.

Republicans pointed out that the Obama administration has issued two veto threats during the first two days of the GOP-run Congress, one involving a proposed oil pipeline and the other involving a change to the health care law.

"It seems with every new day, we have a new veto threat from the president," said Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R- Ky. "The president is not going to set the agenda for us here in the Senate."

Obama's visit to the Ford Michigan Assembly Plant kicked off three days of national travel, partly to promote his economic policies and partly to preview his State of the Union address Jan. 20.

That prime-time speech will emphasize "building on the progress that we've already made," Obama told the Ford employees.

The president is scheduled to discuss housing policy Thursday in Phoenix, announcing an order to lower the premium the Federal Housing Administration charges on mortgage insurance by 0.5 percentage points.

Education and manufacturing policy are on the agenda Friday when Obama (and Vice President Biden) visit eastern Tennessee.

This is Obama's first extended trip since the elections Nov. 4 that brought Republicans control of the U.S. Senate and expanded the party's majority in the U.S. House.

In his last appearance in the Detroit area, three days before those elections, Obama said that whenever Republican leaders "had to take a stand this year on policies that would help the middle class, their answer was no."

The GOP did not appear in Obama's text Wednesday. The president talked about an increase in jobs, lower gas prices, declining deficits and the fact that auto companies recently completed the repayment of bailout money the government had given them.

Standing on a stage featuring shiny new Ford models, Obama praised the new Mustangs. He told auto workers that the recovery of their industry since the financial meltdown in 2008 symbolizes the comeback of the economy.

"The point is, we're moving," Obama said. "America's resurgence is real."

Republicans said voters in November endorsed their plans for lower taxes and fewer business regulations, and they criticized the administration's veto threats as a sign of bad faith.

One prospective veto involves a Republican-backed bill that would require immediate construction of the Keystone oil pipeline. The Obama administration said the legislation would pre-empt the normal approval process for the pipeline, and Obama has questioned the economic and environmental value of the plan.

McConnell, a major Keystone backer, said, "Threatening to veto a jobs and infrastructure bill within minutes of a new Congress taking the oath of office — a bill with strong bipartisan support — is anything but productive."

The other veto threat concerned a proposed change in the health care law's definition of a full-time worker, increasing it from 30 hours a week to 40 hours a week. The Obama administration said that would reduce the number of people eligible for employer-based health insurance.

Brendan Buck, a spokesman for House Ways and Means Chairman Paul Ryan, R-Wis., said employers are using the health law's 30-hour requirement to reduce workers' hours.

"There is bipartisan recognition that Obamacare will reduce take-home pay, but the president is showing once again that protecting his law is a higher priority than protecting these workers' wages," Buck said.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1IsnYat