Stephen Kimatian is a former Republican candidate for Syracuse mayor and a regular columnist for The Post-Standard.

It was just a matter of time before Donald Trump, the political apprentice of reality television, brought his outrageous style to the presidential campaign trail. His contemptible comments on Sen. John McCain's military service show how quickly his self-importance can disconnect him from reality. Yet with his poll numbers apparently defying vulgarity, it seems there is a segment of the public that views his reality show manners as open and frank compared with the guarded and measured hyperbole of the political campaign trail.

It was at the announcement of his presidential ambitions that he triggered a flashpoint on the issue of illegal immigration from Mexico. However, contained in the crudeness of his comments was a candid truth on the failure of immigration reform, which has been an advancing fire for decades, to the point where the issue is ready to combust. Trump ignited the issue that no candidate will now be able to ignore. The reason for the reaction to Trump's tirade is a direct result of the inaction and incompetence of the United States Congress on immigration reform.

If you remove the crude and insulting part of Trump's comments, what he was saying is that little is being done about the issue of illegal immigration. That's the truth. The kindling for this firestorm has been building for two decades. Trump saw this as his cue to spew a verbal flare-up that would get the attention of the media.

In 1990 there were an estimated 3.5 million people living the United States illegally. In 2000 there were 8.4 million. In 2007, the number was 12 million, which is the current estimate. Over that period of time there have been 13 congressional elections and 26 sessions of the House and Senate. That includes times when Democrats controlled Congress and when Republicans controlled Congress. If Congress had acted on immigration reform, it would have never reached this point of blow-up. It took the Brobdingnagian style of Trump to call out the Lilliputian progress of Congress. It is a stunning illustration of ineptitude.

The failure of Congress to address burning issues becomes a threat to the stability of our democracy. When Congress is unwilling to put out fires, cities and municipalities resort to crafting other ways to contain those flames. Because many of our major cities are overflowing with undocumented immigrants, because of the inequities in applying the law, because of the issues between federal and state jurisdiction, the pressure builds and the municipalities devise their own responses.

San Francisco and over 200 cities in the country have become sanctuary cities — cities that do not prosecute illegal aliens. If we are a nation of laws, we cannot allow these outlaw zones. The appalling result of sanctuary cities and not having a comprehensive immigration policy is the backdrop for the senseless killing of a 32-year-old woman on a San Francisco pier by an immigrant from Mexico who is in this country illegally.

President Barack Obama's Dream Act, using executive order to give amnesty to classes of immigrants here without permission, is another example of the failure of Congress. If Obama exceeded his authority, it was tied to Congress' inability to pass immigration reform. With respect to the Supreme Court saving the Affordable Health Care Act by rewriting the clause on coverage by health insurance exchanges, one of the factors in the decision was that the court saw chaos if they ruled otherwise. If the Republicans had a plan on the table, the court might have decided differently; instead, it took the place of Congress and rewrote the act. Yes, it's unconstitutional for the court to do that, but justices obviously felt Congress abdicated its responsibility. So they bailed out the lawmakers.

We have 12 million immigrants living here without legal permission, many here for over 20 years. Are we going to deport them all? Anyone who thinks so is not being realistic. Do we want them to continue living in the United States illegally? Not if we are nation of laws. By not addressing reform, we are saying some laws should be enforced and some not, which we have seen creates a tinder box. Unless we are prepared to accept a category of second-class citizens, there must be a path to citizenship. The real questions are who should be entitled to stay in the United States, and what does that path look like? And unequivocally, the borders need a backfire of security to show we do not tolerate illegal entry.

The volatile immigration issues, the president's amnesty action with the Dream Act, the rise of sanctuary cities and the Supreme Court decision on health care all can be traced back to an incompetent Congress. Congress's inaction lit the fuse on these issues and failure to act at this point will only lead to a blow-up. One thing is certain: Unless Trump "fires" himself from the campaign trail, we can count on more "hair on fire" episodes.