And that is even though the latest proposed school budget would no longer make them full-time employees.

The mandatory benefit is because of the federal Affordable Care Act, not because of the school board or County Commission. And the insurance should have been offered by the county last year because the nurses already work 30 hours a week, school officials said Monday.

The Board of Education voted 5-0 with two absent to submit an amended 2015-16 school budget request that deleted $394,070 from the proposed budget the board approved June 1. That still leaves the budget seeking $2,153,963 in county funding, which — adjusted for required funding to be shared with city school systems — would add about 13 cents to the countywide property tax rate.

However, the new proposal includes about $85,000 to cover the estimated cost of providing health insurance for the nurses, although no retirement or life insurance is provided to such part-time employees.

The new proposal would decrease the estimated property tax increase needed to fund the school budget from about 15 cents per $100 of assessed value, Business Manager Leslie Bonner said after a called BOE meeting Monday.

The change was approved on a motion by Randall Jones, seconded by Jerry Greene. Member Todd Broughton, Vice Chairman Jack Bales, Michael Hughes, Greene and Jones vote for it; Chairman Dan Wells and member Betty Combs were absent.

“A lot of them (nurses) stay later off the clock to get things done,” Hughes said, while Interim Director of Schools-elect Evelyn Rafalowski said that probably goes for other employees, too.

Rafalowski said she was comfortable with the recommendation and that school officials since June 1 have determined that if nurses ever do go full-time, it might be better for them to remain Sullivan County Regional Department of Health employees rather than becoming school system employees.

Initially, the nurses were to become school system employees, which would save money because the county’s self-insured health insurance plan is more expensive than the one the school system uses from Tennessee.

However, she said other factors down the road might make keeping them health department employees worth considering.

Since current nurses are contracted workers, the county system does not have to share money spent on them with the Kingsport and Bristol school systems.

Rafalowski said county school nurses in 2014-15 were paid slightly more to offset the lack of health insurance, and Business Manager Leslie Bonner said the county was responsible for offering health insurance under the ACA, also known as Obamacare.

“It was up to the county to offer it to them,” Bonner said.

The budget change was in response to a recent Budget Committee request for a “do-over” or review of the school budget by the BOE.

As for that committee’s questions about school nurses, Rafalowski said three or four of the 22 school nurses are licensed practical nurses, or LPNs and the rest are registered nurses, or RNs. LPNs work in school with an RN nearby, she said, such as the elementary portion of Sullivan Gardens K-8, North Middle inside North High, Blountville Elementary next to Blountville Middle and Weaver Elementary near East High.

She said Kingsport City Schools uses all RNs, while Bristol, Tenn., schools use all LPNs at individual schools with an RN available to float among schools for things an LPN cannot do. She said Bristol is more compact and has fewer schools than the county.

Things an RN can do but a LPN alone cannot include sign off on individual health care plans, do IEP or individualized education plan meetings, train in use of EpiPens or glucose monitors and critical care, Rafalowski said.

“I think most of us would like to leave the (proposed budget with) nurses full-time,” Broughton said.

The proposed general purpose budget of $84,580,680 — more than $2.3 million more than the amended 2014-15 budget — also leaves in about $2.2 million to give all employees a 4 percent raise, with about half the money for the teacher portion of that coming from Tennessee; $451,855 to take maintenance and custodial workers back to full-time status and $12,000 for a part-time fire science instructor at East High.

It also would take $2,193,902 from county school system reserves.

“The reason we keep putting things out there is because they are important,” said outgoing Director Jubal Yennie, who is leaving for the Albany County, Wyo., school system. Monday was his last board meeting, and he called the board’s vote a “good-faith” response to the committee.

In other action during the called meeting, the board approved the same differentiated pay plan it first used in 2014-15. It includes signing bonuses for hard-to-fill positions such as speech, as well as extra money for teacher leader program participants, technology coaches at the school building levels and teachers who act as assistant principals in elementary schools otherwise without that position.

The board also approved budget transfers to “zero out” federal Race to the Top fund accounts.