Amazing — Iran finally has been requested by our government to compensate our American U.S. Embassy employees violently taken hostage by Iranian terrorist kidnappers. It’s about time for our victims, who desperately waited without success on any U.S. president, secretary of State and congressional body to rectify the mother of all national disgraces. This political turnabout in Washington has taken since Jan. 21, 1981, the day after our 52 hostages were released.

Let’s be completely blunt about the political facts here. Ever since they were released, one national political leader and political appointee after another has failed them. Both Republicans and Democrats alike, there’s enough blame to smother them in.

ADVERTISEMENT

Sadly, so many former hostages have died waiting on a D.C. miracle that never came. For them and their families, this result is too late. Not one hostage or surviving family member owes the current secretary of State or current president a thank you. This ridiculously delayed result never should have happened.

The only reason the Iranian government has agreed to this is because the U.S. is giving $1.7 billion of our hard-earned tax money to Iran — a gift political bribe. They kidnap our fellow Americans, illegally holding them hostage for 444 days, but somehow in Washington-unintelligible speak WE owe Iran?

As a citizen and Lebanon U.N. peacekeeping mission veteran, I’d like to offer these surviving hostages and families my sincere apologies for our nation’s failed leadership. None of you deserved being sold out like this.

Kudos on this compensation deal are actually due to Hollywood. In 2012, Ben Affleck, Grant Heslov and George Clooney released the film “Argo,” loosely based on the rescuing of six Americans not taken hostage but who made it out thanks to a bold plan from Canada and the CIA. Thanks to their movie bringing the issue back into the public and Washington area of focus, the public responded, pressing our politicians to act on behalf of our forgotten hostages.

Way to go; thank you for being more human than those we elected.

From A.J. Castilla, Boston