National news:

A federal judge has allowed gay marriage in Utah to continue, making Utah the 18th state plus the District of Columbia where gay and lesbian couples can marry. (Associated Press)

The Christmas Eve spacewalk planned by NASA at the International Space Station should wrap up repair work on a faulty cooling line. (Associated Press)

President Obama completed a "symbolic" signup for a health insurance plan under the Affordable Care Act over the weekend in advance of today's deadline. (Reuters)

If you think this week's holiday travel will be crazy, it's got nothing on the wild weather sweeping the country. (CNN News)

More than 30 passengers were briefly trapped inside a tour bus early this morning after the driver lost control while on a Los Angeles-area freeway. (CBS News)

New York City police say a father was alone with his son for the first time since breaking up with his wife when he threw the toddler off the roof of a building on Sunday, then jumped to his death. (Associated Press)

A western Pennsylvania woman has been charged with putting child pornography on a computer in an unsuccessful effort to frame her estranged husband. (Associated Press)

Two New Jersey real estate agents are facing a civil lawsuit from a homeowner who alleges the listing agent steered potential buyers away from the home so he could use it for "sexual escapades." (Cox Media Group)

A Seattle teenager and her family are crediting her eyeglasses with helping save her life when they became the victims of a drive-by shooting. (ABC News)

International news:

South Sudan's army was poised for a major offensive against rebel forces, the president said today, as the country slid towards civil war despite international peace efforts. (AFP News) About 150 U.S. Marines are poised to enter South Sudan to help evacuate Americans and provide security for the U.S. Embassy. (CNN News)

Nearly 500 people have been killed in more than a week of punishing air raids on Aleppo in northern Syria, as helicopters dropping so-called barrel bombs targeted the city. (CNN News)

Lt. Gen. Mikhail T. Kalashnikov, the arms designer credited by the Soviet Union with creating the AK-47 rifle, died today in Russia. He was 94. (New York Times)

Two members of Russian punk protest band Pussy Riot freed from prison today derided President Vladimir Putin's amnesty that led to their early release as a propaganda stunt and promised to fight for human rights. (Reuters)

South Korea's intelligence chief said today Jang Song-thaek, the uncle of North Korean leader Kim Jong-un who was executed this month, apparently had not plotted a coup, but had fallen victim to intrigue within the country's elite over lucrative business deals. (New York Times)

A British Airways plane bound for London clipped its wing on a nearby building as it was preparing to take off from Johannesburg Sunday, South Africa's airports authority said. (Reuters)

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is the latest world leader to turn down a formal invitation to attend the Winter Olympic Games in Sochi, Russia. (Haaretz)