Topics: Books, Chicago Bears, Football, NFL, Life News, News

It wasn’t always like this. The quarterback wasn’t always sacrosanct, the jewel at the center of the football empire, a diamond that must be protected with bulletproof glass.

In the beginning, when the game was a scrum, the quarterback was just another sorry son of a bitch getting blasted with the rest. The single wing, the formation that long dominated football, was built around a Tim Tebow-like halfback who took the snap and ran along the line, his options a precious few: run, pitch, throw. The ball was different too, huge, rank with its descent from Rugby. Even freaks who could throw the thing did so with an Oh-no-I’m-about-to-lose-it anxiety.

The big change came in 1934, when a handful of owners, realizing the love that fans had for the pass, remade the pigskin from a bladder into a dart, a weapon that could be driven deep like a spike. The rules changed too: the game was opened up. In the old dispensation, an incomplete resulted in a loss of possession; a pass could not be caught in the end-zone but had to be carried into the goal.

But the new rules would be just that — jottings in a book, until a genius could take advantage, find the loophole that exploded into points. Like many great things, it started in Chicago. It was George Halas, owner of the Bears and a founder of the NFL — the lantern-jawed maestro still haunts my dreams — who pioneered the offense known as the Modern T-formation. That’s what it looked like from the stands: the QB under center, a fullback and two runners behind.

The modern QB did something counter-intuitive: in a game that’s all about progress, his first move was in the wrong direction. After taking a snap, he dropped back five or eight yards, setting up in a bubble cleared by a detail of Secret Service agents, otherwise known as tackles and guards. The pocket. A diving bell amidst a roiling sea, collapsing as the QB searched for receivers. He had to be smart as an engineer and resilient as rubber, memorizing hundreds of plays and options. He became the chief among equals as a result, raised on a pedestal. The first to master the new offense was Sid Luckman, recruited from Columbia University because Halas figured it would take an Ivy Leaguer to run the goddamn thing.

Sid Luckman was not the best even of his era — that was probably Sammy Baugh of the Redskins — but he was the first true pocket passer. In his second season, he led the Bears to the championship game, where he faced Baugh. It was a hinge moment, the afternoon that the modern overcame the ancient. In what remains among the most lopsided championships ever, Chicago beat Washington 73 – 0. (When a reporter asked Baugh what might’ve happened if a D.C. receiver had not dropped a pass early — momentum is everything — he said, “We would’ve lost 73- 7.”) Within a few seasons, every team but Pittsburgh was running Halas’ formation, and Pittsburgh stank.

As it’s said all Russian literature came out from under Gogol’s overcoat, all modern QBs scrambled out from under Luckman’s helmet. (He still shares the record for most TD passes in a game). You go from there to Johnny Unitas picking apart the Giants in the 1958 championship — said to be the best game of all time — to Joe Montana leading his team 92 yards in 11 plays in Super Bowl XXIII (in the huddle, when a normal person might panic, Montana pointed to the stands and said, “Hey, isn’t that John Candy?”) — to Peyton Manning leaning over the line and shouting before the snap. In this way, Halas brought in not just a new style but a new archetype: the quarterback, who resides in the pantheon with the cowboy and astronaut. The great ones, enacting their drama in the bubble dreamed up by George Halas — for what is the pocket if not a hyper-violent stage? — embody certain national characteristics: ingenuity, courage, grace under pressure and aversion to pain, for the pain is coming.

While working on a book about the 1985 Bears, I spent time with several old players, including the great QB Jim McMahon, whose pictures, once upon a time, covered the walls of my bedroom. (He’s the reason I chewed Copenhagen; why I wore Vaurnets.) Mac was the closest the team has come to replacing Sid. (Though Jay Cutler is now closing in on Luckman’s team passing record). Mac was a gunslinger who could bumble all day then win with an improvised play, the sort you might draw in the backyard dirt. I met him at his house in Arizona, almost twenty years into retirement, bald, lumpy but still cool as shit. In McMahon, I recognized the QB who represents our dreams but also pays the price.