Please enable Javascript to watch this video

MADISON (WITI) -- "A clear and present danger" -- the words one Wisconsin Senator uses to describe the threat to American from the terrorist organization known as ISIS. On Wednesday evening, September 10th, President Barack Obama is expected to address the nation -- unveiling his plan for military action against the Islamic state.

Wisconsin Senator Tammy Baldwin and Wisconsin Senator Ron Johnson say they're deeply concerned about ISIS, but they differ on what they're willing to vote for.

President Obama has been criticized for not having a strategy on ISIS. On Wednesday night, he'll lay out his plan.

"On Wednesday, I'll make a speech and describe what our game plan is going to be going forward," President Obama said.

President Obama's plan will be unveiled in a prime-time address from the White House.

Wisconsin's Senior U.S. Senator Ron Johnson says he's expecting the outline of a forceful campaign.

"What America needs to hear is a clearly articulated goal, and we also need to see his firm commitment to achieving that goal," Senator Johnson said.

Senator Johnson says the goal must be the complete destruction of ISIS.

"These are evil, barbaric people, and they have to be destroyed. Once you establish that goal, we have to do what it takes," Senator Johnson said.

Senator Johnson says that includes American combat troops on the ground in the Middle East.

"American troops are already on the ground in Iraq. They're already supporting security forces in the Kurdish Peshmurga area, so now it's just a matter of degrees. We're already at war with ISIS," Senator Johnson said.

That's something U.S. Senator Tammy Baldwin opposes. In a response to FOX6 questions, Baldwin said in a statement: "'I am concerned about the potential for long-term and open-ended U.S. led military action so I don`t support sending American combat troops on the ground in Iraq or Syria and will not support a go it alone approach."

"We don't have to go it alone. Europe will support us. The west will support us," Senator Johnson said.

Baldwin said in a statement: "I do support using American diplomatic leadership to help build an international coalition."

Senator Johnson has been receiving intelligence briefings on ISIS as a member of the Homeland Security Committee.

"You don't need a secure briefing to understand that their method of diplomacy consists of beheadings, of crucifixions, of mass executions. We've heard reports of burying people alive -- and what they do to women is horrific," Senator Johnson said.

Senator Johnson says the beheading of Marquette University graduate James Foley shocked the country and brought the threat home to Wisconsin.

"That was a watershed event. That was an act of terrorism against America, against an American and we need to respond to it," Senator Johnson said.

President Obama says his plan will resemble a counter-terrorism campaign, rather than a full-scale war -- but the details are being saved until Wednesday evening's speech.

Tammy Baldwin's statement:

“I look forward to hearing more details from the President about the strategic plan ‎the Administration has developed to address this situation. This terrorist group represents a threat to American personnel in Iraq and to the stability of Iraq and the region. So it’s important for the President to lay out clearly the nature of the threat and how we are going to work with international partners and the Iraqi government to deal with it.

I am concerned about the potential for long-term and open-ended U.S. led military action so I don’t support sending American combat troops on the ground in Iraq or Syria and will not support a go it alone approach. I do support using American diplomatic leadership to help build an international coalition and to help support an inclusive and unified Iraqi government that has the capacity to be a strong partner in counterterrorism efforts against ISIL.”