Donald Trump says he can make health insurance affordable for all. Just “get rid of the lines around the states,” he said in last week’s GOP debate. Let people buy insurance from any state and competition will do the rest.This is an appealing idea. It is also completely wrong.I don’t say this to defend the current system. Obamacare is failing dismally because it did nothing to bring down skyrocketing medical costs, especially prescription drug costs. While there is some pleasure in seeing this president’s signature achievement go down in flames, the underlying problem is serious. Lives are at stake and we need a better solution.Is interstate competition the answer? I don’t think so.To understand why, let’s see what happened in another industry: credit cards.Next time you open a credit card bill, look at the fine print on the back. No matter where you live, you will see your card was issued by a bank subsidiary in South Dakota, Delaware or Nevada.Why is that? Court rulings years ago let banks issue cards across state lines. Banks then moved their credit card operations to states without usury laws or other impediments. Over time, it became impossible for banks in other states to compete.Result: Now you can now get a credit card from any state you want as long as it is South Dakota, Delaware or Nevada. Some competition.If we implement Trump’s idea, we’ll get the wrong kind of competition.Instead of insurance companies competing for customers across state lines, states will compete to attract insurance companies. Every insurer will relocate to a state that lets it cherry-pick healthy people and dump everyone else on government programs.The result, unless you are young and healthy, will be higher premiums with lower benefits.It will be no better than Obamacare and possibly worse.That’s one reason health care reform expert and Obamacare critic Robert Laszewski calls interstate insurance “a really dumb idea.”

Conservatives should see another problem, too.Allowing interstate insurance sales would strip the states of control over their own affairs.We’re trying to get Washington out of our business. Trump’s idea will do the opposite.Donald Trump says we have to take care of our people, that we don’t want them dying in the streets. I believe he is sincere. I wish he would understand that reaching his goal will take more than erasing lines from the map. Patrick Watson is an Austin-based financial writer. Follow him on Twitter @PatrickW To read more of his insights, CLICK HERE NOW.