When grocers like Rollin’ Oats Market & Café opened in the Tampa Bay area two decades ago, natural food stores were viewed as an oddity by many mainstream shoppers.

Rice cakes, granola, protein powders, green vegetables with exotic names like arugula, and suspicious substances like tofu weren’t exactly at the top of the family grocery list.

The fact that labels like “organic” and “gluten-free” are common today, scattered through the aisles of Publix and Wal-Mart, is a testament to the success these healthy grocers have enjoyed in recent years.

For the local natural food pioneers, the entry of national competitors like Fresh Market, Trader Joe’s and Whole Foods, which opened its first Pinellas County store last week in Clearwater, is a sign that demand for their products is at an all-time high.

“It’s kind of flattering because I know there’s going to be more consumer demand, more consumer focus being turned to natural,” says Mike Asher, chief operating officer of Rollin’ Oats, a natural food grocer with locations in St. Petersburg and Tampa.

A new Trader Joe’s is under construction on Fourth Street North in St. Petersburg, a few miles from the Rollin’ Oats store at 2842 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. St N.

Business has been so strong at the St. Petersburg Rollin’ Oats that it doubled in size this year.

“I think now you’re just starting to see the benefits of a healthier lifestyle. You’re starting to see the effects of what all the genetically altered foods are causing,” Asher says.

❖ ❖ ❖

Austin, Texas-based Whole Foods is riding a national wave of enthusiasm for premium, natural foods and has made significant inroads in Florida with 31 stores, including two in Tampa and the newest location at Westfield Countryside Mall on U.S. 19 that opened to big crowds Wednesday.

The company saw substantial demand in Clearwater with many North Pinellas residents driving to the Tampa store on North Dale Mabry Highway, and it is scouting for other locations around St. Petersburg and in Hillsborough County, says Juan Nunez, Whole Foods regional president in Florida.

The 31,000-square-foot grocery store occupies the bottom floor of a former Sears in the mall, offering tens of thousands of natural and organic meats, produce, cheeses and snacks, a food court and a machine that makes fresh doughnuts.

While Whole Foods clearly strives to be the biggest and most comprehensive in the marketplace, the grocer also actively courts local farmers, brewers and other suppliers to stock its shelves, even offering small loans to entrepreneurs who are successful selling in their stores, Nunez says.

“One of the first things we do before we open a store, we get into a community and find out a lot about the local community,” he says.

Local health food grocers with a long history in the community such as Nature’s Food Patch in Clearwater aren’t too worried about getting crowded out.

“There would have to be a lot more players in Pinellas for it to be competitive,” says Sean Balsley, general manager at Nature’s Food Patch. “Our prices, honestly, are much better than Whole Foods anyway.”

Located just east of downtown on Cleveland Street, Nature’s Food Patch has gained a loyal customer base since opening in 1987, catering to both the occasional shopper and those devoted to an all-natural diet.

It recently has taken a strong stand on GMOs, foods with genetically modi­fied organisms, hiring a full-time employee to vet each product to ensure they’re truly natural and don’t contain harmful lab-created elements.

While many stores rely on third-party organizations to investigate products, few go as far as Nature’s Food Patch, Balsley says.

“Our customers are very educated and they are ahead of the curve. From that perspective, we have to be on our game because our customers wouldn’t let us not be,” he said.

What’s surprising about the health food market today is how relatively inexpensive products have become as demand has made them more widely available, says Asher of Rollin’ Oats.

“The demand that’s come in has driven prices down to where it’s actually affordable now. The stigma for so long was, ‘I can’t afford to eat organic; I can’t afford to eat natural,’ and, us in particular, we’ve tried to get rid of that stigma,” he says, noting the store frequently posts prices lower than Publix for comparable products.

Part of that demand may be attributed to the fact that the foods taste better than what used to be available, and there are more choices.

“You look at health food stores 30 years ago and it was like, ‘Oh, you don’t like tofu — too bad, that’s what we do,’” says Danielle Dunn, manager for supplements and personal care items at Earth Origins Market, which has locations in St. Petersburg, Palm Harbor and elsewhere around the state.

Today there are natural variants of nearly everything: popcorn, ice cream — even a premium alternative to the Oscar Mayer Lunchable snack pack.

“Honestly, I wish I was a kid now because all we had back then was fruit leather,” Dunn says.

jboatwright@tampatrib.com

(727) 215-1277