Editor’s note: This post has been updated to correct Sen. Mitch McConnell’s title. As of print time, he was the Senate Minority Leader, not the Majority Leader.

Today in the Morning Line:

Teeing up 2014’s Super Tuesday

Tea party vs. establishment in Kentucky

Race to the right in Georgia

Women candidates key to both parties’ chances

Super Tuesday has it all: If there’s one primary day to pay attention to, it’s this Tuesday. It’s got everything — Senate control, another bite at the GOP establishment vs. tea party apple, prominent women candidates on both sides, political dynasties, and the Democratic fight to replace a vulnerable Republican governor swept in with the 2010 tea party wave.

Senate control: Tuesday will tell us something about how the race for control of the Senate will shape up this fall. Kentucky and Georgia are Democrats’ two strongest targets. The race for the Senate in Arkansas officially kicks off. And Oregon will show whether Republicans have a real target or not there this fall, as the establishment hopes to get its preferred candidate in Monica Wehby, a pro-abortion rights doctor. Wehby has garnered attention for a strong positive ad with testimony from a woman who said Wehby, a neurosurgeon, saved her child’s life. But the other side of politics surfaced in the closing stretch — it was revealed that last year, after a breakup with her wealthy ex-boyfriend, she was accused of “stalking” him in a police report. Ironically, the ex-boyfriend, a timber executive, said he overreacted when talking to police and is actually funding ads against her primary opponent.

Tea party vs. establishment: The tea party may have gotten a win last week in non-competitive Nebraska, but as we noted then, the next few weeks don’t line up well for the movement. Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., appears to be on track to cruise to a victory Tuesday against his tea party opponent, Matt Bevin. The latest poll shows McConnell up 55 percent to 35 percent over Bevin, who spent $3 million on the race, $1 million of which was his own money. In Georgia, of the top three opponents, tea party activists aren’t quite sure who to root for. The two most tea party-aligned candidates are polling toward the bottom of the five-way primary. But one thing is for certain: as the Democrat waits for them to wrap up their primary (that will almost certainly extend to a July 22 runoff), the Republicans are trying to out-right each other. In Idaho, it appears the tea party fight against Rep. Mike Simpson may have fizzled as the Club for Growth has pulled out and decided to spend its resources elsewhere. (And, by the way, that Idaho governor’s race primary will be decided. Does Republican Butch Otter survive his serious primary fight after that unserious debate?)

The rise of women: Tuesday will also highlight the importance of women on BOTH sides of the aisle. Four women, who are key to both parties’ chances this fall, are running in races Tuesday. Women are severely underrepresented in Congress. Despite making up 51 percent of the U.S. population and 53 percent of the electorate, women make up just 20 percent of the Senate (20 of 100) and 18 percent of the House (79 of 435). In the Senate, 80 percent of women are Democrats (16 of 20). In the House, 76 percent are Democrats (60 of 79). Two Democratic women give Democrats their best chance at flipping GOP seats this fall — Alison Lundergan Grimes in Kentucky and Michelle Nunn in Georgia. Both are polling tied or close to their potential Republican opponents. Two women Tuesday could help Republicans tell a better story about making in-roads with women — Wehby, who could put the seat in play in Oregon — a state Republicans haven’t won in in 12 years — against progressive Democrat Jeff Merkley; and Karen Handel in Georgia. Handel is the former Georgia secretary of state, and Republicans believe that if she gets through the primary, she could offset Nunn’s potential advantage. Handel could also raise lots of national GOP money because her winning would help negate the Democratic storyline that the GOP isn’t the party of women. Other Republican women could be added to the Senate as well this cycle, including Joni Ernst, who appears to be the front-runner in the June 3 Iowa primary; Terri Lynn Land, who is running unopposed in Michigan Aug. 5; and Shelly Moore Capito, favored to be the next senator from West Virginia. But just how important are women to Democrats holding the Senate? In addition to Grimes and Nunn challenging, three Democratic women are targeted incumbents facing a competitive general election challenge — Sens. Kay Hagan in North Carolina, Mary Landrieu in Louisiana and Jeanne Shaheen in New Hampshire.

2010 GOP governors in blue states to be tested: Tom Corbett in Pennsylvania is widely considered the most vulnerable Republican governor in the country. His approval ratings have been in the 20s and 30s, and that has set off a crowded Democratic primary to replace him. Corbett is one of a handful of GOP governors swept in with the 2010 tea party wave and now up for re-election in states President Barack Obama won in 2012, including Rick Scott in Florida, Scott Walker in Wisconsin, John Kasich in Ohio and Rick Snyder in Michigan. The favorite in the Democratic primary Tuesday is Tom Wolf, a kitchen cabinet-maker and former state revenue secretary under Ed Rendell. Wolf is a testament to the power of ads. His early and quirky positive ones helped him leapfrog Rep. Allyson Schwartz from last to first place. Corbett trails his potential Democratic opponents in hypothetical match-ups by double digits. He has upset Democrats in a left-leaning state with his comments on same-sex marriage, his anti-gun control stance and opposition to the Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act.

Julian Castro heads to Washington to be named head of HUD: San Antonio Mayor Julian Castro is expected to be named secretary of Housing and Urban Development. The move will raise Castro’s profile in Washington circles, allow him to focus on an issue of importance to the Democratic base, help him build a national portfolio and contacts and, of course, spur talk of him as a potential vice presidential candidate in 2016. Castro was thought to be a potential PRESIDENTIAL candidate at some point beyond 2016, especially if he could become governor of Texas, something that wouldn’t be likely for the 40-year-old until at least 2018. Jonathan Martin and Peter Baker write in the New York Times: “Some of Mr. Castro’s allies also believe that with income inequality becoming a focal point for Democrats, the HUD job offers the mayor an opportunity to burnish his credentials on issues of poverty and to raise his appeal among those on the party’s left. The post will also let him develop relationships with and win favors from city leaders and activists in a way he cannot on the Democratic lecture circuit.”

Daily Presidential Trivia: On this day in 1962, Marilyn Monroe performed a rendition of “Happy Birthday” for President Kennedy. Where was the event? Be the first to Tweet us the correct answer using #PoliticsTrivia, and you’ll get a Morning Line shout-out. Congratulations to Rachael ‏(@CreativeArtistB) for correctly guessing Friday’s trivia. The answer was: Johnson was impeached for removing Secretary of War Edwin Stanton, which was a violation of the Tenure of Office Act.

LINE ITEMS

For more political coverage, visit our politics page.

Sign up here to receive the Morning Line in your inbox every morning.

Questions or comments? Email Domenico Montanaro at dmontanaro-at-newshour-dot-org or Terence Burlij at tburlij-at-newshour-dot-org.

Follow the politics team on Twitter:

Follow @DomenicoPBS

Follow @burlij

Follow @elizsummers

Follow @rachelwellford

Follow @sfpathe