Topics: Affordable Care Act, Americans for Prosperity, Barack Obama, Editor's Picks, Koch Brothers, Pre-existing conditions, Video, Politics News

Given how horrible Obamacare supposedly is, it’s a little bizarre that Republicans and their allies have such a hard time finding victims who are unambiguously worse off as a result of the law.

GOP leaders trotted out a woman named Bette during their official response to President Obama’s State of the Union address. Once reporters with even rudimentary understanding of the law began poking around, they discovered that Bette was more a victim of anti-Obamacare histrionics than of the genuine article.

The ad makers at the conservative pressure group Americans for Prosperity are the Jerry Bruckheimers of atmospherically devastating campaign spots attacking Democrats who voted for Obamacare, but like nearly all Bruckheimer films the plots of these ads fall apart upon the mildest scrutiny.

The “victims” in one of their ads attacking Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., turned out to be paid actors. Now in Michigan, they’ve found a genuinely sympathetic character — Leukemia patient Julie Boonstra — who seems to earnestly dislike the Affordable Care Act. But neither Boonstra nor AFP can quite put their fingers on why she’s worse off under the law than she was before. That’s not to say she should be an Obamacare fan — who am I to tell her that? But there’s almost no denying that she’s more protected now than she was before, and probably better off financially as well.

Boonstra’s central complaint is that she lost her old healthcare plan because of Obamacare, just like an untold number of other individual market patrons. But the ad also suggests very strongly that she lost her doctor as well, and has been saddled with significantly higher costs.

The Washington Post’s Glenn Kessler beat me to the fact check. It turns out that she kept her doctor, and in a separate interview with the Detroit News, acknowledged that her premiums under Obamacare ($571 a month) are half as much as they were last year ($1,100). Her annual savings — $6,348 — are actually just $2 shy of the Affordable Care Act’s $6,350 “Out of Pocket Maximum” for an individual plan, above which the insurance company must pay every penny.

Either she’s unaware of that, or doesn’t want to admit it, because she told Kessler, “the premiums are half, but the out‑of‑pocket costs are so high that, for me, it’s unaffordable. My coverage is 80/20. Blood work, I’m paying 20 percent. If I needed a bone marrow transplant, I would only be covered 80 percent. Everything, everything I do now, I have to pay a percentage of.”

By “80/20,” Boonstra’s implying she has a silver-plated healthcare plan, but the 20 percent cost sharing only applies to costs incurred under the OOP maximum. Any individual on that plan who needed, say, a $100,000 bone marrow transplant tomorrow wouldn’t owe $20,000 out of pocket. They’d owe $6,350.

AFP spokesman Levi Russell’s response amounts to an observation that a higher deductible exposes patients to lumpier, more unpredictable costs. “Now her expenses are unpredictable, and that means unaffordable. It could be $600 one month, and three times that the next month. The reality of what she’s dealing with is much more involved and can’t be swept aside by saying, ‘you have an OOP maximum so quit complaining about your cancer.’”