Dallas County District Attorney Susan Hawk is taking a big step Monday in her journey to repair a political career that, just months ago, seemed doomed.

Hawk is staging the third – and most important – town hall meeting she’s hosted since taking office in January.

The event, to be held in the sanctuary of one of Dallas’ oldest black churches – St. Paul United Methodist Church in the downtown Arts District — marks a pivotal moment in Hawk’s personal and political life:

This is Hawk’s first town hall appearance since she returned to her post on Oct. 1 - after spending two months at a psychiatric hospital where she got treatment for major depression.

Lots of people are still wondering whether she’s up to the task, if she can put her personal demons behind her, if she can withstand the intense scrutiny that comes with her job.

So Hawk can’t keep lying low, allowing the narrative to get away from her.

“I didn’t know she was doing a town hall, but I’m glad she is,” Dallas County Republican party chairman Wade Emmert said Friday. “I think people need to see her.”

Upon her return, Hawk went on a round of media interviews to try to allay concerns about her troubles and assure the public that she’s capable of being our district attorney.

But for the most part, she’s lived in a small cocoon. She’s made few public appearances, save a visit last week to the nonpartisan Oak Cliff Lions Club, where she was warmly received.

Still, the media’s attention in recent weeks has focused on Hawk’s ongoing political and legal troubles.

A former high-ranking prosecutor who Hawk fired – administrative chief Cindy Stormer – is giving Hawk fits.

Citing the DA’s mental health issues and prior treatment for prescription drug use, Stormer filed a lawsuit seeking to force Hawk from office.

Hawk and her advisers are confident they’ll prevail in court and that she’ll be able to finish out her term.

But right now, Hawk’s advisers say, it’s time for the DA to reassert herself, rebuild a rapport with the community and remind voters why they elected her in the first place, over ex-DA Craig Watkins, a Democrat.

She’s eager to turn over a new leaf.

“Judge Hawk is so ready to get back in the saddle,” said Brittany Dunn, an assistant DA recently assigned to Hawk’s communications team. “She’s really picking up where she left off. I don’t think there’s any nervousness or anxiety about that. It’s like, ‘Let’s get this show on the road.’”

As political theater goes, this promises to be good.

Hawk’s aides said they’ve sent invitations to many dignitaries including the mayor, the city council and county commissioners. They hope to pack St. Paul’s sanctuary.

Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins, who met with the Republican DA last week for the first time since January, said he has a conflict on Monday “so don’t think I’m going to that.”

“But I had a good meeting with her and we’re going to be meeting monthly,” said Jenkins, a Democrat. “I wish her the best.”

In a statement released this week, Hawk hinted at her town hall agenda.

“My hope is for us to continue connecting with different parts of our community,” she said. “My job is just to bring everyone to the table, to listen, and to formulate fair, balanced, effective solutions for the challenges we face — and specifically the challenge of rebuilding trust between law enforcement and our communities.”

That last part — rebuilding trust between police and the communities — is a theme that Hawk’s team knows will play well at St. Paul, a historic black church with deep roots among African-Americans in North Texas.

Not only is the venue rich with symbolism, it’s also a safe spot for Hawk to land on her rebound tour because the church’s pastor, Richie Butler, is a dynamic and charismatic young leader who reached out to Hawk after she sought help for depression. Hawk met with Butler one afternoon and shared what she’d been through.

“He was one of the people she sat down with first,” a source close to Hawk confirmed, adding that Butler offered to host her town hall meeting at his church “and she said great.”

Hawk will try to focus on the work she’s done since returning. She likely will mention that she’s created a new Community Response Team, a group of assistant DA’s charged with targeting habitual criminal offenders.

It’s an idea that sprang from concerns folks expressed about repeat offenders at a town hall meeting Hawk held earlier in the year.

Hawk also is prepared to talk about the uptick in cases her office has filed and disposed of this year — again, with the goal of showing that her office is running efficiently and resolving problems.

In addition, like she did at the Oak Cliff Lions Club meeting, Hawk will brag about securing nearly $2 million more in federal grants to prosecute more sexual assault and family violence cases.

“She does plan on recognizing all the good work we’ve done,” said Dunn.

Will it be enough to give Hawk the fresh start she covets?

“Hopefully,” said Dunn, “there won’t be any questions” along those lines. “I don’t know what else she can say. This meeting isn’t about that. It’s about going forward.”

If nothing else, it’s a step Hawk needs to take.