For small business owners in Michigan – meaning those with 50 or fewer employees – decisions on purchasing health insurance have become more difficult each year.



While the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare, was billed as making health insurance more affordable, that isn’t always the case when it comes to business or certain individuals who already are insured.



During the past two years under Obamacare, some individuals and businesses are paying much higher rates than they ever had to absorb in the past.



While average premiums have increased 8 percent and 12 percent each year over the last decade, Obamacare, in some cases, has forced rates upwards 20 percent to 50 percent, even more, for a variety of reasons.



Of course, at least 15 million previously uninsured folks have been able to either sign up for Medicaid or purchase subsidized health insurance thanks to Obamacare. These are primarily the people who are receiving affordable health insurance by provisions in the Affordable Care Act.



Despite that good news, I understand small business owners and self-employed individuals complaining about the recent spate of rate increases. They have to pay employee salaries, invest in their business, pay bills and set aside a decent amount for profits.



Over the next few years, hopefully, experts say, these rate increases - especially the extreme variations of rate increases from year to year - will drop to below 2010 trends, again for a variety of reasons.



In 2016, small businesses are expected to benefit from Obamacare’s mandate that Michigan change its insurance code definition of small business from 50 or fewer employees to 100 or fewer employees. This should open up options for small businesses not currently available, some experts tell me.



Another way small businesses could benefit in the future is if Congress repeals the member-level rating requirement - a real possibility if politicians unite to do the right thing. This Obamacare feature, while generally designed to remove discriminatory insurance company practices, drives up prices on small business benefit plans and makes administration of the plans more expensive and contribution strategies confusing for participants.



The member-level rating feature requires insurers to calculate premium costs for small employers based on each person in the plan.

For example, employers are charged based on separate costs for each family member based on such defined criteria as age, geographic location, tobacco use and plan benefits.

In other words, larger families will generally pay more than smaller families.



Setting aside member-level rating, which I believe needs to be repealed to allow insurers to go back to offering small businesses composite rates, benefits promised from Obamacare to the majority of small businesses haven't materialized - yet.



Since March 2010, when Obamacare was approved, I have written quite a bit about health reform, mostly from the perspective of the health care businesses I cover in Southeast Michigan.





Small business health plan options

Obamacare forced - and also in many cases encouraged and provided incentives – many hospitals, health insurers and physicians to up their game and become better deliverers of health care services and products.As I wrote in the Sept. 15 Health Care Extra section , small business owners have lots of choices in choosing a variety of health plans and products for their workforces in 2015.

Competition for market share among health insurers has increased the choices of plans for employers with 51 to 100 employees, said Dante Diamente, a health care consultant and principal with Pricewaterhouse Coopers LLC in Detroit.



Besides traditional fully insured HMO plans, Diamente said employers with fewer than 100 employees can select plans among several self-insured product offerings and at least three private health insurance exchanges in Michigan.



“As more small employers take advantage of these new mechanisms, the available options will continue to increase and it will become easier for other small businesses to purchase,” he said.



But like all advice, there are caveats to consider based on the size of your business.



Despite more options for larger employers, agents tell me that small employers with fewer than 50 employees are finding less flexibility within the plans offered by insurance companies – unless they purchase the more expensive Accountable Care Act-compliant (Obamacare) plans or go the private exchange or self-funded route.



Under Obamacare, new health insurance policies are pricier because they must comply with a minimum of 10 essential benefits that include outpatient and preventive care, mental health care, maternity, lab, prescription drugs and hospitalization coverage.



Rick Murdock, executive director of the Michigan Association of Health Plans, said private health insurers in Michigan have developed dozens of new plans – offered inside and outside of the Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) exchange –– to help small businesses reduce premium costs and improve coverage for their employees.



To check out SHOP online, click here.



Here are some comments from my health insurance executive sources about options for small businesses.



Steve Selinsky, director of new business and consumer solutions with Health Alliance Plan, said small group purchasers have more choices for 2015 with HAP than they had in 2014.



“There is much more competition this year. There have been a host of carriers that have gone back and refilled rates to be more competitive on the individual and small group side,” Selinsky said.



John Dunn, vice president of middle and small group business with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, said Blue Cross has tweaked a number of its plans to comply with Obamacare mandates and added new plans to its portfolio for small businesses.





Private exchanges offer defined contribution approach

“One new plan is the routine care plans, which are similar to health savings accounts, but everything is subject to the deductible (office visits and pharmacy),” Dunn said. “We give them a limited number of free office visits and generic drugs. We think that will be popular this year.”For 2015, HAP has created more than 50 different Obamacare-compliant plans on and off the exchange for small businesses, Selinsky said. The offerings include various coverage plans through health maintenance organization, preferred provider organization, exclusive provider organizations and also choices and narrow provider networks, he said.“We are offering many more products than before, but not just on a fully insured basis, we have choices for companies through private exchanges and self-funded” programs, Selinsky said.

Another option now available to small businesses is a private alternative to the SHOP public exchange option – private health insurance exchanges.



Private health exchanges include iSelect Customer Benefits Store, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan's GlidePath and the Michigan Chamber of Commerce have popped up to offer defined contribution plans to help small businesses fix costs of employee benefit plans. Employees also can use online benefit plans to search for competitive plans and providers.iSelect offers multiple carriers for employers with 10 or more employees to choose among, including HAP, Priority Health and newly added national carrier, United Healthcare. GlidePath is an exclusive Blue Cross private exchange product.



Most of Southeast Michigan’s larger health insurers this year are also offering a number of new self-funded and partially self-funded plans to companies with small workforces, said Dunn.

Using an agent or broker to help choose the right plan

The breadth of health plan choices – from fully insured to self insured to defined contribution – could make it a dizzying open enrollment period for small businesses.



“It will be difficult for agents and carriers to manage the business in the fourth quarter,” Norman said. “A lot of employers deferred decision to December this year. More than half of small employers moved their renewals to December to extend their decisions.”



In March, the Obama administration issued an executive order that allows individuals and small businesses to keep their non-compliant plan an additional two years through 2016, pending state and insurance company approval. Most states, including Michigan, approved.



“We are seeing 75 percent of renewals for 2013 plans extended to 2015 and 2016,” Norman said.



One problem small businesses face in addressing health benefit issues is they lack dedicated human resource departments that can devote time to evaluate multiple health insurers and plans.



Because small businesses have diverse needs, Selinsky said agents can help them find the right plan for their employee group.



“There are so many options and so many things changing, an agent plays a key role,” Norman said.



Diamente said agents can help small employers navigate the complicated waters of health insurance industry.



“While these (agents) know there are many options, it takes time to educate the small employer decision maker on the different options, so they may narrow the overall selection to help the small employee decision maker come to a cost-effective decision,” Diamente said.