Percentage of loan-free purchases on the rise; more than a third of Boulder buyers pay in cash

Related Stories In ultra-competitive local market, buyer's feline Xmas pics clinched deal

All-cash sales for homes in Boulder County are on the rise, even as those numbers decrease nationally.

Twenty-six percent of county home sales in the first half of 2015 were cash transactions, up from 23 percent for the past two years, according to a report from real estate research agency IRES and the Boulder Area Realtors Association.

The city of Boulder has the highest percentage of all-cash sales in the county, at 36 percent, up 10 percent from 2013.

During that same time, national all-cash sales dropped from 31 percent to 25 percent.

"The trend has fallen in the past year or so as the share of investor sales has gone down due in part to rising home prices," said Adam DeSanctis of the National Association of Realtors.

Typically, DeSanctis said, investors buy when the market is poor, such as during the Great Recession. That drives up the percentage of cash sales.

As prices rebound, those numbers drop as investors move out and private home buyers make up more of the market.

But locally, those trends are reversed.

Here, "cash is king" said Ken Roth, managing broker at Goodacre & Co.

"One of the primary reasons for someone to go cash is how highly competitive it is," Roth said. "If a seller doesn't have to worry about a (buyer qualifying for a)loan, they are going to accept possibly a lower purchase price as to one that's financed."

"Typically, cash sales are higher in areas with tight inventory conditions, a highly competitive market, desirable location, or with multi-bidder situations," DeSanctis said.

Advertisement

Those characteristics describe to a tee the Boulder County market over the past three years, where prices have risen rapidly after only modest losses during the recession. And cash sales for individual cities reflect that reality.

Louisville saw a 10 percent increase in cash sales from last year, when 15 percent of all home purchases were made in cash. At 25 percent of sales in cash, that city is in line with current national averages.

Both Longmont and Lafayette are slightly lower, at 20 percent, but still saw growth over last year.

Only Erie saw declines in cash sales, from 13 percent in 2014 to nine percent this year.

That figure is more in line with historic national norms, DeSanctis said, which hover from around 10 percent to the low teens.

Who is paying cash?

With average county home prices topping $550,000, many wonder: Who has that much cash on hand?

"(Those buyers) can cash out a lot of assets," said Roth, taking money out of the bank or stocks to put toward an investment practically guaranteed to accrue value.

Often, Roth said, they put a loan on the offer after they close — at least in the lower price range, from $250,000 to $400,000.

It's a different story in the $500,000 to million-dollar range that dominates Boulder.

"You know someone buying a million-dollar house, they're not exactly on food stamps," Roth said. "They just have a lot of assets that they can call on."

D.B. Wilson of Re/Max Boulder said that cash activity in the highly sought- after sub-$400,000 market "can certainly be attributed to investors."

"The recovery started in the city of Boulder and has worked its way out," he said, which may explain why the percentage of cash sales decreases as buyers venture farther north and east into less competitive markets.

"People are doing anything they can to be the strongest offer," Roth said. "I don't really see that going away anytime soon."

Cash buyers winning bidding wars

Wilson also has seen a fair amount of second-time home buyers that sell their first house and put that money directly into a new, bigger space.

Those buyers, with no need for a mortgage loan, are simply winning the bidding wars.

"We put two offers in, and in both cases, cash offers beat us to it," said Maria Hennessey, 40, who has been looking for a home with her partner since February.

The couple lost another offer on a house in Gunbarrel just last week.

"To get a three- to four-bedroom house that's move-in ready, there's not a ton on the market, and there's a ton of competition," Hennessey said.

Hennessey is in a much better position than many buyers, as the owner of a condo in north Boulder that has gained nearly $200,000 in value since she bought it in 2007.

But Hennessey has no plans to sell, instead intending to keep the unit as a rental for income that will help them afford a home in the $500,000 to $600,000 range they are looking for.

"As a homeowner, we're in a good situation," she said. "But as a buyer, it's frustrating."

Still, as their search stretches into its sixth month, Hennessey admits she has been considering her options, including moving farther away from Boulder to find a home for her two kids, a 3-year-old and a 4-month-old.

"We're ready to move on."

Shay Castle: 303-473-1626, castles@dailycamera.com, @shayshinecastle