Transcript for Get Fit With Kelly Rowland

working up a sweat of the "gma heat index". Kelly rowland, on "shape" magazine, where she reveals her diet and workout secrets. Sara haines is here. You worked out with her? Heck yeah. Can't you tell? Here's a girl who is literally doing it all. From her new album to a judge on "the x factor." And she has time to keep her body rockin'. She has even shared some of her secrets with me. ♪ Motivation ♪ Reporter: Kelly rowland's sizzling silhouette, is more than enough motivation to hit the gym. And in "shape" magazine, kelly flaunts her perfectly sculpted bod. She is dynamic. She has such energy. She practically jumps off the pages. I saw that cover. Who am i? The songstress turned "x factor" judge, says she owes her physique to her friend and trainer, jeannette jenkins. I started to get into it when I started to work with j.J., To be honest. I just like the way my clothes fit. Reporter: Yeah, but I needed some tips. Tell me your secrets. Green. I love kale. I love spinach. I really do love it. Reporter: When do you work out? In the morning. I like to do it. It starts off my day. Gets me ready. All of my energy levels up and excited for the day. Reporter: And my tip. I read you have the 80/20 rule. You have to be good 80% of the time. 80% would be about six days a week. And 20% would be one, for me. That's how I break it down. Reporter: Now, comes the hard part, the dreaded workout with jeanette. Where will I feel it? Everywhere. Let's do ten more together. Come on, you people at home. Get off the couch and try this with us. Put down your cereal now. Reporter: After 30 minutes, every muscle in my body was scream pfg but what's a few sore muscles between girlfriends. One, two, three. Girl power. So cute. And the best part, all of the moves you can do in a hotel room, or at home. Out in the yard, where we were doing it. Super girl power. We were doing the workout. Absolutely. I was dabbing lara's sweat here. I was enjoying the 20. The 80/20. I was enjoying the 20. Let's get outside. Amy and sam. That's right. Time for our series "eat it to

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.