You've probably heard the phrase "a picture is worth a thousand words," and instead of protesting with chants, one group is holding a contest to find the best image of damage done by releases from Lake Okeechobee.

Last week, Fort Myers resident Chris Shaul and others who share his enthusiasm for the water created a Facebook page called "Save Our Estuaries" to illustrate the damage. It already has nearly 700 likes.

"We're using to seeing it in the summer, and now it's hitting us in the winter and really beginning to impact how we live our life," he said.

His family spends a lot of time on the water. In fact, seven-year-old daughter Ella and her little brother had a fit when their dad went exploring without them this morning.

"Me and my brother like to go fishing with Daddy and go paddleboarding with him," Ella said.

But their dad said he left them behind for a reason.

"The water is dark; it's dirty. I haven't been able to get them on the water in quite some time, and they want to be on the water. They want to be around the water."

It's not about what he sees, but what he doesn't see.

On Sunday, he paddled around the Ding Darling Wildlife Refuge on Sanibel.

"We went to one of my favorite spots that I take my kids to see the sand dollars and the sea stars. I found one dead one."

He said the water coming in from Lake O is killing the wildlife and stunting the economy.

"It makes me feel sad because it doesn't look good," said Hailee Shaul, 9.

Chris Shaul encourages anyone in the state to look around and snap a photo to help with the bigger picture: redirecting the water south into the Everglades.

"It makes me feel better because then I know that someday, the water will be clean, and we'll be able to go back in the ocean and play," Hailee said.

This isn't the only social-media protest. There's also a page called "Captains for Clean Water," a contest where people are also encouraged to submit photos of dirty water.

Meanwhile, the mayors of Fort Myers, Cape Coral and Sanibel will be in Washington D.C. on Monday to speak to legislators about the issue.