Model Allie wears a skirt from Free People and a Sanctuary travel vest, which are both available at Eleanor in Louisville. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

I can't believe it's already spring.

I'm typing this while wearing fuzzy blue slipper-socks emblazoned with puffy Zac Efron accents. The world from sky to earth outside my window is solid white.

But it's definitely spring. Halfway through, in fact. No, this isn't some kind of global warming shift. This is according to the fashion industry.

Tracy Hobbs, owner of the Louisville boutique, Eleanor, just returned from market in Los Angeles with a full fashion game plan all the way through fall; that starts in July.

"People in January have already gotten over the winter ick and they want to turn the corner and get some springy things they can actually wear," Hobbs says.

These Zac Efron socks have got to go. So I'm paying close attention to Hobbs' 15 top fashion trends for spring 2014. Starting this month, you will be able to find these items at Eleanor, 630 Front St. in Louisville —- at least until they sell out. This boutique carries only a few of each piece.

1. A transitional sweater: Translated: a comfy, looser-weave sweater you can wear now, under a jacket, all the way through the summer, over a tank. Pick up a Wooden Ships sweater in springy colors of fresh green or light blue-gray.

2. Bright, new colors: This spring, try mint, peach, light peach and light yellow. Those are the hot colors in L.A. and New York.

3. Camo print, with a new spin: Look for camo in dark gray and green, or in springy shades of light pink, dark pink, white and olive. Try the camo-print "charmer" pants by Sanctuary. Popular brands Velvet and Free People also have a camo line for spring-summer '14.

4. Chili instead of red: Chili — a spicy, reddish-orange — is the big color for spring. Find it at Eleanor in cotton-silk dresses, blouses and accents. Unlike red, Hobbs says, chili looks flattering on everyone. And orange, well, it's getting a little tired, she adds.

5. Lavender, the color of the year: Just like turquoise in 2013, you will see lavender everywhere this year. Ease into it with a lilac Hobo wallet or cross-body bag over a white and gray outfit, Hobbs says. U.S.-made Hobo bags are huge in Boulder County, she adds. At a November trunk show, she special-ordered 26 Hobo bags.

6. Look ahead into summer with poppy (redish-pink), pool (turquoisy light blue) and lemon: These three fresh, clean, fun colors will help define this summer.

7. AG denim in dark navy blue: Eleanor can't keep AG in stock, it sells so quickly. The shop's planning an AG trunk show in April, featuring the line's 12 top-selling styles, including shorts, capris, jackets and bermudas for spring.

Wooden Ships sweaters come in springy colors, such as the fresh green Allie is wearing. She's also showing off the popular AG denim. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

8. Skinny jeans: They're not going away. Deal with it.

9. One-piece rompers and jumpers: This is a bit of a risk for Colorado women, but Hobbs believes they'll be well received — especially the Bella Dahl line in amazingly lush cotton and cotton-silk fabrics. Look for comfy onesies — even overalls in dressier denim — in trendy colors, such as chili, tangerine and icy blue. You truly haven't seen jumpers like this before.

10. A "travel" jacket in khaki: The big pockets of this olive or white Sanctuary jacket with leather trim feel cargo-style. Try it without sleeves for a vest in the spring, or layer it in the colder months.

11. Trainers-inspired pants: Yeah, trainers, as in the drawstring sweatpants from the '70s with cuffed ankles. Look for tencel denim pants by Bella Dahl, sometimes with cargo pocket accents. In L.A., other than skinnies, this is all people wear, Hobbs says.

"I'm trying to bring in new things," she says, "yet I'm trying not to be too crazy."

12. Funky, colorful open cardi sweaters: Look for three different styles of these cozy, cotton-knit statement sweaters by Goddis, all with different patterns of stripes. Imagine them with leggings and a tee or jeans. Very Boulder.

13. Silk tunics and blouses: Language, of L.A., makes these rich silks, which can dress up even the simplest pair of jeans. Pick up a sleeveless or cap-sleeve blouse in ice blue or cobalt.

14. Simple, sweet linen dresses: Hobbs' favorite linen company is CP Shades, which hand-dyes its washable, natural, sustainable linens in California. The fabric feels airy and cool for summer, and the company has a reputable name, too.

15. Free People's specialty pieces: Did you know Free People has three different lines? The stuff you find in the department stores, such as Nordstrom; the funkier styles you will find in their stand-alone shops, as on Pearl Street, and the boutique-specific items you can find only in select stores such as Eleanor. That means the limited-number Free People items — typically a few conservative mixed in with a sprinkling of novelty pieces — that you find in Eleanor can't be found on the Nordstrom sale rack.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Aimee Heckel at 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com and twitter.com/Aimeemay.