Arsenal Expands Investments in Plastic and Rubber Additives

The PE firm adds to its PSG platform company with Flow Polymers, following purchases of Burtin; Coating and Foam; and Premium Spray

Arsenal Capital Partners-backed Polymers Solutions Group has acquired plastics additives provider Flow Polymers LLC from Geneva Glen Capital for an undisclosed amount.

Flow Polymers, based in Cleveland, manufactures plastic and rubber additives along with chemical dispersions for the plastic, automotive and industrial sectors. Geneva acquired the company in December 2010.

“We will continue to build on the Flow Polymers acquisition by harvesting on new product launches and additional acquisitions that will enable PSG to better serve its existing customers and enter new markets,” says Arsenal industrial group co-head John Televantos.

Arsenal formed Polymer Solutions in June 2015 when it purchased Peach State Labs Inc., a chemicals and polymers distributor. The PE firm has been actively investing in the chemicals and coatings space. In 2015, Accella Performance Materials, backed by Arsenal, has purchased Burtin Polymer Labs and Coating and Foam Solutions; IGM Resins BV has bought a unit of Lamberti SpA; and Accella also acquired Premium Spray Products.

Other buyers that have been making deals in the sector include PPG Industries (NYSE: PPG) which won Mergers & Acquisitions’ M&A Mid-Market 2014 Strategic Buyer of the Year award after it acquired Homax Group, Masterwork Paint, Hi-Temp Coatings Technology and Canal Supplies.

In another deal, announced on Feb. 22, Carlisle Cos. (NYSE:CSL), has acquired MS Oberflächentechnik AG. The target, based in Balgach, Switzerland, makes powder coating equipment and related parts to customers mostly in Europe.

Kirkland & Ellis advised the buyers on the Arsenal deal who have received financing from Twinbrook Capital and Kayne Anderson. Keybanc Capital Markets (NYSE: KEY) advised Flow Poylmers.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: