Eye on Augusta: Maine’s Lawmakers Attempt to Pass Medicaid Expansion — for the Sixth Time



Sen. Tom Saviello (R-Franklin), the sponsor of the latest expansion proposal, says there is more urgency to expand Medicaid now because the money is needed to help fight the opiate addiction epidemic. On Tuesday morning, Saviello held a press conference with Farmington Police Chief Jack Peck, Franklin County Sheriff Scott Nichols and Sagadahoc County Sheriff Joel Merry, who said that many Mainers with drug addictions are unable to access treatment because they are uninsured. In addition to the Maine Police Chiefs Association and the Maine Sheriff’s Association, Medicaid expansion is also supported by the Maine Hospital Association and the Maine Medical Association.



“I see the poverty that’s in my district,” Saviello told the HHS Committee. “I see the people struggling to get by. Do they ever complain? No, I will tell you they do not. So if I can make their lives better, which I believe this bill will do, I’m going to do it. It’s just the right thing to do.”



Under Saviello’s proposal, LD 633, people below 100 percent of the federal poverty level ($15,930 per year for a family of two) would be able to access MaineCare, while people between 101 percent and 138 percent of the federal poverty level would be able to buy heavily subsidized private insurance. All MaineCare recipients would be required to pay premiums and co-payments as well. Saviello said the bill will alllow jails and prisons to use federal funds for substance abuse and mental health treatment, which will provide savings to the state. The bill would also require the Legislature to reevaluate Medicaid expansion every year to ensure that there are savings. LD 633 marks the sixth time legislators have pushed for Medicaid expansion; LePage has vetoed it each time.



Republicans on the committee voted straight party line against the bill. Rep. Deb Sanderson (R-Chelsea) expressed doubt that providing health care coverage to low-income Mainers would do much to solve the drug crisis because, she said, a lot of people have also died from drug overdoses in Medicaid expansion states like Massachusetts and New Hampshire. She said low-income uninsured people can use hospital charity care if they can’t afford health insurance.



“I don’t want folks to look at using a crisis as a reason to throw this state and this program into a fiscal tsunami,” said Sanderson.



Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said that LePage will certainly veto Medicaid expansion yet again and told WVOM radio on Tuesday that if Maine expands health care to poor people the state will be thrown into “financial chaos,” just like “California, Illinois, Massachusetts, Connecticut [and] Vermont.”



Saviello’s bill will now go to the Maine Senate for a vote.



On Tuesday, the Legislature’s Health and Human Services Committee voted 6-6 on a bill to expand MaineCare, the state’s Medicaid insurance program, to 70,000 low-income Mainers. Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government will pay 90 percent of health care costs for individuals who are below 138 percent of the federal poverty level ($27,724 for a family of three). However a Supreme Court decision made Medicaid expansion optional for states. Maine is currently one of 19 states in the country, mostly in the South and out West, that have not expanded Medicaid, due to opposition from Gov. LePage and most of Maine’s Republican lawmakers.Sen. Tom Saviello (R-Franklin), the sponsor of the latest expansion proposal, says there is more urgency to expand Medicaid now because the money is needed to help fight the opiate addiction epidemic. On Tuesday morning, Saviello held a press conference with Farmington Police Chief Jack Peck, Franklin County Sheriff Scott Nichols and Sagadahoc County Sheriff Joel Merry, who said that many Mainers with drug addictions are unable to access treatment because they are uninsured. In addition to the Maine Police Chiefs Association and the Maine Sheriff’s Association, Medicaid expansion is also supported by the Maine Hospital Association and the Maine Medical Association.“I see the poverty that’s in my district,” Saviello told the HHS Committee. “I see the people struggling to get by. Do they ever complain? No, I will tell you they do not. So if I can make their lives better, which I believe this bill will do, I’m going to do it. It’s just the right thing to do.”Under Saviello’s proposal, LD 633, people below 100 percent of the federal poverty level ($15,930 per year for a family of two) would be able to access MaineCare, while people between 101 percent and 138 percent of the federal poverty level would be able to buy heavily subsidized private insurance. All MaineCare recipients would be required to pay premiums and co-payments as well. Saviello said the bill will alllow jails and prisons to use federal funds for substance abuse and mental health treatment, which will provide savings to the state. The bill would also require the Legislature to reevaluate Medicaid expansion every year to ensure that there are savings. LD 633 marks the sixth time legislators have pushed for Medicaid expansion; LePage has vetoed it each time.Republicans on the committee voted straight party line against the bill. Rep. Deb Sanderson (R-Chelsea) expressed doubt that providing health care coverage to low-income Mainers would do much to solve the drug crisis because, she said, a lot of people have also died from drug overdoses in Medicaid expansion states like Massachusetts and New Hampshire. She said low-income uninsured people can use hospital charity care if they can’t afford health insurance.“I don’t want folks to look at using a crisis as a reason to throw this state and this program into a fiscal tsunami,” said Sanderson.Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said that LePage will certainly veto Medicaid expansion yet again and told WVOM radio on Tuesday that if Maine expands health care to poor people the state will be thrown into “financial chaos,” just like “California, Illinois, Massachusetts, Connecticut [and] Vermont.”Saviello’s bill will now go to the Maine Senate for a vote.