Two thunderstorms, a tornado warning, 188 minutes of rain-delay and 102 days in limbo separated the second and third outs of a Rockies’ sixth inning against the Giants.

A May 22 game, suspended because of nasty weather, got its second chance Monday at Coors Field under sunny Labor Day skies. It left the Rockies wishing for a third chance.

Hunter Pence’s eighth-inning double finally, without mercy, gave the Giants a 4-2 victory over the Rockies. Official game time: Three hours, 16 minutes.

“Once the game started, it was business as usual,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said.

But the Rockies’ loss closed a time bridge that, over three-plus months, sent their season into shambles.

If the May game came in like a lion for the Rockies, it went out like a kitten in September. The Rockies on that day were 26-21, just three games behind division-leading San Francisco in the National League West. Colorado had the fourth-best record in the NL overall.

“I felt like we had the upper hand when that game started,” Weiss said. “We got out to a lead and Jorge (De La Rosa) had to come out of the game because of the rain.

“We had 10 hits at that point in the game. It looked like we were on our way.”

Since then, the Rockies are 28-62 (a paltry .311 winning percentage). They dropped 11 spots into the cellar. At 54-83 overall, they now have the worst record in the NL.

The resumed game will go into the books with an odd boxscore. Michael Cuddyer went 3-for-4 with a second-inning RBI after he singled home Wilin Rosario. And Troy Tulowitzki went 1-for-2 with a walk.

But when Part II started, Cuddyer was on the 15-day disabled list with a hamstring strain. And Tulowitkzi’s season was long over — he’s on the 60-day disabled list after surgery on torn cartilage in his hip.

That left the Rockies to cobble together a lineup of replacements. They included players who, by September, have become regulars — Josh Rutledge at shortstop for Tulowitzki and Charlie Culberson, who pinch-ran for Cuddyer.

For the Giants, their May stars carried over to September with barely a missed step.

Pence, who in May’s fourth inning homered off Rockies reliever Tommy Kahnle (he’s now also on the DL), came through again in September’s eighth. His line-drive double to right field scored catcher Andrew Susac. Pence then scored on Travis Ishikawa’s soft single to right for a two-run lead.

“Pence is a clutch hitter. He’s a good hitter,” Weiss said.

Jorge De La Rosa, who pitched a scoreless first three innings in May, will get a no-decision on his record.

Christian Friedrich — who was pitching as a starter for the Triple-A Colorado Springs Sky Sox in May but was recently called-up as a Rockies reliever — earned the loss after allowing the winning run eighth.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke

Looking ahead

Giants’ Yusmeiro Petit (4-3, 3.44 ERA) at Rockies’ Jordan Lyles (6-2, 4.08), 6:40 p.m. Tuesday, ROOT; 850 AM

Lyles will make his second consecutive start against the Giants. He pitched six innings in a 4-1 loss at San Francisco last week. It was his first loss since May 17 — a span that included a two-month stint on the disabled list because of a broken hand. Lyles had five strikeouts and gave up only four hits against the Giants last week at AT&T Park, but he issued three walks in the sixth inning. Nick Groke, The Denver Post

Wednesday: Giants’ Ryan Vogelsong (8-9, 3.73 ERA) at Rockies’ Christian Bergman (1-2, 5.74), 1:10 p.m., MLB

Thursday: Off

Friday: Padres’ Eric Stults (6-15, 4.56) at Rockies’ Tyler Matzek (4-9, 4.75), 6:40 p.m., ROOT