The rapid growth of Denver’s residential urban core is on most everyone’s radar today, yet as our city’s unprecedented development boom continues unabated, a troubling shift has begun to reveal itself to all but the most casual observer.

As downtown Denver has become increasingly densified with block after block of repetitive five-story, stick-framed rental apartments stacked on top of (or connected to) massive concrete parking structures, banality has begun to quietly replace the well-designed historic buildings that once populated our urban core. Meaningless, uninspiring structures that feature mere surface variation rather than genuine innovation seem to be the zeitgeist of the day.

We’re talking about a huge volume of housing here. In April 2014, the Downtown Denver Partnership stated in its Downtown Denver Economic Update for 2014 that “residential development in downtown Denver and the City Center Neighborhoods continues to thrive with 7,170 rental units and 1,173 for-sale units under construction or planned.”

Urban planner Ken Schroeppel puts it in perspective at DenverInfill.com: There were approximately 10,500 residential units built within Denver’s center city from 2000 to 2009, while about 5,000 units were added to the downtown core from mid-2012 to mid-2014. That’s roughly half the total from the entire first decade of the 21st century — not including any recently completed units or projects planned for 2015 and beyond.

Schroeppel concludes, “Assuming all of the developments under construction will be completed, then a total of 7,388 new residential units will be added to downtown Denver from January 2012 through mid-2015 (without including proposed projects). That translates into roughly 11,000 new residents and approximately $1.5 billion of residential investment in downtown Denver.”

In other words, the 1.5-mile radius that includes Denver’s urban core is being transformed before our eyes. In fact, the massive investment being poured into our city to turn it into a major residential market is beyond comprehension for most. Yet, critical conversations about how this dramatic shift is fundamentally changing downtown Denver’s design aesthetic, or how such an unprecedented number of renters condensed into such a small area will impact residents’ ownership of and engagement in our city, are not taking place.

This is the time for those who care about the long-term viability and vibrancy of our great city to pause and consider whether there might be more appealing, innovative approaches to building a timeless, dynamic residential urban core before it’s too late.

Somehow, while we were weathering the recent recession, the valuing of innovation, offering people viable choices, improving the lives of occupants, enhancing the environment, and reaching beyond the notion of duplicating what others have already done seems to have been forgotten in Denver.

Other cities, architects and developers — both in the U.S. and abroad — have been actively questioning this formulaic approach to housing for some time by reimagining local housing solutions and reaching beyond the simple quest of maximizing net leasable square footage, and catering exclusively to young professionals.

Because great ideas relative to high-density housing often come from other countries before making their way to one of our coasts, eventually showing up in Denver, four very different multifamily housing projects come to mind as recent examples.

One is in Seoul, South Korea (micro-housing); the second and third are in Copenhagen, Denmark, and in Manhattan (both multifamily housing); and the fourth is in San Francisco (affordable senior housing). What is most compelling about these projects, however, is the special care the architects took to respect context, integrate social spaces throughout the buildings (not merely at street level), and maximize useable exterior space.

Unlike some of the most recent five-story apartment boxes built in downtown Denver, these projects embrace the concepts of outdoor living and social interaction while responding thoughtfully to context. Through innovative approaches to unit stacking and shape, redefining the ground plane, integration of the car, and the exploration of vertical neighborhoods, these projects have successfully begun to reimagine what 21st century housing can be.

For example, The Mountain multifamily project in Copenhagen designed by the Bjarke Ingels Group (BIG), incorporates L-shaped units with outdoor protected courtyards terraced vertically to allow each unit full sun exposure, privacy and its own private courtyard. A similar project by BIG on West 57th Street in Manhattan utilizes a unique, warped pyramid form to preserve existing views and maximize natural light.

David Baker Architects, a respected California-based firm, designed Armstrong Senior Housing in San Francisco. Avoiding additional planning themes that often lead to the downfall of projects of this type, the exterior is vibrant, fresh and dynamic, reflecting the neighborhood’s African-American population through the tradition of African textiles. The residences — predominantly studios and one-bedroom units — are built over commercial space that houses shops, senior services, a library and community center, and wrap around a large private courtyard, contributing to residents’ sense of connection to their community.

Finally, the Songpa Micro-Housing project in Seoul, designed by Jinhee Park and John Hong, uses connecting stairways as social space, introducing a linear micro café and an amphitheater, for example. Hallways function as collaborative areas that seamlessly transform from private to semi-private to open space, allowing residents to either claim a single unit or combine units to create larger configurations on a temporary or permanent basis.

These projects represent a few of the newest and best examples of innovative, contextual design within the multifamily sector. While each originally began with a standard program with specific goals relative to unit mix and size, the architects ventured far beyond what was expected, ultimately exploring opportunities that broadened both client expectations and the traditional concepts of housing, individual units and one’s connection to community.

Denver’s planning department, developers, investors, builders and architects must begin asking whether the economic success of repetitive, five-story wood apartment boxes is enough. Housing solutions that enhance our environment, strengthen our urban condition and bring a sense of permanence and longevity to our collective future must be seriously pursued before it’s too late.

Downtown Denver could be a leader in generating multigenerational, diversified, innovative housing. We could easily compete with Portland, Vancouver or some of the more innovative parts of cities around the world. Yet, along with the recent surge in rental apartment construction, we have experienced a simultaneous decline in unit types, variety and quality — not to mention a serious lack of design innovation.

Is the building of repetitive, banal housing solutions the best we can do? If your answer is “no,” contact me at jsheppard@rothsheppard.com. Perhaps we can come together to initiate a long-overdue conversation in our city.

Jeffrey Sheppard is co-founder and design principal for Roth Sheppard Architects in Denver. He was the American Institute of Architects’ 2014 Architect of the Year in Colorado.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.