Topics: Bill Clinton, Chicago, Chicago Teachers Union, Education, Education Reform, Hillary Clinton, Karen Lewis, Michael Bloomberg, neoliberalism, Rahm Emanuel, Richard Daley, Elections News, News, Politics News

Now that he has a city to run and is too busy to seduce the press like he used to, Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel is not quite the political celebrity he once was. Ironically, despite being the most powerful man in one of the world’s greatest cities, Emanuel’s profile right now outside Illinois is probably the lowest it’s been since his brief and extremely lucrative late-90s hiatus. As a professional consumer of political media, I’ve enjoyed the break from Emanuel’s signature brashness and machismo. But as a lefty who believes the Democratic Party can be made better (which is not the same as good) Emanuel’s upcoming, near-certain, and little-noticed reelection makes me nervous about the party’s near-term future.

In defense of the national media’s scant attention, I should note that this year’s mayoral election has been extremely uncompetitive, which best explains why its mostly flown under the radar. Judging by the latest polling, there’s no doubt that the mayor will receive more votes than any other single candidate on Election Day. Instead, the question is whether he’ll win the 50 percent-plus-one-vote he needs to avoid an April runoff against whoever finishes second. On that score, and with less than a week before Chicagoans head to the polls, Emanuel’s coming up short. But according to the Chicago Tribune, nearly 20 percent of voters still haven’t decided how to cast their vote yet — and Emanuel’s team has an insane amount of money to spend on advertising for the final push.

Still, all the money in the world can’t make people vote, and campaigning to avoid a future runoff — which Emanuel would almost certainly win, too — isn’t quite the stuff of political dreams. That’s probably the best explanation for this recent piece on Emanuel in the New York Times, which focuses on efforts to woo African-American voters that the paper implies are desperate and belated. “[A]n essential worry for his campaign is how well he will do with black residents,” the Times reports, before noting that “alienated black voters” could tether Emanuel below that 50-plus-one threshold. And as the Times shows, if African-Americans decline to do Emanuel any favors, they won’t lack for reasons.

To be clear, there’s no reason whatsoever to think Emanuel — who left the inside track for being the first Jewish speaker of the House in order to serve as chief of staff for the first African-American president — harbors negative feelings towards African-Americans. As is increasingly the case in the U.S., the problem is fundamentally more about class than race. But you can hardly blame black people in Chicago if they decide the mayor’s personal views don’t compensate for his neoliberal policies, which have often been terrible for those Chicagoans who aren’t members of Emanuel’s affluent political base. If you look at his record thus far, in fact, it’s hard not to think that Emanuel has almost been trying to vindicate the leftwing critics of his neoliberal, Clintonian approach.