His comments came at the Detroit Music Hall, where he was preparing to rehearse for his announcement. Ben Carson says he will run for president

Ben Carson confirmed on Sunday that he will announce his presidential bid on Monday.

Carson, a retired neurosurgeon, made the announcement in a television interview with Sinclair Broadcasting ahead of his formal campaign kickoff event, still scheduled for Monday in Detroit . Carson suggested to POLITICO the interview was a pre-interview to be released around the time of the announcement but said in it: “I’m willing to be a part of the equation, and, therefore, I’m announcing my candidacy for president of the United States.”

Story Continued Below

Carson later acknowledged that he did informally disclose his candidacy. His comments came at the Detroit Music Hall, where he was preparing to rehearse for his announcement.

“We probably wouldn’t be doing all this if we weren’t” running, he said.

Sitting next to her husband at the Detroit Music Hall for the announcement rehearsal, Candy Carson deadpanned: “I think the country is probably more excited than we are.”

Carson gained attention, and began to draw interest from the conservative wing of the Republican Party, after his appearance at the National Prayer Breakfast in 2013, where he chided President Barack Obama over the Affordable Care Act.

Carson has not gone unnoticed in recent months, either: He recently ripped into “selfie’’ culture and even drew the ire of Vice President Joe Biden after he postulated that being gay is “a choice.” “A lot of people who go into prison straight, and when they come out they’re gay,” he had told CNN “New Day” co-host Chris Cuomo.

But the latest arrival in the Republican field told reporter Jeff Barnd that he had learned from his experience courting controversy.

“I don’t wander off into those extraneous areas that can be exploited. I have learned that,” he told the CBS affiliate.

The candidate’s schedule took another twist Sunday night: Carson is canceling the Monday events he had scheduled in Iowa.

He was initially scheduled to head straight to the Hawkeye State after his announcement, but he got word Sunday that his mother is seriously ill, so he will head headed to Texas to see her. The campaign hopes he’ll make his Tuesday events in Iowa, but whether he will is unclear.

In a video posted to his YouTube channel on Sunday, Carson laid out his vision for the country over images of diverse Americans, national monuments and familiar icons, like Abraham Lincoln and Martin Luther King Jr.

“If America is to survive the challenges of the modern world, we need to heal, we need to be inspired and we need to revive the exceptional spirit that built America,” a voice-over intones in the 4½ minute video.

Nick Gass contributed to this report.