Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

CHARLOTTE, N.C. (AP) — Travis Trice received a text message Sunday from Golden State Warriors forward and former Michigan State player Draymond Green that read: “Don’t let this be your last game.”

The Spartans’ senior guard texted back, “It won’t.”

Trice made sure of that Sunday, scoring 23 points and helping Michigan State knock second-seeded Virginia out of the NCAA Tournament for the second straight year, 60-54.

The 6-foot, 175-pound Trice scored 13 of his team’s first 15 points on 5-of-5 shooting, including three 3-pointers, to help the Spartans build a 15-4 lead.

Branden Dawson added 15 points and nine rebounds for the seventh-seeded Spartans, who advanced to the Sweet 16 for the seventh time in the last eight seasons under coach Tom Izzo. The Spartans will play the winner of the Oklahoma-Dayton game in Syracuse, New York on Friday.

“Our thing was attack from the get go and get a lead,” said Trice, in his first full season as a starter after three years as a reserve.

“It was his time to shine,” said Dawson, who started playing with Trice in AAU ball.

With top seed Villanova having lost Saturday, it is the first time a No. 1 and 2 seed from the same region didn’t advance to the Sweet 16 since Kentucky and Gonzaga in 2004.

The Cavaliers (30-4), the first Atlantic Coast Conference team to lose after a 9-0 start in the tournament, were led by Anthony Gill’s 11 points and Darion Atkins’ 10 points and 14 rebounds.

Izzo made some defensive tweaks to his game plan after Michigan State’s first-round win over Georgia, and the Spartans (25-11) stole a page from last year’s regional semifinal win by limiting the Cavaliers to 29.8 percent shooting. Virginia finished 2 of 17 from 3-point range.

Izzo said the Spartans “changed what we do” defensively in a day-and-a-half.

Instead of having his guards jump to the ball and give help, Izzo relied more on his big men in the middle to stay disciplined — and not cheat or go for steals — and guard against Virginia’s flare screens.

“We’re just not as talented as we’ve been so we are always cheating to find a way to get an edge,” Izzo said. “Coaches can tell you what to do, but when muscle memory tells you to do it another way … your focus has to be incredible. And that was incredible focus if you asked me.”

Last year, the Spartans upset the top-seeded Cavaliers in the regional semifinal by holding Virginia to 35.1 percent shooting.