Gov. Matt Bevin is dealing with the biggest mistake of his young administration, the rollout of Benefind. And he has no one to blame but himself.

Buy Photo Gov. Matt Bevin speaks during a press conference about Benefind on March 31, 2016. (Photo: By Michael Clevenger, The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Gov. Matt Bevin must thank heavens every morning for Tim Longmeyer.

While attention was focused on what could be the biggest scandal in Frankfort since two dozen FBI agents descended on the state Capitol in 1992, kicking off the BOPTROT investigation, he’s been dealing with the biggest mistake of his young administration.

That, of course, is the ill-prepared rollout of the Benefind system, which will do for Medicaid patients some of the things done by kynect, Kentucky’s health insurance exchange that he has derided as just a costly website.

The new system, planning for which started during the Beshear administration, is set up to be the digital front door for people applying for government benefits through the state. It went live around March 1 and was intended to complement kynect, not replace it.

What happened in recent weeks was a bit like the old Spencer Tracy-Katharine Hepburn movie, "Desk Set," in which the fictional EMERAC computer went berserk and started firing workers. All of them.

The state’s computer system wasn’t firing people. Instead, it was telling people that they no longer qualified for Medicaid, food stamps and other programs upon which they depend.

Unlike the movie, this wasn’t a romantic comedy. It was dead serious.

Some people who had obtained Medicaid through kynect were shifted to the new system and then were told their coverage was being cut off or they needed to provide more information, such as proof of citizenship, which they had already provided to kynect.

Worse, kynecters who had been hired to help people navigate the kynect system were not given access to Benefind to assist in many cases.

My colleague, Deborah Yetter, wrote about cases in which Medicaid funds that pay for assistants for people with disabilities – allowing them to stay out of nursing homes and saving the state thousands of dollars per person – were cut off.

One elderly man was told he would lose the $16 he gets each month in food stamps.

What’s worse, people being affected by the screw-ups couldn’t get through to state workers on the phones to set things straight. And lines at state offices where thousands of people were showing up to complain meant hours-long waits.

To top it off, Bevin’s administration at about the same time fired the ombudsman, the state official charged with taking complaints and getting resolution for the state’s clients.

Bevin’s response on Thursday was to call a press conference to acknowledge problems but to also heckle the reporters who were covering the debacle. As he often does when caught making an error or changing his story, he blamed the reporters covering it.

It wasn’t their fault.

It was the fault of the Bevin administration. His administration should be better than this.

Unlike the kynect system, which was rolled out with few hitches despite a hard deadline, the Bevin administration rushed Benefind despite knowing there were problems.

In fact, according to WFPL, state workers were given a “defect guide” in the days before Benefind went online to help employees work around problems that arose. That wasn't enough.

It seems clear those problems should have been fixed and more testing should have been done before Benefind was rolled out – despite Bevin’s haste to begin dismantling a system that works.

But as long as folks are focused on burgeoning Democratic scandal, Bevin enjoys a bit of cover.

Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com. Follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1MJEvz3