A new Denver Health clinic will replace a long-vacant grocery warehouse in southwest Denver, providing access to medical care to one of the most underserved communities in the city.

Denver Health recently purchased the land at 1339 S. Federal Blvd., which previously held an Albertsons warehouse that has been empty for nearly a decade.

“There’s a huge need for healthcare services in this part of town,” Denver City Councilman Paul Lopez said. “For years there hasn’t been enough slots available, resources available for folks who need healthcare, prenatal care, dental and checkups.”

The new clinic will be one of Denver Health’s larger facilities outside the main campus at 777 Bannock St., according to Dr. Paul Melinkovich, director of community health services for Denver Health.

The clinic will have 40 exam rooms, 10 rooms for urgent care with extended hours, a pharmacy and dental clinic.

Melinkovich said Denver Health is looking at other specialty services such as optometry, podiatry or physical therapy.

Denver Health will break ground on the $37-million facility this fall, and it is scheduled to open early in 2016.

“Clearly what we want to do is increase our capacity for primary care services, dental care and urgent care,” Melinkovich said.

Southwest Denver, along with the northeast part of the city, has stood out as being underserved to Denver Health. While the organization has expanded in areas such as Montbello and Green Valley Ranch, this is the first venture into southwest Denver in some time.

Lopez said the proceeds from the sale of the closed Mariposa clinic will help support the building of this new location.

There is already a small clinic next to Knapp Elementary School in the Westwood neighborhood and the Sam Sandos Westside Family Health Center at 1100 Federal Blvd. Lopez said those sites will remain open.

“Those places will stay as is. We’re not replacing, we’re adding,” he said.

There are currently seven satellite Denver Health clinics throughout the city and Melinkovich said this eighth facility will not only serve low-income people, but also everyone who needs health care. The new clinic doesn’t have a name yet, but Denver Health is determining a process to name the facility.

Melinkovich also noted the increase in patients with the Affordable Care Act, but that Denver Health hasn’t had the facilities to support everyone.

“There are a large number who have been enrolled in the exchange program, yet capacity for primary care hasn’t increased,” Melinkovich said.

Feedback has been mostly positive from the community, according to Lopez. However, some residents have complained about traffic that the clinic will create, while some wanted to bring a new grocer to the area.

Lopez said a new grocer was not possible because the landowners were the grocer across the street and didn’t want to bring in competition to the area.

He added: “Rather than it sitting vacant, it’s being put to use.”

Joe Vaccarelli: 303-954-2396, jvaccarelli@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joe_vacc