The cornerstone of the Patriot Alliance is the Patriot Alliance Messenger, a 16-page monthly newsletter that will launch in October.

Americans interested in returning the United States to a place where Constitutional liberties are respected and where they can exercise their independence and self-reliance without government intrusion are joining the newly formed Patriot Alliance.

Launched by the creators of Power4Patriots, SurvivalSeeds4Patriots, Food4Patriots and Privacy4Patriots, the Patriot Alliance is a group of like-minded individuals who want to return America to the way it was envisioned by the Founding Fathers.

The Patriot Alliance was formed for patriotic Americans who want to reclaim the free America they once knew and who want to return government to what it was intended to be – a servant to the people.

The cornerstone of the Patriot Alliance is the Patriot Alliance Messenger, a 16-page monthly newsletter that will launch in October. This publication is designed to both inform and entertain. It will give readers timely information about protecting their property, possessions and privacy, and will provide realistic steps they can take to survive government spying, gun confiscations, privacy invasions and ObamaCare.

The Patriot Alliance Messenger will let readers know about other Patriot Alliance members and what they are doing to improve the quality of their lives. It will also include entertainment features such as crossword puzzles, Sudoku’s, cartoons, word games and trivia questions.

Those who join the Patriot Alliance will not only be subscribers to the monthly Patriot Alliance Messenger, they will also receive the following eight bonuses:



The Patriot Alliance Album for keeping each edition of the Patriot Alliance Messenger.

The Patriot Alliance Survival Tool, an 11-in-1 survival tool that can be carried everywhere.

A Special Exclusive Report – How to Hide Your Guns and Other Valuables.

A Special Exclusive Report – Retirement Security Secrets Revealed.

A Special Exclusive Report – The Government Is Spying on You.

A Special Exclusive Report – Surviving ObamaCare.

A Special Exclusive Report – Prepping for Pets.

The Off-Grid Living DVD.

Power4Patriots is a series of videos and manuals describing how to build solar panels, wind turbines, water heaters and solar heaters. SurvivalSeeds4Patriots is the maker of the Liberty Seed Vault containing more than 5,400 heirloom seeds from 21 varieties of vegetables. Food4Patriots is the supplier of emergency food suitable for long-term storage, survival and emergency preparedness. Privacy4Patriots is the publisher of an upcoming report on how to protect one’s privacy.