Uninsured Orange County residents have received more than 500 free surgeries worth $6.5 million since 2007, with 25 more scheduled for Saturday.

Over the past seven years, the nonprofit Access OC has recruited doctors, hospitals and surgery centers to donate outpatient hernia repair, cataract surgery, gall bladder removal and other procedures. On Saturday, Kaiser Permanente in Anaheim hosts its 13th Super Surgery Saturday.

“There’s just an electric feeling in the air; the volunteers feel it, the patients feel it, the families feel it,” said Dr. Monica Gabaldon, a Kaiser anesthesiologist and event organizer. “I think it’s the feeling of being part of something bigger than yourself, that you’re a part of something that may change someone’s life.”

Ericka Waidley, executive director of Santa Ana-based Access OC, said the waiting list for surgery has about 200 people, some of whom have been waiting several years. They are referred through nonprofit community clinics.

“These are the people that are the grassroots workers in Orange County, the ones keeping the mega resorts going, the beautiful gardens in people’s homes, the nannies, the restaurant workers,” she said. “They are so grateful. They are just amazed that this opportunity has presented itself. A lot of them had no idea that they’d ever be pain-free or be able to go back to work 100 percent.”

Waidley said even though the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, has resulted in more residents with coverage, she expects strong demand among underinsured patients who have lower-cost plans with high out-of-pocket costs.

“There’s still a large number of people that are either not eligible or still not able to pay because they can’t afford the deductible for any kind of specialty care,” Waidley said.

Since the program started, more than 1,000 medical volunteers have provided 552 surgeries and colonoscopies. After Saturday, the 33rd free surgery day will take place June 7 at Mission Hospital.

“There is no county hospital here in Orange County so they have nowhere to go at this point,” Gabaldon said. “We hope we’re able to catch a lot of these people and help them before they end up in the ER.”

To learn more: 714-543-9400 or accessoc.org

Contact the writer: cperkes@ocregister.com 714-796-3686