The Sedgwick County Zoo's elephant exhibit is ahead of schedule on construction and fundraising for the project is nearing its goal, but now the zoo could face a new obstacle for opening the $10.6 million dollar expansion. A proposal by Sedgwick County commissioners to end a five-year funding agreement with the Sedgwick County Zoo would affect staffing for the upcoming elephant exhibit.

The long-term funding agreement set back in 2013 included money for additional elephant keepers the zoo needs to hire when the new exhibit opens next spring. If this proposal passes, the zoo will have to figure out how to pay for those employees and they come with a big price tag. It could leave the zoo searching for up to $388,000 to staff the exhibit for 2016 alone.

"It certainly was an alarm bell with the zoo that we're having our exhibit opening next year," says director of zoo development Steve Onken.

Onken says worst case scenario is they would have to make up the money by raising admission and membership prices.

"When we developed the financial agreement with the county it was really under the guidance of this growth of the elephant exhibit," adds Onken.

Sedgwick County commissioner Jim Howell says the county is reevaluating the five-year agreement because they're facing a considerable deficit moving forward.

"In 2013, when they signed this agreement, this 5 year agreement with significant increases it did not take into consideration that the revenue just isn't going to be there," he says.

Howell tells KAKE News there are other important things in the county taking a back seat on funding such as thirty-five sheriff's deputies positions at the jail and six firefighter openings.

"We're going to have to put everything back on the table to solve the problem," says Howell.

Onken hopes there's a solution that works for both parties to keep their partnership strong.

"If we need to look at some changes in that agreement we would be willing to do so and talk about it but just an out and out termination of it is a little bit difficult to swallow," says Onken.

The commissioners they will put this proposal to a vote next week. They have until June to notify the zoo of any changes in the funding agreement.