Photo

WASHINGTON — With the federal online insurance exchange running more smoothly than ever, the biggest laggards in fixing enrollment problems are now state-run exchanges in several states where the governors and legislative leaders have been among the strongest supporters of President Obama’s health care law.

Republicans have seized on the failures of homegrown exchanges in states like Maryland, Minnesota and Oregon — all plagued by technological problems that have kept customers unhappy and enrollment goals unmet — and promise to use the issue against Democratic candidates for governor and legislative seats this fall.

“People see incompetence when they look at this,” said Michael Short, a spokesman for the Republican National Committee. “Everyone that’s associated with it is going to have to deal with the consequences of this terrible law, including the state legislators who created these exchanges and the governors in charge of running them.”

Last month, the Republican National Committee filed public-records requests in Hawaii, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota and Oregon seeking information about compensation and vacation time for the exchange directors, four of whom have resigned. All five states have Democratic governors whose terms end this year. Three of them — Gov. Neil Abercrombie of Hawaii, Gov. Mark Dayton of Minnesota and Gov. John Kitzhaber of Oregon — are seeking re-election.

In Maryland, the turmoil around the state-run exchange is dogging Lt. Gov. Anthony G. Brown, a Democrat hoping to succeed Gov. Martin O’Malley, who is leaving office because of term limits. Mr. O’Malley made Mr. Brown his point person on the health care law’s rollout in Maryland, and now Mr. Brown’s opponents — both Democratic and Republican — are bludgeoning him with the state exchange’s failures.

Photo

Addressing a legislative panel on Jan. 14, Maryland’s top health official said the state had made the mistake of using “off-the-shelf” software with serious defects. The official, Joshua M. Sharfstein, said the state would stick with the current system until the enrollment period ended on March 31, but might consider other options, such as joining the federal exchange, after that.

All five states lean Democratic, and many analysts believe the exchange failures will not be enough to allow Republican upsets this fall. Still, the issue has been potent enough to hurt Mr. Obama’s approval rating and put congressional Democrats on the defensive. If nothing else, it will provide a continuous headache for Democratic candidates like Mr. Dayton in Minnesota, who is hoping to cruise to a second four-year term. The website of the state’s exchange, known as MNsure, is still plagued by software defects, and an outside review last month found that it cannot be completely fixed before the March 31 enrollment deadline.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The reality is that Mark Dayton owns the MNsure debacle — there’s no other way about it,” said Ben Golnik, a Republican strategist and a former executive director of the Minnesota Republican Party. “He pushed it through the Legislature, he said Minnesota is all in, so I think it’s going to be very difficult for him to distance himself from this.”