Before we knew learned the identity of the shooters who massacred 14 people in San Bernardino, before we learned there was more than one shooter, I assumed that the gunman was another white, right-leaning domestic terrorist. Why he’d target a county-run health center for the developmentally disabled was unclear: Because it represented the government, and Obamacare? Or, I admit it crossed my mind, because Donald Trump’s vicious mimicking of a disabled New York Times reporter triggered some unspeakable reflex? (As it turned out, none of the victims were disabled.) Ad Policy

At that early point, Leon Wolf of the conservative Redstate.com was on the lookout for liberals like me jumping to conclusions—as I was on the lookout for wingers who assumed it was Muslim terrorism. Wolf trolled “breaking: Mass Shooting in San Bernardino, Liberals on Twitter Ecstatic,” and he ran “some tweets from liberals who are involved in their favorite sporting event, pin the shooting on a conservative!” To say anyone was “ecstatic” is disgusting, but this meme then making the rounds did speak to me.

At the same time, though, the right was crossing its fingers and pleading, as it did during the previous week’s Planned Parenthood attack: Please let it be a transgender leftist activist—anybody but a white, pro-life, Christian male whom we’ll have to fit into our “mentally deranged and apolitical” narrative. GET THE LATEST NEWS AND ANALYSIS DELIVERED TO YOUR INBOX EACH MORNING SIGN UP!

But when the names of the shooters Syed Farook and his wife, Tashfeen Malik, surfaced, you could almost hear the right’s whoops of, if not ecstasy, then of sweet revenge. The New York Post changed its cover headline from the cautious murder mission to the incendiary muslim killers. (Where was the Post headline christian killer for suspected Planned Parenthood attacker and self-described Christian Robert L. Dear Jr.?) Fox News anchors kept saying that Farook attacked his co-workers at a “Christmas party,” although most legit news sources described it as a “holiday party”—which is indeed what a government agency would call it. But Fox had found a seasonal twofer: Muslim terrorists (and their liberal symps) are leading the War on Christmas!

What we have in these mass shootings, time and again, is each side accusing the other for prematurely pointing fingers.