This year will see further movement of services to Foothills campus

Lab assistant Meagan Fraley talks on the phone while working with fluid samples last week in the new laboratory at the Boulder Community Foothills Hospital. ( JEREMY PAPASSO / DAILY CAMERA )

Boulder Community Hospital's expansion plans First phase: Transitioning the majority of inpatient acute services to the Foothills campus. This includes surgery, imaging and laboratory services, and inpatient care for patients with heart disease, neurological issues and orthopedic injuries. This phase began in 2011 and is expected to be completed in the fall of 2014. Second phase: Renovations will begin at the current Broadway campus of Boulder Community Hospital. Construction at Broadway is expected to begin in November and include the consolidation of the outpatient services and business operations currently provided at the Mapleton Center for Rehabilitation at the renovated Broadway location. This second phase is expected to cost approximately $15 million, depending on how plans develop. Source: Boulder Community Hospital

CORRECTION: This story originally misidentified Ron Secrist, president of Boulder Community Hospital Foundation

Since its beginnings in 1922, Boulder Community Hospital's site off Broadway and Balsam Avenue has seen its share of changes.

The subsequent decades brought expansions and additions, and plenty of remodels and renovations, but the cobbling together of facilities was not sustainable for the long term, hospital officials eventually concluded.

Later this year, Boulder Community Hospital's Broadway campus will experience the most significant transformation in its nearly 100-year history.

Come October, Boulder Community will move the emergency, surgery, acute care and other main services currently housed at Broadway to its newly expanded and remodeled campus off Foothills Highway and Arapahoe Avenue in east Boulder.

The move is part of a 10-year, $125 million comprehensive plan unveiled in 2010 to create a state-of-the art hospital facility designed to meet the needs of the Boulder region and to improve efficiencies amid the passage and enactment of the Affordable Care Act.

"It's a big move," said Ron Secrist, president of Boulder Community Hospital Foundation. "It's a once in 50 years, 100 years type of project."

The expected fall 2014 completion of the Boulder Community Foothills Hospital project — which started in 2011 and will result in the addition of 123,000 square feet of space and the renovation and repurposing of 89,000 square feet of existing space — will wrap up the first phase for the multi-pronged effort.

Boulder Community's project is slightly behind schedule and slightly above cost projections, Secrist said, attributing the higher costs — which are on the scale of 2 percent to 3 percent — to regulatory changes that have taken effect since 2010 and also the increasing expense of new technology.

The project is funded by Boulder Community's existing savings, the issuance of bonds and community fundraising efforts.

As for the time table, officials initially projected that the opening of the expanded Foothills campus would occur by May or June of this year.

"A lot of that is actually snows from last season," he said of the delays.

Several concrete pours were snowed out as a result of the wintry storms, he said.

The Foothills campus, however, did escape unscathed after the historic rains wreaked havoc throughout Boulder and surrounding regions in September. Secrist credited the master-planning process behind the development and expansion of Foothills.

The major construction at Foothills should be concluded in July with the supplying of rooms and training taking place in August.

Community tours and public events most likely will be set for September, with the operating opening slated for October, he said.

There will be little downtime before the next phase of the project as officials plan to start renovating the Broadway facility in November.

The Broadway work is projected to take about 15 months. But, if all goes as currently planned, those efforts could wrap up as early as the end of 2015, Secrist said.

Moving patients, critical services

Registered nurse Jamie Teasley, left, works on her computer last week at the emergency department of the Boulder Community Hospital's Broadway campus. (JEREMY PAPASSO / DAILY CAMERA)

The second phase, expected to start in November, will consist of the renovation of the west Boulder campus, which will serve as the new home to the rehabilitation and behavioral health services currently housed at the hospital's Mapleton Center for Rehabilitation facility at 311 Mapleton Ave.

Boulder Community Hospital recently sold the Mapleton Center property — first home to the Boulder-Colorado Sanitarium in the late 1800s — to a private development group for $12.9 million. Plans for the Mapleton Center property have yet to be disclosed or submitted to the city of Boulder.

The sales agreement with the Mapleton Center's buyer includes a lease-back arrangement for the hospital to continue utilizing the facility through the completion of the Broadway renovation, Secrist said.

"The sale is not accelerating our departure from Mapleton," he said.

Most of Boulder Community Hospital's facility activity could be completed by 2016, but the remaining years of the comprehensive plan involve the hospital adjusting to and accommodating the various changes — to services such as medical services, reimbursements and billing — that could come from health care reform, Secrist said.

But first, officials have to move through the task at hand: moving a hospital's critical services and patients.

"We're making some big decisions, some big efforts this year," Secrist said. "You know how important it is to do it right, and we intend to."

Hospital officials already are working on a coordinated plan for the transition, which includes the moving of some equipment and services in September and the transport of acute care patients over the course of one day in October.

Moving emergency and critical care services — and, especially, patients — three and a half miles east will be a heavily orchestrated process.

As October grows closer, most likely over the course of a month, Boulder Community's two hospitals will take a hotel-like approach. Foothills will start taking on more new admissions while Broadway's bed count slowly will lessen as patients' regularly scheduled discharges take place.

After a certain cut-off date, the patients remaining at Broadway will be moved to Foothills via ambulances and other emergency service vehicles over the course of one day.

"You hope you get down to where you're moving very few patients," he said.

Intent of design

Several of the functions and departments previously housed at Broadway have already moved to Foothills including about 75 percent of the laboratory services, Secrist said. The hospital will maintain a reference lab at Broadway in addition to some imaging services.

After the opening, Foothills will have more than 130 beds, including those for acute care. About 35 to 40 beds will remain at Broadway to serve the needs of the rehabilitation and behavioral health departments.

Boulder Community Hospital currently has 165 beds.

"As you see how the medical technology, surgical procedures and recovery times have changed, you'll see most hospitals are not adding more beds — it's not about in-patient stays," Secrist said, adding those are combined with a greater focus on costs and concern about hospital-borne infections. "The hospital of the future will have less in-patient beds and much more out-patient services."

Hospital officials applied "Lean" design techniques to improve flow and reduce constraints to patient care, he said. Architects, doctors and nurses came together to design patient rooms, configure departments and floor layouts, and determine the most efficient movements and walking routes.

In the newly renovated Foothills hospital, the operating room is adjacent to the intensive care unit, which is adjacent to the step-down unit.

At Broadway, those units are located on different floors in opposite wings.

"The major focus of the Affordable Care Act was to try to deliver medicine in a more efficient manner," Secrist said. "This hospital allows us to do that. At the same time, we're able to go in and do some renovations at the Broadway campus."

The space is designed in such a way as to easily accommodate for the addition of new technologies and services and to serve Boulder residents and those from surrounding communities.

"Clearly the emergency room is now moving toward the center of the population served as opposed to the center of Boulder proper," he said, noting the emergency room at Foothills will be larger than the existing emergency rooms at Foothills and Broadway combined.

Secrist and hospital officials say that ambulance response times are expected to improve for the overall community.

"First, Foothills Hospital has a more centralized location for many city and county residents," said Richard Sheehan, Boulder Community Hospital spokesman. "Second, Foothills hospital has greater accessibility for ambulances since Foothills Parkway and Arapahoe Avenue are both multi-lane roads with fewer stoplights than the section of north Broadway ... near Boulder Community Hospital.

"Ambulances responding to the northern section of the central core can use Foothills Parkway to reach that area."

Emergency services

The Broadway campus renovations also include the construction of a shelled-out space that can accommodate a future urgent care center. However, that space most likely would not be build out in the near-term, Secrist said, noting that Boulder Medical Center plans to continue operating its facility and urgent care center at 2750 Broadway.

"As long as Boulder Medical Center is going to do it, we're not going to replicate it across the street," he said. "If they would ever stop running an urgent care center, then we would come back and put one at Broadway."

Brad McKee, chief executive officer of Boulder Medical Center, said his organization has no plans to change the facilities or existing operations along Broadway and at Boulder Community Foothills Hospital.

"We hope to maintain the same relationships we currently have with (Boulder Community)," he said. "We think that we are in a strategic location in west Boulder."

The relocation of primary services to Foothills may cause some changes to the traffic pattern of some Boulder Medical Center physicians and staff, but the Broadway facility — including its primary care, speciality care and urgent care offerings — will remain, McKee said. Boulder Medical Center opened the Broadway office in 1949.

Boulder Medical Center also is not currently planning significant changes to the operating hours or structure of its urgent care facility.

"Our intent is to keep urgent care pretty much as it is now," he said. "We often staff up with physicians during peak periods.

"It will remain an urgent care and not an emergency room. We're really an out-patient facility."

Changing landscape

As Boulder Community has shifted eastward, so has the nonprofit's property holdings.

In recent years, the hospital and its foundation have sold several of the hospital's west Boulder buildings and are expected to make another round of transactions in the coming months by selling a cluster of neighboring residences that were acquired near Broadway an Balsam, Secrist said.

Alternatively, the hospital also has been snapping up office properties near the Foothills campus.

Boulder Community currently owns eight of the 12 small office buildings in the Riverbend Office Park, which is located across Arapahoe Avenue from the Foothills hospital, Secrist said, adding the hospital plans to acquire more.

That Riverbend area would be the next area of expansion for Boulder Community Hospital if the needs change in the future, he said.

"The Foothills campus will be completely built-out (by later this year) under the provisions that the city allows and under zoning," Secrist said. "Clearly, hospitals are not static institutions; they're dynamic institutions. They tend to be growth institutions."

How Boulder Community's changes might shape western and eastern Boulder is yet to be seen, but the city of Boulder should consider some comprehensive planning for the area, said Mary Young, newly elected member of the Boulder City Council.

Young said she believes that efforts made during the planning of the Junior Academy parcel at 2641 Fourth St. could have been broader in scale.

"It was a missed opportunity in terms of being able to have a more holistic view of the area and come up with a broader plan that would have encompassed this area because we knew even then that things would eventually change with the hospital," she said.

As it stands now, Young said she hopes city officials develop a plan to address potential residential and traffic changes in west Boulder.

"I actually would like to see us, the city, really step back and do a plan that ... really thinks about that area in the context of our housing needs on a broader scope," she said.

Some early steps have been taken toward that goal, she said, noting how city officials are currently in the process of developing a Comprehensive Housing Strategy plan that will be presented to council later this year. The plan could include changing to zoning and planning processes, as well as affordable housing programs.

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com