Topics: andrew jarecki, Editor's Picks, HBO, robert durst, Serial, the jinx, True crime, true detective, TV, Entertainment News

The first episode of “The Jinx” starts with the discovery of a gruesomely dismembered body off the coast of Galveston, Texas. It has the shape and feel, at first, of many other true-crime stories—indeed, set as it is on the Gulf Coast, it has a whiff of the meditative investigation and rural mystery of “True Detective.” The investigators sport cowboy hats and bristle-brush mustaches. It feels more like a news network’s salacious prime-time programming than an HBO documentary.

But then things start deviating from the script: The murdered party’s upstairs neighbor is a mute woman. She is described as “ugly.” A man is found picking up a prescription found in her apartment. The man flees. The man walks into a Wegman’s in Pennsylvania and tries to steal a hoagie, despite having more than $500 in his pocket and $38,000 in the car. And the man, whose name is Robert Durst, insists he has done nothing wrong.

Is Robert Durst jinxed? The possibility is where HBO’s six-part documentary series, debuting Sunday night, gets its name. The wealthy scion of a New York City real estate mogul, Durst has been linked to three different unsolved cases—the 1982 disappearance of his wife in New York, the murder of a journalist in Beverly Hills in 2000, and, most recently, the 2001 murder and dismemberment of an elderly man in Galveston. He has only been charged once, for the Texas murder; he was acquitted. Today, Durst walks free, albeit with some limitations on his movement. “The Jinx” is an attempt to tell the story of this man and the mysteries surrounding him—it’s subtitled “The Life and Deaths of Robert Durst”—with one major trump card: Durst himself, who sat down with director Andrew Jarecki for a face-to-face interview.

Jarecki is best known for the critically acclaimed 2003 documentary “Capturing the Friedmans,” also produced by HBO, which examined the case of a father and son both being arrested for child molestation and eventually pleading guilty. It’s a chilling documentary—not just because of the nature of the crimes, but because of how difficult it becomes to pin down any one truth about the guilt or innocence of these men. Stories conflict; testimony is tampered with; home video is excavated and examined. The viewer doesn’t leave “Capturing the Friedmans” thinking that justice has been served; the viewer leaves wondering if anything they’ve just seen is real.

“The Jinx” is Jarecki’s attempt to do something similar for the case of Robert Durst—a man who displays breathtaking arrogance and self-delusion along with real pain and confusion. In one of the oddest twists of the story, Durst actually came to Jarecki with his story, instead of the other way around. Jarecki produced a feature film based on Kathleen Durst’s disappearance in 1982, and in an interview clip included in “The Jinx,” he says his mission was to create a story that Robert Durst himself would have an emotional reaction to. Apparently, on some level, he succeeded. Durst called Jarecki and offered him not just an interview, but the interview—exclusive access and full cooperation.