Tatum Hauck Allsep (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Resources for where to get help enrolling.

88,007 people across the state have selected plans so far.

Tatum Allsep, founder and executive director of the Music Health Alliance, helps musicians find the best bang for their insurance buck on the federally run exchange. She is also, for the first time this year, shopping for her family of five.

Allsep's husband, a professor, is on sabbatical to write so her family is no longer on an employer-sponsored plan. Like other families, there are several priorities she's balancing when looking for plans: children's care, cost and preferred physicians.

She's planning to buy one plan, an E Network plan from BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, for her and the children. Her husband will be on an S Network plan.

The two-plan option will save them about $10,000 year. Allsep will pay out of pocket to see a preferred OB-GYN who is not covered in the E Network.

She's excited about a feature of the E Network that gives her a free membership to the YMCA and a health coach as long as she goes three times a week.

"The accountability, for me, will get me to the gym," she said.

The Music Health Alliance has seen about four times the number of people so far this enrollment season than it did last year.

The state is one of three that already has more enrollees than it did at the first deadline in 2014. There were 88,007 people across the state who selected plans as of Dec. 5.

That's nearly 1,000 more than the number who selected plans as of Dec. 15, 2014, which included the rush to get coverage in place on New Year's Day.

Federal officials anticipate a surge of enrollees in the run up to the end of Tuesday, the deadline to get coverage that starts on Jan. 1. The enrollment season runs until Jan. 31.

Buy Photo Misganaw Moges gets help signing up for health insurance from Get Covered Tennessee volunteer Tanya Radic on Friday in Nashville. Get Covered Tennessee is using a mobile classroom on to help enroll people for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)

There are sign-up events around the city leading up to Tuesday hosted by several volunteer groups as well as BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee.

Sandy Dimick, Get Covered Tennessee program director at Family & Children's Service, expects at least 20 to come to each of the weekend events and at least 60 at event on Tuesday.

Many shoppers have confused enrollment periods for Medicare, which is for people over age 65, and the federally run exchange, which is sold as individual plans that may quality for subsidies called premium tax credits.

Medicare enrollment ran from Oct. 15 to Dec. 7.

The federally run exchange, commonly called Obamacare, enrollment started Nov. 1 and runs until Jan. 31.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Enrollment Help

• If you want help, you can contact Get Covered Tennessee online or on the phone to schedule an appointment with someone in your area to help you for free.

• Go to http://www.getcoveredtenn.org/ or call 1-844-644-5443.

Events around Nashville

Saturday

Southeast Library, 5260 Hickory Hollow Pkwy #201, Antioch, 10 a.m.-2 p.m.

A mobile truck provided by the Tennessee Foreign Language Institute will be at the Highlands Apartments at 4646 Nolensville Pike all day

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee at 100 Oaks Mall, 719 Thompson Lane, from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., https://www.facebook.com/events/1647796382155633/

Sunday

Bellevue Library, 720 Baugh Road, Nashville 37221, 2-5 p.m.

Monday

A mobile truck provided by the Tennessee Foreign Language Institute will be at the Highlands Apartments at 4646 Nolensville Pike from 1 p.m. on Monday.

Tuesday:

Nashville Downtown Library, 615 Church St, Nashville, 37219, 10 a.m.-5 p.m.

Southeast Library, 5260 Hickory Hollow Pkwy #201, Antioch, 10 a.m.- 8 p.m.

Family & Children's Service, 201 23rd Avenue North, Nashville, 5 p.m. - 9 p.m.

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee at 100 Oaks Mall, 719 Thompson Lane, from 9 a.m. to midnight.

Check out the plans for yourself at healthcare.gov/

Insured by Community Health Alliance?

Community Health Alliance will no longer offer insurance plans as of Jan. 1. You will need to enroll with a different insurer.

Health insurance companies selling plans on the 2016 exchange

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee is selling statewide. http://www.bcbst.com/about-health-insurance/how-to-enroll/index.page

Cigna is selling in Memphis, Nashville and the Tri-Cities. http://www.cigna.com/individuals-families/tennessee.page

Humana is selling in Knoxville, Memphis and Nashville. https://www.humana.com/individual-and-family/products-and-services/medical-plans/

UnitedHealthcare is selling statewide. http://www.uhc.com/

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Y9DcJn