A police officer who was arrested in Plantation for refusing to take off his mask during a government protest violated department policies, according to an internal affairs report released this week.

Commanders at the North Miami Beach Police Department have recommended Officer Ericson Harrell be suspended without pay for violating three internal policies including having a membership in an activist group that supports "interference with the established government."

Because Harrell was suspended with pay immediately after his arrest, his pay will be docked 20 hours, said Major Kathy Katerman, the agency spokeswoman.

She described Harrell as an "above average" officer. "We are disappointed in this, absolutely," she said. "Any policy violation we take very seriously. We expect he'll improve his behavior or face more discipline."

Harrell was off-duty during what he said was a protest against Obamacare on the sidewalk along South University Drive in Plantation on Nov. 22, 2013.

He was wearing a black cape and a Guy Fawkes mask seen in the movie "V for Vendetta" and holding a flagpole with an inverted U.S. flag in a one-man protest. The mask is symbolic of the group Anonymous.

Plantation police asked him repeatedly to remove his mask and produce some form of identification; Harrell refused. He identified himself only after officers found his gun. He was charged with obstruction of traffic and with wearing a hood or mask on a street, which defense attorneys said was created in 1951 to combat the Ku Klux Klan.

Prosecutors dropped the charges and Harrell returned to road patrol soon after.

It wasn't his first protest. In August 2013, he held a similar protest in Sunrise but identified himself to police who determined he wasn't breaking any laws. And the following month he held a similar protest in North Miami Beach, where his supervisors "monitored" his actions.

But after his arrest in Plantation, investigators seized his police-issued laptop where the agency found "numerous pornographic images stored on the computer's memory" as well as records that indicated he spent "excessive amounts of time" on Facebook, YouTube and conspiracy theory-related websites "during work hours."

Harrell did not respond to requests for comment.

North Miami police found he violated three policies: conduct unbecoming an officer for using the agency computer for non-work matters and because he "ridiculed" the police chief on his Facebook page; for committing an act that could be considered a misdemeanor, regardless of whether he's charged; and for being part of an organization that could interfere with the agency.

Harrell is a member of the activist group Anonymous, whose decal is on his personal vehicle. Anonymous "wreaks havoc around the world to further its anti-government mission," according to the police report, which includes exploiting "government computer systems."

Because Harrell has security access to government computer databases, he was warned that associating with Anonymous could jeopardize his computer access and that he could lose his police certification, according to the report.

lhuriash@tribpub.com or 954-572-2008