Buy Photo Sen. Ted Cruz announced during a rally at the Pavilion at Pan Am Plaza, that if he is the Republican presidential candidate, his running mate for vice president would be Carly Fiorina, a former candidate herself. (Photo: Matt Kryger/IndyStar)Buy Photo

Indiana and Wisconsin have a higher percentage of people working in manufacturing than any of the other states in the country. And both states share a deep devotion to farmers who grow the economy and feed our families.

Hoosiers and Badgers also share common sense Midwestern values. We appreciate candidates for office who tell us what they are for and not just who they are against. We know that actions speak louder than words. We want leaders who do more than talk, they lead.

It has been my honor to follow in the footsteps of your great former Gov. Mitch Daniels who was one of the best reformers in the country. And I am proud to call your current Gov. Mike Pence a friend. He too knows how to reform government.

Mitch and Mike have shown what principled conservative leadership looks like and the people of Indiana are better off because of it. We have a chance to elect that same kind of leader as our next president. That is why I ask you to join me and vote for Ted Cruz.

First, Ted is a constitutional conservative. He knows that our Founders intended for power to flow to the states and to the people; and not be concentrated in Washington, D.C.

Ted will repeal Obamacare and put you back in charge of your health care. He will rein in the out-of-control EPA that hurts manufacturers, farmers and small business owners. And he will eliminate the IRS and put in place a simple flat tax that you can fill out on a post card.

Second, Ted will take on the big government special interests in Washington and win. He will not back down. He doesn't play the go-along-to-get-along game. He is an outsider who will shake things up and put you back in charge of your federal government.

Years ago, Democrats tried to block Republican reforms in Indiana and Wisconsin by fleeing to Illinois. We didn't back down and neither did you. Today, both of our states are better because of it, and Illinois...well it is a mess because they didn't have the courage to pursue the same reforms.

Ted Cruz has shown that he is not intimidated by the Washington power brokers. He will restore the government to the people.

Third, Ted can win. He is the only candidate left who can both win the nomination and win in the fall against Hillary Clinton. Two candidates have enough delegates to win on the early ballots at the Republican National Convention. Two candidates have shown that they are with in striking distance of defeating Clinton. Only one can do both: Ted Cruz.

Jobs. Freedom. Security. If you care about these issues and you want a president who will actually do something about it, please vote for Ted Cruz on Tuesday.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1TAEUU3