Bob Diamond: “We see this an opportunity to really be the bank for business.” Bloomberg News

Former Barclays CEO Bob Diamond’s Atlas Mara Co-Nvest announced on Monday its plan to buy sub-Saharan African Bank ABC Holdings Ltd. and the Frankfurt-listed African Development Corporation AG for about $265 million in cash and shares.

The deal is the first for the new firm, which Diamond co-founded last December with Ashish Thakkar, a Ugandan entrepreneur whose company, the Mara Group, operates in 18 markets across Africa. Launched as a shell company, Atlas Mara raised $325 million in an IPO on the London Stock Exchange with a mission to build a pan-African bank.

Diamond and Thakkar’s vision for the bank, which has operations in five countries including Botswana and Zimbabwe, is to create “the premier financial services business in sub-Saharan Africa.”

Initial investor response to Atlas Mara’s plans was enthusiastic. Coco Ferguson, a partner at $50m East Africa-based investment group Maris Capital, said growth in sub-Saharan Africa had been stymied by local banks’ limited interest in lending to small businesses: “Typically, all loans need 100% asset or land backing,” she said. “If this new bank takes a different approach, it could unleash a whole new life for small businesses in Africa. I can’t wait!”

WSJ Frontiers tracked down Atlas Mara’s co-founders in Gaborone, Botswana, to find out more about their maiden deal.

WSJ Frontiers: What most attracted you to ABC?

Diamond: ABC is ahead of the curve in terms of both small business lending and consumer lending. We have a multi-country platform … and an outstanding management team with a track record of growth and innovation.

WSJ Frontiers: How will your bank differ from others in the region?

Diamond: The traditional banking model in sub-Saharan Africa has been to take deposits and invest them in domestic T-bills with interest rates in the 12-13-% range. That has not incentivized them to lend to businesses or consumers. We see this an opportunity to really be the bank for business.

WSJ Frontiers: Who will be your main competitors?

Diamond: There are some very strong global banks in sub-Saharan Africa, such as Standard Chartered, Barclays and Citi, as well as some very strong South African banks. Our whole secret is it’s very concentrated and we are going to integrate the pieces and build a very strong financial services organization.

Thakkar: It is a pretty bold statement to say that we want to be the leading financial services organization on the continent, but when we say ‘leading’ we don’t necessarily mean we want to be the biggest but the best, offering innovative services, tapping markets in a different way. We want to create something unique.

WSJ Frontiers: What countries are you most excited about in Sub-Saharan Africa?

Thakkar: Our strategy is more about looking at countries as part of regions rather than individually.

WSJ Frontiers: Some markets put limits on foreign ownership. Will you still enter those markets?

Diamond: We are looking for a controlling position. We feel welcomed by most governments and regulators but there are some jurisdictions that would not be high on our list because they are not prepared to have a major shareholder like Atlas Mara.

WSJ Frontiers: Are you looking for other deals?

Thakkar: Absolutely, this is the beginning.

Diamond: The beauty of having permanent equity, we are not subject to the timing of our investors. We would like to move as quickly as we can but if things take a little bit longer, that’s okay with us.

Write to Neanda Salvaterra at neanda.salvaterra@wsj.com.

–Dan Keeler contributed to this article.