New economy, new labor movement: Declining wages, benefits stir dismantled unions

In Southeast Michigan, big labor isn't so big anymore. Membership is down and Michigan's recent right-to-work law may challenge those numbers further.



However, with Michigan's hourly wages, adjusted for inflation, at the lowest rate in more than 30 years, a new labor movement is afoot. Local experts say there is an increase in protests and litigation — the unintended consequences of a dismantled union workforce. And it's going to get worse.



Nationally, unions lost nearly 400,000 members in 2012 alone, down to 11.3 percent of the workforce, or 6.6 percent of private-sector workers. In Michigan, union members accounted for 16.6 percent of workers, compared with 17.5 percent in 2011 and more than 25 percent in the 1980s and 1990s.

David Hecker, executive vice president of the Metro Detroit AFL-CIO and vice president of the American Federation of Teachers Michigan union, said Michigan is a war zone for worker's rights, and it's beyond just unionization.



"We've lost some major battles, but the commitment that we're going to win this war is so rock solid; more and more people are saying, 'We're not going to let them take away our voice at the workplace,' " Hecker said. "The system of fighting back is pervasive; it's well beyond just the ranks of unionized labor."



Activism transformed?



Roland Zullo, research scientist at the University of Michigan's Institute for Research on Labor, Employment and the Economy, said Michigan, along with the rest of the country, is on the precipice of an unorganized, more activist workforce similar to that of the Great Depression.



According to the U.S. Library of Congress, union membership fell to 3 million in 1933, from 5 million a decade earlier.



"We are heading toward what I would call a pre-New Deal environment when the unions were smaller and dispersed," Zullo said. "They tended to sort of pop up in areas where there was local strength. What it almost always involved was some sort of collective action or protest to force employers to deal with that particular issue."



Recent examples of union and nonunion activism include protests at the newly opened Crowne Plaza Detroit Downtown Convention Center, formerly the Hotel Pontchartrain, and walkouts by nonunion fast-food workers throughout metro Detroit and across the country.



Unite Here Local 24 has been protesting at the Crowne Plaza since the July opening for fairer wages for workers at the nonunionized hotel, said Heidi Hughes, director of the union.



"Detroit is coming back, they are building new hotels and the occupancy rates are up," Hughes told Crain's earlier this month. "If the hotels are doing well, the workers should do well, too."



Hughes said the room attendants at the Crowne Plaza are being paid as low as $8 an hour compared to the average wage of $14 to $16 an hour for unionized hotels in the city.



Nick Knight, assistant general manager for the Crowne Plaza, said the protests are leading to unhappy customers.



"The issue is mostly noise," Knight said. "There is an intimidation factor as well; people are making reservations and get here and don't want to stay."



The union is also planning protests in front of other nonunion hotels, including Hilton's DoubleTree Suites Fort Shelby downtown.





"When the union rep isn't right down the line, they (workers) don't know who to

talk to; and when they feel they're not being heard, where do all good Americans go? The government," Palazzolo said. "With the union decline, we've got an entirely different (workplace) dynamic and something has to fill that void, and in this case, they think it's the federal government."





"We've seen cutbacks on benefits, unemployment, food assistance and cash assistance, and we know there are people who are actively looking for jobs, are working very hard in low-wage jobs that can't support a family," said Gilda Jacobs, president and CEO of the Michigan League. "Understandably, they are feeling very frustrated by that."



Hecker said the wage issue is uniting Michigan workers, regardless of unionization.



"You can't raise a family on $12,000 a year," Hecker said. "This is the result of policy that's not been implemented to help families. We're talking about people's lives, and they are not going to sit there and let this happen anymore."



However, whether a strong labor movement can cure the wage blues remains to be seen, said Marick Masters, director of Wayne State University's Labor@Wayne and professor of business.



Masters said the stagnation of wages and economic growth are "tipping the scales" on the labor movement, but questions remain whether a renewed movement can change the minds of Michigan's general public.



"Labor is trying to take advantage of the resentment and sentiments that exist, but the challenge they have to face is to convince people that they are engines of economic opportunity and growth," Masters said.



"Labor is increasingly becoming marginalized, but the question remains whether their current actions will translate into a stronger labor movement or something that resembles anarchy."



Dustin Walsh: (313) 446-6042, dwalsh@crain.com. Twitter: @dustinpwalsh

Related Links