Topics: Crime, Editor's Picks, Life stories, Mental Illness, Real Families, Shane Shumerth, Life News

It’s Super Tuesday, 2012. Before Mitt Romney separates himself from the rest of the Republican candidates, a 28-year-old man named Shane wakes up groggy. He is about 5’ 10” and 170 pounds. He has curly brown hair, green eyes, and is a graduate of Purdue University. He lives with two male acquaintances in Jacksonville, Florida. Two days earlier, he posted a G. K. Chesterton quote on his Facebook page: “But the man we see every day – the worker in Mr. Gradgrind’s factory, the little clerk in Mr. Gradgrind’s office – he is too mentally worried to believe in freedom. He is kept quiet with revolutionary literature. He is calmed and kept in his place by a constant succession of wild philosophies.”

On this day, like many days, Shane stays in bed past his alarm. He took NyQuil the night before, partially to loosen his congestion, but also to combat his insomnia. About the time he should be leaving for his job as a Spanish teacher at the Episcopal School, he hops in the shower. When he finally arrives at school, Shane is pulled from his classroom and fired. The school’s administration had warned him several times about his lateness and other infractions such as missing meetings and deadlines. Shane is given paperwork for a severance package, and security guards escort him to the school’s gate.

He walks to his teal 1996 Toyota Tercel, the first automatic transmission he has ever driven. He drives home. Then, he goes back to his first-floor bedroom and grabs his black guitar case. It’s time. By early afternoon, Shane is driving back to school, blaring Papa Roach:

Cut my life into pieces I’ve reached my last resort, Suffocation, no breathing Don’t give a fuck if I cut my arms bleeding Do you even care if I die bleeding Would it be wrong, would it be right If I took my life tonight

He parks at an insurance company, about a block from the school. From there, he returns to Headmaster Dale Regan’s office, slips in a back door, and interrupts a meeting between her and Christopher Bland, the school’s conditioning coach. “Can’t you see we’re in a meeting?” Regan asks. Shane unzips the case and reveals an AK-47, purchased a month earlier at a gun show. It is loaded with one hundred rounds. “No, no!” Bland yells and runs out for help. Shane fires several times, first at Regan. Blood splatters on nearby cabinets.

If Shane has any plan for something bigger, apparently Regan’s bloody death is enough to deter him, because his next and only other victim is himself.

It’s the kind of tragedy you see on the evening news and you wonder: Who would do something like this?

Several hours later, I sit in a dark Indianapolis parking garage by myself as a Jacksonville detective gives me the answer to that question.

My older brother, Shane.

*

Shane and I were both June babies, born less than a year apart. Irish twins and the first two of five children my parents popped out after marrying in their thirties. Shane was my earliest and most consistent life companion, and we were out to find great adventure. That meant anything from building elaborate communities out of Legos and Lincoln Logs, gathering our friends for epic football battles in the yard, spreading out and organizing thousands of baseball cards, playing each other in basement ping pong matches for hours, or exploring every woods and body of water within walking distance of our house.

From a young age, I had a desire to please him, and he took advantage of that desire. For example, we would wander into a marsh to catch frogs. “Chris, go get that one,” he would tell me. I would look out halfway across the mucky pond, and there it would be: slimy, green and as big as my fist. Begrudgingly, I would wade in, waist deep, snag the frog with my net, and put it in whatever bucket contraption we used to store our catch. Sometimes, we left with as many as a dozen, though we quickly forgot about them back at the house.

My relationship with Shane was symbiotic. If I longed for his approval, there was something he needed from me, too. As the oldest, he was “supposed” to be the first to experience going out on his own and “doing things.” But the first time my parents took him to t-ball practice, he cried hysterically until the coach convinced my mother to take him back home. So he quit the team. Until I joined a team and thrived, that is. Then, Shane came back and played. This was not an isolated incident. The first time Shane rode the school bus by himself, something very similar happened. For whatever reasons, for Shane, looking out at the world and the people in it was a terrifying proposition. But once I accomplished whatever task it was, then Shane knew the terrain was at least safe enough to try.

In high school, Shane quit playing on the basketball team after his freshman year. I played, though, and by his senior year, Shane wanted to play again. And he did. During one particularly rough practice, our coach scolded us for not communicating well. “If you’re not going to talk, then get off the floor!” he yelled. Everyone interpreted this as motivational coach-speak. Everyone except Shane, who walked off the court. Apparently, he had no intention of communicating better. There was this moment of awkward silence; no one knew what to do, even the coach. But I intercepted Shane’s route, shoved him back onto the court, and we all went on like nothing had happened.

It got to the point where people mistook me for being the oldest. In college, he even transferred to the school I attended for a year. I graduated first, and as soon as I did, then Shane got serious about finishing, too. We both spent several months back home with my parents, trying to figure out where we would go and who we would be in life. I left first, then Shane followed me to Jacksonville, where we both took our first full-time jobs. I refused to live with him, but that didn’t stop him from sleeping on my floor for three weeks until he found a place of his own. His tendency to let me clear a social and professional path and then follow behind was quite an annoyance to me by then. But I did love him, and I wanted him to do well, even as I resented how much he needed me.

Shane and I had developed a classic dependency: the perpetually-broken-and-in-need-of-fixing person finds and latches onto the perpetually-willing-to-fix-other-people person. These systems are always a bit of a façade, of course, which is to say that Shane was no less capable than I was, and I was no less broken than he was. But as flawed as our arrangement was, the roles we played genuinely reflected what we believed about ourselves. So there I would be, in his apartment, creating a filing system for all his important documents or moving him and his stuff for the umpteenth time.

Shane was always trying to definitively pronounce the difference between him and me. “You are an extrovert, and I am an introvert,” he declared one day, as if that were the answer to every question. I suspect he was trying to communicate something like what Susan Cain later wrote in her book, “Quiet: The Power of Introverts”: “If you’re an introvert, you also know that the bias against quiet can cause deep psychic pain.” That said, I was never completely comfortable with Shane’s diagnosis, and when I took my own personality tests I discovered why: I am an introvert-leaning ambivert, not an extravert. But Cain also distinguished between introversion, shyness and high sensitivity. Of the three traits, introversion is the only one that somewhat applies to me. Shane, on the other hand, almost certainly lived with all three.