Bassmasters event impresses reader

From Dr. Jerry Kinder,

Mountain Home

What a wonderful weekend of April 21-24 for Mountain Home.

The Bassmaster Elite came to the Twin Lakes. I followed each day of the tournament through The Baxter Bulletin. I personally watched the Saturday weigh-in at ASU-Mountain Home. I also watched beautiful sponsor boats from my dock on Bull Shoals.

I was impressed by the numerous vendors at the college, the BBQ contest, the drone to monitor ESPN2 and the band. At the start of the tournament, it was estimated that 3,000 to 5,000 people would take part in the festivities, filling motels in town and bringing as much $1.5 million to the Mountain Home area economy. A nice first-place prize to the top angler of $100,000 was also given.

Kudos for all involved! I would hope the Chamber of Commerce would try hard to repeat the Bassmaster Elite in the future.

Affordable Care Act a benefit, deserves respect

From Johanna Hill,

Mountain Home

Thank you Baxter Bulletin for bringing back “Letters to the Editor.”

The letter from Nancy Lewis of April 23, was outstanding; congratulations for expressing your opinion so professionally.

Yes, I can indeed imagine those “left out” feelings of people who are working for a minimum wage, less than 40 hours per week, without access to a proper healthcare plan. But thank God that this situation has finally changed for so many.

This change was one of our President’s great accomplishments, and it deserves to be called the “Affordable Care Act” and not “Obamacare” any longer. However, the problem remains that far too many politicians and selfish people will continue fighting that law, instead of improving the situation for the “little people” nationwide.

I personally get that warm-hearted feeling whenever hearing children’s voices among us waiting seniors at the doctor’s office.

And may the good Lord bless our wonderful local hospital and our great medical teams.

Too much ‘Monkey Business’ in politics

From Curt Longhenry,

Mountain Home

Too much ‘Monkey Business.’

Chuck Berry had a hit with this title. It is a perfect example of politics today.

Our politicians have been operating in this mode for too long. And we the people, who are supposed to be in control of the government, have let the government get control of us.

The young people of this country need to be taught the real meaning of freedom, or they might see it lost in their lifetime.

I think this is why Donald Trump is so popular. He might just do what he says he will, and actually change things. Politicians probably won’t. The career politicians don’t like him because they love their cushy jobs and the lobbyists’ payoffs that go with the job, and they will do and say anything to keep them.

But notice they never get done what they promise to do. Remember the government that wants to give you everything, will eventually need to take it all from everyone to keep operating.

Can you see it happening? What can you do?

Our forefathers knew where God belonged and our country was blessed beyond anything the world has ever seen. Maybe God is starting to take America out of his picture. Please pray for the candidates who know what God’s position is.

In the meantime, pray for them, us and our county. God bless America.

Read or Share this story: http://www.baxterbulletin.com/story/news/local/2016/05/02/letters-editor/83827580/