Buy Photo James and Johnathan Warner enjoy a ride at the Tennessee State Fair on Sunday. (Photo: Alan Poizner / For The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Less-than-sweltering temperatures and nostalgia drew families from around the region to the Tennessee State Fair's opening weekend.

On Sunday afternoon the air was crisp, even as the shrieks emanating from whirling rides and the shouts hawking "fluffy, fluffy unicorns" at game booths, as well as ice cold lemonade, seemed to signal that summer was still in force.

Cristina Serrano, 33, of La Vergne was enjoying the fair she'd visited as a kid.

"It's been years, but it's such a pretty day," she said.

Serrano was there with her fiance, sisters and parents, Barbara and Israel Serrano.

Barbara Serrano nursed a tall lemonade at a picnic table in the shade.

She said that, as a girl growing up in Berry Hill, it was tradition to walk to the fairgrounds on Wedgewood Avenue.

"They gave you the day off school," she recalled.

Israel Serrano said that he was glad to hang out at the fair with all of his adult daughters.

Plus, he said, he likes to sample new cuisine.

"I get the most unusual food I can find," he said. This time? That meant a Serbian-style burger.

Story continues below photo

This year's fair boasted a range of new attractions, from a "Brew Mile" race to cultural shows throughout the fair's 10-day run.

But in its 109th year, old standbys — classic carnival fare such as funnel cake, turkey legs and corn on the cob, or rides like the Ferris wheel — seemed to be the main draws.

Shontae Wilson quietly chowed down on a Polish sausage.

Her favorite thing about a day at the fair?

"You can let your kids go while you eat in peace," she said.

The mother of five — including three teens who were out playing games and going on rides — said that even though they're teenagers, her kids don't mind coming to the fair with their mom.

"If they come with Mama, Mama's going to pay," the Nashville resident said as she cracked a smile.

Quianna and Frankie Ashford said their three daughters were excited to check out the rides and try new foods.

First, though, they stopped in one of the exhibit halls to try their hand at decorating cupcakes.

Anaya, 5, showed off a cupcake with Jackson Pollock-like splashes of color.

"It's called a crazy cupcake," she said.

Her sister, 3-year-old Mariyah, however, couldn't wait to explain her design.

She had already started eating it.

Reach Jill Cowan at 615-664-2150 and on Twitter @jillcowan.

Buy Photo Mason Collins presents his calf in the Hereford calf exhibit at the Tennessee State Fair on Sunday. (Photo: Alan Poizner / For The Tennessean)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1UPZU7K