Stubbornness in arguments only shows immaturity

Open mindedness in discussion would eliminate unnecessary conflicts

The freedom to speak our minds is one of the rights that modern Americans either don’t fully understand or take for granted. I understand the laziness that comes from not having your basic rights challenged on a daily basis by fear of incarceration or death as in some other countries, but I believe that an awakening to the true meaning of freedom of speech needs to occur.

Instead of embracing our differences and being open minded to other viewpoints, I encounter at least one person or group every day that feels it necessary to silence an opposing party. It happens on campus, and it happens at the highest levels of our government — especially through social and mass media. If we truly want to get anything done in life, we must learn to listen and properly identify the arguments of all people, whether we want to agree with them or not.

Look at the outrageous claims made in Washington and how ridiculous they’ve become. Whenever a controversial proposal arises, there is one side that supports it and one that rejects it. Instead of having an adult conversation, they each want the other to just shut up and accept it. That is not how freedom of speech is supposed to operate.

Republicans love to remind the American people that their opponents allegedly want to destroy the country through enacting allegedly socialist policies. This was their reasoning for attempting a government shutdown in an effort to derail funding for the Affordable Care Act.

Pundits for both sides of the political aisle also had a field day weighing in on the failed political maneuver by suggesting things, like how Obama supposedly hates WWII veterans and the Republicans hate the poor. Ridiculous statements continue to fly from the mouths of cowards who claim to be experts on policy.

Rarely will you see an intelligent debate between people with different views on cable news. A week or so ago, Tea Party favorite Sarah Palin compared the binds of federal debt to slavery, which prompted MSNBC host Martin Bashir to essentially say that Palin should be treated like a slave and have someone stuff feces in her mouth.

Regardless of your personal feelings about either of these pundits, comments like these should never be used to silence the opposition through fear. I would never want Bashir to be afraid to make an outrageous statement like that because we gain insight to his true ideology. However, what never occurs in the midst of such hostility is understanding between the individuals. I would prefer to see those who have a microphone come together with civility and respect.

At UNLV, more and more Christian Evangelists have begun appearing around campus. Most of the time, students are quite successful at simply walking past the men with microphones speaking about God’s love in a seemingly unreceptive place. However, it disturbed me to see one group surrounding a preacher, firing back at him with personal insults.

I would appreciate a little back and forth challenge in which students and these Evangelists are given an opportunity to sort out their differences in public without being crass. Unfortunately, I was disturbed by the lack of respect and civility.

I would love to see more Christian ministers, as well as Jewish, Muslim, Catholic, Hindu, Buddhist or even atheist leaders. More information is always better, so long as we are willing to listen without tearing someone down with whom we disagree.

The freedom to speak your mind, regardless of the forum, is one of the privileges that Americans have enjoyed for over 200 years. Other nations may go so far as to actually put someone to death for speaking out against the state religion or government, but we are supposed to act on a higher standard than that.

If we are to fulfill the legacy that the Founding Fathers have set out for us, should we not embrace civilized disagreement?

How much better would society be if the Republicans and Democrats could actually sit down and offer reasons for their disagreements? I believe we would all be better served if all grievances were met with open-minded discussion, rather than ideological vitriol.

For students, receiving a higher education would be the best way to become more open minded, thereby introducing a new era of understanding. It is too late for politicians who are easily corrupted through their involvement in the muck of political ideology.

Their beliefs have been forged by the flames of personal attacks and immoral practices. We still have a chance to turn the ship around as our generation will be running for office soon. Let us speak freely and respectfully without fear of death or persecution.

Let’s show the country and the rest of the world that freedom of speech still means something.