Buy Photo “Counties now have greater flexibility to use their local levies for whatever non-medical needs are in their county,” says Greg Moody, director of Gov. John Kasich’s Office of Health Transformation. The Enquirer/Gary Landers (Photo: Cincinnati Enquirer)Buy Photo Story Highlights Now that tens of thousands of residents are gaining new health care coverage under Obamacare, officials are questioning what's next for the Hamilton County's indigent care levy.

Counties across the state are weighing similar questions, as thousands of residents sign onto Medicaid.

New future for levies could mean supporting non-medical services, such as housing and job placement help.

Hamilton County commissioners are weighing the future of a property tax levy that's long served as a health safety net for the county's poorest residents.

Now that tens of thousands of residents are gaining new health care coverage under Obamacare, officials are questioning what's next for the Health and Hospitalization Levy, also commonly called the indigent care levy.

"We're just not going to go in there and whack (the levy money) by 50 percent," CommissionerChris Monzel said. "We're going to have a thoughtful process. But we don't want people paying taxes for the same thing twice."

The current levy expires at the end of this year, and the county wants to put it back on the ballot this fall.

Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, states were given the option to expand Medicaid to millions of poor individuals and families left out of the program in the past. Ohio is among 29 states that expanded the program this year to include anyone under 65 who makes less than 138 percent of the federal poverty limit, or $16,104 a year for an individual. Previously, Medicaid excluded coverage for adults under 65 who did not have dependent children, and those families who made more than 100 percent of poverty – forcing many of them to rely on services provided with levy support.

Statewide, more than 308,000 Ohioans have enrolled in Medicaid, with 13,000 Hamilton County residents signing on through April, according to state and county data. Nearly 70,000 residents in Butler, Clermont, Hamilton and Warren counties are expected to qualify for Medicaid coverage, according to state estimates.

All this has officials rethinking what services are still needed as they review the indigent care levy – which generates about $39 million annually and is set to expire at the end of the year.

A decision is now being examined by Hamilton County's Tax Levy Review Committee, which is working with a consultant to make recommendations to the commission after July 4, said Lisa Webb, the county's tax levy and finance specialist. By Aug. 6, the commission is expected to decide on what millage to place the levy on the November ballot.

Currently, the levy costs the owner of a $100,000 home $45.87 a year.

The review committee and consultants "look at the variety of different programs funded, the overall tax burden and recommend what they feel would be the best application of the dollars," Webb said. "The commissioners are the final decision makers."

For the commission's part: "We want to make sure there's not duplication," Monzel said. "It's unfortunately murky right now with the delayed implementation of the Affordable Care Act."

Similar assessments are under way by public health officials and counties across the state, said Amy Rohling McGee, president of the Health Policy Institute of Ohio, a Columbus-based nonprofit.

"Communities are now asking, 'How do we redirect those resources, and where do they need to be, given the new environment and all the policy decisions that have to be made?' " she said.

Even with Medicaid expansion and new coverage options through Obamacare's online marketplaces, "there will still be a certain percentage of people who will be uninsured for a variety of reasons," Rohling McGee said.

Some people will still refuse to buy insurance and pay the federal tax penalty. Others won't know they qualify for Mediciad or just won't sign up.

"There is a case to be made for the continuation of the levies, at least in the short term," said Rohling McGee.

Ohio's top health official agreed, adding that levy funds could be used for non-medical needs.

"Counties now have greater flexibility to use their local levies for whatever non-medical needs are in their county," said Greg Moody, director of Gov. John Kasich's Office of Health Transformation. "A lot seem to be identifying housing. Some are focusing on employment services, which are things not covered by Medicaid but are important overall to maintaining good health."

Other counties, Moody added, are considering supporting services for people who make too much money to qualify for Medicaid but are in need of addiction and mental health services. "This is one of the areas that really is transformative," Moody said.

Depending on where counties choose to invest, the impact longer term could equate to taxpayers' saving, said Rohling McGee,

"It's an opportunity to look upstream and say, how do we make investments so that people don't need to be on public assistance permanently, and prevent these conditions that are so much more costly downstream," she said.

As the review process moves forward, agencies supported by the levy are speaking up about their needs and concerns.

Hamilton County voters last passed the indigent care levy in 2011 for a three-year cycle, with 69 percent voting for it.

Of the $39.5 million a year the levy raises, $20.9 million goes to University of Cincinnati Medical Center and $5.2 million to Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. The remainder goes to smaller health care and nonprofit organizations.

In the levy's prior cycle, UC got $26 million, but commissioners cut the hospital's portion due to declining revenues as a result of falling county property values.

The funding to hospitals was cut again this year by $7 million. Since 2006, the county has cut by more than 30 percent of UC Medical Center's and Cincinnati Children's share of funding, according to a February letter from UC Medical Center CEO Lee Ann Liska and Children's CEO Michael Fisher.

"Both UC Medical Center and Cincinnati Children's feel strongly that further reductions cannot continue if we are to maintain the intent of this levy," according the letter. "If there comes a time the two institutions jointly believe the integrity and value of the levy has been compromised, we will not be able to move forward with our support."

Regardless of the final decision, officials with Cincinnati Children's said the hospital "would not campaign against the levy" said Children's spokesman Terry Loftus.

University of Cincinnati Medical Center spokeswoman Diana Lara said the hospital is "working with the county" on the levy amount.

"Regardless of the final outcome, UC Medical Center will not campaign against it," she said. ■

Who gets the levy money?

• UC Medical Center

• Children's Hospital

• Hamilton County Sheriff

• Hamilton County Juvenile Court

• St. Vincent de Paul (charitable pharmacy)

• Mental Health and Recovery Services Board

• Hamilton County Public Health (tuberculosis control)

• Hamilton County Probate Court (civil commitment)

• Central Clinic (alternative interventions for women)

• Strategies to End Homelessness

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1h19KWI