The talking point that Elizabeth Warren is the new Ted Cruz came from Democrats. Warren responded to this attempt to shut her up by fighting the Wall Street Dems twice as hard.

A senior House Democratic aide told MSNBC that Sen. Warren is the new Ted Cruz,

“She is the Ted Cruz of the Democratic Party,” one senior House Democratic aide complained, comparing Senator Warren to Senator Ted Cruz’s hard line tactics last year when he led a caucus of House Republicans to shut down the government in an effort to defund Obamacare.

“[Sen. Warren is] the purist who may stand on principle, but refuses to be part of the governing majority,” the aide added.

The of comparison of Warren to Cruz was an attempt to marginalize her with fellow Democrats. While Ted Cruz appears to be only motivated by self-interest, Elizabeth Warren isn’t being driven by a run for the White House. Warren cares deeply about how Wall Street wrecked the economy. She fights every single day to make sure that it doesn’t happen again. Sen. Warren isn’t some liberal ideologue. She is a Democrat who has serious policy differences with some members of her own party.

After Democrats had tried to turn her into the new Ted Cruz, Warren didn’t go sit in the corner with her mouth closed. The senator from Massachusetts didn’t go along to get along. She responded by fighting even harder for what she believes in.

Video:

Warren took to the Senate floor and called out Democrats, Republicans, and Citigroup,



Enough is enough with Wall Street insiders getting key position after key position and the kind of cronyism we have seen in the executive branch. Enough is enough with Citigroup passing 11th hour deregulatory provisions that nobody takes ownership over but that everybody comes to regret. Enough is enough. Washington already works really well for the billionaires and big corporations and the lawyers and lobbyists. But what about the families who lost their homes or their jobs or their retirement savings the last time Citi bet big on derivatives and lost? What about the families who are living paycheck to paycheck and saw their tax dollars go to bail Citi out just six years ago? We were sent here to fight for those families, and it’s time – it’s past time – for Washington to start working for them.

The big winner in the government funding deal wasn’t President Obama or the Republicans. It was Elizabeth Warren. Sen. Warren fought for what she believed in, and liberals in the House and Senate stood with her. As has been mentioned before, members of the Hell No caucus like Warren and Bernie Sanders are gaining in power, and the one thing that these liberal leaders all have in common is that when anyone tries to silence them, they push back harder and louder.

Wall Street Democrats may have won the battle over the government funding bill, but liberals like Elizabeth Warren are watching their ranks swell as an underpaid and ignored group of Americans are making their voices heard.