DES MOINES — Hillary Clinton continues to speak her mind on state issues in the first-in-the-nation caucus state.

On Tuesday, she joined critics of Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad’s decision to shift management of the state’s Medicaid program to private companies. Clinton, the front-running Democratic candidate for president, posted a statement Tuesday on the blog-publishing website Medium.

“I’m very wary of proposals like this because when Republicans say ‘privatize services,’ too often they mean cut services,” Clinton’s post said.

Branstad’s administration is in the process of turning over management of the state’s $4.2 billion Medicaid program, which delivers health care services to a half-million low-income and disabled Iowans, to four companies selected from a bidding process.

The administration says the transition is needed to rein in expanding program costs while preserving services.

Critics say the move could result in reduced services when the program is operated by for-profit private companies.

“Medicaid is essential for nearly one in five Iowans. We should focus on strengthening programs like Medicaid and Medicare, rather than putting benefits at risk,” Clinton’s post said. “And we should ensure that any company involved in administering the program goes through a thorough process of due diligence.”

In response to Clinton’s statement, Branstad spokesman Ben Hammes noted Clinton’s home state of New York has millions of patients on Medicaid managed care plans, and that New York has partnered with three of the same companies as Iowa.

“Gov. Branstad wants to work with people regardless of party on how we can improve Medicaid in Iowa and not simply accept status quo,” Hammes said in an email to the Des Moines Bureau. “We are taking steps to modernize and improve Medicaid in Iowa, following in the footsteps of many other states, including New York, aiming to improve patient outcomes and improving efficiency.”

Clinton’s campaign has posted a digital petition on its website opposing the state’s privatization of Medicaid management.

Clinton, along with her fellow Democratic candidates, returns to Iowa this weekend for the Iowa Democratic Party’s fall fundraiser.

“Instead of unilaterally turning Medicaid benefits over to private companies without demonstrating an effective plan to deliver savings and quality to Iowans, Gov. Branstad should come to realize that the Affordable Care Act is working and partner with Democrats to build on this effort,” Clinton’s post said.