What financing secret can you offer to help an entrepreneur looking for money?

SHARON HADARY: There is no magic bullet when seeking financing! Similar to any other part of the business, it takes planning, record-keeping, persistence and relationship building.

Most entrepreneurs know the basics—have a good business plan and financial and business performance records. Where entrepreneurs often fall short is in recognizing the value of the business banker as an adviser and an advocate. They invest in building relationships with customers, vendors, colleagues—but think of their interaction with the bank as a transaction rather than a relationship.

A good business banker becomes a business adviser; is an advocate for you within the bank; and shares connections with other professional advisers to help you build your business. Benefit from this relationship—let the banker know about your challenges as well as your goals. Work with your business banker in managing cash flow and identifying financial products and services you need to be successful. Knowing when to ask for money and what financial products to use is critical achieving your goals.

Be proactive in selecting a bank—as proactive as you would be in selecting any other business partnership. Get to know several banks—most will have comparable financial products and services. The differentiator is whether the bank is truly interested in helping your business grow and a banker who will be a good partner for you. See which banks have representatives at your professional associations and supports entrepreneurs like you. Interview business bankers. One entrepreneur sent her business plan, including financials, to five bankers and then met with each to make a selection. She eliminated those who went straight to the financial reports and selected the one who started by discussing her business plan, making suggestions and identifying ways the bank could help her achieve her goals.

Sharon Hadary (@hadaryco) is the founding and former executive director of the Center for Women’s Business Research, an adjunct professor in the doctorate of management program at the University of Maryland University College and has co-written a new book, “How Women Lead: The 8 Essential Strategies Successful Women Know.”

Read the latest Small Business Report.