Daniel and Jacquentte Jaramillo treated the community on Sunday to the second annual celebration commemorating the birthday of their son, Daniel "The Lion."

Baby Daniel was born prematurely at 26 weeks on Aug. 31, 2012, and died at 14 months after a long struggle with lung problems. He earned the lion nickname when his father urged him to be strong like a lion through his health challenges.

"We want to continue to celebrate Daniel's life every day and celebrate you guys and celebrate community," Daniel Jaramillo told the crowd gathered at Broomfield's North Midway Park.

Jacquentte Jaramillo holds a plaque of her son and daughter that she is giving to key staff members at Children's Hospital and the University of Colorado Hospital. Children's Hospital staff member Kerri Staton is on the left. The Jaramillos hosted an annual memorial celebration in Broomfield for their son, Daniel, who was born prematurely and died at 14 months. For more photos, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

The celebration also was for baby Daniel's big sister, Kylar, a second-grader at Kohl Elementary School. Her friends, plus children of friends of the family, filled the park with laughter as they played.

The park was packed with kid fun, including cotton candy, a petting zoo, a giant bouncy slide, snow cones and face painting.

Music, lots of food — from burritos to mac-and-cheese to barbecue to pizza, all donated by local businesses — and drinks for the adults rounded out the offerings. Two Denver Broncos cheerleaders also signed autographs and posed for pictures, while Broomfield High cheerleaders helped with the event.

Photographing the event was family friend Amy Corbin, who lost her great-nephew at 18 months to meningitis.

Advertisement

"Little wings are important," she said. "It's an honor to be involved."

Everything at the event was free and no donations were accepted.

"There was just so much support we got from the community," Daniel Jaramillo said. "This is a gift from my family to yours."

The celebration included recognition of those who cared for baby Daniel and his family at Children's Hospital and the University of Colorado Hospital. His health problems were so severe, Daniel only left the hospital once during his short life, and then only to be transferred from one hospital to another.

Amanda Vandiver, left, and Luz Tiscareno, hold roses at the "Daniel the Lion Day," celebrating the life of Daniel Jaramillo. The Jaramillos hosted an annual memorial celebration in Broomfield for their son, Daniel, who was born prematurely and died at 14 months. For more photos, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

The Jaramillos said the care teams were filled with love and support as they helped the family understand surgeries, procedures and complicated equipment. About 30 nurses and doctors from the two hospitals also came to baby Daniel's funeral.

As stressful and intense as the experience was, Daniel Jaramillo said, there were many good moments in the hospital thanks to the nurses and doctors.

"These folks became our family," he said.

One member of their hospital family was Katie Lambert, a nurse at the University of Colorado Hospital who knitted baby Daniel caps and was there with the family the night he died.

"I just fell in love with the whole family," she said. "Daniel was so special to all of us. It's good to celebrate him and remember him."

Team members from both hospitals received plaques and white roses on Sunday, while anyone who had lost someone or gone through something difficult also was invited to take a rose.

"We would love what we went through to be for something," Daniel Jaramillo said. "There's so much positive you can do. There might be someone who is going through something in their life who can be inspired by our story to find something good in it."

Family friend Elizabeth Lucier came with her parents, brother, two sisters and her family's combined six children.

"We're just here to support them," she said. "It's such a great event where they really encourage people to have fun."

C.B. Barthlow, who lives in Denver, said he and Daniel became friends at age 10. He and his family "just loved on them" while baby Daniel was in the hospital.

Sunday's celebration, he said, is "who Daniel is."

"He will take any opportunity to bless other people, even in the midst of his own tragedy," he said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa