TLC renovates building for new students

Amy Watson, 4, plays at TLC Learning Center, formerly Tiny Tim Learning Center. The center is renovating its building to add infant and toddler classes in February and March. ( LEWIS GEYER )

LONGMONT -- The Tiny Tim Learning Center, now known as TLC, is accepting applications for children from 6 weeks to 2½ years old for the preschool's first infant and toddler classes.

The preschool, which serves typical and special-needs children ages 2½ and up, is expanding its programs to accommodate a gap in early education, said Educational Services Manager Cindy Wickham.

If you go What: An open house offering information about the programs at TLC, formerly the Tiny Tim Learning Center When: 4 to 7 p.m. Jan. 14 Where: TLC, 611 Korte Parkway, Longmont For more information: Call 303-776-7417 or visit learningwithtlc.org.

"Education starts at birth," Wickham said. "Research shows that 90 percent of brain development happens by age 5 and we are going to start at 6 weeks with highly responsive relationship and language-based education."

In February, TLC will open two toddler classes. The infant class will open in March. There are 26 slots available for students -- 10 in the infant class and 16 between the two toddler classes.

A $100,000 renovation is underway at the facility, located at 611 Korte Parkway, to make room for the additional three classes.

The goal is to create a warm, home-y feeling to make parents and children feel more comfortable, which is in line with the center's new name, TLC, said Dee Andrews, who is in charge of marketing and communications.

"We want people to think of us as a nurturing environment for their kids," Andrews said. "TLC gives that connotation of tender, love and care and also works with our old name."

"We're still doing the same things, but we wanted to update our name while we're expanding our programs," Andrews said.

One of the center's community playrooms is being divided to add an infant classroom that will include a kitchen.

The preschool classrooms will be located in two rooms previously used for overflow, Wickham said. Minor renovations in those rooms include adding windows between the rooms to increase visibility and creating a potty-training room.

The outdoor playground is also being restructured to make room for an infant and toddler-specific playground.

Most of the renovations have been paid for with grants and contributions from volunteers and parents, Wickham said.

Whitney Bryen can be reached at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.