Regular customers to this shebeen know that I am somewhat bughouse on the Morrill Act, and those measures that flowed from it, the legislation that made possible the system of land-grant colleges in what were then very new states, and provided us some of our finest college football powers into the bargain, although I am fairly certain that Senator Justin Smith Morrill of Vermont did not have the Chick-Fil-A Bowl in mind when he began his long fight to establish a system of higher education that would benefit the sons and daughters and grandchildren of Wisconsin loggers and Nebraska sodbusters. But, recently, while doing some research, I happened to go through the legislative history of the Morrill Act again and, in doing so, I once again was reminded of the one thing about which we can be certain about our politics -- almost none of our most virulent political arguments is truly new. Most of them flow from the original debates within the Constitutional Convention, especially the endless pulling-and-hauling over the concept of "states rights," which quickly morphed from a learned dispute over the shape and role of government to the basic constitutional justification for the continuation of the slave power. In fact, the latter purpose wasn't far from the debate from the outset. The compromise that produced the 3/5ths Rule, which probably made ratification of the Constitution possible, fastened the slave power to the states rights argument in what seemed like perpetuity.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

States rights loosed something else into the country's political bloodstream that we still see manifest today. From the beginning of the country, in their attempts to maintain their peculiar institution, the Southern states inculcated in themselves a distrust of Northern money and Northern education, which they saw not only as a vehicle for regional dominance, but also, as the Southern states increasingly saw all forms of progress, a threat to the slave economy. This kind of cultural know-nothing populism spread west as well, although, because there was little or no slavery practiced officially in what were then called the western states, most of the populist resistance to new ideas was rooted in a distrust of the admittedly sharp (and not altogether honest) practices of Eastern money and Eastern bankers.

Most Popular

Anyway, in 1857, Morrill first introduced his act providing for the establishment of land-grant colleges. As Theodore Sky points out in his history of the federal spending power:

"(The

Morrill Act) '...was consistent with

legislation that Lincoln actively promoted during his presidency and discussed

in his annual messages, including grants of public lands for railroads, federal

assistance for internal improvements such as canals and waterways, and the

homestead legislation..."

The problem, of course, was that Abraham Lincoln wasn't president yet. James Buchanan was. And the debate over the Morrill Act has a lot to it that echoes down through our current dysfunctional national legislature. For example, there was more than a little anti-science sneering at Morrill's attempt to make higher education available to the nation's yeoman farmers and their children. Historian Neal Harl quotes a Minnesota Democratic senator named Henry Mower Rice snarking Bachmannishly at the whole notion:

"We want no fancy farmers, no fancy

mechanics," said Senator Rice of Minnesota, while Senator Mason of Virginia

railed, "'It is one of the most extraordinary engines of mischief...misusing the

property of the country...an unconstitutional robbing of the Treasury for the

purpose of bribing the States."

As with almost every national issue, slavery shadowed this debate as well. (It is not insignificant that one of Morrill's staunchest allies in this fight was Thaddeus Stevens, the implacable Pennsylvania abolitionist, who answered the nastiness directed at the more mild-mannered Morrill with his own not inconsiderable talent for invective.) The frame of the debate was about the "role" of the federal government, but the undeniable subtext was that, if the federal government could do this, if it could build roads and canals and universities, then it could abolish slavery if it wanted to. And President Buchanan, trying mightily to stave off the inevitable conflagration, gave in and vetoed the bill. His veto message could have been read word for word at CPAC on a panel about the evils of the Affordable Care Act.

"The

Constitution is a grant to Congress of a few enumerated, but most important powers,"

Buchanan wrote in his veto message. "...All other powers are related to the

states and to the people. For the efficient and harmonious working of both, it

is necessary that their several spheres of action should be kept distinct from

each other. This alone can prevent conflict and mutual injury."

(At least Buchanan was consistent. As one of his last acts as president, in 1860, with the country sliding toward civil war, he vetoed what later would become the Homestead Act, and his justification could have come right out of Paul Ryan's bootstrappy playbook: "The honest poor man, by frugality and

industry, can in any part of our country acquire a competence for

himself and his family, and in doing this he feels that he eats the

bread of independence. He desires no charity, either from the Government

or from his neighbors. This bill, which proposes to give him land at an

almost nominal price out of the property of the Government, will go far

to demoralize the people and repress this noble spirit of independence.

It may introduce among us those pernicious social theories which have

proved so disastrous in other countries." Morrill, who considered his land-grant proposal as sharing principles in common with the Homestead Act, was predictably agog.)

(And, yes, it required a second Morrill Act -- in 1890 -- for the

country's African American citizens to get land-grant colleges of their

own. And, yes, many of the promises of the second Morrill Act were

broken. See Ta-Nehisi Coates's remarkable essay for why that was. But the schools established by the second Morrill Act, many of which comprise what are now known

as Historically Black Colleges And Universities, have stubbornly

survived, and carry on their portion of Justin Morrill's dream.)

The Morrill Act did not become law until 1862, when most of the states that most vigorously had opposed it were in rebellion against the Union. I mention this only to point out that no political argument is altogether new, and to point out that, from the Articles of Confederation onwards, at almost every point in our history, the idea that the United States is a collection of sovereign states has been morally destructive and politically retrograde. Adherence to states-rights philosophy has been intellectually crippling, and in most case, has hobbled national progress on everything from education policy to transportation infrastructure. It is often said by hopeful liberals that Dwight Eisenhower couldn't get nominated by the current Republican party. Well, there's no way that James Buchanan still could be a Democrat, either. But he might just run a strong second in the 2016 Iowa Republican caucuses.