Snyder's proposed state budget cuts rural hospitals, graduate medical education funding

Michigan hospital officials said they were surprised Wednesday that Gov. Rick Snyder’s proposed 2016 budget calls for wholesale elimination of state funding for graduate medical education, and financial support for small and rural hospitals and obstetrical programs at rural hospitals.

While the overall cut in the general budget totals $74 million, the hit is actually much larger —$163 million when federal matching funds are added, said Laura Appel, senior vice president of federal policy and advocacy with the Michigan Health and Hospital Association in Lansing.

In a statement, Spencer Johnson, MHA’s president, said the hospital association's board met Wednesday and found Snyder’s proposed budget unacceptable.

“We’re in the process of analyzing the full impact of the proposal on Michigan hospitals, the health care community and the patients they serve,” Johnson said. “The MHA will consider all its options as the Legislature confronts the state’s budget shortfall.”

Republicans who control the Michigan House and Senate have already said they want to finalize the state's $54 billion 2016 budget in early June. The next fiscal year starts Oct. 1.

Snyder also plans to shortly sign executive orders that will cut more than $325 million in this year’s budget to address a funding shortfall. The cuts include about $7 million for hospital GME programs and to small and rural hospitals, which amounts to about $20 million when federal matching shares are included, Appel said.

“We were surprised. We expected some cuts, not this much," Appel said. "GME funding was eliminated for 60 hospitals and a small pool of money for small and rural hospitals also was taken away."

The $74 million in general fund cuts to hospitals in 2016 breaks down this way: $57 million general fund cut to GME, $12 million cut for small and rural hospitals, and $5 million cut to hospitals that perform obstetrical services in rural areas.

In one executive order Wednesday, Snyder also cut $16.6 million from the state Department of Community Health, $23 million from state police and $17.8 million from the Department of Corrections.

Tim Becker, deputy chief director at Community Health, said the budget cuts this year in the department were necessary to address a “sizable deficit. We have a fairly large portion of the general fund, so consequently these are fairly large cuts.”

“We want to see these programs continue in 2016. We are proposing to reinstate these programs at 2014 levels with (an increase in hospital) provider taxes,” Becker said.

But Appel said it is difficult to expect hospitals to increase their provider taxes by millions of dollars to receive the federal matching share.

“The state is asking us to put up the state match (for 2016),” Appel said. “That is $57 million to get the $163 million, but our net would only be $106 million. To get to $163 million, we would have to put up much more.”

Becker said he did not readily have the percent provider tax increase required for hospitals to receive their full GME and other hospital state funding.

In a statement, Sara Wurfel, the governor’s press secretary, said Michigan hospitals are benefiting financially from Medicaid expansion.

Wurfel said Health Michigan enrollment has surged to more than 549,000 enrollees, much higher than the original estimates of 322,000.

“That’s significant additional resources flowing into hospitals —$80 million plus that hadn’t been accounted for or planned on earlier,” said Wurfel in an email to Crain’s. “This helps provide some key offsets for this loss of state specific dollars.”

“The governor views hospitals as an essential part of and partner in Michigan’s efforts to improve our state’s health and wellness,” Wurfel said.

“This GME conversation from state general fund to the (provider tax fund) that hospitals cover is part of that,” said Wurfel, noting that Michigan is only behind New York in receiving state GME payments. Other states, including Massachusetts, receive none.

Appel said hospitals are not financially benefiting from Healthy Michigan Medicaid expansion.

“We are seeing more covered people in terms of how Medicaid is financed,” Appel said. “Community Health is arguing that Healthy Michigan is a good paying program. What I don’t know is how much Healthy Michigan helps with all the problems we have in traditional Medicaid.”

But Michigan’s proposed 2016 budget states the following: “Additional revenues to the health care system as a direct result of the Healthy Michigan Plan more than offset these reductions.”

Appel said MHA does not believe that Healthy Michigan offsets reductions in GME and the small and rural hospital support programs.

She said she has not been told by any executives that hospitals are now making money on Medicaid. “We lose money” on Medicaid, she said.

Moreover, Appel said Michigan hospitals have contributed more than $7 billion in reduced Medicare payments since the Affordable Care Act was approved in 2010.

“We have spent billions of dollars to help expand Medicaid (and private insurance) on the (federal health insurance) exchange,” Appel said.

For 2015, Becker said Community Health’s $16.55 million in cuts fall in these areas: $5 million for GME, $2 for million small and rural hospitals; $1.5 million for health plan services; $2.9 million in mental health commission; $1.5 million in local public health; $350,000 for an injury prevention project; $1.5 million in health and wellness; and $300,000 for behavioral health.

Related Links