Francisco Rodriguez Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Phoenix — The command will come. So will the conditioning.

All the pitching-related stuff is going to seem like child's play this spring for Francisco Rodriguez compared to what he saw transpire in his hometown of Caracas, Venezuela, before reporting to Maryvale Baseball Park for his third stint with the Milwaukee Brewers.

There has been major political unrest in Caracas over the past two weeks with anti-government protests and marches taking place. There have been eight deaths reported so far due to the violence.

"I have never seen so many protests, so much division," Rodriguez said Saturday morning, his first day back with the Brewers. "I hope they can come up with a resolution and everything can get back to peace.

"I hope (it will happen). There is nothing impossible in this world. I hope they can sit down, because the only people who are suffering are the Venezuelan people. Nobody else."

Making things even dicier is the fact Rodriguez's residence happens to be located in the epicenter of it all, making the acquisition of his visa the least of his concerns as he prepared for his trip back to the United States.

"I'm right in the middle of it, exactly," he said. "The area I live in Caracas, that's the opposition. I'm in that area. I couldn't get out of my area for four to five days because they were burning tires and they closed the roads. It's pretty messed up right now."

How did Rodriguez get out?

"I've got bodyguards," he said. "They're policemen. Motorcycle cops. I was in an SUV with them behind on motorcycles. It's sad."

Rodriguez brought his immediate family with him, and it's his hope he can fly his other family members out to Arizona soon so he can turn his full attention to baseball.

"I don't want to have distractions being on the field and thinking, 'What are they doing? Is everything all right at home?'" he said. "I don't want that distraction. The main thing I want is their safety. That's the most important thing to me."

Rodriguez, 32, signed with the Brewers on Feb. 7 after entertaining "four or five offers." The Brewers traded for him at the all-star break in 2011, saw him save his 300th career game in 2012 and re-signed him to a minor-league deal early last season.

He made it back to the majors with the Brewers and pitched well enough to return to the closer's role with Jim Henderson hurt and John Axford struggling. Rodriguez went 1-1 with a 1.09 ERA and went 10 for 10 in save opportunities before being traded to the Baltimore Orioles for third-base prospect Nicky Delmonico.

"I knew I was coming back. I had a feeling," he said. "For some reason, I knew that I wasn't saying bye at all. I was just saying, 'See you guys later.' I know where I need to be, where I want to be. It was a no-brainer for me when the decision came to get back here once again.

"Chemistry, the guys in the clubhouse, the fan base. Everything. I feel really comfortable. My family is extremely happy here, I am extremely happy here, so that's why I said it was a no-brainer for me to come here again."

Rodriguez will definitely be behind to start, but there's little concern in the Brewers' camp that he will be for long. A defined role is a ways off yet with Henderson set as the closer and Brandon Kintzler as the setup man, but Rodriguez says he's happy to do whatever is asked of him.

"That will take care of itself later on," he said. "This is a really long season. Just be ready. Stay healthy. The one thing I have in mind is whenever my opportunity comes, just be ready for it."

If nothing else, Rodriguez will bring leadership to a bullpen that has once again been turned over in the off-season. With 304 career saves, the single-season record of 62 still in his back pocket and a World Series ring, he knows of what he speaks and embraces his new role as veteran mentor to the younger relievers.

"It's something that I like," he said. "I like to lead them and guide them. 'Listen, I usually throw this pitch in this situation.' This game is 80% mental and 20% physical. Physically, the stuff is going to be there but I want them to be mentally strong and have a short memory when they don't do the job.

"Make sure to wrap it up and go get them the next day."