By Eileen Kelley Proquest LLC

When firefighters and police officers like Bobby Deal retire, the pensions they receive can make them millionaires - but how much longer can the city afford to pay? ; THE $5 MILLION COP

When Bobby Deal retired from the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office last month, he did so with the promise of a nest egg worth at least $4.9 million , a sum he'll be paid over the next 25 years.

Deal now earns nearly 50 percent more per year as a retiree than he did when he worked for the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office .

That's just for starters.

A guaranteed 3 percent cost-of-living increase annually and the ability to bankroll a separate pension - funds from his Deferred Retirement Option Plan account potentially paid by taxpayers - will allow Deal one day to bring home twice as much money per year as a retiree as he did when he worked.

Deal, though considered highly paid when he was a cop, is far from alone as a pensioner who will make considerably more in retirement than when he was working.

Deal is among a group of 16 July retirees who are guaranteed to turn $4 million in DROP benefits into $11 million in additional pension benefits.

The DROP program is considered one of the greatest perks of the job for Jacksonville police officers and firefighters. It is much more lucrative than any other DROP program for state and other city employees.

No other police and fire pension fund in the state offers such lavish guarantees - money on top of a regular pension, potentially for life.

And no other large municipal pension fund in the state is in such dire financial shape as the Jacksonville Police and Fire Pension Fund , which is $1.65 billion in debt and is so underfunded that the city's bond ratings have suffered.

"Our pension benefits are so generous that we really are creating millionaires," City Councilman Bill Gulliford said.

Police and firefighters say they have worked hard for these benefits, which were negotiated long ago and approved by the City Council .

The DROP program allows police officers and firefighters with just 20 years of service the chance to put five years of future pension checks into what amounts to a secondary, high-interest retirement account while they continue to work and draw their regular pay.

Most Florida cities require their retirees to take their DROP earnings with them when they officially leave work.

Not in Jacksonville .

The program is so enticing that only a handful of retirees each year decide to withdraw their DROP earnings to spend or invest on their own.

The rest, between 80 and 130 or so retirees a year, know their earnings will double, triple, even quadruple if they play it safe and invest their money here, in a troubled pension fund that has taxpayers acting as a bank when the stock market falters.TAXPAYERS HAVE ALL THE RISK

The Jacksonville Police and Fire Pension Fund has been good for retirees.

John Keane , the executive administrator over the fund, became the leading advocate for enhanced benefits for police officers and firefighters. Deal, as one of the fund's trustees, helped to secure them.

Since the 1990s, police and firefighters gained progressively better benefits, leading to this: the ability to retire after just 20 years at any age, a 3 percent cost-of-living increase on the pensions, a supplement to help pay for insurance costs in retirement and the creation of the DROP program.

This DROP program was supposed to be cost-neutral when the Internal Revenue Service signed off on the Jacksonville plan 15 years ago.

It has been anything but that.

A bad year of trading on Wall Street means nothing to Deal and other retired police and firefighters, thanks to long-ago negotiated deals between former Mayor John Delaney and the pension fund - where Deal served as a decision-making trustee for 17 years.

Seven times in the 15 years DROP has been offered, taxpayers were forced to make up the difference when the market value of the pension fund's returns fell below 8.4 percent.

Considering that most retirees are paid from their DROP accounts in equal, set amounts 26 times a year, the payouts and the guaranteed growth of 8.4 percent on the remaining balance of their accounts offer a much better return than a savings account, U.S. Treasury bonds, many mutual funds and stock investments.

During the worst of the recession between late 2007 and late 2008, when taxpayers saw their 401(k) funds and stock portfolios obliterated, the Jacksonville Police and Fire Pension Fund had market returns of negative 16.12 percent.

Taxpayers made up that loss and then added 8.4 percent for a total payout of nearly 25 percent that year.

City finance officials did not want to comment on the matter but did acknowledge in an email that they do not know what it cost taxpayers that year, or for any of the other six years when the market did not deliver the promised 8.4 percent.

Others who have studied Jacksonville's long-standing pension promises and the economic fallout of those promises do talk. And they are usually slack-jawed by the numbers from The Florida Times- Union analysis of DROP.

The newspaper found that a group of 16 who retired last month are being promised more than $11 million collectively in future payouts just from their DROP accounts. That does not include what they'll take home from their regular pensions.

"There's nowhere on the planet that I am aware of that offers such a high, compounded rate of return that is guaranteed over decades. Where can I - and the rest of the Jacksonville taxpayers, for that matter - sign up?" asked Tom Majdanics, a Jacksonville resident who has followed the city's attempt at pension reform closely.

While retirees are protected when the market performs poorly, taxpayers are not. They absorb the risk without ever getting paid back in better years.

"It's fleecing the taxpayers," Majdanics said.

Jacksonville's version of DROP also allows the retirees to leverage time.

The longer the money is invested in the pension fund, the more money the retiree makes, regardless of the true value of the investments.

In other words, the balance on the account grows 8.4 percent for 20, 30 or even 50 years while the retiree draws guaranteed payments 26 times a year. 'MILLIONAIRES NEXT DOOR'

Deal decided to invest and draw on his DROP account over the next 25 years.

On top of his regular pension, Deal will draw more than $52,000 a year from his DROP account. By being able to have his pension funds in a high-interest account for five years before he retired, what would have been a $546,585 pension for his 35 years at the Sheriff's Office will become $1.3 million , a difference of $762,034 .

At the end of his DROP plan in June 2039 , Deal will have collected $4.9 million in combined pension and DROP benefits. His DROP benefits end that year, but his pension will continue; he is due to receive $210,845 in 2040. He will receive an additional 3 percent every year after that.

Most employees who retired in July decided to invest and draw from their DROP accounts over the next 30 years. One chose 42.6 years.

Two people who retired in the spring, one a firefighter and the other a police officer, opted to invest and draw from their accounts for more than 50 years. In doing so, they will have been paid four times the amounts they would have received had they taken lump sums.

If they die sooner, the payments will continue, passed to surviving spouses, children and even grandchildren if they are named in the deceased retiree's trust.

Former Fire Capt. Edward Brackett is just 44 and retired after 25 years of service.

His DROP account had a balance of $326,866.68 when he left work in March. He has asked to draw on that account for the next 51.5 years. The pension fund - or taxpayers, depending on the stock market - will pay Brackett $1,070 every other week from his DROP account.

All the while, Brackett will receive a regular pension, which now is almost $60,000 annually.

By the time Brackett is done collecting from his DROP account, he will be 95, should he live that long.

By then, he and/or whomever his trust is passed on to, will have received $1,432,796 because he was in DROP.

Vanessa Bass , a former police officer who is 45, chose the same option after working with the Sheriff's Office for 25 years. She's turning her $244,243.04 DROP account into $1,070,624 over the next 51.5 years.

Just between the two of them, that is $1.93 million more than the lump-sum pension payouts other Florida cities would have required them to take.

"This is just totally ridiculous," said Dominic Calabro , president and chief executive officer of Florida TaxWatch, a nonpartisan taxpayer research institute and government watchdog.

"Generous is not even a word for it," Calabro said. "It is dysfunctional. We don't know of any pension system in the United States that has such ridiculous and unbelievable [perks]. Many of these folks become the millionaires next door."

Many like Calabro say the time is now - not in 30 years, as Mayor Alvin Brown proposes - to drop DROP.

The City Council likely will discuss just that in the coming weeks, when it votes on a plan that Brown and the pension fund hammered out months ago.

"This is absolutely preposterous," Gulliford said.

Gulliford said those who have tried to rein in out-of-control pension costs - currently costing taxpayers $153 million this year with an anticipated pledge of another $40 million a year for more than a decade - received significant pushback from the pension fund and union members.

"They think they should be guaranteed something," he said. "Anyone who has any fiscal responsibility and fiscal acumen would say that this is crazy.

"I'm not so sure the agreement on the table is in the best interest of the taxpayers. We could pass this thing that is on the table only to have people in my position 10 years from now say, 'Wow we are in a bad or worse position.' "HOW IT WORKS

The rationale behind DROP varies.

Some believe it is an incentive to keep employees on the job, giving them a reason to stick around at least 20 years so that there isn't a brain drain caused by an exodus of seasoned employees.

Others say it is an incentive to rid the public sector of what are typically higher-paying jobs because only those police and firefighters with at least 20 years of service can apply for the DROP in Jacksonville .

On one point, there is no debate: DROP is lucrative.

The police officer or a firefighter who hits the 20-year service mark has three options: Enroll in DROP, wait to enroll, or opt out.

There is no record of police and firefighters who have opted out of DROP after meeting the eligibility requirements.

Enrolling in DROP is a pledge that the police officer or firefighter officially will leave the job within a specified time frame, up to five years.

Deal went with the maximum time, five years.

As a senior-level employee, Deal was entitled to a pension of 80 percent of his average monthly salary of the previous two years.

The DROP payments put into Deal's account almost immediately started compounding interest annually at 8.4 percent.

In January 2010 , after Deal entered DROP, his regular pension in that account was given a 3 percent cost-of-living boost and again his payments compounded annually at 8.4 percent.

That scenario happened again and again until July, when Deal, 59, and who by then had worked for the department 35 years, hit the maximum allotted time he could be in DROP - five years.

On July 4 , he retired, leaving more than a half million dollars in the police and fire pension fund.

Deal's earnings will grow just as they did when he entered DROP in July 2009 .

For 2015, Deal will have earned $153,045 in pension benefits between his regular $100,701 pension and $52,344 from his DROP account. Deal's top income earned when working was $109,221 .

Deal's regular pension in 2016 will grow by 3 percent. On top of that, again he will receive $52,344 from DROP. In fact, Deal will receive $52,344 from DROP every year until his account runs dry in mid-2039. At the same time, his regular pension will grow 3 percent a year.

That means by 2030, 15 1/2 years from now, Deal's combined pension benefits will be $209,233 . For his last year in the DROP program - which ends in June 2039 - he will receive $231,017 in combined benefits.

By then, Deal would have been paid $4.9 million .

Deal says the current retirement perk, DROP, is better than what police had before.

"What we had before was the drop-dead plan," Deal said. "What we were doing is having people work until they dropped dead. They couldn't afford to walk out the door."MANY RETIREES

Deal is far from alone as a retiree making more a year than those still working at the Sheriff's Office .

He was one of 16 police officers and firefighters who retired last month and have opted to keep the bulk - or all - of their DROP accounts in the pension fund.

The value of all of these 16 DROP accounts last month was $4,538,207 . By the time the retirees finish drawing from these DROP accounts, the amount actually paid out to just 16 retirees will mushroom to $11,651,142 , thanks to the annual 8.4 percent guaranteed by taxpayers.

That's a difference of $7.11 million that taxpayers must pick up should the market not produce 8.4 percent annual returns on investments.

"That is an incredible amount that would go to just a few [retired] employees," said Clay Yarborough , the council president. "That is the exact reason that we need a different plan in place."

The 16 July retirees provide a snapshot of the future as the city grapples with getting pension costs under control.

At a relatively low 80 retirees a year, that means that if the other retirees realize similar-sized payouts to the $11.65 million committed to the July DROP retirees, about $58.25 million would be committed to DROP payouts from one year's retirees alone.

Similar commitments could be expected every year.

"It wouldn't surprise me," City Councilman John Crescimbeni said of the promised payouts for just 16 retirees. "It's a contractual obligation the City Council approved."

The DROP and pension program rattled businessman and former Mayor John Peyton , who was elected after Delaney struck the deal with the pension fund.

Peyton did not return repeated phone messages left on his cellphone over the last few weeks.

But others recall that Peyton spoke frequently and fervently at businessmen's luncheons about the perils of the lucrative perks given to the employees.

His passion and campaign promises to end these lucrative deals essentially got him aggravation and no real change.

Like Peyton, Mayor Alvin Brown</person> suggested early on he wanted to see aggressive changes to police officers' and firefighters' pensions.

Under the mayor's proposal, DROP is essentially dead, but only for future employees.

Several City Council members say the deal Brown cut with Keane didn't go far enough.JACKSONVILLE UNIQUE

The financial rewards of the Jacksonville Police and Fire Pension Fund's DROP program are so seductive that at least 80 and possibly 90 percent of all police and firefighters who entered DROP kept their money in the fund because of the guaranteed interest.

Of the 18 who retired in July, just two decided not to keep their money in the pension fund.

"There is nowhere else [in the market] you can get that guarantee payment," said Chris Draughon , an analyst with First Coast Wealth Advisors of St. Augustine .

By comparison among safe investments, U.S. Treasury Bonds yield 2.4 percent.

Keane said the 8.4 percent guarantee was not some far-fetched figure; it was consistent with the market conditions when DROP was first considered in Jacksonville in the late 1990s, which was a time of rapid stock market investment growth.

Market investment returns for the pension fund between 1996 and 1997 were 22.33 percent.

A year later, when City Council approved the measure, the market return rate was just 1.67 percent.

DROP officially was offered in January 1999 , a time when market returns picked up.

For the next two years, DROP experienced negative returns, requiring taxpayers to make up the difference plus 8.4 percent.

The market has fluctuated greatly over the years, with last year's investment returns hitting 22.3 percent.

Keane and Deal said it's important to remember that retirees are not getting those high returns in the good years.

They are in Fort Lauderdale .

And they also feel the sting when the market tanks.

"If the plan makes 10 percent, they make 10 percent. If the plan loses 10 percent, they lose 10 percent. There are no guarantees," said Fred Nesbitt , director of the public information over Fort Lauderdale's police and fire pension fund.

Most large municipal pension plans require the retirees to roll their DROP accounts into private investments or take lump sums once they finish work and the DROP program.

Mark Bogush , board chairman of the Tampa Police and Fire Pension Fund , said if the same perks were offered his retirees, the ability to guarantee 8.4 percent rate after DROP, there would be a stampede of retirees investing their money in his Tampa pension fund.

"If we could do that, I bet 80 percent would do the same," Bogush said.

But they can't.A 'NO-BRAINER'

Jacksonville's police and fire pension fund is $1.65 billion in debt.

Right now, about 43 cents is available in assets for every dollar promised to retirees.

The cost rises with DROP.

Jarmon Welch , the pension fund's Atlanta -based consultant who prepares the actuarial valuation report each year, said he looks at current values of what is owed because of DROP.

As of 2013, that value was more than $247 million , a huge jump from just four years earlier - the earliest year on record - when it was about $170 million .

A review of the DROP account balance from 2009 to 2013 shows a significant increase each year - typically about $20 million a year because more people are entering the DROP.

"I pretty well figured [the DROP] was a bad deal," Gulliford said. "But the fact that they don't take into consideration [the future payouts] only tells me that the hole is deeper than we think it is."

Filling that hole may be difficult, because there has been a steady stream of police officers and firefighters entering the program.

In DROP's inaugural year, 319 police officers and firefighters signed up. At that time, the average age of those entering DROP was 53 and the average police officer or firefighter had put in 28 years of work.

Today, the average soon-to-be retiree is 48 and has put in 21 years.

In other words, they are signing up younger and after fewer years worked.

Through the early to mid-2000s, between 44 and 61 people entered each year. Starting in 2010, at least 105 entered each year.

Today, 554 police officers and firefighters are in the first phase of DROP, meaning they still go to work each day while their pensions earn interest for up to five years before the employees are eligible to collect them.

As for the retirees who will continue to collect the taxpayer- guaranteed pension supplements for another 5, 30, or even 51 1/2 years?

There are 880 of them.

"It's a no-brainer," Crescimbeni said. "You have a 8.4 percent return and your principal is never at risk.

"You cannot find that in the real world, and I don't know of a single person who wouldn't want to invest in the DROP if they had that opportunity. It's a super, super deal."CHANGE A LONG WAY OFF

That deal could be a thing of the past for future hires.

But the major potential money-saving changes to DROP that Brown negotiated with the pension fund won't be seen for at least 30 years. That's the earliest any new hires after the plan is approved could retire.

Under the plan, DROP as it is now will look so different that it essentially drops DROP altogether.

There is one change that, if approved, would have a slight impact on current DROP participants - having returns change from a fixed rate to a variable rate ranging from 5 to 10 percent.

That means if the stock market experiences a loss, the DROP recipient would get 5 percent interest instead of 8.4 percent. If market returns are at 6 percent, the DROP recipient would get 6 percent. If the market performs at better than 8.4 percent, the DROP participant would get the higher rate, but no higher than 10 percent.

Keane estimated the cost savings to be about $200,000 a year, saying there was a great deal of time devoted to a relatively minor tweak in the program.

Chris Hand , the mayor's chief of staff, objected, saying the proposed changes for old and new employees are significant.

Not so, said Majdanics, the Jacksonville pension observer. He said the pension reform plan did not go far enough.

The future, he said, looks pretty bleak for taxpayers and the city's overall vitality considering the volume of police officers and firefighters who could qualify eventually for DROP.

"There are more than 2,600 who could reap the benefits of this ill-conceived, financially destructive DROP perk," Majdanics said. "Without any changes, it will predictably bleed our city budget over the next 50 to 60 years. Yet the so-called comprehensive pension reform agreement before the City Council neglects to address this gaping problem right now.

"Our city finances need a blood transfusion. The negotiated agreement asks current employees to donate a few drops [of blood] to solve the pension problem while the taxpayers are expected to give quarts." [email protected], (904) 359-4104THE MILLIONAIRE COP NEXT DOORHow do Jacksonville police officers and firefighters earn millions in retirement? Here's how the numbers add up for former assistant police chief Bobby Deal:DEAL'S PENSION$3.6 MILLIONPolice and firefighters who served for 25 years retire with a pension equal to 70 percent of their salary. Deal will receive $3.6 million in pension payments if he lives until 2039. His payments start at $101,701 in 2015 and increase by 3 percent a year, guaranteed.DEAL'S DROP PAYOFF$1.3 MILLIONIn addition to a regular pension, the city offers the DROP program to police and firefighters.8.4%Guaranteed return: The DROP program guarantees retirees an 8.4 percent interest rate regardless of stock market performance. If the stock market falls short, as it has done for 7 of the last 15 years, taxpayers have to make up the difference. But taxpayers don't get paid back when the stock market performs well.In Deal's case, he is to receive an additional $52,344 a year over his regular pension because of the DROP program. The money is guaranteed through 2039 and will go to his relatives or trust if he dies before then. $153 ,045Making more in retirement: That means that Deal, who never earned more than about $109,000 a year as assistant police chief, will collect $153,045 in his first year of retirement.JULY RETIREESHow 16 July retirees are turning $4 million from their drop accounts into $11 million *

DROP Payout Name retirement in years Total DROP payoutsMark Beebe $224,194 30 $614,624 Leroy Brantley $303,034 30 $830 ,762Dewitt Cooper Jr. $237,124 25 $567 ,716Bobby Deal $546,584 25 $1,308 ,619Micheal Edwards $571,829 30 $1,370 ,740Cathy Griffin $253,834 35 $788 ,141Ronald Jenkins $250,338 30 $686 ,298Stephen Lee $275,532 30 $755 ,367David Makauskas $244,720 15 $430 ,790Wayne Miller $269,233 20 $556 ,264Glen Palmer $250,622 25 $600 ,034Bobby Smith $100,000 42.6 $368 ,199William Smith $150,000 20 $309 ,914Thomas Staples $360,248 30 $839 ,576Timothy Thomas $274,825 25 $657 ,982Ronald Thompson $305,913 36 $972,110 * Not all 16 retirees invested the full amounts of the DROP accounts back into the troubled Jacksonville Police and Fire Pension Fund . Column 2, the DROP retirement column, is the amount after some lump sums were taken out for those who chose that option. After making the decision - on lump sums, if that was the case, and the time that the person would like to be paid - the pension fund sorts out what the biweekly payments will be considering the retiree is guaranteed to earn 8.4 percent on his or her principal every year regardless of the true value of the stock market.

Copyright: (c) 2014 ProQuest Information and Learning Company; All Rights Reserved. Wordcount: 4091

[jetpack-related-posts]