Boulder City Councilwoman Kathleen Collins Becker — better known as KC — today won a vacancy committee appointment to the House seat now held by Rep. Claire Levy.

Becker will be sworn into office next month to represent House District 13, which includes part of Boulder County and all of Clear Creek, Gilpin, Grand and Jackson counties.

The 43-year-old Democrat bested two other candidates to win Levy’s seat. Levy resigned effective Oct. 31 to serve as the executive director of the Colorado Center on Law and Policy.

Becker will be the third new face when the 2014 legislative session begins. Earlier this month, Republicans Bernie Herpin and George Rivera were sworn in as senators, replacing Democrats John Morse of Colorado Springs and Angela Giron of Publo, who were recalled for their gun votes.

Becker will have some big shoes to fill. Levy previously served as House Judiciary Committee chair and would have chaired the Joint Budget Committee had she finished her term.

“I’ve known KC for several years now, and I think very highly of her,” Majority Leader Dickey Lee Hullinghorst, whose district includes part of Boulder, said in a news release. “It’s terrific that House District 13 will continue to be represented by a strong woman.”

Becker is in the final year of a four-year term on the Boulder City Council, where she was the council’s representative on the Boulder Urban Renewal Authority and was the city’s representative to the Denver Regional Council of Governments. Before that she worked for the Department of the Interior for six years, notably on public land issues in Colorado and Wyoming.

“I have a solid background on Colorado’s water, public land and environmental issues,” she said, in the release.

She has a law degree from the Northwestern School of Law at Lewis and Clark College in Portland, Ore., and a master’s from the Burns School of Real Estate at the University of Denver’s Sturm School of Business. She also spent two years in the real estate business.

Becker and her husband, Miles Kunkel, are parents of two young children.