Third French cop killed

France's top security official was forced to abandon a top-level meeting this morning about the deadly attack on a satirical newspaper in Paris after just 10 minutes to rush to the scene of another shooting, on the southern edge of the French capital. CBS News correspondent Elizabeth Palmer reports two people, including a police officer, were wounded in the shooting today in a suburb south of Paris, which came amid an ongoing manhunt for two heavily armed brothers and the surrender of their alleged accomplice. The officer died of his wounds. Get the latest at CBSN.

Security worries

Thirteen veteran flight attendants are suing United Airlines, alleging the airline didn't take proper security measures after seeing an ominous note with the words "Bye Bye" on a plane. When the attendants refused to fly, they were fired for insubordination. Elaine Quijano reports on the story you'll see only on "CBS This Morning."

Polar express

The frigid first full week of 2015 has gone from a cold inconvenience to dangerous and even deadly, as much of America waits out the January deep freeze. The National Weather Service says cold air is continuing to cascade down from Canada, causing bitter cold and freezing conditions from the Plains states to the Northeast and even into the Southern states. CBS News correspondent Mark Strassmann reports some of the coldest wind chill readings will be as low as 25 to 45 degrees below zero.

Obamacare 2.0?

More than four years after the law's passage, Republicans are as insistent as ever that Obamacare is destined to fail. Illustrating their commitment to taking it down, the GOP-led House plans to vote today on on a bill that would make a major adjustment in the Affordable Care Act.

New antibiotic

Today's research offers a one-two punch in the search for new antibiotics: a different way of finding them and the discovery of one: Teixobactin, which makes antibiotic resistance unlikely. CBS News chief medical correspondent Dr. Jon LaPook reports the kinds of mutations that usually cause bacteria to become antibiotic resistant don't seem to affect how the new drug works.

Pot investment

Until now, it's been a few rich individuals who secretly funded burgeoning pot companies. But for the first time, a major investment firm is going to put its money behind marijuana. CBS News correspondent Anthony Mason reports on the watershed moment, announced first on "CBS This Morning."

Growing pains

Late December's deadly crash of AirAsia Flight 8501 en route from Indonesia to Singapore, along with the disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 last March and other accidents in recent years involving Asian-based airlines, has drawn new attention to the state of air travel and commercial aviation in the Asia-Pacific region ,which has enjoyed rapid growth recently.

Top News

World

Divers searching for AirAsia "black boxes" slowed

"Sloppy" North Korean hackers left a trail, FBI director says

Australian man dies in Outback a mile from safety

Politics

Obama: Auto industry "leading the way" in America's comeback

Marco Rubio believes he can win the presidency

U.S.

Protesters shout at fans as Bill Cosby hits the stage

Five-year-old girl tossed from bridge in Florida

Fla. sibling murder: "This is the stuff nightmares are made of"

How to keep your phone from dying in freezing weather

People's Choice Awards: 2015 winners and highlights

MoneyWatch

The latest Hollywood entry?

Planning your retirement? Plan on living on less

Apple iWatch could launch in March

Health

Study: Premium growth slowed after Obamacare

What too many hours of screen time can do to your eyes

An avocado a day can help keep bad cholesterol at bay

Measles cases linked to Disney theme parks