Republican candidates in Georgia’s 9th and 10th Congressional Districts, which include parts of Athens-Clarke County, slid easily to victory over their Democratic opponents in Tuesday’s midterm election.

Complete but unofficial results placed Jody Hice ahead with 67 percent of the vote to represent the 10th Congressional District over Ken Dious’ 33 percent out of more than 196,000 ballots.

“The people of the 10th District have told me they are troubled about the future and direction of our nation,” Hice noted in an email issued Tuesday evening. “I am honored to be the voice of their concerns in Washington, and as their congressman I will immediately focus on the issues that are important to them.”

Hice went on to reinforce his agenda of repealing the Affordable Care Act, passing a balanced budget amendment and enacting the FairTax, a national consumption tax.

In the 9th Congressional District, incumbent Doug Collins had 81 percent over David Vogel’s 19 percent of about 181,000 votes.

In comments Tuesday, Collins noted Republican victories across the country as a chance to end gridlock.

“With an even stronger majority in the House and leadership we have desperately needed in the Senate, we will break the lock of President Obama’s bitter partisanship and get Washington working for you again,” he said.

Athens is mostly represented by the 10th, which was heavily reconfigured during a 2013 redistricting that moved the city from the center of the district to the far northern portion.

Dious, an attorney from Athens, was only victorious in his home county with 65 percent of 22,088 votes cast in Athens-Clarke County. Dious also carried Taliaferro, Hancock and Jefferson counties. Hice, a conservative radio host and pastor from Walton County, won the remainder of the 10th.

Vogel took Clarke County from Collins with 68 percent, or 1,985 votes to Collins’ 937, but Collins managed to scoop up every other county in the district.

Contact government and enterprise reporter Kelsey Cochran at (706) 208-2233.