Bloomberg News

On Friday published reports indicated that the long expected bidding for Time Warner Cable may start next week. According to the reports, Charter Communications—which has just over one-third the market capitalization of Time Warner Cable– is preparing a “bear hug” letter to buy Time Warner Cable for cash and Charter stock.

Bear hugs are public approaches in deals where bids aren’t exactly welcome, designed to put pressure on a target company to sell. The idea is that the approach looks amicable enough (hug) but it comes with the pressure of likely public disclosure and shareholder pressure (bear).

The problem with Charter’s proposal is that in this situation the letter will likely exert very little pressure on Time Warner Cable to accept it. Reports say that the purchase price for the Time Warner Cable shares will be under $135 per share. Time Warner Cable shares closed on Friday at $131.41. And it was trading over $135 most of last month. That probably means there aren’t going to be many anxious shareholders desperate to take Charter’s price. Those stockholders have had ample opportunity to sell for at least as favorable prices.

In addition, Time Warner Cable doesn’t have any large holders who would likely be concerned that there is insufficient liquidity for them to cash out. Other than two mutual fund companies, Time Warner Cable’s last proxy did not report any shareholders with more than 5% of the stock. And one of the 5% holders reported selling down below 5% over a month ago.

That reduces the pressure on Time Warner Cable to take Charter’s deal at least somewhat. Of course the Time Warner Cable’s stock has been on a tear since the summer, probably largely in anticipation of a possible deal. The Time Warner Cable board could decide that the Charter deal looks good or could be improved to a level that would be attractive.

Plus Charter’s bear hug could kick off an auction in which the deal price becomes significantly higher. Comcast has been reported to be interested in buying Time Warner Cable as well.

In terms of takeover defenses, Time Warner Cable is relatively vulnerable, particularly if bidding results in shareholders being offered a substantial premium. All of Time Warner Cable’s directors are elected each year, so Time Warner Cable doesn’t have the defense of a staggered board which can force a hostile bidder to wait over a year to gain control through director elections. This year’s annual meeting was held in May. Under Time Warner Cable’s by-laws, if a hostile bidder wanted to replace directors at the 2014 annual meeting to get its bid approved by the board, nominees would have to be named by mid-February. Charter’s current bid is unlikely to be strong enough to tempt shareholders with such a tactic.

But much is unknown about this situation. We do not know how Time Warner Cable will react to a definitive proposal. Nor do we know how much Charter is able or ultimately willing to pay if and when Time Warner Cable opens up to a deal or whether Comcast or someone else will enter the fray.

This deal so far has been playing out slowly and it may take some time to know where the possibility for a deal is headed. But Charter’s bid will be a first step which could ultimately flush out how the various players will react.

(The author owns shares of Time Warner Cable.)

Send questions, comments or story ideas to Dealpolitik@gmail.com and follow Ron on Twitter @Dealpolitik