Jim Stingl In My Opinion SHARE Bill and Jean Drilias of Wauwatosa are dwarfed by two palm trees that grew from a palm plant that their daughter Liz brought home from Sunday school 27 years ago. Michael Sears

Liz Drilias was about 3 years old when she came home with a small palm plant from Sunday school at St. Jude the Apostle Parish in Wauwatosa.

That day, like today, was Palm Sunday. Though her memory of this event is fuzzy, Liz has been told the plant was in a foam coffee cup of dirt.

"I really remember after it was split into four plants and they were around 2 feet tall. I later went to Sunday school at St. Bernard's, so I'm not sure if any of the other kids at St. Jude still have their plants," said Liz, who is now Liz Elgar, 30 years old, married with a baby and living in Middleton.

Her parents, Jean and Bill Drilias, have two palm plantsat their Wauwatosa home. They're more like trees now, 8 feet tall and kissing the highest ceiling in the house on a stairway landing.

"This is the only place where they fit now," Bill said when I stopped in to have a look at the childhood project gone wild.

The Drilias family would like to find a new home for the two trees, perhaps a church or library or somewhere else with tall ceilings. I'll be happy to forward any offers to them.

"We don't know what to do with them," said Jean, adding that they used to carry the trees outside to the backyard every summer until they got too heavy.

The plants are mostly skinny stalks with a couple feet of greenery on top. They look healthy to my untrained eye, and seem to be enjoying life on each side of a large window. They get water once a week and an occasional dusting, and they have to make do with a thermostat setting well below tropical.

Sadly, the other two plants divided from that initial palm in the coffee cup didn't make it.

"My cousin killed one, and I killed one," Bill admitted, though not on purpose, of course. Bill thinks his died from not playing nice with geraniums he planted in the same pot to add a dash of color.

The leaves of the remaining plants are way too short to qualify as the blessed palms given away to churchgoers on Palm Sunday. People take them home and slide them into a crucifix or perhaps fold them into a cross shape or braid them to look fancy.

My own childhood memory is using my 3-foot-long palm to sword-fight with my brother in the pew until someone was poked in the eye and my parents seized the palms. We were slow to come around to an appreciation of the palms as a symbol of triumph as they were placed in the path of Jesus while he entered Jerusalem on a donkey.

St. Jude's told me they don't distribute palm plants at Sunday school anymore, but they still give out the longer, waxy palm fronds at church. They buy them from T.H. Stemper Co. in Bay View, a church supply store in business since 1911.

Joe Stemper, one of the owners, said they get their palm strips from Texas and sell them to more than 400 churches in Wisconsin and the Upper Midwest.

"We get three-fourths of a semi full of them, in bags of 100," he said. Bigger churches will go through 20 to 40 bags. Leftover palms are burned for the ashes used next year on Ash Wednesday.

The palms that have marked time at the Drilias home have been a blessing, even though they probably were not sanctified in the holy water sense.

The grown-up girl who brought the plants home some 27 years ago doesn't think she and her husband can take them. "The only room tall enough is our three-season sunroom, and I don't think they would survive the winter," Liz said.

I didn't need to be a palm reader to know that Bill might try to get me to take the twin trees.

"They will fit in the trunk, by the way," he hinted.

I doubt that. Plus, they're too big for sword fighting.

Call Jim Stingl at (414) 224-2017 or email at jstingl@jrn.com