Did GOP Insiders Steal the Kentucky Governor's Race for Tea Partier Matt Bevin?

Photo Credit: www.facebook.com/mattbevinforkentucky

We see, again, the nightmare scenario I've warned about for so many years: a U.S. election where all of the pre-election polls suggest Candidate X is set to win, but Candidate Y ends up winning by a huge margin instead and nobody even bothers to verify that the computer tabulated results accurately reflect the intent of the voters.

That's exactly what happened in Kentucky on Tuesday, where Democratic Attorney General Jack Conway was leading by a fair margin (about 3 to 5 points) in almost every pre-election poll in his race for Governor, but then ended up being announced as the loser to 'Tea Party' Republican candidate Matt Bevin by a landslide (almost 9 points) --- according to the state's 100% unverified computer tabulation systems.

As detailed on today's program with my guest Karoli Kuns of Crooks And Liars, there are a number of reasons to question the reported results. Among them, as Kuns points out today at C&L, the Democrats running in the down ballot races --- for Secretary of State, Attorney General (Conway's current job) and even state Auditor --- each reportedly received tens of thousands more votes than Conway did at the top of the ticket!

Bev Harris, of BlackBoxVoting.org, described the higher vote totals in the down ballot races as a "significant anomaly". She tells me that, at least until more records are requested and examined, the KY-Gov's race "has to be looked at as a questionable outcome, particularly because of the discrepancies in the down ballot races. More votes in those races and not at the top...that just doesn't happen."

(Here is a link to a helpful Public Records Request toolkit [PDF] from Black Box Voting for those of you who may be interested in helping to try and obtain some transparency in this race, as we also discussed on today's program.)

There are many other reasons for supporters to question the reported results in the KY-Gov's race, as I detail during the show. Of course, the reported results could also be completely accurate. But, without public, human examination of the hand-marked paper ballots (which, thankfully, now actually exist across most of the state!) and other related records, we have yet another unverified, 100% faith-based election to leave supporters wondering if they really won or lost.

We've seen this before, of course. Too many times. We've seen malfunctioning paper ballot op-scan systems report losers as "winners" until a hand-count corrects the record. We've seen how easy it is for hackers to game election equipment. We've seen election insiders, even as recently as last week, breaking in to computerized central tabulators. And we've even seen high-ranking election officials in Kentucky (including County Clerks, Circuit Court Judges and School Superintendents!) convicted for decades of insider election fraud, including the manipulation of electronic voting systems.

We've seen both Democrats and Republicans alike fall victim to similarly anomalous and unverified results. And, while none of it bodes well for 2016 and beyond, neither does it bode well for those immediately and directly impacted by Tuesday's elections --- such as the 400,000 Kentuckians who stand to lose health care under a new Republican Governor who has vowed to shut down the state's expansion of coverage under ObamaCare by the very popular if term-limited and outgoing Democratic Governor.

(Editor's note: one scenario worth investigating and paying attention to concerns identifying the contractors who programmed the voting machines, especially in rural areas that were likely to see GP majorities but perhaps not by as much as were reported in the vote totals. That suggestion is based on a 2005 investigation and 2006 book, What Happened in Ohio: A Documentary Record of Theft and Fraud, by co-authors Bob Fitrakis, Steven Rosenfeld and Harvey Wasserman, into how the GOP suppressed and stole votes in Ohio's 2004 presidential election.

One contractor, whose website favored Republicans and sold memorabilia celebrating the Republican's presidential win in Florida in 2000, programmed the machinery in dozens of rural counties where George W. Bush received close to 100 percent of the vote, as opposed to the expected two-thirds to three-quarters range. As a result, tens of thousands of votes appeared to be electronically shifted from John Kerry to George W. Bush without any audit trail, because the voting machines involved did not rely on paper ballots. According to Verified Voting's state-by-state map of voting machinery, many Kentucky counties have similar all-electronic machinery.)