BOULDER — Overlooking the Flatirons and the foothills, family and friends gathered Saturday at an outdoor plaza to remember two 19-year-olds who died when floodwaters swept them away.

“It’s been a very depressing week, but we want to lift our spirits,” said Glenda Aretxuloeta, the mother of one of the victims, Wesley Quinlan.

The uplifting ceremony included American Indian prayers and singing. A video memorial that featured a rock version of “Ring of Fire” as well as “You Are My Sunshine” moved a young girl in the back to dance, and even Aretxuloeta tapped along in her black heels.

Her son and his girlfriend, Wiyanna Nelson, were driving home late Sept. 11 with two friends as rain was pounding down. A mudslide appears to have stopped their car. When Wiyanna stepped out, she was swept away in the water. Wesley got out to try to save her. Their two friends survived.

A week and a half later, the state bears reminders of the disastrous flooding. But Saturday, above the plaza at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, the sun hid behind soft clouds and a quiet was interrupted only by spoken memories of the young couple.

Although the two had been together less than a year, they were remembered Saturday as a pair — each free spirit complementing the other.

Both were described as fearless.

Wesley went through adventures in “subzero temperatures” and hunted for the mythical Chupacabra in New Mexico.

Wiyanna was fearless in her determination and in speaking her mind.

“From even her earliest moments on her first day of kindergarten, when the class was asked what they were most looking forward to learning and Wiyanna answered, ‘I want to cut with scissors,’ ” said Lizzy Schleuning during her eulogy.

Wesley loved leather jackets and Cap’n Crunch shakes. He recently spent all night playing Dance Dance Revolution with friends, moving to Carly Rae Jepsen’s “Call Me Maybe.”

Wesley and Wiyanna were writers. Two poems, one written by each, were recited at the service.

Wesley’s poem, “Safe,” spoke of a new day bringing peace. Wiyanna’s poem expressed her determination to stay positive and her gratitude for her life.

“I aspire to believe in life and living through the things I have lost throughout my existence, in gaining perspective through them, in remaining positive because life really is too short to look at the glass half empty,” her poem read.

One friend who spoke during an open-microphone invitation said he remembers Wiyanna in their most fun moments as she would run after him trying to give the reluctant friend a hug.

“She would just chase me outside Wesley’s house for, like, 20 minutes,” said the friend, Jason. “It was the greatest times I ever had with Wiyanna.”

Family and friends said the couple will be remembered in the words they crafted, in videos Wesley produced and in the memories they left for their loved ones.

Yesenia Robles: 303-954-1372, yrobles@denverpost.com or twitter.com/yeseniarobles