Bronwyn Bishop.

Bronwyn Bishop has promised to preside over a more ''dignified'' Parliament from the Speaker's chair.

Ms Bishop, who entered Parliament in 1987 and was twice a minister under John Howard, has accepted the role of Speaker of the House of Representatives after a personal request by incoming prime minister Tony Abbott.

Mr Abbott is due to announce his first ministry on Monday and Ms Bishop's acceptance of the speakership was seen as vital to him making some minor tweaks to his team, largely carried from his shadow ministry.

Advertisement

The loss of Sophie Mirabella, who was to have been Industry Minister, has prompted calls for greater female representation in the cabinet and outer ministry.

Mr Abbott said his choice of Ms Bishop was about returning the floor of Parliament to a place of ''genuine debate''.

''I want to bring some dignity back to the Parliament and that means a Speaker who can control the Parliament and who can act without fear nor favour,'' he said.

''And I want someone who is as tough on the government as on the opposition, because I think the people expect a parliament which is a genuine debating chamber and not just a chamber where the government bludgeons the opposition.''

The Liberal party room will be asked to endorse Ms Bishop's selection before the first sitting day of the 44th Parliament. It is traditional for the Speaker to be escorted ''against their will'' to the chair by colleagues.

Mr Abbott, who has pointedly promised a ''measured and calm'' government, will also be hoping for less action in the Speaker's chair after the removal of Harry Jenkins and Peter Slipper's brief but controversial stint in the chair during the fractious 43rd Parliament.

Ms Bishop said: ''I certainly feel that the Parliament itself is entitled to have dignity returned to it. That doesn't mean it won't be a robust place, but it does mean that it will have a dignity that has been lacking in the last little while.''

Meanwhile, Liberal Victorian Premier Denis Napthine has urged Mr Abbott to promote more women to the federal ministry, suggesting Victorian MPs Kelly O'Dwyer and former workforce participation minister Sharman Stone as worthy possible selections.

It is understood NSW senator Arthur Sinodinos will be promoted to cabinet in the finance role. However, the Australian Financial Review is reporting that Senator Sinodinos may be overlooked for the role in favour of Mathias Cormann.

Queensland Senator Ian McDonald, who missed out on a frontbench seat, took to social media to express his disappointment, saying it was the ''worst day of his life''.