OXNARD

Industrial center sells for $9.6 million

Rexford Industrial Realty Inc. has purchased a multi-tenant industrial center located near the Port of Hueneme in Oxnard for $9.6 million, according to Colliers International, which negotiated the deal.

This is the first time since the Hueneme Road Industrial Center was built 30 years ago that it has changed ownership.

Los Angeles-based Rexford is a publicly-traded real estate investment trust specializing in the acquisition, ownership and operation of industrial properties in Southern California.

The seller was a private family trust.

Both Rexford and the private investment seller were represented by Colliers Senior Executive Vice President John DeGrinis, Vice President Patrick DuRoss and Associate Vice President Jeff Abraham, who are all based in the brokerage firm’s Encino offices.

Located on Hueneme Road at Perkins Road, the 23-unit center has 86,904 square feet and sits on a 7.39-acre parcel. The development was built in 1985 and since that time has experienced nearly-full occupancy. The average length of tenant occupancy at the park is 12 years

Abraham said one of the draws for tenants is that the development is strategically located near the deep-water Port of Hueneme.

SIMI VALLEY

Medical partnership enters ninth year

The Free Clinic of Simi Valley, in partnership with Kaiser Permanente for over eight years, welcomed its newest class of resident doctors for the 2015-2016 term and said farewell to those graduating from their respective programs. Since 2007, the Free Clinic has partnered with two of Kaiser Permanente’s training programs, the Woodland Hills Family Medicine Residency Program and the Pharmacy Residency Program.

The Kaiser Permanente Woodland Hills Family Medicine Residency Program partners with a number of local “safety net” clinics like the Free Clinic of Simi Valley to provide medical services to the underserved. Kaiser Permanente resident physicians volunteer at the Free Clinic on a rotating basis throughout their three years of training. Dr. John Hann completed his residency in family medicine at the Ventura County Medical Center before becoming the Free Clinic’s attending physician. Dr. Tracey Young has served as a resident with the Free Clinic in the 2014-2015 term. She attended George Washington University as an undergraduate and the University of Southern California for medical school.

The Free Clinic of Simi Valley announced the following graduating residents from the Family Medicine Residency Program: Dr. Roberta Obadia, Dr. Kaori Nakasone, Dr. Anita Damodaran, Dr. Mary Terrie Macaladad-Huerta and Dr. Francine Frater; and from the Pharmacy Residency program: Dr. Troy Phipps, Dr. Petrina Maio, Dr. Paniz Joukar and Dr. Aimee Li.

For more information about the Free Clinic of Simi Valley, visit http://www.FreeClinicSV.com.

VENTURA

Coordinator at CMH receives recognition

Community Memorial Hospital’s new Parent Resource Center Coordinator Sheila Dedrick has been recognized as a professional in the community working to support breast-feeding families by the Breastfeeding Coalition of Ventura County.

The coalition honored Dedrick with its 2015 Liquid Gold Award during an award ceremony held at the Ventura County Board of Supervisors meeting on July 28. The award was conceptualized in 2014 and presented to Dr. Abhay Vaidya of West Coast Ear, Nose and Throat. The Liquid Gold Award is an annual recognition by the breast-feeding coalition to an individual who has made a difference in the lives of families and the community by supporting breast-feeding through resources, education, services and networking.

Dedrick brings a wealth of knowledge to her role and helps hundreds of new moms and babies each year. She has championed the evolution of lactation care at CMH and has supported and mentored countless nurses in their pursuit of lactation certification. Dedrick provided leadership and expertise to the breast-feeding coalition from 2006-2014.

For more information about the New Parent Resource Center at Community Memorial Hospital visit http://www.cmhshealth.org/mch.

First-place honors given to jeweler

Fox Fine Jewelry of Ventura took first place in the national contest for jewelry stores, “America’s Coolest Stores.” A panel of 10 experts in the jewelry and retail field selected Fox Fine Jewelry as the “America’s Coolest Store” out of 23,000 jewelry stores.

Fox Fine Jewelry won first place in the “Big Cool” division, which goes to stores with six or more employees. The contest is judged by retail and jewelry experts, including Paco Underhill, author of “Why We Buy: The Science of Shopping,” and other experts in merchandising, store and jewelry design.

Stores are judged in five areas: interior appearance, exterior appearance, story, advertising and marketing, website and individuality.

For 13 years, Instore Magazine, a jewelry trade publication, has hosted the competition.

Fox Fine Jewelry, owned by George and Debbie Fox, is at 560 E. Main St., Ventura.

For more information, contact Debbie Fox at 652-1800. To read more about the award, visit http://instoremag.com/acs2015.html.

VENTURA COUNTY

Collaborative adds program specialist

Entrepreneur and international business professional Curtis Crispin has joined the Economic Development Collaborative — Ventura County’s Small Business Development Center of Ventura and Santa Barbara Counties as its new international program specialist.

Crispin, who is a former SBDC intern, will help coordinate all international client intakes and consulting appointments, as well as manage training events and workshops for all international activity in the Los Angeles region.

Crispin has served in various positions within the hospitality, sales, manufacturing and nonprofit sectors. He was the 2014 Santa Barbara City College Enterprise Launch grand prize winner of $1,000 for his business plan, pitches and final presentation on a 3-D printing manufacturing project titled Phoenix Sunglasses. He was also named the college’s Scheinfeld Center of Entrepreneurship Aspiring Entrepreneur.

Crispin also serves as the career seeker coordinator for WorkBubble, a startup that uses a combination of proprietary algorithms, assessments and analysis to match employers and job seekers.

A Santa Barbara resident, Crispin holds an associate degree in international business from Santa Barbara City College and is pursuing a bachelor’s degree in marketing and international business from Thomas Edison State College in New Jersey.

The development center is funded by the Small Business Administration and provides professional business assistance at no cost to businesses. Participating businesses are required to follow a well-defined scope of work and report their economic successes. These milestones are defined as job creation, increase in sales, capital investment, jobs retained and business started.

EDC-VC is a private, nonprofit that serves as a business-to-government liaison to assist businesses in Ventura County by offering programs that enhance the economic vitality of the region. For more information, visit http://www.edc-vc.com.

WESTLAKE VILLAGE

Cemetery business names manager

Pierce Brothers Valley Oaks Memorial Park, a local Dignity Memorial provider, announced the addition of Jesus Aguilasocho Jr. as a family service manager.

A native of Riverside, California, Aguilasocho will work closely with families to help them celebrate the lives of their loved ones with dignity and honor and to preserve the memories that transcend generations.

Most recently, Aguilasocho worked as a regional sales director for Assurant Solutions where he was responsible for building and sustaining client relationships and acting as a liaison to Service Corp. International/Dignity Memorial. While there he provided coaching, training and development for more than 30 sales teams in California and Nevada. Previously, he worked as an assistant branch manager with JP Morgan Chase and as a retail store manager for T-Mobile.

For more information about Pierce Brothers Valley Oaks-Griffin Memorial Park, call 818-889-0902.

Account manager earns designation

Westlake Risk & Insurance Services Inc. announced that Jackie Brady, account manager in the agency’s Property & Casualty department, has earned the Certified Insurance Service Representative Designation.

Requirements for designation are the completion of five comprehensive courses and examinations. CISR is a designation in the insurance industry recognized in all 50 states and worldwide. Brady is among only 28,000 CISRs in the world. Brady’s primary responsibilities as an account manager include marketing insurance for a wide variety of commercial businesses, servicing accounts, auditing policies and accounts, endorsing policies, issuing certificates and assisting clients with carrier audits.

Before joining Westlake Risk, Brady was an executive sales assistant with American Business Insurance Services Inc. In addition to CISR designation, she has a license in property and casualty insurance.

For more information about Westlake Risk & Insurance Services, visit http://www.westlakerisk.com or call 413-0250.

To share news about your company or business-related organization, email dajustesen@VCStar.com. If there is an event involved, please email the information at least three weeks in advance of the event.