Buy Photo Patricia DeShields (left), CEO of Project H.O.P.E., and Dr. Lynda Bascelli, its chief medical officer, outside the nonprofit health care provider’s Camden facility, which is beginning an expansion funded through a $4.7 million federal Affordable Care Act grant. (Photo: Chris LaChall/Courier-Post )Buy Photo

The long-awaited expansion of a health clinic in Camden's Lanning Square neighborhood is underway.

Ground has been broken at Project H.O.P.E., the only medical services provider specifically serving homeless people in Camden County.

The federally funded nonprofit is using a $4.7 million grant it won last year through the Affordable Care Act to build a new 11,000-square-foot health center. The center treats patients regardless of their ability to pay.

The work will more than triple the size of the existing facility at the corner of Clinton and West streets, said Marisa Manley, president of Healthcare Real Estate Advisors in New York. The project manager said she expects the new building will open next summer.

"Project H.O.P.E. is really looking forward to getting the new building up and looking forward to expanding its services," said Manley, adding regulatory delays pushed back construction about three to four months later than hoped.

Within the next few weeks, neighborhood residents will see steel rising at the site, Manley said. Once finished, the new two-story, L-shaped building will open and the present building will be torn down to make room for a fenced-in parking lot.

The health clinic will remain open during construction and nearby parking will be available to patients and staff, Manley explained.

The new building will have more exam rooms for each doctor, increasing efficiency and reducing wait times. Because the office also treats patients' behavioral health, it will have private counseling rooms for patients to visit with a clinical social worker.

The design includes a large community room on the first level, which can be used for educational seminars, health programs and meetings.

Reach Kim Mulford at (856) 486-2448 or kmulford@courierpostonline.com. Follow her on Twitter @CP_KimMulford

Read or Share this story: http://on.cpsj.com/1smcGlM