A woman holds a banner during a demonstration in Warsaw March 6, 2011. The event was organised two days before the International Women's day to show support for feminists. (REUTERS/Kacper Pempel)

4356173

In 1964, singer Leslie Gore recorded “You Don’t Own Me,” a feminist anthem of equality of the sexes. It was a hit, and it has endured.

Today, feminists under the banner “The Department Of Peace,” are using the song as a rallying cry to get women to vote for Democrats this November.

Gore introduces the video that features semi-celebrities like Lena Dunham and Carrie Brownstein, and others.

While lip-syncing, the participants dance and some flash signs reading things like “get your rosaries off my ovaries,” and “my body is not a battleground.”

“You Don’t Own Me” PSA – Upworthy from The Department of Peace on Vimeo.

Other messages flashed on the screen are:

“Women constitute more than half the population.”

“In 2012, 53% of voters were women.”

“Your vote matters, especially when some people plan to overturn Roe v. Wade, immediately defund Planned Parenthood, shut down the nation’s family planning program, and repeal the Affordable Care Act.”

“Let’s send a clear message on Nov. 4th.”

“We will not go backwards!”

“When women vote, women win!”

At the end of the video, Gore returns to clarify the message for anyone who may have missed it throughout the video. “I recorded ‘You Don’t Own Me’ in 1964. It’s hard for me to believe but we’re still fighting for the same things we were then. Yes, ladies, we’ve got to come together, get out there and vote, and protect our bodies; they’re ours. Please vote.”

Planned Parenthood receives millions in taxpayer subsidies annually and the Affordable Care Act mandates insurance companies offer “free” contraception, which is actually paid for by raising premiums on everyone. For the government to truly “get their laws off” these women’s bodies, these subsidies would have to be ended. But that’s not what these women, and this group, is advocating for.