Student Mike Lotto, 22, inspired by astronaut over his years at CU

Joe Tanner's hands have repaired the Hubble Space Telescope. They've spent countless hours inside pressurized space gloves, and now they squeeze a hand grip to combat the osteoarthritis that has developed over the years as a result.

Tanner is no longer with NASA, and it's been seven years since he was last in space. But he tries to keep his hands in good shape.

"For an astronaut, your grip is your life, your performance," said Tanner, 63. He had to have surgery for syndactyly, webbing of the fingers, so he could fit correctly into his gloves. He doesn't depend on his hands like he used to, but they're still important.

Mike Lotto has never been to space, but he's been dreaming about it his entire life. He eventually realized that his poor vision would be the end of that dream, a devastating blow to all he had worked toward.

But, luckily, he met Joe Tanner.

'Go give 'em hell'

Lotto, 22, was a freshman in the University of Colorado's aerospace engineering department in 2009. The first week of that school year he met Tanner, who informed him that the NASA requirement against corrective surgery had recently been lifted.

"He went and called one of the doctors at the Johnson Space Center to confirm and then he told me, 'Yeah, your dream's still alive, bud. Go give 'em hell,'" Lotto said. "And it's been magic ever since." His laser operation last winter was a success.

Advertisement

Lotto is now a senior in the aerospace bachelor's and master's degree program, and Tanner is an instructor and coordinator for the department's graduate projects. Academically, their paths never cross, but they've been spending time together ever since that day in 2009.

"I think we've kind of become friends," Tanner said. "He calls me for advice."

Tanner, who flew four missions with NASA between 1997 and 2006 before coming to CU in 2008, was an important figure in the space shuttle era that inspired Lotto's generation.

They've been brought together by a department at CU that has dominated space flight academics, producing 17 astronauts since 1943. Among those were Scott Carpenter, one of the first Americans in space, and Apollo 13 pilot Jack Swigert, who famously told Houston, "We have a problem."

It's impressive company for Lotto, who passes a mural on a wall in the engineering center with those names on it almost every day. He's already logged hours at the Johnson Space Center in Houston through NASA internships and is on track to become one of two aero students in his class to graduate with a 4.0, the first time that will have happened in more than two decades. A desire for a future in space burns behind it all.

"Dreams don't take any commitment," Lotto said. "There's a necessary step you have to take in effort to make that dream reality."

Since the summer after his freshman year, if Lotto wasn't in Boulder or his hometown of Seattle, he was in Houston at the Johnson Space Center. His internship included spacewalk training, done under water.

When Tanner was at NASA, one of his jobs was to oversee that training. "They're still using terminology he came up with," Lotto said.

Tanner's 'defining moment'

Tanner, born and raised in Danville, Ill., was 11 when Alan Shepard became the first American in space in 1961. When he was a sophomore at the University of Illinois, man walked on the moon. The space explorers became his heroes.

After graduating with a degree in mechanical engineering and joining the Navy, his dream came into focus. He applied for the astronaut program in 1980, was rejected and joined NASA in 1984 as a research pilot. After two more applications and rejections, he was finally selected in 1992, the oldest person ever accepted into the program at 42.

"I remember the day I got the phone call saying I was accepted," Tanner said. "That's a pivotal moment engrained in your brain forever. You know that this is the defining moment where your goal has been achieved."

Tanner recalled the first time he ventured outside in space. It was during the 1997 Hubble mission, and he'd had a recent heart scare that threatened to derail his career as an astronaut.

"I had almost lost that flight, so when I popped out of the airlock 320 miles above the Earth, the first word that came out of my mouth was 'Hallelujah,'" Tanner said. "And then I went to work."

"He's lived everything I want to make a reality," Lotto said.

The implications of space exploration -- innovation, technological advancement and the thrill of discovery -- are the foundation of Tanner's and Lotto's relationship. It's where Lotto's dream is rooted and what Tanner's purpose as a teacher is now.

"We're one of only a few programs internationally with a teaching focus on human space flight," said David Klaus, a professor in the aerospace department and associate director of BioServe Space Technologies, a CU-based organization that provides hardware to space flight missions. "That draws both the future astronauts and the past astronauts. It's part of the reason why Joe is here."

Klaus is a daily witness to the relationship between Lotto and Tanner.

"Being at the JSC, it's a culture, a language that's spoken," Klaus said. "Mike is looking to Joe as someone who's been there and done that, and Joe looks to Mike as someone who's going to carry the torch into the future."

Lotto: 'Odds are you won't get selected'

The likelihood of becoming an astronaut is always slim, no matter how impressive the candidate. Lotto knows this.

"If your sole purpose is becoming an astronaut, that has the potential to really backfire," Lotto said. "Odds are you won't get selected. You have to make sure you pursue things you wouldn't mind doing the rest of your life, not just a means to an end."

He would be more than happy with a career at NASA, period. But staying on the ground is not the dream.

The peak of NASA's federal funding was during the Apollo 13 mission in 1970. During that time and for a while after, longtime interns like Lotto were enjoying almost a 100 percent acceptance rate into the astronaut training program. But sequestration and budget cuts have made the selection process even stricter.

"There are different challenges for every generation," Tanner said. "We, as a nation, spend more on popcorn and pizza every year than we do on space flight. I will give up popcorn if I have to so he can go to space."

At 3 a.m. one day in May this year, Tanner's phone rang. He didn't pick up. The caller left a voicemail.

The message was from Chris Cassidy, who was on Expedition 35, an international space station mission. He was preparing for a spacewalk. His voice crackled over the phone's speakers, inaudible at times. But the last thing he said to Tanner before going out into space was clear:

"Your wisdom is with me every step of the way."