The federal government has toughened its grading system for nursing homes, making it harder for a facility to earn top marks.

The new evaluation system, available to consumers Friday, Feb. 20, also measures nursing homes' use antipsychotic medications and provides more scrutiny on staffing levels.

Consumers can look up the nursing home ratings on Medicare's Nursing Home Compare website.

The changes are a step in the right direction, said Sarah Slocum, Michigan's long-term care ombudsman. But because much of the evaluation is based on self-reported information, consumers have to rely on the nursing homes to fairly and accurately report data.

To more accurately show a home's staffing levels, an evaluation should look at its payroll data, she said. That step is required under the Affordable Care Act. However, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid have missed the 2012 deadline and now says it will include the payroll information in 2016.

"That is a really critical issue," Slocum said. Although staffing is not the only factor in quality care, she said, "there is no way you can provide adequate care without adequate staff in the building."

Slocum cited a recent study that found inflated staffing data reported by nursing homes. More than 80 percent of nursing homes reported higher levels of registered nurse staffing in their evaluations than was reflected in Medicare billings, according to the Center for Public Integrity study.

The evaluations also now rate nursing homes on their use of antipsychotic medications for people who are not diagnosed with schizophrenia, Huntington's disease or Tourette syndrome.

"Certainly, the overuse of antipsychotic medication has been a concern for some time," Slocum said. "I'm glad there is more focus on that.

"I just hope there will be a focus not just on the frequency of use of these drugs but also on the implementation of non-pharmaceutical interventions to assist people."

Rather than simply ending the use of antipsychotic drugs in a patient who has behavioral issues, however, a home should use a thoughtful, individualized dose reduction plan while adding in alternate therapies and care plans, she said.

For example, she cited "Bathing Without a Battle," a DVD that explores a task that often becomes a source of frustration and conflict for people who have dementia. It teaches "person-centered" techniques that take into account the feelings and perspective of a person with dementia.

Other training information is available through the Pioneer Network, a national advocacy group that addresses care of older adults.

The Nursing Home Compare website covers Medicare and Medicaid facilities with skilled nursing home beds. In Michigan, that includes 430 facilities providing care to 44,000 people.

Slocum encourages consumers to check the website for information on nursing homes. In addition to a home's star rating, she suggests also looking at the results of state inspections.

In looking at a profile of a nursing home, a consumer can click on tabs that show health and fire safety inspections and whether federal fines have been issued.



Sue Thoms covers health care for MLive/The Grand Rapids Press. Email her at sthoms1@mlive.com or follow her on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.