The author as an assistant professor, early in her career at Harvard. R. Gregoire

SARA LAWRENCE-LIGHTFOOT: Max Weber, the renowned late-19th century social theorist, who probed the concept of authority, made two important distinctions. First he drew the contrast between power and authority (terms we often confuse and conflate). Power is the capacity to unilaterally force others to comply with one’s own will, and authority, by contrast, involves a voluntary compliance following the granting of legitimacy to the person or group who commands the authority. The latter emerges out of deliberation and choice; the former is coercive and restrictive.

Second, Weber distinguished between two kinds of authority: “positional” and “personal.” The former is granted to us by our role and status, our socially recognized position in an institution, a group, or a culture; the latter is an expression of our individual traits; our knowledge and skills, our personality, expertise and charisma. Positional authority is static and unmoving, defined and reified by law, tradition and rules, while personal authority is dynamic and iterative; it grows, develops and matures over time as we test the contours and limits of our relationships, our commitments and our engagement with the world.

I have always taken Weber’s analytic mapping very personally, and used his distinctions as a useful template for considering my own growth as a teacher; for reflecting on my developing pedagogy, and for marking and measuring the changing nature of my relationships with my graduate students at Harvard, where I have taught for the last four decades.

At 26 1/2 when I launched my career, I was a very young assistant professor; young enough to still be measuring my birthdays in half-years. I felt terrified and unsteady facing my mostly older, exceedingly bright graduate students whose tough scrutiny and chronic skepticism about whether I—who was younger than they, brand new to the job, African-American and a woman—was even worthy of leading them; whether I was deserving, up to the task.

It did not help that I, too, felt I was in way over my head; I too questioned my competence and worried about being exposed as fraudulent. Like most inexperienced new teachers, I clung to my positional authority, my only source of legitimacy. I covered myself in the mantle of my role and my professional persona, and counted on the cover of Harvard—and its unquestioned elite status—to defend me from the harsh gaze of my students. This posturing, however smooth and polished it may have appeared, kept me at some distance from my students, restricted my pedagogy; dampened the dialogue, masked the students’ sense-making, and made me fearful of taking the intellectual risks that enrich and enliven classroom discourse.

Over the last 40 years, I have enjoyed growing into my teaching and finding myself; I have relished the long developmental journey—sometimes tender and treacherous, but always exciting and challenging—of throwing off the shackles of positional authority and finding the more authentic, soulful underbelly of personal authority.

As I have grown in knowledge, experience and wisdom, as I have become more confident and much less anxious, my teaching has become more searching, less guarded and more playful. I do not fear the questions that might expose my ignorance; I welcome and provoke them.

And even though the age difference between my students and me gets larger with each passing year, I feel closer to them. I value the intimacy that vulnerability makes possible. The boundaries of age become a bridge to mutuality and generational understanding. My personal authority—deep and sturdy—brings us together; we are all teachers and learners.

Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot is the Emily Hargroves Fisher professor of Education at Harvard University. She is a MacArthur prize winner and author of the recent book, “EXIT: The Endings that Set Us Free.” Her website is www.saralawrencelightfoot.com.

Read the latest Encore Report.