Topics: China, Chinese Economy, development, Environment, Environmentalism, Hong Kong, OnEarth.org, pink dolphin, sustainability, Sustainability News

This article originally appeared on OnEarth.org.

As I stand in the bow of a 35-foot boat cutting through Hong Kong’s busy harbor, a dolphin rockets out of the blue-gray waters, his rosy body marked with old scars. This startlingly pink old male breaching off the starboard bow is an Indo-Pacific humpback dolphin, native to the waters surrounding Hong Kong.

Calves are born slate-gray, but as they grow, the gray fades to mottled pink. Adults are a pure white color that often flushes to rose. Standing next to me in the bow, Samuel Hung, director of the Hong Kong Dolphin Conservation Society, smiles as he recognizes the scar pattern on the dolphin to the right of us. This battered creature is an old friend.

“That’s EL01,” Hung tells me. “He’s been here since the early 1990s. From those marks, I can tell that he must be a warrior.”

Little is known about the private life of south China’s Indo-Pacific humpback dolphin, which is known here as the Chinese white dolphin. But Hung, who has been studying this population since he was a graduate student and EL01 was young, guesses that the male earned his scars battling for mates.

Although these dolphins are beloved local icons—they were Hong Kong’s official mascot in 1997 when the British ceded power to China, and that year their image adorned flags all over the city—massive construction projects around the busy harbor are threatening the region’s population. EL01 might be a warrior, but unless Hong Kong’s government moves to protect the local dolphin population, this could be one fight that he and his fellows can’t win.

Indo-Pacific white dolphins thrive in the shallow, murky waters of coastal estuaries in the Indian and Pacific Oceans. Small populations exist at river mouths scattered from South Africa to southeastern China. New genetic evidence suggests that these dolphins comprise four distinct species separated by geography and differences in behavior. No one knows how many exist in the world, and many populations have never been studied, but each population faces threats in their corners of the sea.

More than a century ago, the fishermen who plied Hong Kong’s waters in small boats revered these animals. As the city grew from a fishing village to an international economic powerhouse—with the busiest harbor on the planet—the dolphins have paid the price. The Hong Kong population had already plummeted to 158 animals in the early 2000s; by last year, Hung’s census found just 60 left.

Hong Kong’s government only began to fund studies of the local dolphins when construction of Chek Lap Kok airport started in the 1990s. Built on landfill stretching into the harbor, the airport obliterated prime dolphin habitat. Machines drove pilings deep into the harbor floor with a deafening din. The noise overlapped with the same frequencies that dolphins use to communicate and locate prey. Sound is vital to all dolphins, Hung notes, but because Chinese white dolphins live in turbid water, they’re even more dependent on their ears.

As the city grew from a fishing village to an international economic powerhouse—with the busiest harbor on the planet—the dolphins have paid the price.

During airport construction, dolphins fled the area, though some returned after things settled down—only to encounter new threats. Dolphin “eco-tours” sprang up in Hong Kong; Hung says they often harass the animals, getting too close and moving too fast. High-speed, hydrofoil ferries that shuttle passengers between central Hong Kong and outlying islands added to the danger. Dolphins that wash up dead in the area have often been seriously wounded—slashed by propellers, their bodies beaten against hulls. Last May, tourists on a dolphin-watch boat were stunned to see a mother dolphin and several other adults struggling to keep a dead calf afloat. The incident made headlines in the South China Morning Post.