The Texas economy grew faster in the second quarter, thanks largely to the booming energy industry and strong commercial real estate activity, according to a report by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

Employment growth is a big part of that picture. Texas’ annualized job growth rose from 2.4 percent in the first quarter to 4.3 percent in the second quarter — the strongest pace in nearly nine years. And that happened even though employment growth slowed in May and June.

The state’s job creation is outpacing the nation’s in all major industries except construction, manufacturing and other services in the first half of 2014. The Dallas Fed forecasts 3.5 percent employment growth this year, or 400,000 new jobs.

“We’re seeing strength in services and manufacturing [activity] ... and we expect that to continue,” said Jason Saving, senior research economist and adviser. “We’re especially seeing strength, not surprisingly, in energy and areas of the economy that relate to energy.”

Dallas Fed indexes for manufacturing activity, service-sector activity and retail sales rose in June and July. Moreover, their quarterly averages were higher in the second quarter than the first quarter and from a year earlier.

That growth doesn’t necessarily translate into more manufacturing jobs because of technological advancements. Texas’ manufacturing employment growth has been weak this year, but job creation in chemical manufacturing tied to energy has grown.

The energy industry remained robust. Texas’ growth in drilling activity is increasingly concentrated in the Permian Basin, with 563 rigs in that area in mid-July, up by about 95 rigs since January. The rig counts in the Barnett Shale and Eagle Ford basins have declined by 10 rigs each.

Commercial real estate activity picked up as the housing market showed mixed results.

Texas’ major metropolitan areas saw strong office and industrial construction in the second quarter. Office leasing was strong, rents rose and office vacancy rates were lower in major metro areas except Fort Worth, according to commercial real estate services firm CBRE Inc.

In June, existing home sales rose 2.1 percent. However, housing starts fell 5 percent. Six-month averages show that sales are flat to up slightly in most major metros. Companies report tight lot supplies, higher construction costs and labor shortages are hurting them.

Another area of flat growth is exports, which dipped 0.2 percent in May.

“Exports have been flat lately largely because many of our [trade] partners have not been doing that well,” Saving said. “Our biggest trade partners are South America, Central America, the European Union and Asia — and there are questions as to whether those economies will strengthen or weaken.”

Follow Sheryl Jean on Twitter at @SJeanDallas.