Topics: devil, devil songs, Music, Satan, Video, Entertainment News

It’s often said that the Devil has the best tunes. That may or may not be the case, but it’s certainly true that pound for pound there are way more songs about God than about his adversary. Still, Satan has inspired a legion of melodies. To do this as it should be done, I should probably list 666 of them, but even my patience doesn’t extend that far (to say nothing of my editor’s). So the number of the beast in this case is 18, unless you want to list another 648 in comments.

Shelley Faulkner and Hildegard von Bingen, “Sed Diabolus”

Hildegard von Bingen has been subjected to some unfortunate New Age renditions, but this is a pleasingly low-fi setting for voice, cello and recorder. There are three songs here; the middle one is “Sed Diabolus,” or “Only the Devil Laughed.” It’s part of a cycle dedicated to St. Ursula, who was slaughtered along with thousands of accompanying virgins after making a pilgrimage to Rome. “Sed Diabolus” is thought to be the conclusion, in which the devil, “who would leave no work of God intact and undiminished,” sneers and jibes at Ursula. It seems a bit odd that a saint like Hildegard would let Satan get the last word, but perhaps she was feeling especially pessimistic that day. It can happen to the best of us.

Seldom Scene, “Satan’s Choir”

There’s a long bluegrass gospel tradition of warning listeners off Satan. The most famous example is probably the Louvin Brothers’ “Satan Is Real,” but this 1993 track from the Seldom Scene is also a worthy entry in the genre. The singing doesn’t sound exactly demonic, though I suppose the devil could conceivably be taken with the affectless chill of bluegrass harmonies.

Alex Bradford, “Don’t Let Satan Turn You Round”

Dour country singers wail about the devil all the time, but Old Nick is noticeably absent from the African-American gospel tradition. This Alex Bradford track from (I believe) the early ’50s bucks the trend, even if the group here musters more confidence about beating the devil than the Seldom Scene manage. Certainly no one whose soul was damned could manage the hearty “oooooh” that Bradford lets rip around the :50-second mark (and if you think Bradford recalls Little Richard there, it’s because they’re both imitating the great Marion Williams).

George Jones, “Take the Devil out of Me”

This is one of Jones’ early career Mercury tracks from the mid-to-late ’50s, straddling the line between rockabilly and honky-tonk. Jones’ hiccupping yodel here gives you the impression the devil and Jesus are in fact wrestling in his larynx — a glottal struggle over that demon drink, perhaps.

IJenNeh, “Satan Fall Down”

A blind gospel performer from Liberia, IJenNeh offers a casually chipper challenge to the forces of darkness in “Satan Fall Down.” There’s none of the warbling uncertainty you get in George Jones’ performance here. Instead the dancers boogie and shake with blithe enthusiasm, as if every step is squishing an adversary underfoot.

Bill and Belle Reed, “Old Lady & the Devil”

The devil in this song wishes that some mild trampling was the worst he had to suffer. You can read “Old Lady & the Devil” as cheerful misogyny or cheerful empowerment, but either way, the old lady in question gets to go to hell, murder various devils and then bash her husband for trying to get rid of her in the first place. To this day, no doubt, the devil fears those terrifying syllables, “Faaa-dita-la-dita-la-Faaa-dita-la-dita-la-daaay.” (If you listen carefully you can hear the priest repeat them in “The Exorcist.” No fooling.)

Robert Johnson, “Me and the Devil Blues”

One of several Johnson tunes about dealing with the devil. This one seems almost like a reply to the Bill and Belle Reed track; instead of the old lady beating the devil, the devil helps him beat his woman. Not especially enlightened, but the guy does die, so perhaps that’s retribution of a sort. Johnson is generally celebrated for his guitar work, but his singing is perhaps just as striking, shooting up into falsetto moans, part spooky, part celebratory, part mimicking the squeal of that Greyhound bus that incongruously gets his soul at the end.

Rex Allen, “Tying a Knot in the Devil’s Tail”

One of the more popular musical cowboys in the Roy Rogers mold, Allen subjects Satan to a series of cruel indignities, as fruity cowboys bearing accordions, of all things, rope and tie the poor bugger. As Allen says, the “gut line is coiled up neat,” the violent humiliation (including branding) delivered with a tidy, forthright, avuncular aplomb. Don’t trifle with cowboys, Satan, especially if they’re drunk and singing.

Lyle Lovett, “Friend of the Devil”

I’ve always had an ambivalent relationship with the Grateful Dead’s “Friend of the Devil” — the hook is great but the delivery is so thin, watery and half-assed it takes much of the pleasure out of it. Lyle Lovett’s cover is a relief. With the cello and the vocals vying to see who can slow down most, Lovett comes across as world-weary enough to be a passing acquaintance of the evil one. (Surely if they were close friends, Satan would have talked to him about that hair.)