Spring allows coach Tom Hilbert to experiment with lineup

Colorado State volleyball coach Tom Hilbert, left, has used spring practice to experiment with different systems and putting players in different roles. ( Mike Brohard / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

FORT COLLINS — Tom Hilbert isn't looking for an identity for his team. That's not what spring practice is about for the Colorado State volleyball coach. However, those months of training can offer him an idea of what direction the Rams may head in the fall, when new players have reported and practices become a bit more focused.

When that time arrives, the goal will still be the same. The Rams have won the past six Mountain West titles, and will set out to continue that string, as well as qualifying for the NCAA Tournament for a 21st straight year, with last year's squad reaching the Sweet 16.

The one thing Hilbert does know is the next team will be different. It has to be with the loss of MW player of the year Deedra Foss, a setter who so skillfully guided the Rams the past four seasons. Gone too are all-conference performers Kelsey Snider in the middle and outside hitter Marlee Reynolds outside.

Getting an inclination of just how the lineup might change is something Hilbert said he's enjoyed.

"I have. I think we're getting better, and you've seen different players start to grow in positions. It's been nice to see," Hilbert said. "It's taken us awhile. In the last couple of years it's been simple, because people have known their roles coming in and jumped right into them. It's taken us a little while to figure some things out and for players to figure out who they are."

First, the Rams had to figure out their newest player, senior transfer Alex Reid, who fills a void on the outside immediately. Hilbert was glad to get her initially, but her teammates say she's been even better than advertised.

"Within like the first week, she was already a leader, already a senior that we trusted and we looked to in tough situations," defensive specialist Cassidy Denny said. "In conditioning and workouts, she's always there and being encouraging. Little things that establish the trust, and she's amazing at volleyball, so that helps too."

For some, there is no drastic change. Libero Jaime Colaizzi and Denny are back, and in Hilbert's eyes, better than ever. So too are Jasmine Hanna and Alexandra Poletto, both of whom had impact performances as true freshmen. Middle Acacia Andrews returns after playing a much bigger role last season, but for others, times may be changing.

Such as Jaliyah Bolden, who came to CSU as a middle, but has looked good while playing as an opposite hitter this spring. That change comes as Adrianna Culbert, a two-time All-MW performer as an opposite hitter has taken on an old role once again, that as a setter/hitter as Hilbert has his team experimenting with a 6-2 offense.

It is a system Hilbert has never employed at CSU, but one he feels may suit the makeup of his roster, especially because of Culbert's unique skills.

"It's helped teach me that putting a great player in that position trumps other things," Hilbert said. "It trumps other things she might do if not put in that position. You watch her, and she looks the part.

"Our team is very good when she's playing that position. I do think it's a possibility."

That's fine with Culbert, who played the same spot in club back in Michigan. She was actually recruited by the Rams to be a setter, but her all-around skills forced her into the lineup as a true freshman on the right side.

Colorado State has spent part of the spring running a 6-2 offense, a system coach Tom Hilbert has never used with the Rams, but one he feels could best utilize the unique skill set of Adrianna Culbert (far right at the net). (Mike Brohard / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"It's different, and I like it," she said. "I ran it in club a lot. It's just getting back into the setting role. I feel like I'm still a little rusty, but I'm getting back into it. I think that's what makes spring so great is the fact you can go out and try different things and not have it affect our schedule."

The beginning of the spring started with individual work, the first time to try new techniques and put them into play. That doesn't always start well, but the finished product doesn't feel too bad.

"At the beginning, it's kind of awful, because you're learning new skills that you're not good at," Denny said. "It's very repetitive and very much you feel like you're bad at volleyball. I was working on one-handed stuff, and I'm bad at it, so I'm like, 'oh my God, I'm horrible.' Then as spring goes on, I see myself in practice doing it and it's like, it actually helped.

"It's good in the end when you feel like you've come a long way from where you started. It's like, good job, we're learning something."

The Rams scrimmaged three times this spring with varied results, and they have one more date slated, heading to New Mexico for a beach volleyball session, which is what they'll do the final two weeks of the spring.

When the Rams return in the fall, all the ideas will be in play. The team will add freshmen recruits Kirstie Hillyer and Jessica Jackson, and a third in Julia Cubbedge is expected to sign this week. A few invited walk-ons will also be added to the mix, giving more options for Hilbert and the Rams to consider.

"I think this will help us in the long run," Culbert said. "I think that's the best part of the spring. I think we've just learned that our dynamics are different with people. We have an insane amount of defense, and our blocking is getting really good. It's clicking with new people on the court.

"We have an idea, but at the end of the day, you don't really know what's going to happen until we step out on the court in August."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/mbrohard