New York State has in many ways been a showcase for things that have gone right with Obamacare. The rollout of the state-run health insurance exchange went relatively smoothly and registered patients at a clip well ahead of the national average. Supporters say the exchange’s 2.1 million enrollees are proof positive that the law is increasing consumer choice and fostering a competitive marketplace.

But there have also been some surprising wrinkles here. One is that the Affordable Care Act seems to be having a negative impact on the bottom lines of nearly all of New York’s nonprofit regional health plans, many of which offer coverage in underserved parts of western and upstate New York.

The most pronounced underwriting losses stem from the Medicare Advantage line of business, which allows private health plans to administer the government insurance program for Americans over the age of 65.

In 2015, more than 1.2 million New Yorkers were enrolled in Medicare Advantage plans. The state has the third-highest number of enrollees in the country behind California and Florida.

If the trend continues, consumers who rely on these regional nonprofits will face higher premiums as insurers pass on the increased costs in order to survive. The worst-case scenario, if the losses are sustained over a long enough period of time, is that the insurers stop offering certain plans.

The large national for-profit insurers aren’t seeing these financial losses when it comes to Medicare Advantage. While profit margins have been tighter under the Affordable Care Act, big plans like Humana and UnitedHealthcare are still seeing positive gains overall and benefit from certain economies of scale in their operations.

“Most of the for-profits plans are operating across the country and therefore they can pick and choose what counties they are going to offer their products in,” said Bob Hinckley, chief strategy officer of the Albany-based nonprofit insurer CDPHP. “They move in and out of counties depending on where they see the best business opportunity, and they are also able to spread their costs over a wider base."

New York’s regional nonprofits, on the other hand, are operating on a much smaller scale and are limited by their service areas.

POLITICO New York’s analysis of the 2014 annual statements filed with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners found underwriting losses in the tens of millions of dollars for all of New York’s nonprofit insurance companies operating at least one plan under Article 43.

EmblemHealth, which serves the greater New York City area, reported a net underwriting loss of more than $167 million from the Medicare business across its two health plans—Group Health Incorporated and the Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York. Excellus Blue Cross Blue Shield and HealthNow New York, which both serve the western New York region, posted underwriting losses of $31.91 million and $78.97 million for Medicare respectively.

Albany-based CDPHP reported a loss of $33.87 million in Medicare across its two plans, and Buffalo-based Independent Health saw a loss of $71.71 million. Schenectady-based MVP lost $32.51 million.

For most of the plans, Medicare Advantage wasn’t the only business in which they lost money last year. The Medicaid business also generally saw underwriting losses, but to a lesser extent.

“The upstate not-for-profits are mission-driven not market-driven,” said Brian Morrissey, Chief Marketing Officer, CDPHP. “We’re going to hang in there for as long as we possibility can.”

Traditionally, the Medicare program was administered by the government, but starting in the 1970s, beneficiaries were given the option to enroll in Medicare administered by private plans. Originally there wasn’t a lot of uptake because the reimbursement structure didn’t make good business sense—plans were often compensated less than the average costs that the government was paying for enrollees.

But this all changed in 2003 with the Medicare Modernization Act, whereby Congress increased the reimbursement rates. Plans received what’s known as a capitated payment — a lump sum per Medicare beneficiary. By 2009, the insurers were receiving reimbursements as much as 14 percent above the costs of the traditional Medicare program on average, according to a report from the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission.

The Affordable Care Act sought to alter this imbalance by phasing in reimbursement reductions from 2012 to 2016 to bring Medicare Advantage payments closer in line to traditional Medicare.

Since it was first proposed, America’s Health Insurance Plans, the industry’s national trade association, warned that the reimbursement reductions could drastically reduce enrollment in Medicare Advantage and disrupt plan offerings. But several studies found just the opposite. Enrollment in Medicare Advantage has actually increased since 2010 and seniors have a wide variety of plans to choose from, according to reports from the Congressional Budget Office and the Kaiser Family Foundation.

But these reports so far have not accounted for two additional Affordable Care Act provisions that went into effect in 2014: the health insurance industry fee and the transitional reinsurance fee.

New York’s regional nonprofit insurers say it is the compounding of these three elements — the reimbursement reductions, taxes and fees — in addition to general increases in the cost of care and pharmaceuticals, that is to blame for the substantial underwriting losses in Medicare Advantage.

“Medicare is the most expensive product for us to administer,” said Jared Gross, a senior vice president at HealthNow New York.

Given the current regulatory landscape, it will likely continue to be the most expensive one for the foreseeable future.

Beginning in 2014, the Affordable Care Act assesses what amounts to a sales tax on premiums underwritten by health insurers known as the health insurance industry fee.

In 2014, the tax amounted to $8 billion, growing to $14.3 billion by 2018, according to IRS estimates.

It is one of the main funding mechanisms for the law and runs across all lines of business–individual, group, Medicare and Medicaid.

For example, in 2014, Excellus Blue Cross Blue Shield paid out $90.9 million for the health insurance industry fee and expects that number to increase to $128.4 million in 2015. That same year the company saw an operating loss of $55.3 million on $5.94 billion in premium income.

HealthNow, which is about half the size, paid out $35.5 million for the health insurance industry fee and expects that number to increase to $45.8 million in 2015. The company saw an operating loss of $69.4 million on $2.5 billion in premium income in 2014.

“The taxes do nothing but go up. That’s the primary source of funding and as the ACA grows, enrollment grows, subsides grow, it has to come from somewhere,” said Gross of HealthNow.

“As a not-for-profit insurer, we’re not focused on making money, we’re just looking to cover our costs,” said Gross. “And increasing costs make that all the harder.”

The transitional reinsurance fee, which also went into effect last year under the Affordable Care Act, can also amount to tens of millions of dollars for each of the plans. The transitional reinsurance fee is temporary and will only be assessed until 2016. It is essentially a buffer tax collected to offset the risk of high-cost enrollees for health plans that started offering coverage on the state-based health insurance exchange. It is not related to the Medicare Advantage business, but it is an additional cost that plans are incurring and putting pressure on margins until the plans can better understand the financial impact of the legislation.

When the taxes and fees are assessed on commercial insurance plans, insurers have multiple options to try and recoup the costs, including increasing premiums. Even though in the last two years, the New York Department of Financial Services has approved smaller premium rate increases for the individual and group market plans than what the insurers have asked.

The Medicare Advantage plans have much less flexibility.

“We are a contractor to the government,” said Roberta Rifkin, a senior vice president at Independent Health. “The government gives us very specific guidelines of what we need to be doing and there’s not that much room over and above that to be responsive to market demand.”

This leads to “difficult choices,” Rifkin said, indicating that if the losses persist, insurers may be forced to pass on the costs to consumers.

This idea was echoed by several of the other plans.

“[The financial pressures] put us in the unfortunate circumstance of having to pass either benefit cuts to members or increased premiums to the members—neither of which we would like to do but unfortunately we’re in that situation where we have to,” said CDPHP’s Morrissey.

And, in the worst-case scenario, the insurers might have to stop offering plans in certain areas of the state, which would do the opposite of what the Affordable Care Act intended by decreasing both consumer choice and competition in the marketplace.

It hasn’t gotten there yet, but in 2014, Excellus Blue Cross Blue Shield opted to stop offering Medicaid plans in 14 upstate New York counties “due to significant underwriting losses,” according to the company’s annual statement filing with the National Association for Insurance Commissioners. By no longer offering the plans in these counties, the company’s Medicaid underwriting losses decreased from $69.5 million in 2013 to $23.4 million in 2014.

Given that 2014 was the first year that the plans saw the impact of the reimbursement reductions and the taxes and fees all together, there still remains great uncertainty as to what will happen to the Medicare Advantage business in the long-term.

Gross, of HealthNow, remains cautiously optimistic.

“A lot of revenue is going to disappear to fund [the Affordable Care Act]. All things being equal, the taxes will go up and we expect medical costs to go up,” Gross said. “But there are a number of things that we’re doing to control those costs. Most importantly is partnering with the care delivery systems.”

The way forward, according to the plans, will be increased partnerships with local hospitals and providers in an attempt to better coordinate patient care and reign in costs, not just in Medicare, but across all lines of business. Ultimately, this is in line with what the Affordable Care Act was seeking to accomplish in the first place. But the question remains as to whether the plans can continue to sustain these underwriting losses until these changes take effect.