Cleveland Clinic CEO Dr. Toby Cosgrove on Thursday evening, July 24, visited the City Club of Cleveland and in a frank discussion touched on topics including the future of health care and the importance of big data. He even acknowledged the health system’s telephone and billing systems should work better.



Earlier this year, Cosgrove, who has been with the Clinic since 1975 and its CEO since 2004, released his first book, “The Cleveland Clinic Way,” which argues why the Clinic’s model of care should be the model of the nation.



“Everybody talks about crisis and how things are broken, and I thought we had a model that had been very successful and held up as a model where we might be going in the world,” Cosgrove said during his discussion with City Club CEO Dan Moulthrop. “I thought we were doing things that could benefit some other organizations, so I wanted to get it out there for people in health care and anybody else who was having trouble sleeping.”



The Clinic’s business model is anchored in making its doctors salaried employees instead of being paid based on how many procedures they conduct or patients they see. That’s the Clinic’s “secret sauce,” as Cosgrove characterized it. It’s a fairly unusual model in health care — one only replicated by a handful of health systems in the country. When Cosgrove joined the Clinic in 1975, it employed 140 docs. Today, that number is around 3,200.





“No one questions whether you’re doing something just to generate return,” Cosgrove said about the Clinic’s group practice model.As for the economics of health care reform, Cosgrove said the Affordable Care Act and other pressures are pushing health systems to be more efficient. Over the next decade, for instance, $415 billion will be taken out of Medicare payments. Also, payments from insurance companies remain flat or are decreasing, and patients have to foot more of their bills. As such, Cosgrove said the Clinic — a roughly $6.5 billion operation — will have to take $1.5 billion in costs out of the system over the next several years to remain in sound financial condition. That equates to about $300 million in cuts a year.Late last year, the Clinic announced plans to trim $330 million from its budget — an effort that resulted in 700 employees taking early retirement offers. During his City Club address, Cosgrove noted a series of cost-cutting measures the Clinic has taken to cut back, including an effort to save on soap and saline solution that resulted in $300,000 in savings.“Just like at home, you find ways to trim fat,” he said.As for the billing system, when Cosgrove took the helm at the Clinic in 2004, then-U.S. Sen. George Voinovich paid him a visit asking him to explain his Clinic bill. Cosgrove couldn’t explain it. Neither could a finance staffer.“He couldn’t explain it either, so yes, we do have an issue,” said Cosgrove, adding that the Clinic has since consolidated all of its charges on a single bill.He added, “We are a long ways from being the most efficient billing system. I would take that criticism, and I’ve heard it more than once.”