Taiwan's inclusion in Trans-Pacific Partnership would benefit U.S., and other members.

Jonney Shih, the chairman of Taiwanese electronics company ASUS. (Photo: Mandy Cheng, AFP/Getty Images)

Only half a century ago when I was a primary school boy in Taiwan, our teacher taught us that the top four Taiwan export items were sugar, bananas, tea and rice. Today, they are integrated circuit chips, Liquid Crystal Displays, smartphones and semiconductor devices. Taiwanese companies, both domestic and overseas, are also the world's largest manufacturers of high-tech products such as LED lights, solar power batteries, laptop computers, etc.

Electronic gadgets made by Taiwanese companies such as ASUS, Acer and HTC have become indispensable around the globe. Taiwan, with a piece of land only one-third of the size of Virginia, is now the 18th-largest trading power in the world as well as a major hub and key player in the world's supply and value chains.

The U.S. commitment to building a high-standard, comprehensive and significant regional free trade agreement, the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), is largely welcomed by the Asian community. In May, the 12 initial TPP members finished their meetings in Singapore, which was aimed at hammering out the details of this agreement. Formally known as the Republic of China, Taiwan, a longtime security and economic partner of America, also indicated its interest in joining this regional framework.

However, Taiwan's unique international status usually would give rise to additional difficulties in its joining of international occasions, as shown by its lack of membership in all UN-related agencies. Nevertheless, Taiwan's strong economic power should outweigh political consideration in this regard.

As such, a TPP without Taiwan would be unthinkable for the U.S. If this regional system is going to cover all 50-plus countries around the Pacific Rim, the absence of Taiwan, possibly the sixth-largest U.S. trading partner among them, will render the regional integration incomplete and ineffective to the disadvantage of American interest.

Take the close U.S.-Taiwan economic relations, for example. In 2013, Taiwan-U.S. two-way trade volume reached $63.6 billion. The U.S. goods and services exports to Taiwan, along with Taiwan's investment in the U.S., so far have created or supported more than 300,000 American jobs, according to the U.S. Department of Commerce. In the first quarter of this year, Taiwan became the 11th-largest U.S. trading partner globally, ahead of such large economies as India, Russia and Australia. Taiwan in the trade agreement means more U.S. exports, market access and American jobs. The TPP would further encourage Taiwanese firms to invest more in the U.S.

As a step to showcase Taiwan's interest in joining this trade agreement, a delegation of Taiwanese CEOs led by former Vice President Vincent Siew, traveled to the U.S. late last year. As members of the delegation, Formosa Plastics pledged a $2 billion investment in Texas to expand their shale gas processing operations, and Foxconn announced a $30 million investment in Pennsylvania to build a robotics manufacturing facility as well as $10 million to fund research and development at Carnegie Mellon University, just to name a few cases. In return, we are grateful to see that the U.S. administration has also signaled it's "welcome" to Taiwan's interest in joining the TPP, as Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Daniel Russel and his colleague, Deputy Assistant Secretary Kin Moy, made clear during recent congressional hearings.

As the largest Asia-Pacific regional free trade agreement, the TPP is also critically important to Taiwan's economic well-being. The current TPP members have a collective GDP of $28 trillion, almost 40% of the world's total. Trade with these members accounts for one-third of Taiwan's foreign trade volume now. If left out of the system, Taiwan will be put in an extremely unfavorable and unfair position to compete with its economic competitors. This will mean an indispensable economic partner marginalized to the disadvantage of both Taiwan and the rest of the TPP members.

Taiwan's admission in the TPP, however, will significantly benefit all members. According to the 2014 Index of Economic Freedom, Taiwan's economy is among the "top 20 freest" in the world. Taiwan provides one of the best investment environments, based on a market-friendly approach and a commitment to intellectual property rights, for investors and entrepreneurs around the globe. Feasibility studies suggest that Taiwan's accession to the TPP can bring nearly $78 billion in additional trade for all TPP members. Taiwan will also be an ideal springboard as a gateway to the Greater China market, given its geographical proximity, cultural similarity, unique access and special knowledge vis-à-vis Mainland China.

Taiwan is now ready to work proactively with the U.S. to contribute to the high standards of the TPP. As a first step toward its admission to the system, Taiwan, hopefully, can conclude a Bilateral Investment Agreement with the U.S. to further regularize its extensive business exchanges with this country, leading to a closely connected U.S.-Taiwan partnership heading toward the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Lyushun Shen is representative of the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the United States.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1lAfKpn