Donald Trump. (Charles Rex Arbogast/Associated Press)

All is not sweetness and light between tea partyers and Trumpkins.”The tea-party movement is suspicious of a powerful president, and Mr. Trump talks about using the presidency to force a variety of changes, on immigration policy, corporate decision-making and even libel law. . . . Tea partiers also tend to be fierce deficit hawks, and Mr. Trump’s declaration that he doesn’t want to touch Medicare and Social Security benefits alarms some. There also is suspicion of his malleability on issues, [Tea Party Patriots leader Jenny Beth] Martin said. He has proposed a big tax-cut plan but has said its details are negotiable, and in recent days has sounded open to an increase in the minimum wage.

This is light years away from scorning political correctness. “In terms of Donald Trump’s running mate, diversity in all respects must be a consideration, Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus said Monday.”

This sheds little light on the religious liberty issue. “The Supreme Court on Monday punted on the questions of whether and how religiously affiliated nonprofits must object to providing insurance coverage for contraception under Obamacare, sending 13 cases back to lower courts for further consideration. In the brief, unsigned opinion in the cases, which was read in court by Chief Justice John Roberts, the court announced that its decision ‘expresses no view on the merits of the cases,’ which were claims made under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act by religiously affiliated groups from the Little Sisters of the Poor Home for the Aged to several colleges and universities.”

The light has not dawned on the administration that weakness encourages our foes. “China’s aggressive cyber espionage and military reconnaissance operations against both U.S. government and private networks show no sign of abating under the Obama administration’s policy of holding talks and threatening but not taking punitive action. Typical of the administration’s approach has been the seemingly endless series of high-level meetings with Chinese officials, such as talks held last week in Washington to discuss ‘norms’ of behavior in cyberspace.”

This puts both Trump and his media fans in a bad light: “The New York Times over the weekend published an exhaustively reported expose detailing how presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump has treated women over the years. Among many other things, Trump would constantly make comments about women’s figures during meetings and once he even knocked the woman who oversaw the construction of his Manhattan business headquarters for gaining weight. While these stories have drawn condemnation from many women across the country, including many conservative women, Morning Joe host Joe Scarborough went to bat for Trump on Monday morning to defend his boorish behavior.”

This should be a flashing red light. “Trump Responds to Muslim London Mayor Khan: ‘I Will Remember Those Statements.'” His lack of presidential temperament is jaw-dropping.

Policy makers working on combating poverty should see the light: Nothing is as critical as having a job. “The secret to happiness through work is earned success — the belief you are creating value with your life and value in the lives of others. Americans who feel successful in the workplace are twice as likely to say that they’re happy overall.”