A longtime congressman, an Amarillo certified financial planner and a veterinarian from Bowie will square off in the March 4 primary race for the 13th Congressional District seat.

The contest pits Elaine Hays, 55, and Bowie veterinarian Pam Barlow, 59, against Rep. Mac Thornberry — a political veteran first elected with a tide of Republicans in 1994. The winner of the Republican primary will face Democrat Mike Minter in November.

If re-elected, Thornberry, 55, is widely expected to assume the chairmanship of the House Armed Services Committee after Chairman Buck McKeon of California announced he would not seek re-election and endorsed the Clarendon Republican as his successor.

Dave Rausch, a political science professor at West Texas A&M University, termed the race “fairly serious.”

“I think he thinks it’s serious because he’s obviously coming back to the district,” Rausch said of Thornberry’s multiple trips to the area recently.

“If he were to lose the primary, that would be a significant loss of clout for the 13th District.”

Thornberry said Friday he didn’t know how many trips he’s made to the district during this campaign.

“I don’t think I’m returning more. I would say I’m spending more total days (in the district) right now, at least in January and February,” he said Friday. “I don’t know that it’s more often, but I’d say it’s more total days.”

Hays said she decided to run because she felt Thornberry no longer truly represented the district’s conservative voters.

Hays, a certified financial planner, said she would have voted against the federal budget pact he voted for, and said Republicans lost the momentum gained from the 2011 Budget Control Act that averted a government shutdown.

Hays said 75 percent of spending increases in the Ryan-Murray budget deal occur in the first five years and 75 percent of the savings crop up during the second five years.

“From a fiscal standpoint, I opposed it because we were supposed to be at least flattening the increase in our spending, but we walked away from it,” Hays said. “I don’t have a lot of confidence that Congress five or 10 years from now is going to have any more backbone and stick with those cuts.”

Hays said she also was concerned about the budget pact’s cuts on future military retirees.

Thornberry said he supported the pact because it somewhat shields defense programs from the budget ax, begins entitlement reforms and heads the nation toward a balanced budget.

“It is not perfect, but it gets to balance within 10 years; it begins to reform entitlements, but it protects Social Security and Medicare for people who are already on it; and it protects defense,” he said. “I think that’s the best blueprint to follow.”

Barlow said she would have voted against the Ryan-Murray pact.

“There were cuts that could have been made in many other directions,” Barlow said. “We send our soldiers into war ... We owe them the benefits that they told them they were going to have.”

Barlow said many district residents are particularly worried about the federal deficit and overspending, which she likened to a cancer.

“The major issue that is of concern to the people I have talked to is a $17 trillion debt and the fact that their children and grandchildren are mortgaged to the eyeballs,” she said. “We have absolutely got to stop the spending.”

Instead of slashing the federal budget, Barlow said she favors a zero-based budgeting approach under which agencies would have to better justify their expenditures for each budget year.

“They should start with a zero to begin with and explain why they need X amount of money,” she said. “In other words, you get 90 percent of the previous budget this year and next year when you come for your budget you get 90 percent of your previous budget ... so that you’re going down 10 percent every budget.”

Hays said she also differed with Thornberry’s stance on spying by the National Security Agency. The spying program, first authorized under the Patriot Act, was narrowly tailored originally, but Hays said it has grown exponentially.

“It was originally intended for citizens who were under investigation for terrorism. Now we find out (information is) basically being gathered on all citizens even if you are not under investigation,” she said. “(Thornberry) has just continued, even with more and more revelations of what they are doing ... to support, and for the sake of security, to defend that program.”

Thornberry said such NSA programs are governed by several layers of oversight — including congressional committees, the secret Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court and agency watchdog inspectors — to ensure they are only used under conditions spelled out by law.

“Part of the oversight and the checks and balances are because of us, because we asked for them,” he said of Congress during an earlier interview.

On immigration, Hays said she supports expanding opportunities for legal immigration, but is against a path to citizenship for those who have entered the country illegally.

Barlow said she is against the path to citizenship for anyone who has entered the country illegally. She said, however, she supports worker visa programs that allow visitors from other nations to work in the United States for a year or two.

“To begin with, I am 100 percent against amnesty or a path to citizenship for anyone who has broken the laws and entered our country illegally,” Barlow said. “I think that what we need is to enforce the laws that we currently have.”

Thornberry said he also supports strengthening the nation’s controls over its borders and favors guest programs that allow skilled workers to emigrate to the United States.

“I think you start with border security and enforcement, and on the enforcement side interior enforcement is very important because about half of the people here illegally came here legally on a visa, then they have stayed beyond their visa,” he said. “You eliminate the lottery and bring in people based on their skills, education and what they can contribute to our society.”

Thornberry said he has continued to support repealing the Affordable Care Act, but doesn’t see that repeal moving forward any time soon. He supports more competition, more transparency so patients can get more information about health care costs, permitting insurance sales across state lines and tort reforms.

“There has to be a way for someone who gets a disease to get health insurance that is affordable, and that is probably going to require some sort of government involvement,” he said. “I’m interested in the folks that are proposing that the government cover everybody with kind of a catastrophic plan so that you’re protected on the high end, and then you are responsible for the lower end maintenance kinds of things, more like we do for our car insurance.”

When asked about the two challengers vying for his seat, Thornberry said he’s looking forward to the upcoming primary.

“Every time I go before the voters, I take it seriously because representing our area in Congress is a special trust. This year most everyone is understandably frustrated by what is, or is not, getting done in Washington,” Thornberry said. “Through the campaign, I want people to know that I will not let up in my efforts to represent them and to strengthen our country.”

Andrea Bozek, a spokeswoman for the National Republican Congressional Committee, said Friday the committee considers Thornberry’s seat a “safe” one, and that it doesn’t normally focus on contested GOP primary races and instead focuses its efforts in competitive general election races that pit the GOP against Democrats.

No GOP primary challenger has drawn more than 23 percent of the vote in contested primary races against Thornberry since he was first elected in 1994, according to election results.

Barlow, who battled Thornberry in the last GOP primary, garnered 22.4 percent of ballots cast in the 2012 GOP primary.

Thornberry was elected in 1994 when he defeated Democratic incumbent Bill Sarpalius, 79,416 votes (55.4 percent) to Sarpalius’ 63,923 votes (44.1 percent) in the 1994 general election.

According to the most recent campaign contribution report from the Federal Election Commission, Thornberry received $700,083 in contributions in 2013. During the same period, Hays received $77,342 and Barlow received $11,985.

Roll Call and the Cook Political Report, two political publications that monitor all U.S. House and Senate races, don’t list the 13th District race among competitive House contests in the upcoming election.

Harvey Kronberg, author of Austin-based political newsletter The Quorum Report, said he discussed the race Friday with a group of prominent Washington lobbyists and GOP contributors, and that none of them saw the upcoming election as a competitive contest.

“Nobody saw Thornberry in any kind of danger,” Kronberg said. “They were surprised at the thought that Thornberry could conceivably have any exposure.”