U.S. Rep. Thomas Massie, R-Garrison (Photo: AP/File)

Two months after first being elected to Congress, Thomas Massie made it clear he didn’t want John Boehner as Speaker of the House.

In Jan. 2013 and also this January, he voted against re-electing the Republican from West Chester as speaker.

Massie, R-Garrison, still hasn’t warmed to Boehner’s leadership.

The congressman who represents Northern Kentucky’s Fourth Congressional District is one of three who have signed on to a resolution to boot Boehner from the speaker’s chair. Rep. Mark Meadows, R-N.C., introduced the resolution – seen as largely symbolic by many political experts – that would force a new election by the entire House to pick a speaker.

Some Republicans, particularly those who identify with the tea party like Massie, have felt Boehner hasn’t stayed true to Republican principals. The resolution lists eight reasons why they want another leader of the House. It accuses Boehner of punishing members for votes he doesn’t like and causing the “power of Congress to atrophy.”

Boehner should have allowed debate on topics, such as President Barack Obama getting involved in the conflicts in the Middle East, Massie said.

“Every time he’s chosen not to act and let the president act, the power of the House atrophies,” Massie said. “We should be debating the declaration of war and use of force.”

Boehner has shrugged his shoulders at the coup efforts, telling the Associated Press it’s “no big deal.”

“I’ve got broad support amongst my colleagues,” he said at a recent press conference.

Does Massie’s opposition hurt his ability to get anything done in Congress and hurt Northern Kentucky’s clout? Massie said he finds the question laughable.

“I find it laughable the notion that you come to Congress and hand your voting card to leadership so you can get something done for your constituents,” Massie said. “What you could get done is get your name on a bill lobbyists have passed just so you can go back home and say you could get a bill passed.”

Massie said his opposition might mean leadership might take his name off some bills to deny him credit. But he doesn’t think it will stop him from getting things done. He said his bill to audit the Federal Reserve will likely get passed, just in a bill with someone else’s name on it.

Massie also suspects Boehner has dried up his campaign funds in Washington. Massie has one of the lowest campaign fundraising totals this year, raising $40,000 January through June. Only five other incumbent House members have raised less, two of which are non-voting delegates from Guam and American Samoa. But Massie said he doesn’t rely on Washington money.

Massie thinks this is what people in the Fourth Congressional District elected him to do. Some Republican leaders in Northern Kentucky agree.

Many Republicans in Northern Kentucky would like to see Boehner fight harder to repeal the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, and reform immigration policies, said Brett Gaspard, chairman of the Boone County Republicans.

“I think conservatives need to find ways to put pressure on Speaker Boehner to advance our causes,” Gaspard said. “To that end, this might be the best option to accomplish that goal.”

Many political experts don’t give the resolution much of a chance of succeeding.

But Massie thinks there’s a chance. They have until the next Congress convenes in 17 months to get the votes. But even if it doesn’t succeed, he hopes it puts pressure on Republican leadership to have more debate and to stop intimidation.

“If our leadership will betray Republican principles and betray an orderly and inclusive process, you will see more and more members joining,” Massie said.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1IcYOyY