Louisiana College theatre cast puts a twist on Shakespearean comedy.

Buy Photo Nicole Kiefer, a Louisiana College freshman from Hawaii, puts her hula dancing background to use during theatre louisiana college's production of Shakespeare's "12th Night." (Photo: Miranda Klein/The Town Talk)Buy Photo

PINEVILLE — An authentic hula dancer, Bob Marley music and palm leaves will all help theatre louisiana college tell the Shakespearean comedy "Twelfth Night."

Director Tabitha Huffman, associate professor of theater at Louisiana College, said she did not want summer vacation to end (like many of her students, no doubt). So she decided to extend it into the school year.

Inspiration for an Island-themed version of William Shakespeare's "Twelfth Night" came as Huffman was listening to music she grew up with in Hawaii by the pool this summer.

"I was like, 'This would be fun to have in 'Twelfth Night,'" Huffman said.

By a stroke of good fortune, Huffman even ended up with the perfect freshman theater student to help put on the show.

Buy Photo Nicole Kiefer, a Louisiana College freshman from Hawaii, puts her hula dancing background to use during theatre louisiana college's production of Shakespeare's "12th Night." (Photo: Miranda Klein/The Town Talk)

Nicole Kiefer came from Oahu, Hawaii, to attend college in Pineville. Kiefer said she wanted to go somewhere "different" for the next four years of her life. Central Louisiana apparently fit the bill.

Kiefer is a theater major and likes to entertain. Growing up, she did that through hula dancing, which she learned from her mom. She even danced competitively for a few years, but never imagined the art would come in handy during her first college performance.

"I didn't know I was going to be able to do it in a play," Kiefer said. "It's so cool."

Kiefer shows off her hula moves during the first act. She performs "Somewhere Over the Rainbow," explaining that her arms move to sign words like "bird" and "rainbow."

Huffman hopes Kiefer's performance and other elements of the show will help make Shakespeare enjoyable for all who attend, especially college students.

"I try to make it relevant and entertaining," Huffman said.

As professor, Huffman likes challenging her students with Shakespeare's work because they often are intimidated by it. Her goal is for them to learn it "actually is not that much different."

Buy Photo (From left) Louisiana College students Nicole Kiefer and Jeremy Manuel along with Mackenzie Trotter rehearse Tuesday night for theatre louisiana college's production of Shakespeare's "12th Night." (Photo: Miranda Klein/The Town Talk)

Huffman said it is easy for her to tell when her actors and actresses are not understanding their characters. She works with them to do that and see the job is the same with a character of any show.

"Watching them make those discoveries is so much fun," Huffman said. "They learn they're just acting like they would in a normal play."

As director, Huffman has had success with other Shakespeare works, like "Much Ado About Nothing," in terms of audience reaction, too. If people walk away having enjoyed themselves, she has done her job.

"And that's what happened with 'Much Ado,'" Huffman said.

Know to go

What: The theatre louisiana college's production of "Twelfth Night"

When: Sept. 17-19 and 24-26 at 7 p.m. Sept. 20 and 27 at 2 p.m.

Where: Martin Performing Arts Center at Louisiana College.

Cost: General admission is $15. Discounts are available for groups, seniors and Louisiana College faculty, staff or students.

Read or Share this story: http://www.thetowntalk.com/story/news/2015/09/16/lifes-beach-lc-twelfth-night-cast/72330754/