PHILADELPHIA — Hello, offense. The Nuggets missed you.

After being MIA the previous two games, the Nuggets were able to find some of it again Saturday night in an effort that gained steam as the game progressed and ended with a 103-92 victory over the Philadelphia 76ers.

“It’s good. It’s the first time that we’ve won on the second night of a back-to-back all season,” Nuggets coach Brian Shaw said. “So that’s what you have to have. We were down a man with Ty Lawson being out so guys knew that they would go a little bit deeper into our bench.”

It was a gritty victory and the first time the Nuggets (12-8) eclipsed the 100-point mark in the past three games.

It snapped a two-game losing streak and made certain the Nuggets will go home with no worse than a .500 record on this six-game Eastern Conference road swing. They can make a winning trek with a victory at Washington on Monday night.

But first things first.

This win was a much-needed reprieve from a couple of tough outings filled with self-inflicted wounds. They again inflicted a few on themselves in this one before things started to work themselves out.

Most notably, allowing Philadelphia free reign in the paint. For about two and a half quarters, the Sixers (7-14) did whatever they wanted inside and opened up as much as a 10-point lead. But free throws, oddly enough for the team that struggles to hit them, kept the Nuggets close.

“We talked about the fact that this was kind of an unorthodox team in that their paint points mainly come from their guards,” Shaw said. “They’re attacking the paint; (Spencer) Hawes and Thaddeus Young pick-and-pop a lot. We were up on guys and they were just driving around us and into the paint. We weren’t having any weakside awareness with our weakside defenders, but we did a better job of that in the second half with Anthony Randolph’s activity and alertness.”

And in the third quarter, the Nuggets began figuring things out defensively.

It wasn’t rocket science. The Nuggets simply needed to cut off the lane, and they started to do that in the third. When that happened, Philadelphia’s lead began to erode. At the same time, guard Nate Robinson was making plays that mattered, scoring and finding players in positions where they could score.

By the end of the third, Robinson had scored eight points in the quarter, pushing his total to 20 for the game and the game was tied at 77.

Jordan Hamilton delivered the knockout blows in the fourth quarter, nailing three consecutive 3-pointers to take the Nuggets from a 90-88 lead to a 99-88 lead with 3:21 left.

” The first one went in when (Andre Miller) found me on the baseline, Hamilton said. ” Then the second one fell. Then in transition, Evan Turner didn’t step up so I was like ‘I’m getting this off.’ And it went it and they called timeout. I was just feeling it.”

The Nuggets outscored the 76ers 26-15 in the final quarter to pull away.

“Once again, it was a good team effort,” Shaw said. “Guys, they stayed ready. We just were searching all night for a combination of guys to be effective, and I think the biggest thing, holding them to 15 points in the fourth quarter was huge for us.”

The free-throw line turned out to be the Nuggets’ friend all night. They marched to the line for 34 shots, far outpacing their Philadelphia counterparts (14). And the Nuggets made 26, a respectable enough percentage — .765 — that they were able to withstand shaky play until they ironed out the wrinkles.

“We just found a way to get some stops,” Miller said. “They came out aggressive early, attacking the basket, a lot of paint points early. We found a way to contain them and force them to take some tough shots. Jordan caught a little fire and kind of rode him the rest of the game.”

Nuggets Recap

What you might have missed

Evan Fournier got his first taste of significant court time in a long while, playing 21 minutes. It was the most minutes he played since Nov. 16. … The 76ers had 40 points in the paint — by halftime. … The Nuggets had 19 second-chance points.

Final thought

Not always pretty, but the Nuggets sorted through the muck to get a needed win.

Up next

At Washington, 5 p.m. Monday.

Christopher Dempsey, The Denver Post