It was how “Adolf Hitler” reacted when Obamacare was invoked, when Obama won re-election in 2012 and much more. Now it’s how Hitler reacted when he learned that Chuck Norris had been unleashed on the Third Reich.

“Do you realize what Chuck Norris is? I’ll tell you what Chuck Norris,” Hitler shrieks. “If Chuck Norris gets shot today, tomorrow will be the bullet’s funeral! It’s said he can win a staring contest with the sun. When Chuck Norris’ fever broke global warming was solved. Chuch Norris puts the ‘laughter’ in ‘slaughter.’ And he can squeeze water from rocks!”

The scene has become the source of numerous political and pop-culture parodies.

It comes from a Hitler rant in the 2004 German-language movie “Downfall,” which recounts the Nazi dictator’s final days in his Berlin bunker.

In the new parody, Hitler’s advisers are informing him how various superheroes are challenging his supremacy.

“Mere child’s play,” Hitler said. “Our kryptonite-clad Nazi ninjas will push them back.”

Then he’s told: “We’ve just learned the U.S. has deployed their Chuck Norris on us. He swims the Atlantic as we speak.”

The rant follows.

Hitler says: “The most traumatic day of my life was not when I learned Santa Claus wasn’t real but was when I learned Chuck Norris was. He does all his grocery shopping at Home Depot. He was to die five years ago, but Death can’t muster the courage to tell him.”

The scene from “Downfall” also has played on objections to Obamacare:

The video was posted after more than 6 million Americans received notice that their health insurance plans had been canceled because of Obamacare.

Previously WND reported on another parody using the same film clip.

In it, “Hitler” blasted the government for its inability to build a website that would allow Americans to quickly sign up for the federal health care program.

“Just tell them to sign up with the Obamacare exchange at Healthcare.gov,” Hitler says.

“No one can get logged on. … The website is a joke,” he is told.

Then he erupts in anger.

Another Hitler parody has the dictator planning to interrupt Obama’s State of the Union speech:

Norris has been writing a weekly column exclusively for WND since Oct. 23, 2006. The star of “Walker: Texas Ranger” and some of the biggest action pictures ever, Norris has also reached a new generation as part of the Internet craze for one-liners usually labeled not as jokes but as “facts.”

In “The Official Chuck Norris Fact Book,” Norris gives readers not only his favorite “facts,” roundhouse-kicked by the man himself, but also the stories behind the facts and the code by which he lives his life.

In his bestselling book “Black Belt Patriotism: How to Reawaken America,” Norris provides real solutions for solving the nation’s problems, moving the country forward and changing its course for the better.

As history shows, millions of Americans follow when Chuck Norris leads.

In 2008, Zeta Interactive confirmed that when Norris endorsed former Arkansas Gov. Huckabee in a WND column, it sparked a 66 percent increase in Internet posts on Huckabee.

When Norris wrote of his endorsement of Huckabee, the former governor was holding support from about 8 percent of voters, according to Rasmussen Reports, which is considered one of the most accurate tracking polls. Within a couple days, the time it took for the Norris column to make the rounds of the blogs and media sites, Huckabee’s support rose to 10 percent, his first time ever in double digits, and within another day it was at 12 percent. Huckabee’s campaign also reported a surge in campaign contributions in just days after the Norris endorsement.

Norris’ career began not in movies, television or in the world of Internet trivia. The man who has employed martial arts in so many of his pictures first came to the world’s attention as a real-life martial arts star. He was a six-time undefeated World Professional MiddleWeight Karate Champion. He was also a renowned teacher in the martial arts, with celebrity students including Steve McQueen, Bob Barker, Priscilla Presley and Donnie and Marie Osmond.

He has gone on to found the United Fighting Arts Federation with more than 2,300 black belts all over the world. In 1997, Norris achieved another milestone by becoming the first man ever in the Western Hemisphere to be awarded an eighth-degree Black Belt Grand Master recognition in the Tae Kwon Do system. It was a first in 4,500 years of tradition.

The Norrises say that next to their family, their greatest mission in life is their KICKSTART KIDS Foundation. In 1992, with the help of President George H.W. Bush, the program was launched in four public middle schools in Houston.

For over 20 years, KICKSTART KIDS has developed and delivered an in-school physical education program based on martial arts that teaches responsibility and character development, while building self-esteem and engaging kids in a school-based activity. The program is dedicated to giving middle school students the tools and support necessary to resolve conflicts, avoid participating in gangs, choose a drug-free lifestyle, resist negative peer pressure, remain in school until they graduate, achieve a higher level of academic success and ultimately become productive members of our communities.

Today KSK serves more than 7,000 children daily and has graduated approximately 70,000 students, with many going on to college.