WASHINGTON — You have headaches at work? Sarah Saldaña can top it.

To many Republicans in Congress, she’s now the face of an illegal executive amnesty. Morale at the agency she just took over couldn’t drop much lower. To top it off, funding may dry up in two weeks.

That explains the huge jar of Tylenol on her desk — a gag gift from a Dallas judge when Saldaña left her job as U.S. attorney to become director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement. It’s the nation’s second-biggest investigative agency, and it’s at the center of its most emotional and intractable policy debate.

She’s happy to engage. Deporting 11 million people who are in the country illegally isn’t feasible, she argues. Every day, prosecutors and police set priorities, focusing finite resources on the worst offenders.

“Someone has 10 parking tickets — no, we’re not going to be spending our money trying to run those folks down,” she said last week in her first extended interview since becoming ICE director Dec. 23. “We don’t have billions of dollars in our budget, billions and billions, to reach out to everybody that’s in the country” illegally.

The administration and Congress have been deadlocked over funding for the Department of Homeland Security since President Barack Obama issued executive actions in November shielding 5 million people from deportation — people Saldaña’s agency would otherwise be tasked with rounding up.

The new policy makes it a top priority to remove anyone deemed a threat to national security, border security or public safety.

Saldaña views this as pragmatism, not ideology.

She spent an hour discussing her new job in her 11th-floor office. The view is uninspiring: A power plant dominates, blocking most of the Washington Monument. Mementos include a Dallas Police Department cap. Her desk is covered in files and paperwork.

The jar of painkillers is front and center.

“DHS issues are the most contentious thing right now between the administration and Republicans, with the possible exception of Obamacare,” said Edward Alden, an expert on immigration policy at the Council on Foreign Relations. In the midst of this “open warfare,” he added, “it is her piece of it that is the most controversial.”

‘Full blast’

Saldaña, 63, grew up in Corpus Christi and got her law degree at Southern Methodist University. She joined the U.S. attorney’s office for the Northern District of Texas 11 years ago and became chief federal prosecutor in Dallas in 2011, with support from both Republican Texas senators.

When the president tapped her to run ICE, Sen. John Cornyn, the deputy GOP leader, introduced her in glowing terms at her confirmation hearing. Then came the executive actions. Saldaña’s defense of Obama’s decision cost her the support of Cornyn and most other Republicans.

Even so, she won confirmation in the final hours that Democrats controlled the Senate. She arrived at ICE headquarters on Jan. 6.

“It’s been full blast since then,” she said.

She’s met with ambassadors from Mexico and the Central American countries from which tens of thousands of unaccompanied minors poured into the U.S. last summer. She recently briefed the president on implementation of his executive actions.

Before the Super Bowl, she held a news conference in Phoenix to warn against counterfeit NFL apparel. The customs part of ICE draws far less controversy for an agency with 20,000 employees and a $6 billion budget. But it’s part of a huge portfolio that includes efforts to halt the smuggling of weapons, people and drugs, and to thwart terrorists.

“There’s a lot that I’ve learned in that area, and it’s what makes everybody’s hair gray,” she said.

The immediate crisis is the budget stalemate.

Funding runs out Feb. 28 for DHS. Senate Democrats have blocked GOP efforts to strip funds related to Obama’s executive actions. With no resolution in sight, Congress began a 10-day recess Friday.

Saldaña warned of big problems without a resolution.

“I have investigators out there in the middle of investigations,” she said. “We’re talking about child pornography. Import-export control. Transnational gangs and criminal activity. Counterfeit products,” including faulty air bags and parts for military aircraft.

“Who manages their budget in an organization — never mind the size and import of [ICE] — on a 30-day basis?” she asked. “That’s a hell of a way to do business.”

Other issues

And it’s hardly her only headache.

A recent survey of the best federal agencies to work for found ICE tied for last, out of 314. Agents bristle under a patchwork of evolving policies: Young people brought to the country illegally can stay; now, parents of citizens can stay, and so on.

“People go into law enforcement because they want to enforce the law, and it makes it very difficult for them to do their job if the law is unclear,” Alden said.

Saldaña readily concedes the agency faces a huge morale problem. It didn’t help to have an 18-month gap in leadership before her confirmation.

“If we are able to increase that morale problem — improve it, I don’t think we can go any lower than what we are!” she said, correcting herself and laughing, “I will consider that a job well done.”

One way is to get ICE agents on board with the idea that enforcement can and should be aggressive; it just has to be targeted.

“There’s plenty of criminals out there that fit the top two priorities under executive action — terrorists and gangs, and convicted criminals,” she said. “There’s a lot of work to do. … So I am encouraging folks to focus on that part of it.”

Saldaña is already feeling heat from Congress, too.

Republicans have howled over the release in 2013 of 36,007 “criminal aliens” — people in the pipeline for deportation who had been convicted of a crime unrelated to immigration. Among these were 193 killers and 303 kidnappers.

Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, has been highlighting that 1,000 of those released were later convicted of new crimes.

“They shouldn’t be releasing serious criminals, because they’re squarely the No. 1 enforcement priority,” said Marc Rosenblum, who studies U.S. immigration policies at the Migration Policy Institute.

Saldaña said ICE’s hands were tied in most of these cases. Federal courts require release of most detainees after 180 days. Some home countries, such as China or Cuba, won’t take back criminals. At the same time, she said, ICE agents can still detain anyone they deem a threat to public safety.

“Those that go and commit other crimes, we need to get them in custody and then we need to process them and get them out of the country,” she said.

One of Saldaña’s earliest acts was to visit a detention center that opened in mid-December in the South Texas town Dilley. The center was designed to house 2,400 people caught crossing the border.

Most are women and children.

Immigrant advocates view Dilley as a prison. They’re dismayed that an administration that purports to have concern for families would open such a massive facility. Saldaña lauded on-site medical care, modern classrooms and immigration courts to speed the legal process.

“There is barbed wire,” she acknowledged. But Dilley is “second to none,” she said, noting those caught at the border must be housed somewhere until a court determines their status.

Follow Todd J. Gillman on Twitter at @toddgillman.

AT A GLANCE: The Saldaña file

Age: 63

Education: Del Mar Junior College, associate degree; Texas A&M University-Kingsville (formerly Texas A&I University), bachelor of science; Southern Methodist University law school

Career highlights: Eighth-grade language arts teacher, Dallas, 1973-74; Dallas offices of Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Housing and Urban Development, Department of Labor; law clerk to U.S. District Judge Barefoot Sanders; Haynes and Boone law firm; Baker Botts law firm; assistant U.S. attorney, Dallas, 2004-11; U.S. attorney, 2011-14; director, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 2014-present.