The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) has released new data that shows smoking rates down more than 20 percent between 2005 and 2014, as less than 17 percent of the adult population are now smokers, according to the report. Additionally, there are several new support products and services that can make it easier to stop smoking.

The CDC says the largest indication showing smoking rates down is with adults between 18 and 24 years old. Part of the reason is thought to be due to insurance trends. People with private health insurance were seen to smoke at about 13 percent of the population, people with Medicare at slightly lower at 12.5 percent, and those on Medicaid or having no health insurance that smoked were closer to 30 percent of the population.

Aiming for 12 percent by 2020 CDC says

The CDC report is part of their attempt to get smoking rates down to under 12 percent by 2020. It has been known for a long time that smoking can cause lung cancer and contribute to other illnesses, and it is blamed for about 500,000 American deaths a year.

The CDC says that the passing of Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 has increased the amount of Americans having health insurance and is projected to help improve smoking cessation programs.

Demographics plays part in pushing smoking rates down

The CDC report showed smoking being down in the whole population, but it also noted that some demographic groups had steeper declines. Besides the above statistics on smokers with or without medical insurance, there was a relationship between the person’s education level and whether or not they smoked. Forty-three percent of people with a G.E.D. were said to smoke, as compared to eight percent with a college degree.

Additionally, men were seen to smoke four percent more than women, and Hispanics dropped 11 percent in their desire to smoke. The percentage of whites and blacks that smoked stayed about the same, at around 18 percent of the population.

Many things contribute to smoking rates decline

The CDC credited several things besides the lack of insurance and other items to the smoking rates going down, like media campaigns, cost, and education. The report says that people are becoming more educated and that knowledge is leading them to make healthier decisions, thus bringing smoking rates down overall.