New York Jets defensive end Muhammad Wilkerson scuffles with Jarrett Boykin (right) and other players after a two-point conversion by the Packers in the third quarter on Sunday. Wilkerson was eventually ejected from the game for throwing punches during the scrum. Credit: Mark Hoffman

SHARE Video Loading... Packers Chat Sunday, Sept. 14

PACKERS

Tyler Dunne, beat writer

Read Transcript

By of the

Green Bay — The Green Bay Packers kept New York Jets end Muhammad Wilkerson in check Sunday, but they didn't do it all themselves.

The 6-4, 315-pound Wilkerson had a big year for the Jets last season and though he was coming off just a three-tackle performance against the Oakland Raiders was a focal point of the Packers' protection scheme.

Wilkerson, who had 101/2 sacks last year, did not make it on the defensive stats sheet against the Packers.

The only place his name appeared in the play-by-play and final stats came after a third-quarter drive that ended with Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers hitting receiver Randall Cobb for a 1-yard touchdown and then a two-point conversion.

After Cobb caught the second pass, Wilkerson got into a shoving match with several Packers players and then started taking wild swings, first at wide receiver Davante Adams then at left guard Josh Sitton and then at left tackle David Bakhtiari.

On the other edge of the scrum that had developed, defensive tackle Sheldon Richardson grabbed the facemask of tight end Andrew Quarless and yanked on it. Quarless grabbed Richardson's facemask and ripped off his helmet.

When it was all over, Richardson received an unsportsmanlike conduct penalty that was declined and Wilkerson was slapped with an unsportsmanlike conduct penalty and thrown out of the game.

"The guy (Wilkerson) kept trying to force Randall out of the end zone," Bakhtiari said. "I ended up pushing Randall to make sure he got in the end zone and then I look over to my left and I see Wilkerson fighting with Josh and throwing a punch. I tried breaking that up.

"Then, once that's done, I looked over to my right and I see another skirmish going on. I'm like, this might be like camp right now. I just remember last week my penalty, and the last thing I want to do is have that happen twice. I stayed calm and relaxed."

Besides costing his team 15 yards, Wilkerson took himself out of a game that was very much up for grabs.

The touchdown and 2-point conversion had given the Packers their first lead at 24-21.

Wilkerson admitted after the game that he lost it.

"It's something that rarely happens," he said. "I lost my cool and let my emotions get the best of me. I apologized to the team and everybody and I told them it won't happen again."

Injury report: The Packers lost two players to knee injuries and had another sit because his knee wasn't ready.

Safety Micah Hyde left the game with a left knee injury after returning a punt in the first half.

He limped off the field and, after being examined by the medical staff, was kept out of the game.

In the second half, he came out with the rest of the team and was riding a stationary bike on the sideline in what appeared to be an attempt to return to the game. But he eventually got off and then was declared out for the game.

Rookie Ha Ha Clinton-Dix replaced him and played the entire second half.

Linebacker Andy Mulumba got hurt covering a return and was soon declared out for the game.

Coach Mike McCarthy did not have any information on either injury.

Right tackle Bryan Bulaga, who tore the MCL in his left knee against Seattle, was inactive despite practicing twice last week. Tight end Brandon Bostick was active for the first time since suffering a slight fracture in his leg, but he only played on special teams.

House's night: Last week, cornerback Davon House did not play a single snap from scrimmage. Casey Hayward was the nickel and dime corner, working exclusively in the slot, often against Seattle's Percy Harvin.

This week, it was Hayward who spent the entire night on the bench with the exception of special teams. Defensive coordinator Dom Capers used Tramon Williams and Hyde to play the slot positions and used House as an outside corner.

The strategy worked well. House had a very good game. He finished with two tackles and two third-down pass break-ups.

"I think he did well," Williams said. "He's proven he can play at this level and play well. We're very deep at cornerback. It's going to be week-to-week on who plays. There's always going to be a guy who's deserving to play who gets left out.

"But guys are taking a positive approach about it. His number was called and he did what he needed to do. That's what we need out of him all year long."

Face to face: Cornerback Jarrett Bush said he was surprised to receive a taunting penalty while covering a kickoff return.

The ball wound up going into the end zone, but as Bush was running up to returner Saalim Hakim, Bush said Hakim faked as though he was going to block him to keep him from getting to the ball. Bush said as he ran past Hakim his facemask hit Hakim's and the official thought it was a form of taunting.

"It was frustrating," Bush said. "It came at a crucial time in the game. I can't let that happen. I was pretty fired up about it. That's how bad I wanted to win. But the coaches calmed me down."

Esteemed company: Rodgers moved past Bart Starr into second place on the all-time franchise record books with 24,732 passing yards.

Rodgers threw for 346 yards and now trails only Brett Favre (61,655) for the lead.

Starr suffered a stroke late last week, but his family issued a statement that he expects to make a full recovery.

It was the annual alumni day and Starr often shows up for the game.

"It's an honor to be mentioned in the same sentence with him," Rodgers said. (I was) thinking about him today a lot as it was alumni day and got to see Willie (Davis) and Fuzzy (Thurston) and actually some guys I played with, which starts to age you a little bit.

"But I was definitely thinking about Bart and wish he'd been here. (We) wish him the best and we're thinking and praying for him. Personally, he and I have become close over the last few years and it's been hard to see him going through this."