An FAQ on health coverage for immigrants in the United States.

By Chiranth Nataraj

Immigrant families and people with relatives immigrating to the United States may be eligible for insurance coverage in the Health Insurance Marketplace under Obamacare. Most US citizens, nationals, and lawfully present immigrants are eligible for coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace. Read on to find out the answers to questions about health coverage for immigrants in the United States:

Follow @ambazaarmag



Q: Can an immigrant with a Green Card Apply for Obamacare?

A: Yes, immigrants with Green Cards are covered under the Affordable Care Act. They may be eligible for subsidies depending on income and circumstances. Green Card holders, like foreign born parents sponsored by US citizens, may qualify for Obamacare.

Q: My parents do not have a Green Card, can they apply for Obamacare?

Several class of immigrants (refugee, asylee, paroled into the US etc.), as well those holding non-immigrant visas (such as H, F, U and T) can apply for Obamacare even if they don’t have the Green Card. Typically, however, parents visiting on B1 and B2 visas are not eligible for Obamacare; instead they would qualify for visitor insurance plans (see https://www.visitorguard.com/health-insurance/). Green card and/or I-94 numbers are required while applying for Obamacare.

Q: Will my parents get a fine if they don’t have insurance?

A: Any lawfully present immigrant must have health insurance. Your parents, if they are classed as lawfully present (i.e. permanent residents etc.), they must get health insurance or they will have to pay a penalty fee of $325 (for 2015) per adult or 2 percent of their taxable income whichever is higher.

Q: When can my parents apply?

A: Eligible residents and citizens can apply during the open enrollment period that runs from November of every year to February of next year. One can also apply outside of the open enrollment period under special circumstances; please access the government site at this link to find out how one can apply during a Special Enrollment Period.

Q: What documents do my parents need why applying?

A: The information required while applying includes name, email, address, date of birth, social security number, green card/ I-94 numbers and estimate gross income. Proof and documentation can be uploaded as part of the application.

There are a variety of documents to support an application for enrollment in Obamacare for immigrants. For example, your parents could show a Permanent Resident Card, Reentry Permit, Machine Readable Immigrant Visa, Temporary I-551 Stamp, or many others, depending on status and circumstances.

Q: What is so special about Obamacare?

A: Obamacare insurance or more rightly Affordable Care Act (ACA) insurance is a landmark change in the history of United States of America and in its insurance industry. It guarantees universal minimum essential benefits to all, regardless of health condition at affordable costs.

Most importantly your parents regardless of their pre-existing conditions can enroll under the plans (prior to ACA law, those over 65 or those with diabetes, heart disease would simply be rejected by insurance companies). Your immigrant parents can not only enroll in spite of pre-existing conditions but can also obtain treatment for these conditions. Besides, all plans under ACA act are required to offer annual preventive care exams, pregnancy, mental health and other minimum level of benefits.

Q: How much will Obamacare health insurance cost for my parents?

A: The cost of health insurance under a healthcare exchange program depends on many factors including the city/state and income levels. Based on the income level they may also be eligible for federal subsidies to reduce the effective premium. We have seen immigrant parents’ monthly premiums range from about $100 to $500 per month.

Chiranth Nataraj is an insurance professional and often writes about visitor insurance and healthcare for immigrants and international students. Check out his popular and detailed article at http://www.visitorguard.com/obamacare-for-usa-visitors-and-immigrants/