Jindal is slated to attack a number of high-profile court cases and state laws, including a decision facing the U.S. Supreme Court on whether Hobby Lobby will be required to pay for its workers' contraceptive coverage, including abortifacients, through employer-provided health insurance.

Just a day after a legal challenge was filed against Louisiana's ban on same-sex marriage, he will also warn against what he calls the "next assault" on religious liberty in the United States: the fight over whether the U.S. Supreme Court's decision to strike down the federal Defense of Marriage Act renders state bans moot.

"This is the next stage of the assault, and it is only beginning," Jindal will say, adding that more than half the country is a member of a church that recognizes the definition of marriage as between one man and one woman. "All of those denominations will be targeted in large and small degrees in the coming years."

The son of Hindu parents who converted to Catholicism in high school also plans to laud states like Kentucky, which passed a law in March 2013 requiring the state to prove it had a "compelling interest" in requiring citizens do something that contradicts their religious beliefs.



Louisiana already has this type of "strict scrutiny" law in place when it comes to the gun rights. It passed an amendment in 2012 to enshrine the right to bear arms as "fundamental" in the state's Constitution.

President Barack Obama, long criticized by Jindal in speeches and with whom the governor is currently entangled in an ongoing legal battle over school vouchers, does not go unscathed in the remarks.

Tying the president to those waging "this war on religious liberty," Jindal says Obama is married to the "wrongheaded concept ... that religious freedom means you have the freedom to worship, and that's all."

In an apparent nod to legislation he may push in Louisiana this year, Jindal urges conservative state legislatures and governors to respond by passing laws like those in Kentucky: "We must enshrine in our state laws strong legal protections for churches, religious organizations, and individual believers."

In his prepared remarks, Jindal does not touch on a recently filed suit in the north Louisiana parish of Sabine, in which the parents of a Buddhist student allege their son was called "stupid" and given low marks for not adhering to Christian doctrine taught in his 6th grade science class.



In a statement responding to the governor's prepared remarks, the Democratic National Party criticized Jindal for using the Ronald Reagan library as a platform to express beliefs they said would not be in sync with the former president's views.

"Tonight, Bobby Jindal ... will embrace President Reagan as a model for the Republican Party. He has even called the former President his 'political inspiration,'" said DNC Press Secretary Michael Czin. "But the truth is Jindal's far right and out of touch Republican Party would have no place for someone like Ronald Reagan."

Jindal will be the latest potential presidential hopeful to make the pilgrimage to the Reagan library located in Simi Valley, which regularly hosts "Reagan Forums" that are a veritable who's-who of the conservative policymaking community.

While in California, Jindal will also hold meetings with those interested in his newly formed nonprofit America Next policy group. While the organization's website remains as undeveloped as it was when it was launched in October, Jindal's fairly frequent out-of-state trips have often included his meeting with national policymakers to discuss the nonprofit.

Jindal was last in California on Jan. 25, when he met with business leaders to discuss the Affordable Care Act at a conference hosted by billionaire brothers and conservative advocates Charles and David Koch.

. . . . . . .

Lauren McGaughy is a state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. She can be reached at lmcgaughy@nola.com or on Twitter at @lmcgaughy.