Photo

AUSTIN, Tex. — Bill Clinton’s political awakening came against the backdrop of the civil rights movement and the Vietnam War. Fifty years later, Mr. Clinton observed the anniversary of the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 with a strong reminder about the sacrifices lawmakers must make to advance sweeping and controversial legislation.

Without mentioning the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Clinton did discuss the pushback that lawmakers faced for voting in support of the Civil Rights Act. He alluded to the current climate in Washington in which some Democrats face the prospect that their support for the bill will hurt their prospects this fall.

“That is often the case with big votes that change millions of lives,” Mr. Clinton said. “I’ve had my fair share of tough phone calls to good people who lost their seats after we won this or that big measure by just a vote or two in the House or the Senate.”

Mr. Clinton delivered his remarks near the hallways of memorabilia from a tumultuous period in American history that line the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library here. He was among three former presidents who came to Austin to commemorate with Mr. Obama the anniversary of landmark legislation that sought to end decades of discrimination.

Topics at the three-day event include gay rights, immigration, women’s rights and education. Mr. Obama and former President George W. Bush are scheduled to speak on Thursday.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Clinton also called for the protection of the Voting Rights Act, which passed in 1965. This summer, the Supreme Court overturned a crucial section of the law, and the ruling is expected to have a major impact in Texas, with its large minority voting population. Mr. Clinton also said that barriers being erected in many states that prevent people from voting “are seriously undermining the spirit of both the Voting Rights Act and the Civil Rights Act.”

Representative John Lewis, Democrat of Georgia; Johnson’s daughter Luci Baines Johnson; and the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.’s daughter, the Rev. Bernice A. King, among other civil rights activists, delivered a reading before Mr. Clinton took the stage.

Mr. Clinton often talks about how his political identity was largely forged during the civil rights struggles of the 1960s, and he has many similarities to Johnson — with their modest Southern upbringings and styles of retail politics. Mr. Clinton said he remembered hearing Johnson talk about his childhood in Texas. “I thought he was talking about my childhood,” Mr. Clinton said.

(At one point during the speech, Mr. Clinton referred to Johnson as “Mr. Clinton.” He said, with a laugh, “President Clinton, I know that guy.”)

But as a young college student, he also protested the Vietnam War that Johnson escalated. That dissonance — Johnson’s historic civil rights achievement and his administration’s handling of a deeply unpopular war — is on display at his presidential library, which Mr. Clinton briefly visited after his speech.

On Tuesday, former President Jimmy Carter cited the unemployment rate of blacks — it is more than twice the 5.8 percent unemployment rate for whites — and said the country had been “pretty much dormant” on equality issues since Johnson’s passage of the landmark legislation that ended laws requiring racial segregation.

“We accept self-congratulations about the wonderful 50th anniversary — which is wonderful — but we feel like Lyndon Johnson did it and we don’t have to do anything anymore,” said Mr. Carter, who is 89.

Mr. Clinton hit a somber note at times. He said Mr. Johnson “saw limitless possibilities in the lives of other poor people like him who just happened to have a different color skin.”

Vernon E. Jordan Jr., who worked with Johnson, introduced Mr. Clinton, his longtime friend. Mr. Jordan called the civil rights legislation “the bill of the century” and Mr. Clinton “the Bill of the century.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Jordan first met Mr. Clinton in 1973. “He returned home to the South because he understood that when it came to race there was work to be done,” Mr. Jordan said. He said Mr. Clinton joked that back then, “Who would have thought that I’d end up in Harlem?” It is now home to the former president’s personal office.