New Penrose Elementary School Principal Michelle Lesser sits on a couch inside the school's office on Friday. (Sarah Rose / Daily Record)

Even though it's only been a month since Penrose Elementary School Principal Michelle Lesser took the job, she already feels at home.

Lesser said since she's been there, she has received an unexpected free cup of chai tea from Coyote Café that was brought to her at the school, a volunteer offered to take recess duty, the chamber of commerce invited her to their breakfast and about half of the students' parents took time out of their day to meet her during a meet and greet.

"The whole Penrose community has been thoughtful and welcoming," Lesser said. "I just feel so privileged to be here. It's an honor."

She said her goal for this year is getting to know as many people in the town as possible.

"It's all about building relationships with people ... the community, students and staff, parents. And then from there, we'll set goals together," Lesser said.

She said one of the main reasons she moved to the area from Mesa County is because she has a great relationship with her relatives.

"I wanted to be closer to my family. I grew up in Salida. My dad's still in Salida," Lesser said. "My mom lives in Colorado Springs. My brother's in Cañon City and my husband's family is in Pueblo."

She started a teaching position at Fremont Elementary at the beginning of the year, but when she saw the job opening for PES, she couldn't pass it up.

"I love teaching, but I wanted to make a difference on a larger scale," Lesser said.

Advertisement

Lesser has experience as a principal at Clifton Elementary School. She was employed there from 2008 to 2013.

"We were actually a title 1 school," she said. "What happened is the federal government gave money to states to turn around their lowest performing schools and I was in the first round of that. It just happened that Clifton was in the bottom 5 percent of schools in the state of Colorado."

To receive the $2.6 million grant, the school presented a plan of action to help boost students' test scores to the Colorado Education Commissioner.

"We were low, but from our first year of implementation, we went from turnaround to performance in one year. It was really a superb turnaround," she said.

Prior to working at Clifton Elementary School, she was a first-grade teacher for 10 years at Fruitvale Elementary School in Grand Junction.

Sarah Rose: 719-285-5157, roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com or twitter.com/sarahfaithrose