Donald Trump is just as aggressive on the radio as he is on the podium.

The 2016 GOP candidate released his first set of campaign ads Thursday, two wide-ranging radio slots that attacked his rivals and boasted his anti-immigration, pro-veteran platform.

“Obamacare is a total disaster,” the boisterous billionaire says in one ad that will air in Iowa. “It will be repealed and replaced with something much better.”

Trump quickly touches on a handful of issues in the slot, rattling off talking points but providing few specifics about his plans.

BEN CARSON OVERTAKES TRUMP IN NATIONAL POLLING AVERAGE

“I’ll take care of our veterans and make our military so strong that nobody will mess with us,” he says. “I’ll secure our borders, and yes, we will have a wall. You can’t have a country without borders.”

The Iowa advertisement finished with a plea for votes. The state’s caucus is 87 days away

“If the people of Iowa vote for me, you’ll never be disappointed. I don’t disappoint people. I produce,” Trump says.

The candidate also released a second ad that will air nationally. In it, a spokeswoman highlights Trump’s business experience before breaking down his policies in quick one-liners.

A protestor demonstrates across the street from NBC Studios, where 'Saturday Night Live' is taped, Wednesday, days before Trump hosts the show. (Kathy Willens/AP)

SEE IT: LATINO KIDS HIT BACK AT DONALD TRUMP IN HILARIOUS VIDEO

“He went on to build one of the world’s most iconic brands and companies which employs thousands of people,” the woman says. “He will make our military so strong no country will ever mess with us. Donald Trump will protect Israel and brutally and quickly cut the head off of ISIS.”

She continues: “He is self-funding his campaign. He will only be responsible to the American people — not special interest or lobbyists.”

The ads make the same points Trump has previously used in his campaign rallies and media interviews, but the radio medium could expose Trump’s campaign to a wider voting base.

“It’s time to make America great again. Maybe greater than ever before,” the second ad concludes.