Tens of millions of pounds are being spent every year by the NHS on cosmetic surgery, figures reveal.

Taxpayers are forking out vast and growing sums for facelifts, nose jobs, liposuction and breast augmentation – at a time when patients are being denied life-saving cancer drugs.

The number of facelifts and operations to increase breast size have more than doubled over the past decade, while there has been a 40 per cent rise in liposuction.

Tens of millions of pounds are being spent every year by the NHS on cosmetic surgery, figures reveal. Barman Sam Barton (above), 22, of Sutton Coldfield, in the West Midlands, was given a nose job by the NHS – and boasted how easy it was to get the £5,000 procedure

Despite a looming financial crisis, the NHS in 2012/13 found the money to carry out 1,137 facelifts – costing taxpayers up to £8.5million.

Up to £52.5million went on breast enlargements and a record £10million was spent on liposuction.

Every week there are now 164 nose jobs, 37 liposuction procedures, 22 facelifts and 273 boob jobs being carried out on the cash-strapped Health Service.

Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt recently said the NHS should only fund cosmetic surgery when there is a clear clinical need and if someone’s physical and mental health could be at risk without it.

But the dramatic rise in some forms of surgery indicates that such assurances are not always sought. Surgeons say hospitals are being put under pressure to bend the rules under pressure from patients demanding purely cosmetic work.

Earlier this year a survey found that a quarter of patients who have has cosmetic procedures on the NHS had lied to secure funding. Many claimed to have low self-esteem or depression as a result of the way they looked, according to research by a firm of medical negligence solicitors.

The figures, from the Health and Social Care Information Centre, do not break down the reasons for the operations – and whether there was the sort of clinical need that Mr Hunt was talking about.

Earlier this year a survey found that a quarter of patients who have had cosmetic procedures on the NHS had lied to secure funding. Many claimed to have low self-esteem or depression as a result of the way they looked, according to research by a firm of medical negligence solicitors.

Figures obtained by the Mail show the NHS in 2012/13 carried out 1,137 facelifts – up 111 per cent in a decade. Facelifts cost private patients between £4,000 and £7,500 each, according to the NHS Choices website, meaning that up to £8.5million was spent on the operations in 2012/13.

Josie Cunningham had an enlargement after saying her 32A chest was ruining her life. After becoming unhappy with her new 36DD figure, the Leeds modelling hopeful had a breast reduction on the NHS

The number of breast enlargements has soared by 145 per cent in a decade to 10,504 – costing up to £52.5million.

Many of these will be reconstructions following cancer treatment, but the increase far outstrips any rise in breast cancer diagnoses.

In one case, Josie Cunningham had an enlargement after saying her 32A chest was ruining her life.

After becoming unhappy with her resulting 36DD figure, the modelling hopeful from Leeds had a breast reduction on the NHS too.

And barman Sam Barton, 22, of Sutton Coldfield, in the West Midlands, was given a nose job by the NHS – and boasted how easy it was to get the £5,000 procedure.

He now says he expects the taxpayer to foot the bill for further surgery, including another nose job, as well as having his ears pinned back and jaw reshaped.

The obesity epidemic has also had an effect on the surgery bill, with the number of liposuction operations in 2012/13 standing at 1,926 – up 40 per cent in ten years.

The cost in the most recent year will have been up to £9.6million, according to NHS Choices which says the operation costs between £1,500 and £5,000.

There has also been a 39 per cent rise in the number undergoing eyelid surgery to 4,966 – costing up to £19.9million. This operation is supposed to be carried out to treat affected vision.

And 8,537 nose jobs were carried out in 2013/14 – up 4 per cent and costing £34.1million.

Jonathan Isaby, of the TaxPayers’ Alliance, said: ‘It’s ludicrous the NHS pays for procedures that are not based on strict medical needs.’

The figures were compiled by the Health and Social Care Information Centre, following a request from the Daily Mail.

It also showed that up to £20.3million was spent on breast reduction operations, £5.8million on tummy tucks and £5.7million on ear pinning. However, these totals have declined over the past decade.

Last month Mr Hunt told a Westminster lunch: ‘We should not be doing cosmetic work on the NHS.’

Roger Goss, of pressure group Patient Concern, said: ‘There are two types of cosmetic surgery – the type that happens after illness and the sort where someone is just trying to look better.

'We agree with the Secretary of State that this kind of thing is no longer affordable on the NHS. In fact, it is amazing it was ever considered affordable at all.’

NHS facing £30bn funding black hole that'll hit 'absolutely vital services' with 'dire' consequences for patients, warns minister

By JAMES CHAPMAN

Health minister Norman Lamb has warned of a looming £30billion-a-year black hole in the Health Service’s finances

The NHS is about to run out of cash and ‘absolutely vital services’ will have to be slashed unless billions can be saved, a health minister has claimed.

In a recording obtained by the Daily Mail, Norman Lamb warned of a looming £30billion-a-year black hole in the Health Service’s finances. By 2021, he said, the scale of the funding gap threatens ‘dire’ consequences for patients.

It is the first time a minister at the Department for Health has admitted the financial problems facing the NHS.

Speaking at the Orange Book Conference – a Liberal Democrat event held last month – Mr Lamb, minister of state at the Department of Health, said that the NHS faces a ‘funding gap of £30billion per year’ which austerity measures meant the Government would not be able to fill.

‘If you take health…by 2021 if things carry on as they are, there is a funding gap of £30billion, £30billion per year, and so to be in the position to suddenly find vast amounts of extra money to throw at service, and given the state of public finances and indeed the changing ratio of people of working age to people who aren’t, quite dramatic in our society, that seems to be an unlikely prospect,’ he said.

‘The potential consequences of the status quo are that across the country you lose absolutely vital services which people rely on, and for me the consequences of that are too dire to contemplate.

‘So there is an absolute imperative that we think about how we get a better value from public services.’

NHS England has warned that within the next few years the service is ‘about to run out of cash in a very serious fashion’.

Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt denied there is any existing black hole in the NHS, and insisted the Government is making savings to contend with increasing demand for services.

Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt denied there is any existing black hole in the NHS, and insisted the Government is making savings to contend with increasing demand for services

Asked if he would have to request a bailout from Chancellor George Osborne, Mr Hunt told Radio 4’s Today: ‘No, and I think it is wrong to describe it as a black hole.

‘Every year, because of an ageing population, we have additional demand for services and we have to make efficiency savings. Over this Parliament, we have found about £20billion of efficiency savings which we are investing in more doctors and nurses on the front line.

‘And every year we have a challenge in the NHS to find those efficiency savings.

‘We have had a very difficult few years as a country but every family up and down the country has learned to live within its budget, and we too must live within our budget in the NHS. We are doing that and I’m sure we will continue to do that.’

Some members of Labour’s Shadow Cabinet want the party to commit to increasing National Insurance by a penny to pay for extra NHS spending.

The rise would replicate Gordon Brown’s 1 per cent rise, which was introduced in the 2002 Budget to increase investment in the Health Service.

David Cameron told MPs this week that for the first time, the independent Commonwealth Fund had ranked the UK’s Health Service as the best in the world.

‘It has happened only under this Government,’ he said.

But Shadow Cabinet Office minister Jonathan Ashworth said: ‘You can’t trust the Tories with the NHS.