Bribery? Some people view it as a cost of doing business - and not just in faraway countries where well-founded and well-enforced rules of law are nonexistent. Some people view it as a crime. Whatever the view and legalities, healthcare and life sciences companies are part of that scene.

EY, which is the umbrella label for Ernst & Young's collection of firms, released its a report called "Top Fraud and Corruption Trends for 2015," and healthcare and life sciences made the list at No. 5.

This won't shock many, but EY's Fraud Investigation & Dispute Services (FIDS) division - which is in business to sell services in these areas - produced the report.

Cybersecurity breaches of well-known organizations are now almost a daily occurrence, so that topic is atop the list. A link to the report is here.

The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) is a U.S. law that, basically, makes it a crime for a U.S. company official to bribe foreign officials for commercial gain. But other countries get cranky about that, too, as drugmakers, especially U.K.-based GlaxoSmithKline, found in China. There is also a theory that China was sending a general message to companies of all sorts that they needed to behave, including by not trying to gouge consumers on prices for products.

But many large U.S. and European drugmakers and medical device companies, who fret that price pressures are stifling growth in the United States, can find growth in emerging markets.

The EY statement-report on those areas says, in part, this:

Life Sciences: FCPA compliance will remain a top priority for companies operating in emerging and frontier markets. The past year’s enforcement actions continue to evidence the exposure that life sciences companies face when operating overseas. Life sciences companies must devote greater attention to compliance processes as well as overall internal control enhancements with a range of tools including Forensic Data Analytics. Varying levels of foreign enforcement and cooperation among governments will require life sciences companies to stay abreast of evolving global anti-corruption standards.

Healthcare: Continued implementation of the Affordable Care Act will present new challenges and risks for providers and patients. As the implementation of the Affordable Care Act proceeds and new health information management efforts take hold, infrastructure in the healthcare industry will be tested. The nexus of government-sponsored health insurance programs and increased federal funding will present fraud risks because of the increased complexity between the systems and monitoring efforts."