While technically its new headquarters will be in Dublin, Medtronic said it will keep its operational headquarters in Fridley, shown here. (Photo: Jim Mone/AP)

Medtronic officials are pushing back against widely published suggestions that the company’s proposed acquisition of Dublin-based Covidien is motivated by a desire to avoid U.S. taxes.

A company tax official said Wednesday that the Fridley-based medical device manufacturer will continue to face a host of U.S. taxes once the deal closes, including on about $14 billion in overseas cash, a key figure in the tax-avoidance debate. The company says the deal primarily is about medical technology.

Some tax experts have suggested the Covidien deal would let Medtronic avoid paying billions in taxes on overseas profits, but Medtronic maintains the cash will continue to be “trapped” — subject to U.S. taxes if it is to be used in the United States.

The comments Wednesday came a day after U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew urged Congressional action to prevent these so-called “inversion” deals.

“For Medtronic to take its (outside-the-United States) cash and invest it in the U.S., there is an incremental tax,” said Phil Albert, the company’s vice president of corporate tax. “That continues to apply, pre- and post-inversion.”

Edward Kleinbard, a tax expert at the University of Southern California, countered: “It’s literally true, but it’s not what any well advised firm would do.” There will be ways, he said, for Medtronic to use its corporate structure to avoid taxes.

At 35 percent, the United States offers the highest corporate income tax rate in the industrialized world, Donald Goldman, a professor at Arizona State University’s W.P. Carey School of Business, said in a recent news report. By contrast, the European Union has an average tax rate of 21 percent.

Paul Vaaler, a tax expert at the University of Minnesota, said in June: “At the beginning and end of this, the deal is about corporate taxation rates in the U.S., and how those rates deter Medtronic from repatriating billions of dollars now sitting in foreign subsidiary operations.”

But Albert, the Medtronic official, disputed that motivation, saying: “Medtronic’s foreign earnings post the deal will continue to be subject to the U.S. tax if brought back to the U.S.”

Albert acknowledged certain tax advantages related to Covidien’s overseas cash that explain why Medtronic is moving its headquarters. If Medtronic were to remain in the United States after the deal, Covidien’s overseas profits would be newly subject to U.S. taxes if invested in this country, Albert said.

In a “Guide to Tax Inversion” distributed by the company Wednesday, Medtronic stated: “This deal gives us access to additional cash from Covidien’s overseas operations that will be used to reward shareholders, grow business and invest in innovation. As a result, we are committing to investing $10 (billion) in the U.S.”

Medtronic says it will continue paying federal income taxes on all money earned in the United States, plus state and local taxes. The company also will continue to pay a new excise tax on the sale of medical devices in the U.S., which helps fund expanded health insurance coverage through the federal Affordable Care Act.

But Kleinbard said that cash is fungible, so using the Covidien cash in the U.S. is effectively the same thing as using the Medtronic cash.

“Moreover, the Medtronic cash can be used to fund stock buybacks or lent to the new Irish parent company after the acquisition,” he said. “The end result is the same — they don’t pay U.S. taxes.”

This report contains information from The Associated Press and Dow Jones Newswires.

Read or Share this story: http://www.sctimes.com/story/money/2014/07/17/medtronic-reacts-public-criticism/12808557/