Gov. John Hickenlooper on Thursday said he wants to bring a “nonpartisan focus” on job creation, the economy and small business in the 2014 session after a contentious year which saw his popularity plummet.

Hickenlooper, a Democrat who is up for re-election next year, said one way to gain ground is simply “doing a better job of listening.”

The tragedies Colorado endured this year — fatal wildfires and massive flooding, along with a shooting last week at Arapahoe High School — have brought people together, the governor said.

“I think there is a different sense of community right now even among legislators. Now, we’ll see how strong that is and whether it breaks down,” he said. “It’s an election year. I’m not blind.”

Hickenlooper, who a year ago was expected to coast to re-election, now has a field of at least five Republicans challenging him for the job. Recent polls have shown that about 49 percent of Coloradans do not believe he deserves a second term.

Hickenlooper talked about the 2014 session during a half-hour interview with reporters inside his Capitol office. He was asked about oil and gas development, the Affordable Care Act and the future of education with the failure of a tax hike proposal in November.

Hickenlooper’s support for tougher gun laws introduced brought the first wave of discontent.

“I don’t see us introducing new gun laws this session, but I certainly wouldn’t support repealing those laws we passed last (session),” he said. “That said, if there is a way to improve them, that you have some way they work better or do a better job than what was their intention, then I think we should sit down and have the discussion.”

The governor also addressed the question of whether school staffs should be armed.

“I’m not sure we should be telling school boards and school districts how to run their schools,” he said. “It’s worth pointing out we had an armed officer at (Arapahoe) and he was at the shooter in two minutes. That’s amazing to me.”

Hickenlooper upset Coloradans on the left and the right with his decision to give death-row inmate Nathan Dunlap an indefinite reprieve. He said he is unaware of any death penalty bills being introduced.

The governor and the Democratic-controlled legislature were accused of waging a war on rural Colorado in the 2013 session, in part because of a new law that doubles the renewable-energy target for rural electric cooperatives. A Republican bill to be introduced January would reduce the target from 20 percent to 15 percent.

Hickenlooper said if there is a demonstrated need that a concession is “going to help them succeed, we should sit down and have that discussion.”

Hickenlooper was criticized for not vetoing any bills in the last session, which Republicans called a rubber stamp of his party’s agenda.

“I’ll find something to veto” this year, he joked. ” I guarantee it.”

Kurtis Lee : 303-954-1655, klee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kurtisalee