Customer representatives answer phone calls Tuesday, Oct. 22, 2013, at the Colorado Springs call center for Connect for Health Colorado. (The Gazette, Christian Murdock)

An ironic twist could leave some Coloradans paying more for health insurance next year even though average rates in parts of the state, including Colorado Springs, fell slightly.

The lesson, observers say: Start shopping, and soon.

Open enrollment - that time of the year when people without employer-based or government health insurance can switch plans or purchase new ones - begins Saturday.

For Colorado's health insurance exchange, Connect for Health Colorado, that means year two for offering a place to browse and purchase health insurance made mandatory by the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

"Window shopping" at the online exchange began this week. Exchange officials say several upgrades and improvements have been made to their website, including a streamlined online application and tools allowing people to search which doctors and medications are covered under every plan.

No longer will people have to toggle between the exchange (which sells private insurance) and the state's Medicaid site because it is all combined into one form.

And guiding people through it all will be a new avatar named "Kyla."

But other, potentially costly differences pepper this year's three-month open enrollment season, which is half as long as the last session. Questions abound about how many people will embrace the process in its second year, on and off the exchange.

One thing is certain: Coloradans have just one month to get a plan if they want that coverage to start Jan. 1.

Pick one after Dec. 15, and it won't start until later in 2015 - creating a coverage gap.

"Connect for Health Colorado probably has their work cut out for them," said Jeff Bontrager, with the Colorado Health Institute. "It's going to be some harder-to-reach populations this year."

Buyer beware

In many cases, doing nothing may prove costly.

Most Coloradans who have private insurance coverage can opt to do nothing this enrollment period and stay covered - a process called automatic renewal.

But if they received federal subsidies to ease their monthly payments, they might end up shelling out an average of 77 percent more in out-of-pocket costs in 2015 should they keep their current plans, exchange officials say.

That's because insurance rates dropped.

"That picture looks a whole lot different this year," said Adam Fox with the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative.

Colorado's rates for next year rose an average of 0.71 percent in the individual market on and off the exchange, but many plans' prices actually took a nose dive. Count El Paso and Teller counties among areas seeing a decrease: 2015 rates here fell an average of 0.2 percent.

That affects how much federal financial assistance residents can get. If certain rates drop, so do subsidies.

This year, 2015 rates for one company in particular - Colorado HealthOP, a nonprofit insurance cooperative - are far lower across much of the state than in 2014.

As a result, the amount of subsidy assistance available for 2015 dropped an average of $31, to $231 a person.

That amount varies from person to person because it's based off several factors, including income and location. The types of plans customers pick do not affect how much they receive in subsidies.

In any case, Coloradans need to shop to save, exchange officials say.

"We think that if people take the time to shop and look for a plan that meets their needs, that they'll be able to find something that fits within their budget," said Curtis Hubbard, an exchange spokesman.

He pointed to calculations done by the exchange: In 2014, the average share of costs paid by consumers after subsidies were applied was $161.79. Those same people, keeping those same plans with the revised subsidies could pay an average of $287.01, in part, because some those plans' baseline rates are increasing, according to the analysis.

Meanwhile, people may pay less out of pocket if they find a plan with cheaper baseline rates.

"It's certainly worth it to take 20 minutes, 30 minutes and pull out a pencil and a calculator and just see what's available to you," said Vincent Plymell, spokesman for the Colorado Division of Insurance.

Understanding plans

Experts say price shouldn't be the only consideration when purchasing insurance.

Some plans only cover certain procedures or prescriptions, meaning anyone with a chronic condition should carefully decipher which plans cover which medications.

A plan also might limit doctor choices - placing the onus on shoppers to ensure their doctors are "in network," or covered by each plan.

Many insurers have narrowed their networks in recent years, raising the risk that unwitting consumers may be caught unable to see their preferred doctor, said Tara Smith, a rate analyst for the Colorado Division of Insurance.

"This is certainly not a phenomenon that is unique to Colorado," Smith said. "It's a mechanism for managing costs and remaining competitive."

For example, carriers in Colorado boosted the number of plans called EPOs - small-network plans that pay nothing to outside doctors, rather than reduced rates for out-of-network visits - in 2015. Other plans have become more restrictive, such as in mountain towns where high plan prices gained notoriety in 2014.

Insurance companies have framed the strategy as a means to lower costs. They have only a few means to control their risk pools. For example, insurance companies can no longer deny coverage to people with pre-existing conditions. Thus, many insurance companies have adjusted networks for better negotiated rates, meaning lower monthly premiums for policyholders.

Connect for Health Colorado plans to increase the number of people in its Colorado Springs-based call center, while possibly paying millions more in overtime costs. It projects a $4 million cost overrun at the call center through June 30 because more people are expected to shop for new plans amid spreading word of the reduced subsidies, Hubbard said.

The exchange also plans to open a storefront location Thursday in Colorado Springs to offer free, walk-in enrollment help.

Avoiding the issue entirely - going without insurance - has its costs, too.

Penalties for going without some form of coverage - such as private insurance, Medicaid, Medicare or Tricare - increase in 2015, barring an exemption.

People without coverage next year must pay $325 or 2 percent of their yearly household income - up from the $95 or 1 percent that will be assessed come tax season for being uninsured in 2014.

The question remains: Will that motivate more people to sign up?

"There's been a lot of questions as to whether the penalty is enough of an incentive for people to actually purchase insurance," Bontrager said.