RAISE YOUR VOICE: Share your own opinion online at dallasnews.com/sendletters. Sign up for Sounding Off or submit a guest column (and include your full name and contact information) by visiting dallasnews.com/voices.

Do you think the Health and Human Services Commission should move forward with the plans to deeply cut Medicaid therapy rates? Why or why not?

Charlie McReynolds, Garland: It appears to me that these groups against these cuts are a little late. They should have been before the Texas Legislature hollering when the bill was in committee and later up for a vote. To “Johnny come lately” and file suits and try to get some judge to change the wishes of the body that makes our laws is like chasing the goat that you let out of the pen. Medicaid serves a good purpose, but has been abused so by providers as well as users, that the cuts seem necessary to me. Let the law go into effect Oct. 1.

Joe Chamberlain, Heath: It is difficult for me to comprehend how it is financially justifiable to remove funds from Medicaid, which helps the poorest and neediest among us. A little money spent on speech, physical or occupational therapy to create a better quality of life for the truly needy is a good thing. In closing, the elderly needy have paid their dues, the disabled children are the truly innocent. What else should we be doing for them — certainly not cutting funding. Do you think the average home health care worker is overpaid?

LaQueata Brown, Rowlett: It’s so sad that the budget for the Medicaid health services are being cut soon. Many people use those services to get well and try to maintain health. I hope that our lawmakers review the lawsuit and maybe find a better way to budget the balance without making drastic cuts. If they have to cut services, they can cut smaller amounts like 3 percent to 5 percent per year off the budget instead of causing turmoil to the industry.

June Boyd, Heath: The Commission should be very careful in cutting Medicaid funding for therapy. The far-reaching ramifications of cuts will most likely reduce the number of people that can return to a decent quality of life, become functional again and increase the number that will need long-term assistance from other sources. The impact on other budgets to support people confined to nursing homes or other assisted living has the potential to surpass the therapy cuts.

Jennifer Luderman, Mesquite: These cuts for therapy services are typical of the mean spiritedness of the current Republican-dominated Texas legislature. There are billions of dollars sitting unused in the “rainy day fund” but in comparison to that amount $3 million is to be cut for services for the most vulnerable of Texans. Texas lags behind in spending on social services compared to other states and then even the little that is spent on helping low- income people is cut even further. Not withstanding the refusal of Gov. Greg Abbott and former Gov. Rick Perry to refuse Medicaid funds from the Federal government to obtain medical insurance for those poor who currently have no access to health care except in the emergency room. I see much hypocrisy in the pro-life agenda; as long as Texans remain unborn, they are protected, but after birth, then those who are born poor and disadvantaged are neglected and kicked to the curb to fend for themselves.

By cutting out needed therapy for the elderly and disabled, many problems will only get worse. By receiving therapy in their home, the elderly may remain active longer and be able to stay in their own home, which is much cheaper than the cost of nursing home care, which is paid for by Medicaid in the case of low-income elderly.

William P. Rice Sr., Rowlett: I don’t believe there should be any cuts in Medicaid therapy rates for those that really need it, provided they are legal citizens. And I believe there should be an increase in Medicaid money to pay for mental health therapy and treatment for our legal citizens. Guns don’t kill people. Mentally ill people with guns kill people.

Mary Grimaldo, Garland: I do think it is wrong to cut Medicaid funding, and I say that for several reasons.

The first reason is that people in low-income brackets need those services. Why take them away? Or make it more difficult to access these services? It makes no sense. Texas is at the bottom of the heap when it comes to any kind of health care, and I do not believe that is something to be proud of. Fewer and fewer doctors accept patients who rely on Medicaid because of the unrealistic benefits they pay.

Secondly, any funds that go to the public in the form of goods or services serve to stimulate the economy: The therapist receives a payment and then can pay rent, buy food or spend that money on gas or clothing. Every penny you take away is a penny out of the economy. If lawmakers are cutting funds here, it is because they are going to give them away somewhere else. And it will not be somewhere that will help the economy, I can guarantee.

Carole Dodd, Rowlett: They should not cut the funds to this very necessary program. Why is it these politicians think to always hurt the poor and children? I don’t understand these people who call themselves Christians. They don’t know the meaning of the word.

Ann Wilson, Garland: I have a simple question for our illustrious lawmakers: Why do you always target the neediest, the helpless, the most desperate among us? Never mind, I know the answer to that already: Because you can — they cannot fight back. You tell the rest of us here, and elsewhere, exactly where your priorities lay, and what you truly think about the residents of this state. We are nothing to you.

Barbara Broughton, Garland: Cuts in home health care averaging 18 to 20 percent for disabled children and poor elderly Texans is unacceptable. These are the people who need our help the most. Teaching them to care for themselves in their home is less expensive then in an institutional environment. We have a lot of wasteful government spending and we need to cut expenses, but not at the expense of those who cannot care for themselves.

Marie-Anne Schiffmann, Rockwall: I think the Commission should hold off on the proposed cuts to Medicaid and consider the implications of those cuts, not just in immediate political terms, i.e. “We made good on promises to trim the budget,” but in terms of their long-term effect on the lives of Texans.

The cuts affect the most vulnerable among us. People who can afford speech, physical and occupational therapy will still get those services. Less affluent people will do without. Can the Texas Legislature explain why those people, poor, minority or rural, are not worthy of help in the richest, most powerful country in the world?

Furthermore, in the immediate term, the proposed cuts would add therapists to the ranks of the unemployed, or cause them to leave Texas. In the longer term, those deprived of therapy will be unable to return to the workforce. Looking at no-bid contracts signed by the Legislature might just find those $350 million we need to trim.

Tony Torres, Garland: No one should be surprised by the cavalier attitude shown by the Health and Human Services Commission. The Commission’s position on reducing care for the poor elderly and disabled children is but a reflection of our state leaders. The Texas leaders’ Marie Antoinette attitude of “let them eat cake” is a sickness that has infected our anti-government politicians. For a state that proclaims itself as being Christian, the every day practices and attitudes belie that belief. Elections do have consequences and this latest display by a Commission appointed by our current state leaders is a testament to that. It brings back memories of Nazi Germany and its attitude toward the sick and elderly as not being productive to the Third Reich.

Angel-Light Love, Garland: Ever since I read of this in The Dallas Morning News, I’ve been so appalled and disgusted that I’ve been rendered almost speechless about it. The highest elected officials in the state of Texas and their appointees and hirelings refused to expand Medicaid because they disapproved of the Affordable Care Act (aka Obamacare), and now they want to sabotage care for disabled children and poor elderly. Unbelievable.

Norma Bell, Garland: It’s absolutely absurd to cut off funding for special needs children who are so in need of the expertise of the therapists who are trained to help them in so many ways. I am sure that if Abbott, the devout Christian, would accept Medicaid funds from the Federal government, cutting off assistance for this critical service to needy children would not even come up for discussion.

Wait until you see you new Parkland tax bill in October. All unnecessary if Medicaid funding was accepted by our governor.

Joan Ream, Heath: If cost rates are merely reduced, resulting in a saving of a whopping $175 million per year I’d like to know what the actual yearly bill to Texas taxpayers has been amounting to. These are tough economic times for everyone and the days of taxpayers’ deep pockets are over.

Cynthia Stock, Garland: The goal of many of these services is to maintain the highest level of wellness and function for people with debilitating chronic illness or disabilities of other etiologies. They serve to keep people at home rather than in institutionalized care. Isn’t that the most humane way to care for fragile populations? It would also seem more cost efficient to have therapies a given number of times per week vs. 24-hour care. It makes me wonder who involved in making these decisions stands to profit? In politics, it never seems to be about the good of the people, but rather the bottom line.

Stephen Raynor, Mesquite: Recently, I was in court assisting the mother of a young woman who was incapacitated at the age of 11 through a severe automobile accident where she suffered a permanent traumatic brain injury. Confined to a wheelchair, she mostly sleeps, when not being directly spoken to.

I was amazed to find out that Medicaid pays and provides 96 hours of weekly nursing. The government home health nurse enables her mother to work outside of the home and probably keeps her sane.

Some politicians in the U.S. have said let the church provide the services they say our government can no longer afford. Perhaps they should be specific and volunteer the name and address and telephone number of their church. We are incredibly lucky to be blessed to be citizens of the United States.

That said, we need to hire private investigators to root out fraud and abuse as I have been approached in the past by some folks that want a free ride. Wolves among the sheep. Perhaps through surprise home visitations. Perhaps through group homes. We should build many more mental illness facilities, to keep people working.

We are led by a governor, who uses a wheelchair due to an injury, who got $10 million for his injuries but who seems not to care for other people similarly disabled without compensation. I do not see how that is leadership.

Sara James, Garland: I don’t think they should make cuts in what Medicaid pays for disabled children and the poor elderly Texans’ therapies. Let’s look at other ways to save money, like Medicare fraud, food stamp fraud, welfare fraud, etc. Why cut benefits to the disabled and elderly when millions of other people are taking advantage of the system that was intended to help the helpless?

Lee Wilson, Garland: No. We need to cut money for abortion murderers but not for people who need help with therapies that affect everyday life.

Fill out my Wufoo form!

On Twitter:

@neighborsgo