Republican U.S. Presidential candidate and retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson takes a selfie with students in Detroit. Carson is doing well in recent national polls. But why? (REUTERS/Rebecca Cook)

He has compared Obamacare to slavery, thrown around words like bestiality and pedophilia while arguing against same-sex marriage and said our society resembles Nazi Germany.

He's basically the longest of long shots to run our country in 2017, and there are signs his nascent presidential campaign is struggling with this reality.

So why is retired pediatric neurosurgeon, political novice and presidential candidate Ben Carson near the top of almost every recent poll of the 2016 race?

A recap:

A Washington Post-ABC News poll out this week had Carson tied for sixth among Republican-leaning voters -- but in a statistical tie for the lead in the crowded field. He was at 7 percent alongside Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, while the leader, Jeb Bush, was at 13 percent.

A Fox News poll released Wednesday of likely GOP primary voters found Carson third among 16 candidates, at 11 percent. That's just behind Bush and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, each at 12 percent. Again, a statistical tie for the lead.

The Real Clear Politics average of national polls has Carson tied with libertarian-leaning Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul for fourth place overall.

The answer has less to do with Carson's skill as a candidate and more to do with his background and fortunate timing. Carson has arguably the best non-political background in the field, and he's running for president in an election in which there are so many candidates on the GOP side that it's going to be incredibly tough for one person to command much of a lead.

In contrast, around this time before the 2012 presidential elections, seven GOP candidates were in the race. Eventual nominee Mitt Romney led the field with 17 percent of the vote, according to the Real Clear Politics average. And even that was pretty low for a frontrunner.

At this point, any candidate who has a small, committed group of supporters is going to stand out. And Carson definitely has street cred among tea party supporters.

He earned star power and fueled presidential buzz in conservative circles back in 2013, when he criticized President Obama at a National Prayer Breakfast with the president sitting just a few feet again. Since then he's elevated himself to celebrity status among conservatives.

A Fox News poll of likely GOP voters found Ben Carson in the top four among tea party voters. (The Washington Post)

There's a big difference between getting 10 percent of the vote and competing to win states -- a far taller hurdle for a political novice like Carson. But being at 10 percent also means Carson will look like a contender until other candidates start actually rising from the mess of a crowded field that exists.

But we shouldn't expect that 10 percent support to dry up, no matter how badly his campaign struggles. After all, he got it with very little skill as a candidate, and the things that give him a niche today aren't really going away.