If you have been the victim of a disaster such as a fire, tornado, or flood, you know that the last thing on your mind is how it will affect your taxes. Unfortunately, if you forget to take timely action on your taxes, your misery could be compounded.

If you have been the victim of a disaster such as a fire, tornado, or flood, you know that the last thing on your mind is how it will affect your taxes. Unfortunately, if you forget to take timely action on your taxes, your misery could be compounded.

Disasters and taxes: What victims need to know

Disasters and taxes: What victims need to know

Just one day after an EF1 tornado ripped through a Fort Myers neighborhood, people are bracing for the third storm in just one week.

Orange caution signs are popping up all over the South Pointe neighborhood keeping people away from exposed nails and unsecured railings all left behind by an NWS-confirmed tornado.

"The furniture is tossed, the roofs are off the buildings, the porch is destroyed, and they said this was on the ground for only two minutes," said resident Robert Murray.

Two minutes too long for those impacted in Fort Myers.

"I'm usually out in blizzards and out in hurricanes, and this is far worse than those," he said.

The morning after Friday's tornado, debris can still be seen hauled away with the most extensive damage concentrated around Camelot Drive.

"Tornado just clipped the corner of that roof and tore it completely off, and it went airborne, and it hit this building over here," said resident Jack Morrison.

Neighbor Carolyn Gruett had her window blown out by the intense wind; an experience that has shaken her to the core. If you ask her, she'll tell you her guardian angel was looking out for her.

"I call her Edna after my mother. She was right here; she didn't get hurt."

With another powerful storm in the Saturday night/Sunday morning overnight forecast, others worry once again there'll be more damage.

"We've had two in a few days and a potential for a third one. That's pretty scary," said Murray.

Gruett said she'll stay home tonight but not on her own as she said her "little angel, Edna" will be with her.

The storm system is expected to roll through our area at around 3 a.m.