We’ve seen the images on the news. We’ve heard the reports. The “crisis at the border.” Refugee kids “streaming” into our country, portending “calamitous” consequences.

And I agree. Thousands of kids showing up at our doorstep without parents to take care of them is a crisis, though I think of it as one of humanitarian dimensions. What do we do with these children? What’s our responsibility to them, their undocumented status notwithstanding? What response is most consistent with our values as a country and a people? That’s a complicated question, and one that reasonable people can disagree about.

But to get the full measure of what’s transpiring at the border, I think you have to look at both sides of the line. The angry protestors, waving signs and flags, intent on driving these children back to where they came from without delay — they illustrate a second crisis in this country, only this one is of a political or ideological nature. Here’s what I mean.

[SEE: Cartoons on Immigration]

Think about the kinds of issues that affect you everyday. Maybe they have to do with your job. Or your paycheck. Maybe they have to do with health care or your mortgage costs. Or the school your kids go to. Or your car, and how it keeps breaking down.

These are immediate and at least to some extent economic concerns that impact the things you have to do to get through your day. And they’re the kinds of things that lots of us think about when we consider who to vote for. Is this candidate someone I can trust to, for example, focus on creating good jobs for people like me? Is this someone who believes families like mine should have health care they can afford? Will he or she take an interest in improving our schools, or are they more focused on other things?

Now think about those who are showing up at the border. Getting up, making a sign, getting in your car, joining a protest … those are things that take time and effort. That’s more than most of us do about any issue, no matter how important. But for these folks, making sure children don’t get into our country is so animating they’re out there on the ground, literally turning buses around.

[ READ: Time for Legislating, Not Race Baiting]

Are their values consistent with yours? Do you share their sense of urgency and priority? I think for most of us, whether we are Democrats or Republicans, the answer is clearly: no. Or there would be a lot more of us standing with them.

But because a small group of hard-right conservatives have taken it upon themselves to become a de facto border patrol, they are getting a massive amount of media coverage. And because they hail from the same pool of activists who are exercising a disproportionate amount of influence over the Republican party these days, they are also exerting a disproportionate amount of influence over national policy.

And that’s the second crisis I’m talking about. Because a small, vocal, angry, minority is doing more than just holding signs at the border. They’re blocking any effort to reduce gun violence. Defending policies that benefit the wealthy at the expense of the middle class and those lower down the socioeconomic ladder. Pushing to dismantle basic safety net programs. Trying to narrow the basic freedoms women, African-Americans and Latinos, and the LGBTQ community have fought long and hard to gain. And they’re the engine that drives us towards, and over, the fiscal cliff every few months, flirting with actual calamity.

[SEE: Cartoons about the Republican Party]

In a few months we have another election. By all accounts, Democrats have ground to make up to win back the House, and control of the Senate hangs in the balance. If more Republicans win campaigns, it is very likely we’ll have more representatives of the radical fringe arriving in Washington. And if that happens, our national policy will get pushed even further right, and even further away from the values that guide most Americans of both parties.

So it seems to me that while the solution to crisis number one at the border — how best to respond to the arrival of thousands of refugee children — is one well worth debating, the solution to crisis number two couldn’t be clearer. Stand up. Get to the political border. Make your voice heard.