Indiana Gov. Mike Pence says the new health care coverage plan is as affordable for citizens, fiscally sound for the state and a better, consumer-driven alternative than expanding traditional Medicaid. (Photo: Star File )

I read with interest the Oct. 22 op-ed in The Star (“Medicaid expansion hurts Indiana’s competitiveness”) comparing Indiana’s efforts to provide coverage to more Hoosiers through the popular Healthy Indiana Plan to the expansion of traditional Medicaid taking place in our neighboring state of Illinois. Allow me to set the record straight.

First, Indiana has not and will not expand traditional Medicaid as Illinois has done. Gov. Mike Pence has consistently stated publicly that Medicaid is not a program we need to expand, but one we need to reform. Traditional Medicaid’s shortcomings are well documented, as are Indiana’s successes with our alternative to traditional Medicaid, the Healthy Indiana Plan.

As a physician and health-care provider for the under-served, I have seen first-hand the growing problem of inadequate access to health-care services for our citizens on traditional Medicaid. We cannot and should not merely extend “coverage” to our most needy citizens, rather we need to expand access and improve our physician and clinic networks so our most needy have access to good quality care. Now, as secretary of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration, I strongly support the governor’s efforts to provide responsible health care options to low-income Hoosiers.

Hoosiers below or near the poverty line simply cannot afford to purchase a health insurance policy that costs around $5,000 to $6,000 per year. This cost represents about half of the $11,500 an individual at the poverty line earns annually.

The Healthy Indiana Plan was developed with this reality in mind. Members are responsible for contributing a few dollars each month into an account mostly funded by the state. They then use this account to pay for health-care costs. As with many private insurance plans, the consumer-driven design of the Healthy Indiana Plan requires personal responsibility and empowers members to take greater ownership of their health care. In this way, HIP prepares members to move off assistance and build a better life. Traditional Medicaid does not.

The Healthy Indiana Plan also reimburses providers at a much higher rate than traditional Medicaid, a roughly 30 percent increase across the specialties. This is the solution to increasing the size of our networks and improving overall access for clinical care.

It is also important to note that our most recent effort to use the Healthy Indiana Plan to cover more Hoosiers, which we call HIP 2.0, will not burden Hoosier taxpayers. Indiana hospitals, in partnership with the state, have agreed to help finance the state’s share of the cost of the program in perpetuity. And if the federal government cannot hold up its end of the financial bargain, then the deal is off.

Indiana’s solution stands in stark contrast to the one-size-fits-all, antiquated Medicaid approach that Illinois and other states have taken. For Medicaid to succeed going forward, it must be reformed. Indiana is seeking to do that by expanding its innovative, proven Healthy Indiana Plan.

Wernert is secretary of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1tUV4ON