Charity, it is said, begins at home. But as Tuesday's Wall Street Journal suggests, charity clearly ends with America's health insurance companies. As the Journal reports, insurers are battling charities and hospitals who have launched pilot programs to help pay for the health care premiums of lower-income Americans. But the carriers' campaign to prevent potentially sicker, more costly patients from becoming their customers isn't just cruel. As it turns out, the same insurers accusing hospitals of a conflict of interest are squeezing them using newly acquired billing services and increasingly limiting your choice of doctors to the physician practices they now own.

As the Journal explained, charities in states like California have realized that small monthly stipends could enable those earning too much (that is, over 138 percent of the federal poverty level) to qualify for Medicaid to afford the purchase of subsidized insurance of the state health care exchange. And in the states which rejected the Medicaid expansion, hospitals which will be losing out on disappearing funds for treatment of the uninsured are fast concluding that helping them buy coverage will help their own bottom lines:



A Better LA, a decade-old Los Angeles nonprofit, said last week it was signing up 50 low-income people for health plans in California's health-insurance marketplace. The charity, which said it has the blessing of the state agency overseeing the marketplace, will pay $50 to $100 a month to cover the share of the people's premiums not already financed by federal subsidies. Those 50 people are at the vanguard of a push that could shift the balance between hospitals and insurers across the nation. Nonprofits, including some hospitals, say paying premiums would ensure coverage for people currently uninsured who can't afford even a small monthly payment for health insurance.

"It is a conflict of interest for hospitals and drug companies to pay patients' premiums and cost-sharing for the sole purpose of increasing utilization of their services and products."

So far, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has offered contradictory guidance on charitable support which might the mix of the newly insured towards the unhealthy and so drive up premiums. But America's health insurers, who are spending $500 million just on local television ads in 2014 to win new customers during the enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act, are none too happy about that prospect. As Karen Ignani, president and CEO of America's Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), complained:It may be true that the prospect of thousands of new, potentially sicker and costlier policyholders could have some impact on the insurers' bottom lines. But their protests should be taken with a very large grain of salt. Thanks to the carriers' own conflicts of interest, those bottom lines look very healthy, indeed.

As Kaiser documented in April 2012 ("Conflicts Arise As Health Insurers Diversify"), insurers are rapidly acquiring physician practices, billing companies and research firms. Continue below the fold to read Kaiser's documentation.