Hospitals note uptick in ER visits post-Obamacare

Details Published on 03/25/2015 - 10:39 am Written by Hannah Esqueda

Debbie Hemker, senior vice president and area manager for Kaiser Permanente Fresno, said the hospital has seen a number of new patients who have no previous experience with primary care physicians who are now taking advantage of their medical coverage. Since the Affordable Care Act (ACA) took effect last year, hospitals across the Central Valley have seen a dramatic increase in the number of patients visiting their emergency departments.

According to annual reports from the Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development, the number of Valley patients paying for emergency department visits out of pocket has decreased across the board.

Hospital administrators attribute this to the simultaneous increase in residents having medical insurance through government programs like Medi-Cal.

“We are very pleased that so many formerly uninsured individuals and families now have access to coverage through Covered California and the ACA,” said Debbie Hemker, senior vice president and area manager for Kaiser Permanente Fresno.

The hospital has seen a number of new patients who have no previous experience with primary care physicians who are now taking advantage of their medical coverage. She said Kaiser is now facing the challenge of familiarizing them with how to navigate its integrated health care system of hospitals and physicians.

But while more patients having medical coverage through ACA and Medi-Cal is fundamentally a good thing, the Central Valley has too few physicians who accept those plans, said Kelley Sanchez, director of communications for Saint Agnes Medical Center in northwest Fresno. Already this fiscal year, the hospital has seen more than 55,000 ER patients, 6,000 more than the same period the previous fiscal year.

“On average, 52.5 percent of our ER volume is comprised of Medi-Cal patients, compared to 40.2 percent last year,” she said.

A majority of those patients are being seen for conditions that would typically be handled by primary care physicians. Due to the region's shortage, they are instead left to hospital emergency departments.

“Patients trying to get in and see their primary care physician are seeing wait times of six to eight weeks,” said Dr. Scott Whitlow, chairman and medical director for the emergency department at Kaweah Delta Medical Center in Visalia. “For most people that’s just too long.”

Whitlow said the emergency department at Kaweah is part of the California Emergency Physician medical group that has locations throughout the state. The group sees about 5 million patients a year but has observed a dramatic increase in patient volume in the last few months.

“From October to February, we have seen a 10- to 12-percent increase in volume at emergency departments,” he said. “That’s above and beyond what we expect seasonally.”

While an ineffective flu vaccination this season may have contributed to the spike in patients, Whitlow said it’s also likely the ACA's rush of newly insured patients has also led the change.

Since emergency rooms are meant as a last resort for patients, treating chronic conditions there makes little economic sense and further strains the system, said Sandra Celedon-Castro, Fresno Building Healthy Communities hub manager.

“It costs ten times more when someone goes through the emergency room when they need specialty care,” she said.

The advocacy group has been active in enrolling Fresno County residents in Covered California and Medi-Cal for the last several years and has spoken out against the reduction in coverage for the county's Medically Indigent Services Program (MISP). Before ACA took effect, the program covered both undocumented and low-income residents.

Fresno County reduced the MISP safety-net coverage as result of a predicted decrease in need as the ACA took effect. The program no longer covers undocumented residents, and residents must live at or below 138 percent of the federal poverty line in order to qualify for the no-share cost of MISP.

But while many former MISP users have moved on to state and federal plans, Celedon-Castro said there are still many residents without coverage who are falling through the cracks. These people don’t have primary care physicians and still come to emergency rooms, increasing wait times for others at Central Valley emergency facilities.

While most hospitals view the increase in patient volume at emergency rooms as a problem, it’s a sign of a job well done to Dr. Benny Benzeevi, chairman of Healthcare Conglomerate Associates (HCCA). The organization took over management for the cash-strapped Tulare Regional Medical Center in January 2014.

“We in Tulare have seen about a 30 percent increase in volume in the last year,” he said.

HCCA sees this increase as a sign that its efforts to turn around Tulare Regional have been effective.

Benzeevi said the increase in visits to the emergency department is a result of the community being more aware of their medical options and trusting the hospital to take care of their medical needs. Since taking over management last year, he said HCCA has revamped Tulare Regional's rural health centers and seen the facility climb out of the red. The hospital is now operating with a net profit of $4 million, he said.

“There's been a seismic shift in our approach to health care,” Benzeevi said. “We are focusing more on prevention rather than intervention.”

While the initial wave of newly insured is hitting the emergency departments first, Whitlow said there is reason to believe the industry will eventually settle down. Hospitals in Massachusetts, which experienced its own health care reform long before ACA, initially saw a similar pattern.

“Much of that volume went to their emergency departments before the primary care could catch up with patient demand,” he said. “This would not be unique to see emergency department volume go up because it is the easiest and fastest way to get care.”

To adapt to the changes, hospitals and health care districts will need to focus on increasing access to primary care physicians, Whitlow said. Rural health clinics will play a bigger role in helping treat patients and relieve pressure on emergency rooms. Kaweah Delta already has five clinics and plans to open an additional site in July, dedicated solely to chronic disease management.

“This facility will try and help [patients] manage their health and stay out of the emergency department,” he said. “We want to help them learn how to manage their condition long-term at home.”