By Bobby Harrison

Daily Journal Jackson Bureau

JACKSON – Gov. Phil Bryant’s appointment of Supreme Court Justice David Chandler to head the Division of Family and Children’s Services could put in jeopardy a $30 million lawsuit verdict for the state.

In October, the Mississippi Supreme Court upheld by a 4-4 margin a $30 million verdict for the state against drug company Sandoz. The case was decided by Rankin County Chancellor Thomas Zebert.

The drug maker has asked the state’s highest court to reconsider its decision. Final briefs from the state arguing that the case should not be overturned are due on Dec. 21.

Without Chandler on the Court, and if the justices vote the same on the request for rehearing as they did originally, the case and $30 million verdict would be overturned by a 4-3 margin.

Knox Graham, a spokesman for Bryant, said the governor did not look at court cases in appointing an executive director of children’s services.

“The governor did not consider past or pending decisions when he appointed Justice Chandler,” Graham said. “He identified the best person for the position and appointed him.”

At some point Byrant will name a replacement from the Northern District for Chandler. It is not clear whether the decision on the reconsideration of the Sandoz case will be made before the appointment is made. And it is not clear how the new justice would rule on the issue.

Mississippi Attorney General Jim Hood, who filed lawsuits against numerous companies claiming they artificially inflated the price of drugs being prescribed to Medicaid enrollees costing the state tens of millions of dollars, said he hopes the four justices who sided with the drug company will reconsider.

“We have such a strong case,” Hood said. “It was decided by a conservative, well-thought-of chancery judge. This was no run-away jury.

“It would be a shame for a state as poor as Mississippi to lose a $30 million verdict from a company that was cheating the state.”

Hood, with the help of private attorneys working on contingency fee contracts, including former Gov. Ronnie Musgrove, filed lawsuits against numerous drug companies as did the federal government and other states.

Other drug companies settled with Hood for a total of $147.6 million instead of going to trial. The state netted $117 million from the settlements with $30.6 million going for fees to the private attorneys working on the case and for expenses.

“You know we have a strong case or those companies would not have settled,” Hood said.

Sandoz and drug company Watson opted not to settle. A similar verdict was rendered against drug company Watson in Rankin County Chancery Court. The company also has appealed that decision to the Supreme Court. That case has not been ruled on yet by the justices.

The four justices who ruled in favor of overturning the verdict cited the drug maker’s argument that the state was warned that the average wholesale price, which is what the state based its reimbursement rates on, was artificially inflated. The drug company contended that the state had the responsibility to come up with another method to pay for the drugs.

The four justices who voted to overturn the verdict were Jess Dickinson and Randy Pierce from the Southern District and Josiah Coleman and Ann Lamar from the Northern District.

The three siding with Chandler to uphold the verdict were James Kitchens and Leslie King of the Central District and Michael Randolph of the Southern District.

Chief Justice William Waller Jr. did not participate in the decision.

Efforts to reach Chandler through the governor’s office and the Supreme Court were unsuccessful.

bobby.harrison@journalinc.com

Twitter: @bobbyharrison9