GOP candidates focus on Iowa caucus-goers

By Frank Holdmeyer

© Copyright Agri-Pulse Communications, Inc.

DES MOINES, Iowa, Nov. 1, 2015 -- Almost exactly three months before the Iowa caucuses on Feb. 1 and just three days after the GOP debate on Oct. 28, 10 Republican candidates for president of the United States took to the stage Saturday in Des Moines to present their case to Iowa caucus-goers.

The venue was the first-ever Growth and Opportunity Party, an event billed by Iowa's Republican Party as “thinking outside the box.” More than 2,000 people gathered at the Iowa State Fairgrounds to hear the candidates and visit the booths, many of which were decorated in Halloween themes.

Former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum, who was actually the last speaker of the day, was also the only speaker to reference agriculture in detail. Noting that he has been to all 99 counties in the state, he said “Iowa is under attack by the administration. With the Renewable Fuel Standard,





Barack Obama is ignoring the law and changing it to suit him. And as a result he is hurting Iowa agriculture and affecting our national security as well. Santorum said he voted for the RFS back in 2005 and “I support the RFS for one principle reason: We need to have as much a domestic supply of transportation fuel as possible and we need to have it grown here in the state of Iowa.”

The rest of the candidates often echoed the same themes: reducing taxes/eliminating the IRS, term limits for Congress, a stronger military, spiritual leadership, blocking the Iran nuclear deal, saving Social Security and Medicare, reducing regulations from Washington, and restoring friendships with our allies and making our enemies fear us.

Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul focused his remarks on the national debt and noted “people in Washington lack the courage to stop spending. We have the means to stop it. All funding expires each year. I would let Planned Parenthood funding expire” and dare the liberals to restore it. He said the GOP should be the party of the Bill of Rights if it wants to win the White House.

Ted Cruz, the junior senator from Texas, received a standing ovation for his comments on the recent GOP debate. “Stop letting left-wing liberals moderate Republican debates. How about if you have never voted in a Republican primary you don't get to moderate a Republican debate?”

Cruz pointed out key issues that were never mentioned in the debate such as Obamacare, the Waters of the U.S. rule, which he said is harming farmers and ranchers, the Clean Power Rule and other EPA regulations, ISIS, Iran and Common Core.

Departing from the format, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie took questions from the audience and in response to a question on energy noted that he supports the Renewable Fuel Standard and would implement even more energy options.

Christie also said his “number-one idea for uniting the country” would be to stand up for the men and women in law enforcement.

Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal told the crowd, “The idea of America is slipping away. Our allies don't trust us and our enemies don't fear us. I want to fight to save the idea of America. Our best days are ahead.”

The youngest of the candidates, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, said “we must turn the page as a party and a nation and elect new leaders.” He said he is running for president so future generations can do what his parents, who emigrated from Cuba, were able to achieve in the American dream. “If we keep doing what we are doing now we will be the first generation that leaves the country worse off for future generations. “

Mike Huckabee, a former Arkansas governor, promised: “Within a decade we will find a cure for cancer, heart disease, diabetes and Alzheimer's. If the country can send a man to the moon, cure polio, we can find a cure for these diseases.” Huckabee also declared, “The next president must be a spiritual leader for this country.”

Pledging to destroy Islam and rebuild the military, South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham, said he has never been more worried about the threats to our country. He said he would “hit our enemies before they hit us,” and “do whatever it takes” to beat ISIS.

Graham also criticized Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton saying “she is unfit to be commander in chief,” and claiming she lied to families of those killed in the 2012 Benghazi attack.

Jeb Bush spent most of his time touting his successes in the private sector and as governor of Florida. But he also said as president he would “push the power away from D.C and back to the states.” He advocated a balanced budget amendment and line item veto power for the president.





Like what you see on the Agri-Pulse website? See even more ag and rural policy news when you sign up for a four-week free trial Agri-Pulse subscription.





Bush would repeal what he called “the mind-numbing laws of the Obama administration,” specifically the Waters of the U.S. and Clean Power rules.

The only female candidate, Carly Fiorina also took aim at Clinton saying if she were to debate the former New York senator she “would be able to take every punch.” Fiorina also said, “I would never ask you to vote for me because I'm a woman, but because I'm most qualified.”

Fiorina called for zero-based budgeting to make every dollar accounted for. “We are at a point where the government is so big it is crushing us. We have to cut the government down to size and make it accountable.”

The two front-runners in the Iowa race --Donald Trump and Ben Carson -- did not attend.

#30

For more news, go to: Agri-Pulse.com