Once again, New York has marked the anniversary of that terrible day when savage men transformed lower Manhattan into a blood-stained battlefield.

Now that the commemorations are over, some of New York’s elected officials are pushing Congress to extend two key provisions of the Zadroga Health and Compensation Act, set to expire by 2016, for another quarter-century.

Like the original battle over the bill’s passage, this one is fraught with emotion and hyperbole: Rep. Jerrold Nadler claims that failure to approve the extension would be “a moral stain on this generation and the United States.”

Let’s be clear: Those heroic first-responders who rushed to Ground Zero and later became ill because of that selfless service deserve both financial compensation and unstinting care at public expense.

But the Zadroga Act is something else.

Because this act is virtually based on the unscientific assumption that any illness contracted by someone who lived and worked in lower Manhattan must have been caused by toxic dust at Ground Zero.

The name of the bill itself speaks to the problem. James Zadroga was a NYPD officer who died of a respiratory disease.

After an examination, the city’s chief medical examiner determined “beyond certainty of doubt” that Zadroga had died not from Ground Zero dust but from having injected ground-up prescription drugs into his blood vessels.

The ME, Dr. Charles Hirsch, later said he’d been subjected to intense political pressure to change his assessment.

Zadroga was far from the only one said to have contracted illnesses that couldn’t be linked to 9/11. Cesar Borja was another. He was reported to have died after ­putting in 16-hour shifts at Ground Zero.

It turned out he’d directed traffic for a few days several blocks away from the site and months after the ­attack.

A 2011 study published in the The Lancet, moreover, debunked the widely touted notion that Ground Zero toxins were causing “an epidemic” of 9/11-related cancers.

Americans are a generous people, especially toward those who suffer because of their public service to their fellow Americans.

But before we spend their money, we have an obligation to ensure we get the science right — so the money goes to those who deserve it.

From the start, science has taken a back seat to emotion in the debate over Ground Zero ­compensation.

Time to end it now.