This Week in Crain's: September 8, 2014 Listen to the Podcast or Download

Jennifer Cunningham was at the top of her game four years ago when she announced she would leave the lobbying business. Her stated reason: "to avoid even the appearance of a conflict" of interest that could be damaging to the political allies she had just helped get elected, Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Attorney General Eric Schneiderman.

Since deregistering as a lobbyist, however, Ms. Cunningham has remained as active as ever. She has represented health care businesses before Mr. Schneiderman and met with Mr. Cuomo on behalf of a lobbying group seeking to pass marriage-equality legislation, according to records obtained by Crain's. But she has operated largely in the shadows, maintaining her access to elected officials without having to disclose activities that could lead to unwanted attention.

Ms. Cunningham is part of a growing industry of strategic consultants who do not register as lobbyists yet nonetheless have close ties with New York politicians and represent clients (including elected officials) with interests before the government. These nonlobbyists—at firms such as SKDKnickerbocker, or SKDK, and BerlinRosen—get many of the lucrative paychecks accorded their registered peers without the hassles and scrutiny that come with having to disclose their frequent interactions.

And it's legal.

"It's a very fine line to walk," said Viveca Novak of the Center for Responsive Politics, which tracks money in lobbying and elections. "You end up having to trust that person. And you put your trust in how they are representing themselves."

'Gotcha' factor

Related 72 pages later...



The fine line that separates lobbying from other activities is defined under city and state laws as "any attempt to influence" legislation, executive orders, agency rules and regulations having the force and effect of law, and a host of other governmental actions. Registered lobbyists face paperwork requirements to comply with disclosure rules—and fines if they don't.

Strategic consultants, on the other hand, do not have to register, and regulators rarely flag cases of unregistered lobbying—something registered lobbyists often gripe about.

Still, just because a consultant meets with a lawmaker does not mean he or she is lobbying, legal experts say. Moreover, these consultants say they refrain from asking lawmakers to make policy decisions benefiting clients not only to avoid crossing into what's defined in law as lobbying, but also because they don't want to risk harming their close relationships with politicians.

That may seem counterintuitive. After all, to attract clients, traditional lobbyists often tout their access to lawmakers. But in an era of unprecedented media saturation, savvy politicians may curtail access for fear of unwanted attention from meeting with lobbyists.

"It's very cumbersome, and there's always the 'gotcha' factor," said Sid Davidoff, a longtime lobbyist who heads the New York Advocacy Association, a trade group. "Once you're in the system, you're under the watchful eye."

Leaving lobbying

Ms. Cunningham resigned as a principal at lobby shop Cordo & Co. in November 2010, but she stayed on as a partner at SKDK, a strategic consulting firm.

It was a career arc 20 years in the making.

Ms. Cunningham married Mr. Schneiderman in 1990. Their marriage ended in divorce six years later, but their political relationship continued to blossom.

After making a name for herself as chief political operative for health care workers' union 1199 SEIU, Ms. Cunningham was hired as the media and advertising director for Mr. Schneiderman's 2010 campaign for attorney general. She also helped Mr. Cuomo, whom she had befriended in the 1980s, win his gubernatorial race that year.

After the election, Ms. Cunningham abruptly resigned as a lobbyist. Observers believe the "appearance of a conflict" of interest she was hoping to avoid stemmed in part from a New York Times story six months earlier. That piece had raised questions about potential conflicts of interest between an elected official (Mr. Cuomo) and a lobbyist (Ms. Cunningham) who was also acting as a campaign adviser. In response, aides to then-Attorney General Cuomo said Ms. Cunningham "has never been paid by Andrew's campaign, nor has she ever lobbied him or his office on any matter whatsoever."

That response highlights the risks that lobbyists face, especially as their businesses diversify. Many lobbyists, including the Parkside Group, the MirRam Group and the Advance Group, also consult for campaigns—work that is disclosed in election filings. When they later report their lobbying meetings with elected officials, the firms face scrutiny for lobbying those they helped to elect.

Nonlobbyists don't face those problems. They make money by giving clients insight into the thinking of officials and the public—expertise that can help businesses make strategic decisions about how and when to advance their agendas.

Blurring the line

In Ms. Cunningham's case, however, she has indeed represented clients before the attorney general's office. She did so after deregistering as a lobbyist and during the tenure of Mr. Schneiderman, according to emails obtained by Crain's through a Freedom of Information Act request.

The emails show that Ms. Cunningham set up and attended a meeting in 2011 with Mr. Schneiderman and the leadership of a health care company, Castlight. Setting up meetings between clients and elected officials is a hallmark of lobbying, those in the business say. According to Mr. Schneiderman's office, the meeting was purely informational.

On another occasion, one Sunday morning this past February, Ms. Cunningham emailed Mr. Schneiderman and a top deputy of his at the attorney general's office seeking an urgent meeting for one of her clients, Hudson Valley hospital operator Health Quest. Mr. Schneiderman's office was in a position to play an advisory role in Health Quest's bid to form a partnership with a nearby bankrupt hospital.

"As you may know, there is a rival bidder and the bankruptcy court will be meeting shortly," Ms. Cunningham wrote the attorney general.

Ms. Cunningham added that approval of the partnership "would clearly be critical for Health Quest in order to avoid any problems with the [Federal Trade Commission]." Mr. Schneiderman's deputy quickly arranged a phone call with Ms. Cunningham.

Two days later, Ms. Cunningham informed Mr. Schneiderman that the company's CEO "asked me to pass along his thanks for your responsiveness and extreme professionalism."

"I had a good talk with him today," Mr. Schneiderman replied five minutes later.

Mr. Schneiderman's office says Ms. Cunningham's representation of Health Quest was not covered by lobbying laws because the attorney general does not have rulemaking authority on antitrust matters. It merely enforces but does not make the law.

The AG's office says few of Mr. Schneiderman's powers are actually under the purview of state lobbying law, suggesting that what might seem like lobbying to the layman—or even to a rival registered lobbyist—may not be.

Ms. Cunningham said: "I strictly adhere to the state's lobbying laws, and none of these activities constitute lobbying." A spokesman for the state's ethics watchdog agency, the Joint Commission on Public Ethics, declined to comment on any specific situations.

Mr. Schneiderman's office also noted that the conversation did not benefit Health Quest. The company withdrew its merger bid, which the attorney general's office had expressed strong concerns about.

Still, the exchange demonstrates how sophisticated nonlobbyists can operate in ways that might seem like lobbying: Ms. Cunningham continued to use her access to the attorney general on behalf of clients, despite having formally quit lobbying.

In fact, Ms. Cunningham remains so close an adviser to Mr. Schneiderman that the attorney general's office refused to share many emails between them in response to a Crain's open-records request. Ms. Cunningham is a "consultant" to the office—and should enjoy exemptions from disclosure granted to state employees—though she's not paid or contracted by it, the office said.

Lucrative nonlobbying

Strategic public-relations and consulting firms often maintain their closeness to politicians by keeping their official roles at arm's length. They work on behalf of campaigns or groups that are registered with the government as lobbying entities. These arrangements can prove lucrative and often have the same effect as direct lobbying.

"In a world where the ball is moving so fast, just buttonholing someone isn't always the key to success," said Bradley Tusk, a former top campaign aide to Mayor Michael Bloomberg who launched Tusk Strategies. "Sometimes tweets rather than lobbying can be more effective."

These firms appear to be growing rapidly and doing well financially. Unlike lobbying firms, however, they don't have to disclose their contracts with clients, so it's difficult to know exactly how well.

Newer firms with political connections include Metropolitan Public Strategies—launched by former top staffers of Mr. Schneiderman—and Tusk Strategies. Mr. Tusk's firm pulled in $1.29 million in 2011 from Wal-Mart for a campaign to help the company enter the New York City market. (The payments may be large in part because they include up-front costs incurred by the consultants, such as buying television airtime.) Firms such as Mr. Tusk's exert influence using social media, polling or television advertising, he said.

A now-bankrupt hedge fund paid SKDK $20,000 a month—more than double the retainer generally charged by registered lobbyists—the fund stated in June court filings. Another client, Success Academy Charter Schools, paid SKDK $519,000 in 2011, according to the nonprofit's tax returns.

In 2011, an umbrella group, New Yorkers United for Marriage, paid SKDK $1.8 million to help pressure elected officials to pass marriage-equality legislation, which Mr. Cuomo supported. Ms. Cunningham was hired, reportedly with Mr. Cuomo's blessing, as the lead consultant for the group and even met with the governor as part of a strategy session in the Capitol's Red Room, his schedule shows. But only the group itself was registered to lobby.

BerlinRosen rises

Among the city's most successful strategic consultants in recent years is BerlinRosen. The firm was started in 2005 by Jonathan Rosen and Valerie Berlin, Park Slope neighbors and former campaign operatives for state Senate Democrats. BerlinRosen has become the city's go-to press shop for progressive causes, growing from the two founders to more than 50 employees. In 2013, BerlinRosen received nearly $4 million just from its roster of labor clients, according to federal labor records.

The company was instrumental as a media and policy consultant in helping Bill de Blasio, another Park Slope neighbor, become New York's 109th mayor.

Like Ms. Cunningham, Mr. Rosen is not a registered lobbyist. Yet he regularly meets with government officials. The mayor's schedule from his first five months in office shows Mr. Rosen was in at least nine meetings and on two calls.

Shortly after Mr. de Blasio became mayor, Mr. Rosen's firm was also hired to advance one of the mayor's pet causes: securing funding for universal prekindergarten. Rather than advocate directly on behalf of the mayor, however, the company represented a nonprofit group set up to lobby on the issue. That organization, Campaign for One New York, was founded by former de Blasio campaign manager Bill Hyers to lobby the state for pre-K funding. Campaign for One New York paid BerlinRosen $363,000 through June, according to its lobbying disclosure.

In helping to control the media message around the pre-K funding effort, BerlinRosen acted as if it were part of the administration. The company returned reporters' calls made to the City Hall press office about pre-K, while Mr. Rosen closely advised government officials on pre-K talking points, according to email messages obtained through a records request.

'Planning' meetings

For example, in January, Mr. Rosen forwarded a blog post published by The Nation to Mr. de Blasio's budget director, calling it a "great piece" they should "talk from" that day. It was similar to pre-K talking points distributed by the firm a day earlier.

Since pre-K funding was secured in the state budget in late March, Mr. Rosen has sat in on administration "planning" meetings at City Hall. Campaign for One New York is now expected to advocate on behalf of other issues important to the mayor; Mr. Rosen has said that likely includes Mr. de Blasio's plan to build and maintain 200,000 units of affordable housing during the next decade.

BerlinRosen also represents developers Forest City Ratner and Two Trees Management, potentially putting the firm on both sides of a contentious issue: how much affordable housing must be part of residential projects. Two Trees clashed with de Blasio officials on that issue last winter but ultimately resolved the dispute.

BerlinRosen understands how issues play out in the public sphere, its clients say. Bob Master, a political director of the Communications Workers of America District 1, a BerlinRosen client, said the firm's value for his union is its public-relations prowess.

"They know how things are going to play in the media, or how to find the leverage points in a particular situation," Mr. Master said. "It has nothing to do with lobbying."

Get Crain's Morning Insider Sign up for the Morning Insider email and receive political news and musings every morning at 6 a.m. More Newsletters ›

Comments