Rep. George Miller to retire after 40 years East Bay House veteran leaving legacy of reform

















Photo: Mike Kepka, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 5 Caption Close Image 1 of 5 Rep. George Miller, D-Martinez, was elected to Congress in 1974. Rep. George Miller, D-Martinez, was elected to Congress in 1974. Photo: Mike Kepka, The Chronicle Image 2 of 5 Rep. George Miller, D-Martinez, gets a hug from Orinda City Councilwoman Amy Worth at his Richmond headquarters before announcing his retirement. Miller will serve through 2014. Rep. George Miller, D-Martinez, gets a hug from Orinda City Councilwoman Amy Worth at his Richmond headquarters before announcing his retirement. Miller will serve through 2014. Photo: Mike Kepka, The Chronicle Image 3 of 5 President Bill Clinton gets a hug from Sen. Barbara Boxer after his speech on oil drilling as Reps. George Miller (left), Rep. Lois Capps, Rep. Sam Farr and Dr. Silvia Earle cheer during the president's visit to Cannery Row in June 1998. less President Bill Clinton gets a hug from Sen. Barbara Boxer after his speech on oil drilling as Reps. George Miller (left), Rep. Lois Capps, Rep. Sam Farr and Dr. Silvia Earle cheer during the president's visit ... more Photo: Michael Maloney, SFC Image 4 of 5 After more than 40 years of service, United States congressman, George Miller poses for a staff pictures after announcing that he is retiring and will not run again for office during a press conference at this Richmond headquarters on Monday Jan. 13, 2014 in Richmond, Calif. less After more than 40 years of service, United States congressman, George Miller poses for a staff pictures after announcing that he is retiring and will not run again for office during a press conference at this ... more Photo: Mike Kepka, The Chronicle Image 5 of 5 After more than 40 years of service, United States congressman, George Miller receives a hug from his son George Miller IV, before announcing that he is retiring and will not run again for office during a press conference at this Richmond headquarters on Monday Jan. 13, 2014 in Richmond, Calif. less After more than 40 years of service, United States congressman, George Miller receives a hug from his son George Miller IV, before announcing that he is retiring and will not run again for office during a press ... more Photo: Mike Kepka, The Chronicle Rep. George Miller to retire after 40 years 1 / 5 Back to Gallery

Washington -- Bay Area Rep. George Miller, a top ally of House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and author of landmark legislation on the environment, health care and labor issues, said Monday that he will retire after a 40-year career in Congress.

Miller, 68, said he ran for Congress in 1974 to end U.S. involvement in Vietnam and pass universal health care. When the Affordable Care Act passed in 2010, "that was mission accomplished for me," Miller said in explaining his surprise announcement.

In a nod to the gridlock in Washington, the Richmond native and Contra Costa County Democrat said that "there are venues outside of Congress that are more exciting to me." He singled out education reform as an area in which he's particularly interested.

Miller said that only 50 people have ever served longer in Congress than he has. When he realized that, he said, he knew it was "time to come home. I didn't want to just be there to be there. I don't want to play on the taxi squad."

Miller's retirement after the November election isn't likely to hurt his party's chances of retaking the House, as his seat is safely Democratic. But it will leave California and Pelosi, D-San Francisco, without one of their most effective and outspoken members. Miller was considered Pelosi's closest confidante.

She called Miller "a model of the serious, substantive and successful legislator," and said he has been "a close friend since my first days in the House."

No endorsement yet

Competition for the rare open seat in Congress could be intense. On Monday, state Sen. Mark DeSaulnier, D-Concord, became the first of what will probably be several candidates to declare his candidacy.

At a news conference in his Richmond district office, Miller said he wasn't sure whether he would endorse anyone, saying only, "There's a lot of talent out there."

His successor will face a challenge in replacing Miller's influence on the issues that he cared about most in Congress: labor, education reform and the environment.

It will take "years for whoever follows George to get up to speed," said Greg Feere, CEO of the Contra Costa Building and Construction Trades Council, an umbrella group for more than two dozen unions.

"I understand it. I accept it," Feere said of Miller's retirement. "But I really don't like it."

As one of the most liberal members of Congress, Miller cast himself as a champion of the working class and poor, pushing issues ranging from school lunches to low wages at Walmart. He has stayed at the forefront of Democrats' marquee economic issues in Congress, including his sponsorship of new legislation that would boost the federal minimum wage.

Miller has been a leading advocate for environmental groups' concerns and for Northern California on water issues. As chairman of the House Natural Resources Committee from 1991 to 1994, he helped pass the Central Valley Project Improvement Act, which increased water allocations for San Francisco Bay and the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta. He has said he spent the past 20 years defending that law, often clashing with California Democratic Sen. Dianne Feinstein when she backed agricultural water users.

Miller also pushed through the California Desert Protection Act in the early 1990s, expanding Death Valley and Joshua Tree national parks and creating a new Mojave National Preserve.

Educational focus

On education, Miller worked closely with former President George W. Bush to write the No Child Left Behind Act, which sought to hold school districts and states accountable for student achievement. Bush nicknamed Miller "Big George," but Miller became disillusioned after the Bush administration failed to fund the law as he had hoped.

Miller is now the top Democrat on the Education and the Workforce Committee, where as chairman from 2007 to 2011 he was a main architect of the Affordable Care Act.

Miller inherited his liberal instincts from his father, George Miller Jr., a former state senator and a leader of the California Democratic Party. The younger Miller entered politics in 1969, losing a special election to fill the state Senate seat that was left open when his father died. He then got his law degree at UC Davis while serving as legislative assistant to state Sen. Majority Leader George Moscone.

Few major challenges

In 1974, with the Republican Party in shambles after the resignation of President Richard Nixon, Miller was elected to the House amid a wave of idealistic young Democrats known as "Watergate babies." He was 29 years old.

He has seldom faced major challenges since, usually winning re-election with 70 percent of the vote or more.

Spurning the trappings of power, Miller for more than 30 years has served as landlord of a rundown group house on Capitol Hill that he shares with fellow Democratic lawmakers. Dubbed Omega House and replete with broken chairs and windows covered with sheets, the house is the basis for a new Amazon television series, "Alpha House."

Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., one of the house's tenants, tweeted Monday that he is looking for a new roommate with an "unmatched legislative record" who loves cold cereal.

Miller said he looks forward to one final year in Washington, "fighting the good fight and then working in new venues on the issues that have inspired me. What a wonderful experience."