Buy Photo Edgewood attorney Patrick Hughes, a partner at DBL Law in Crestview Hills, is expected to be elected chairman of the Kentucky Democratic Party on Saturday. (Photo: Enquirer file)Buy Photo Story Highlights Party head Daniel Logsdon stepped down Saturday

Hughes has close ties to both Gov. Steve Beshear and Jack Conway, the party's nominee for governor.

Hughes said Ky. Dems are united heading into statewide elections

Northern Kentucky's role in this year's governor's race just got a whole lot more interesting.

Edgewood attorney Patrick Hughes was elected chairman of the Kentucky Democratic Party Saturday afternoon at a meeting of the party's state central executive committee in Frankfort. The Enquirer had reported Friday that the move was expected to happen.

Hughes has close personal and professional ties to both outgoing Gov. Steve Beshear and to Attorney General Jack Conway, the party's presumptive nominee for governor in the November election. Beshear spoke in favor of Hughes at the meeting as well as Conway's running mate, state Rep. Sannie Overly.

Daniel Logsdon, KDP chairman and executive director since 2010, announced his resignation at the meeting, and the 51-member executive committee moved swiftly to elect Hughes as party chairman. It is expected to hire an executive director to manage day-to-day operations.

Hughes said the smooth transition signifies a party united as the election season gets underway. In November, Kentuckians will elect statewide officers, including a new governor.

"It's an exciting time for Democrats in Kentucky. We're going to be strongly unified with experienced, competent candidates," Hughes said. "We've got a great message, great people to convey the message, and there's going to be party unity."

It's also an exciting time for Northern Kentucky: political observers couldn't recall the last time, if ever, a Northern Kentuckian chaired either state political party.

"We're delighted and excited to to have somebody from Northern Kentucky (lead the party)," said Fort Mitchell Democrat Milly Diehl, a member of the executive committee. "It's another example of the more important role that Northern Kentucky is taking in the statewide political process."

As party chairman, Hughes will advocate for Conway and all Democratic candidates for statewide office, help raise money for the party, and act as the public face and spokesman of the party.

He struck an aggressive tone right out of the gate Saturday, and he indicated that Kentucky Democrats will run on the recent accomplishments of Democratic statewide officeholders such as Beshear and Conway:

"We're going to be talking about jobs, economic development, education - and we're going to have the track record to do that with credibility," he said. "Right now, the Republicans are talking about right-to-work, but we're going to talk about putting people back to work, and we have the track record to prove it."

Hughes, 45, is a father of two and a partner at DBL Law in Crestview Hills, where his work has focused on government, economic development, banking and health care.

Previously: Attorney's victories helped pave the way for health care reforms

In 2013, Hughes successfully defended the state against lawsuits from the tea party movement which sought to halt Kentucky's implementation of the Affordable Care Act and expansion of Medicaid. And in 2011, he worked as Conway's chief deputy, running the day-to-day operations of the Attorney General's Office while Conway sought re-election.

Hughes got his start in politics and law by clerking for former U.S. Sen. Wendell Ford, where he first met both Diehl and Conway. He later worked as general counsel in the Kentucky Finance and Administration Cabinet before returning to Northern Kentucky and entering private practice in 1997. He has never held elected office, though he ran for Kenton County judge-executive in 2002.

Hughes grew up in Fort Wright and is the son of Terry Hughes, Covington city engineer for more than 45 years.

His election as KDP chairman puts Kenton County square in the crosshairs of this year's governor's race: state Sen. Chris McDaniel, a Taylor Mill Republican, is running for lieutenant governor on a ticket with Agriculture Commissioner James Comer.

Should the pair win their May primary, they would face Conway and Overly in November.

Hughes' election also means Greater Cincinnati has become something of a hotbed for Democratic politics: David Pepper of Anderson Township was elected chairman of the Ohio Democratic Party in December.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1D6iXVt