Richard Miller, left, chief technology officer, and Brian Rhea, chief product officer, and their Mocavo coworkers help do the legwork for genealogists. (Mark Leffingwell/Daily Camera)

Genealogy tips Interested in learning more about your family history? Genealogist Michael Leclerc offers these suggestions for people curious about using Mocavo: Ask around. At family gatherings, ask family members all the names, cities and dates they can remember, and begin writing down the information. If your grandparents are still alive, you can easily go back 100 years just by asking them information about their parents, Leclerc says. Explore website's basic and advanced search options. Play around with how much information you search with. Sometimes, a name you think is uncommon was very common during another time period, and a date and city will be needed. Other times, records might be patchy, and inputting too-specific information can leave out useful information. Search again. With 1,000 new databases added daily, you might think you've hit a dead end, but that doesn't mean that info won't be there in, say, three days. Don't believe every story you hear. Family tales have a way of changing through the generations, Leclerc says. "Take all of the stories and put them together and look for information," he says. "The truth, in my experience, is always a little bit of each story. And the adventure and the fun is finding information to show what those stories really are."

After 39 years of hunting, Pat Roberts finally had a breakthrough.

The Boulder woman knew her husband was related to a "John Morton." But what no one knew for sure was whether it was the same John Morton who signed the Declaration of Independence.

"I tried every trick that I'd learned over the years and could not come up with the answer," she says.

Finally, she found that one sliver of information that filled in the last hole: Their John Morton had been a planter in Virginia with 17 children, eight of whom served with him in the Revolutionary War.

Not the John Morton.

Although it didn't have the celebrity ring to it, this discovery was even more exciting to Roberts. Because it took her back to Jamestown in the 1600s. And it answered the question that had nagged her for nearly four decades.

Roberts is a past president of both the Boulder Genealogical Society and the Colorado Council of Genealogical Societies.

As the leaves continue falling, family trees are growing; this time of year is busy for people who are interested in genealogy. History hunters, like Roberts, agree the holidays are an ideal time to start collecting information about your family, because relatives gather and can share stories, names, dates and past family locations.

Roberts says searching for historical information today is dramatically different than when she started, before personal computers. She visited libraries, museums and sent snail-mail letters to various names and addresses, hoping someone would answer -- eventually.

Today, she says she can accomplish in two weeks what used to take her two years.

Roberts says she "could not live" without websites such as Ancestry.com, Familysearch.org (made free through the Mormon church, boasting millions of rolls of microfilm), FindAgrave.com (with millions of gravesites), Fold3.com (original historical military records) and, more recently, Mocavo.com.

Mocavo, which aims to be the world's largest free genealogy search engine, is based in Boulder.

Got a name you want to learn more about? Type it into the search engine and access about 135,000 databases of information, spanning newspaper articles, 30,000 high school yearbooks, birth registers from 300 years ago, the social security index and more -- plus 1,000 new databases added every day.

Scour the information yourself for free, or sign up for a subscription of $80 per year to refine and automate the searches.

Roberts has a full subscription. And because of the website, she says, she had another breakthrough last summer. While looking at a will abstract, she found a name she'd been seeking for years: Francis Shores Thompson. Roberts had been searching for a Francis Shores but had been missing the second last name.

History of the history collector

More info Boulder Genealogical Society: bouldergenealogy.org Colorado Council of Genealogical Societies: cocouncil.org Mocavo: Mocavo.com

Cliff Shaw, of Boulder, founded Mocavo in 2011. His interest in genealogy started in 1997, when he was a freshman at the University of Colorado-Boulder, after his grandmother mailed him some papers of family history.

"I was completely fascinated -- for about a week," he says. "I went online to find out more information, but there was very little online to find."

He decided to start his own free online community to share historical information, GenForum. As the name implied, it was a large message-board site, organized by more than 100,000 different surnames.

After he sold the website, Shaw says, he founded a variety of other Boulder-based companies, all focused on genealogy, until he decided to take it in a "radically different" direction with Mocavo.

"Bringing content from the offline world, especially the historical offline worlds, is very expensive -- microfiche film, really old fragile books -- they're expensive to scan," Shaw says.

He wanted to create a way for people to access that information for free, unlike other genealogy websites, like Ancestry.com, which charge fees. A one-year membership on that site ranges from about $200 to $400, depending on the level of access.

Shaw says Mocavo offers more databases than Ancestry.com and boasts the largest selection of searchable yearbooks online.

In fact, that's how he uncovered his great-grandfather's Texas yearbook entry from 1909.

Mocavo will present an "educational series" workshop to the Boulder Genealogical Society from 6:30 to 7:15 p.m. Jan. 7 at the Frasier Meadows Retirement Community, 350 Ponca Place, in Boulder. The event will feature genealogist Michael Leclerc.

Leclerc has been in the business of genealogy for 20 years, first at the New England Historic Genealogy Society, the largest and oldest genealogy society in the nation. He left to join Mocavo.

"In the next few weeks with all of the holidays, there are a lot of family gatherings," Leclerc says. "And if there's anyone who's interested in genealogy, it's the perfect time to ask your family members questions."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Aimee Heckel at 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/@Aimeemay.