A longtime reader with a deep interest in war history directs our attention to the amazing website of Dr. Jeff Gusky, who, we have been told by his publicist, seldom spends time at his Turtle Creek condo. Most days Gusky is either in rural Texas tending to patients in need of emergency care that’s usually far out of reach, or he’s on the road documenting what lies in, around and, yes, beneath far-flung locales. He’s documented some of those sojourns in two tomes thus far: 2008′s Bordertown: The Odyssey of an American Place and, four years earlier, Silent Places: Landscapes of Jewish Life and Loss in Eastern Europe about the Holocaust.

His latest work goes back even further — to World War I and the hidden cities carved into the earth beneath private farms in France. There, Gusky has located what he’s called the Hidden World of WWI containing artifacts, sculptures and carvings stretching for miles in the vast pitch-black beneath the idyllic countryside.

Gusky’s preparing to publish 2,000 photos of his buried treasures, and the work will debut in the August issue of National Geographic. But it’s already available to sneak peek on the doctor’s website and in the video below, as well as a piece in the UK Daily Mail that ran earlier this week.

The cities, says Gusky in the promo film, “were used for shelter by armies on both sides, tens of thousands of men. They’re beneath the trenches in ancient rock quarries, which were converted into modern underground cities with rail and telecommunications, electricity, power stations and an amazing amount of art and human inscriptions. … I found a world frozen in time.”

It was almost impossible to gain access to the sites, Gusky has said; those living above them were reluctant, to say the least, to let a nosy doctor from Dallas go poking around underground cities that hadn’t been disturbed in a century. But eventually he was allowed in, and spent some six months, on and off, shooting what he saw.

“Seeing these subterranean cities for the first time was one of the most moving experiences of my life,” Gusky says in a prepared statement. “Finding hundreds and hundreds of messages to the future, written by soldiers in their own hand, made time seem to standstill. I feel a tremendous responsibility to the people who trusted me enough to share their secrets about these places. It was also amazing to realize that while some people knew about some of these spaces, no one knew about all of them.”