Fox Nation spotlights two New York Times’ pieces that label Jenner and Kyle in different lights

Conservative sites expressed anger Friday over recent New York Times’ stories that depicted the man behind “American Sniper” as insane but Bruce Jenner’s reported transition to becoming a woman as courageous.

Fox News’ “Fox Nation” website shows both stories, with “Bruce Jenner’s Courage” on top and “American Sniper Moral” below, suggesting there’s a double standard being practiced when looking at a Hollywood celebrity compared to an American soldier like Chris Kyle.

Also Read: Bruce Jenner's Mom Opens Up About His Transition

In the Jenner piece, Nicholas Kristof writes: “[N]ews reports say Jenner is planning to chronicle the transition in a program for E! television channel and in an interview with Diane Sawyer for ABC News. All this, and comments by family members, suggest that Jenner is willing to be a role model and help educate the world on transgender issues.”

He goes on to praise the stepfather to Kim, Kourtney, and Khloe Kardashian.

Also Read: Bruce Jenner's Transition to Woman Expected to Be Documented in E! Series

“Good for Jenner. All this is probably harder than the training for the Olympic decathlon — but more important, because transgender people face hate crimes and discrimination at an astonishing rate.”

While on “American Sniper,” Gail King wrote:

“There’s been less conversation about the final scene in the movie, which shows the hero walking through his family home, where the kids are romping. He’s carrying a handgun, which he points at his wife Taya, playfully telling her to “drop them drawers.” Taya says she can see he’s finally getting over his war traumas and back to his old fun-loving self. This is, by virtually any standard, insane behavior.”

Also Read: Jesse Ventura Vents More 'American Sniper' Criticism By Comparing US to Nazis, Communists: 'We Behave the Same Way Now'

Some took to Twitter to voice their displeasure:

Stunning stupidity from liberal rag. NY Times: Chris Kyle ‘Insane’– Bruce Jenner ‘Courageous’ http://t.co/vAMtBUeoW0 – Chris Johnson (@michaelaone111) February 7, 2015

.@nytimes says Chris Kyle is insane……and Bruce Jenner is courageous. The world is officially upside down http://t.co/sJub6GoUGL – Mathew S Harrison (@MathewSHarrison) February 7, 2015

“American Sniper” has totaled $264,360,000 to date.