Denver City Councilman Albus Brooks not long ago in a meeting with the mayor raised an interesting question: Why didn’t Denver offer a free citywide Wi-Fi service?

The answer: Because it is illegal.

The city also cannot legally provide free Wi-Fi in libraries or in any of its buildings — though it does.

Brooks didn’t know his question was touching on a vexing state law that has been protecting the turf of the big, wealthy telecom companies since it was passed in 2005.

Not only does it affect public Wi-Fi, Senate Bill 152 also has hindered the expansion of high-speed broadband networks across Colorado. It has kept consumer prices high and download speeds slow and has arguably cost the state jobs.

The bill was passed when the general public was years away from using terms like “gigabit.” Similar to other laws across the country enacted at the same time, SB 152 was pushed by large telecommunications companies as a way to restrict future municipal broadband efforts.

At the time, bill proponents said the laws were intended to limit government from taking on the private sector, saying it was unfair to let tax-supported entities compete with tax-paying businesses.

The legislation, they said, would protect taxpayers from funding risky municipal broadband schemes and allow the free market to work without government intervention.

“Pure and simple, it was a statute written to limit competition,” said Ken Fellman, a Denver attorney who specializes in telecom issues and has been fighting against SB 152 for years. “They didn’t want government to compete directly or indirectly. There are millions of dollars in private capital that haven’t come to Colorado because of this statutue.”

Only now is CenturyLink promising to bring superfast broadband service to a “high percentage” of Denver by next year. (It is doubtful that service will be available in poorer quarters of the city like Globeville or Westwood.)

Colorado’ s law, however, let communities opt out with a vote. Some states with similar types of legislation cannot undo the stranglehold so easily.

So far, every Colorado community that has put the question on the ballot has succeeded. Centennial and Montrose are recent examples. Boulder is expected to ask its voters in November.

The bill appeared to create a democratic process, but it really presented an obstacle.

Campaign finance laws prohibit cities from raising money or advocating for an issue once it’s on the ballot. That gave telecom companies an advantage.

In 2009, when Longmont asked voters for the exemption to build out its broadband network, city officials were stunned when telecom giants spent $192,228 to defeat the measure compared to the proponents’ $95. It was the most money spent in an election in Longmont’s history.

The city came back again in 2011 and was successful, even though the same group spent $419,629 in an effort to defeat the initiative. In 2013, voters approved a $45.3 million bond to bring the network to every home and business in the city.

Fiber optics allow data to be transmitted nearly at the speed of light or one gigabit per second (1,000 megabits per second or Mbps) — roughly 100 times faster than typical download speeds today.

Steve Elliott, a Longmont blogger, was one of the first users on the system and clocked his download speed at 739.66 Mbps compared to 26.08 Mbps from cable. And he is paying $49.95 a month compared to $72 a month for cable broadband.

“Folks, this is fast,” he said in a blog post, comparing his download to a road race between a Vespa motor scooter and a Bonneville race car.

Longmont’s network is being built in six phases and is expected to be completed in 2017. The initial price is the cheapest rate in the country for such a fast system and discounts will be available for low-income families or people with disabilities, said Tom Roiniotis, general manager of Longmont Power & Communications.

SB 152 created a barrier for the city-owned utility from completing the network that had been in the works since 1997, he said. Now, the city expects to reap the benefits of becoming Colorado’s first “gig city.”

“More businesses believe (high-speed broadband) is critical for their ability to compete, particularly on a global stage,” he said. “Cities like Longmont could wait for the incumbent providers to upgrade … or we could do it ourselves. “

Roiniotis said no tax money was used to build the system. Funding came through the city-owned utility that operates as an enterprise fund, meaning it does not operate using tax dollars but instead generates its own revenue.

“The bonds are being backed by (Longmont Power & Communications) revenues,” he said. “The cost of providing the broadband services will be covered by what we charge.”

Neighboring Boulder wants what Longmont has, though it doesn’t have its own utility and would likely seek to partner with a provider. “Longmont is going to eat our lunch,” said Boulder Mayor Matt Appelbaum. “They are going to kill everyone.”

The council will vote later this month to put the measure on the ballot. Already, the issue has the support of the Boulder Chamber, Appelbaum said.

Boulder already has 100 miles of fiber-optic cable connecting government buildings, school district, the University of Colorado and federal labs. But the city cannot begin discussing using that cable because of the law.

Google Fiber, which is putting in networks around the country and got requests from 1,300 cities, looked seriously at joining with Boulder’s network but bypassed the city because of SB 152, Appelbaum said.

“They realized we would have to go to voters and Comcast would fight them,” he said. “It would have at least brought competition. They need competition. There is no incentive to innovate or move to the next generation of service levels. Who is pushing them?”

Synthia Payne years ago saw the problem in trying to set up a website in Denver that would use high-speed broadband to allow musicians across the world to jam together in real time. Instead, she picked up her bags and moved to Kansas City, Kan., where Google Fiber was setting up a network, and where she created CyberJammer.net.

“With music, we have to have it fast both ways, upload and download,” she said. “I thought this is a great opportunity to go and be part of this pioneering business model. The possibilities were really endless.”

Cindy Parsons, spokeswoman for Comcast, defended the company’s stance against municipal broadband systems.

“Comcast does not believe that government-owned networks are a good use of municipal funds in areas where the private market is already providing services,” she said in an e-mailed statement. ” To the extent such deployments occur, they should be targeted to unserved areas and managed as a commercial enterprise without subsidization and subject to the same rules as a private provider.”

She added that “government entry into direct ownership of broadband facilities is risky and costly — especially at a time when other priorities, like transportation infrastructure, desperately need public funds. Building, maintaining, and upgrading a broadband network is a complex endeavor requiring enormous funds and experience. In case after case, localities and their citizens have found that building broadband networks has created severe financial hardship.”

Several cities around the country that have become “gig cities” are touting their systems as being catalysts for economic growth. Chattanooga, Tenn., used $111 million in federal stimulus money to complete a fiber-optic network over 600 square miles, offering 1 gigabit per second service to all businesses, residences and public and private institutions.

Chattanooga has added 1,000 new jobs over the past three years and is emerging as an incubator for tech startups, reports say. The New York Times said the signs of growth in Chattanooga are unmistakable.

FCC chair Tom Wheeler wrote in a June blog post that Chattanooga was the poster child for the benefits of community broadband and the prime example of efforts to restrict them.

“Commercial broadband providers can pick and choose who to serve based on whether there is an economic case for it,” Wheeler wrote. “Chattanooga believes that it has a duty to ensure that all of its citizens have affordable broadband Internet access.”

Wheeler said the FCC should exercise “its power to pre-empt state laws that ban or restrict competition from community broadband.”

In communities that have put in broadband systems, prices have gone down and speeds have gone up, he said. “No wonder incumbent broadband providers want to legislate rather than innovate,’ Wheeler said.

The statute created by SB 152 needs to go away. While civic and business leaders tout ambitious projects to connect the state with the rest of the world, Colorado is falling behind because of artificial constraints to broadband expansion.

Longmont pioneers saw past all of that and pushed through, even in the face of well-financed opposition. A few other communities are starting to see the advantage of bucking SB 152.

Longmont’s Roiniotis says the question he hears almost constantly is, “When am I going to get my gig?”

It is a question the entire state should ask.

E-mail Jeremy Meyer at jpmeyer @denverpost.com. Follow him on Twitter: twitter.com/jpmeyerdpost