Topics: Beirut, Editor's Picks, Life stories, Syria, Syrian refugees, Life News

All photos courtesy Emily Jane O'Dell

I first met Assad and Abdullah about a year ago, when I saw two Syrian refugee kids sitting on shoe-shining kits near my office at the American University of Beirut. Covered in shoe grease, like a pair out of Dickens, they looked bored with shining shoes.

Assad, the smaller of the two, was missing a few teeth, and sweating in a threadbare sweater in the heat. Abdullah, taller but with a baby-face just as sweet, had a scar on his cheek that I mistook for a falling tear.

“Do you want to take some photos with my iPad?” I asked in Arabic, hoping to give them a break from the usual routine. To my surprise, Abdullah took the iPad in his hands and pointed it at the sky — infatuated with the interplay of branches and clouds.

When a low-flying airplane trespassed into the frame, the boys flinched and screamed.

“Sorry,” Assad explained, “but when we see planes in Syria, they drop bombs.”

Arms flapping, heads bent back, Assad and Abdullah began to show me how a body shakes when it’s being struck with bullets. In a slow-moving dance, as if in a trance, they morphed into missiles hitting buildings and snipers shooting machine guns.

“When my uncle got his leg blown off in Syria, he was hopping like this,” Assad said, hopping on one leg.

Watching them act out the horrors of their hometown, I tried to think of how I might help.

“If you could make any wish,” I asked, “what would it be?”

“To go to school!” they said, telling me all about their school in Syria, which was blown to bits in the war. Since I knew that enrolling them in a Lebanese school would be impossible, I tried thinking of alternative ways for them to learn.

Seeing their joy in taking photos with my iPad, I proposed we try making some art together with photography, performance and film — patterned on a program I used to run at Brown University for at-risk Providence youth. Since Assad and Abdullah couldn’t take time off of work, we agreed to meet on the run — in between office hours and shoe shines.

“Let’s start with a play called ‘Waiting for Godot,’” I said. After I explained to them the plot of the play — two guys waiting for a third who never comes — the boys laughed, and noted the play’s parallel to their own lives lived in limbo.

“We’ll do it,” Abdullah said, checking an imaginary watch on his wrist, and asking when Godot was going to show. Within minutes, they transformed before my eyes into Vladimir and Estragon. Didi and Gogo. A pair of Syrian street kids, vamping as tramps.

Rehearsing “Godot,” though, was just the beginning. Soon, they were playing different characters from their daily lives. The alcoholic landlord threatening to evict them. The policeman confiscating their shoe-shine kits. The shopkeepers chasing them away. When I took them on their first boat ride, Assad stood up in the boat, and declared, “I am Samuel Beckett!” “No,” Abdullah replied, “I am Samuel Beckett!”

Whenever we meet on the street, we shine each other’s shoes. Take photos of graffiti. Stroll the Corniche. Some days, I teach them Chinese. Ni hao. Other days, Indonesian. Terima kasih. Foreign phrases I don’t expect them to remember, but it helps to pass the time. Our only pedagogy is spontaneity — it has to be.

On curbs around Beirut, the boys view photos of my travels around the world. Afghanistan, Turkmenistan, Iran. To them, my Ivy League credentials are of no account. All they want is a teacher — and any teacher will do.

On weekends, we venture outside of Beirut for a change in scenery. In the mountaintop town of Harissa, we climbed a 15-ton bronze statue of the Virgin Mary overlooking the sea. At El Rancho, a dude ranch in the hills, we encountered Lebanese cowboys and teepees. Perhaps because of my family’s Native American history, I struggled in Arabic to explain the concept of a cowboy.

“I just don’t want to shoot any guns,” Assad said. He’d seen enough real shooting in Syria. Instead, he wanted to take one of the ranch’s horses for a ride.

“This reminds me of my horses back home!” Assad said from his saddle, with a smile as wide as the corral.

“How many horses do you have in Syria?” I asked.

“None anymore,” he said, “they all died in the war.” Cows, cats, dogs, donkeys, butterflies, pigeons, and worms. All of his beloved animals, he said, were dead.

When it came time for us to walk to the exit, Assad took a detour to the saloon, and picked up a BB gun. With his eyes closed, he tried hitting the target. Bang, bang, bang.

It’s little surprise that their favorite word is majnoon. Syria majnoon. Syria is crazy. Lubnan majnoon. Lebanon is crazy. Polis majnoon. The police are crazy. Koolo majnoon. Everyone is crazy.

Maybe it’s because I don’t have kids of my own that I enjoy spoiling these kids rotten. Maybe it’s because I was adopted that I tend to look out for children whose parents are struggling or far away. Maybe it’s because I am far from home myself that I feel unsettled too — we are strangers together in a strange land.