New York-based Kinderhook Industries LLC has acquired GlobalHealth Inc., a health maintenance organization in Oklahoma that serves more than 40,000 members.

Formed in 2003, Oklahoma City-based GlobalHealth and its affiliates employ approximately 250 people in Oklahoma.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

GlobalHealth, which has executive offices in Tulsa and Oklahoma City, is the largest private HMO serving Oklahoma's state, education and municipal employees. It also offers several Medicare Advantage plans and is one of five companies to offer health plan options on the Federal Healthcare Marketplace in Oklahoma.

Financial terms of the transaction were not disclosed.

"We are excited about our new partnership with Kinderhook which will enable us to expand our affordable health plans to more citizens in Oklahoma," said Scott Vaughn, CEO of GlobalHealth, in a written statement. "Our mission is to make quality health care more affordable for the communities we serve. The Kinderhook team shares our strategic vision of bringing our unique health care delivery model to more Oklahomans and creating more consumer choices in the marketplace."

With the investment by Kinderhook Industries, GlobalHealth expects double-digit growth in revenue and employment during the next few years, said Beth Peters, business development director for GlobalHealth, in an emailed comment.

"The combination of GlobalHealth's unique delivery model and the significant changes to the U.S. health-care industry creates a tremendous opportunity for GlobalHealth to offer affordable health plans to more citizens in Oklahoma," said Chris Michalik, managing director at Kinderhook Industries, in a written statement.

Founded in 2003, Kinderhook Industries is a private equity firm with $770 million of committed capital.