In June 2012, this moose wandered east to the Thunder Mountain Harley-Davidson Amphitheater in Loveland. A wildlife expert will discuss moose at a program Tuesday night at the Harmony Library in Fort Collins. (Craig Young)

Valentine week in Loveland offers many events. Check out the dance competition at Thompson Valley High School or learn about moose in Colorado. There's a valentine card party and a luminescent art display at the Feed and Grain. There's no love story like Romeo and Juliet's, so watch the screening of a modern take on the story at the Rialto Theater on Valentine's Day.

Today

Area dancers to compete in Studio Showcase event

The Studio dance teams will feature The Studio Competition Showcase, a competition between multiple dance genres like ballet, jazz and hip-hop, and a range of dancers from age 9 to 18 from all over the Front Range.

The event is 6 p.m. at Thompson Valley High School, 1669 Eagle Drive, Loveland.

Tickets are $10 and $5 for ages 5 and under. Proceeds from the ticket sales will help fund the opportunity for dancers to travel and perform in New York.

For details or to get tickets ahead of time, email boosterclub@thestudioco.com.

Tuesday

Colorado wildlife expert to discuss Moose Project

The public is invited to hear Eric Bergman from the Colorado Department of Parks and Wildlife discuss the Moose Project at 7 p.m. Tuesday at the Harmony Library, 4616 S. Shields St., Fort Collins.

The Friends of Larimer County Parks and Open Lands program is free.

Advertisement

For details, call 493-4791.

Wednesday

Church women to sponsor Valentine Card Party

The Council of Catholic Women of St. John the Evangelist Catholic Church will hold their annual Valentine Card Party at12:30-4 p.m. Wednesday at the church, 1730 W. 12th St., Loveland.

The event includes games, desserts and door prizes.

Tickets are $5.

For details or to buy tickets before the event, call Roberta at 667-3802.

Thursday-Saturday

Love + Light to transform Feed and Grain building

The third annual Love + Light will feature a conceptual and contemporary art and light event, transforming the Feed and Grain building with LED lights, fire dancers and artistic projections.

The event is 6-9 p.m. Thursday-Saturday at the Feed and Grain, 130 W. Third St., Loveland.

There is a suggested donation of $5.

For details, visit lovelandfeedandgrain.com.

Friday

Rialto Theater to screen 'Romeo + Juliet'

Visit the Rialto Theater Center for a Capulet cocktail hour and a screening of Baz Luhrmann's "Romeo + Juliet," starring Leonardo DiCaprio and Claire Danes in a modern take on the Shakespearean classic.

The event starts at 7 p.m. with a cash bar and treats, followed by the screening at 8 p.m. at the theater, 228 E. Fourth St., Loveland.

Tickets are $7.

For details and tickets, visit rialtotheatercenter.org.

Saturday

Sweetheart Sams RVers plan Valentine luncheon

The Sweetheart Sams would like to invite RVers left behind by the snowbirds this winter to celebrate Valentine's Day with a luncheon at 12:30 p.m. Saturday, Feb. 15, in the Johnson's Corner conference room, 2842 Frontage Road SE.

After lunch, there will be Valentine Bingo with prizes.

RSVP by calling 667-6254 by Monday.