Pop star Katy Perry got a warm introduction to the White House on Thursday night by President Obama, who called her a "wonderful person" before she took the stage to perform at the 46th anniversary of the Special Olympics. Perry isn't the first musician the president has deemed one of his favorites. Here are four others who join the "Roar" singer on Obama's playlist. (JulieAnn McKellogg/The Washington Post)

President Obama loves Katy Perry.

"I love Katy Perry," Obama said last night before the "Firework" singer took the stage to perform at a White House reception for the Special Olympics. "She is just a wonderful person. I just met her mom, now I know why she's such a wonderful person."

Perry, clad in a blue, sequined gown, performed at the Thursday night event, which marked the 46th anniversary of the Special Olympics. And the praise continued from Obama.

Perry is "one of my favorite people," the president said.



Singer Katy Perry (C) and her mother, Mary Perry Hudson (L), arrive for a celebration for the Special Olympics on Thursday in the East Room of the White House. (Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images)

She wasn't the only star in attendance. Stevie Wonder, Kareem Abdul Jabbar and Andy Roddick also attended the gala.

Turns out that Obama and Perry go (relatively) way back. Perry performed at rallies for Obama during the 2012 campaign and told GQ that she "might have won Wisconsin for him" after performing at a rally in Milwaukee.

“Actually, I didn’t do too much, but he called on me a couple of times. Which was very nice," she told the magazine.

Perry also performed in Las Vegas before an Obama rally in 2012. The singer was wearing a dress that looked like a ballot with a vote cast for Obama. Obama said Perry was an "outstanding young lady," and noted her grandmother was a longtime Nevada resident.

Last year Obama's official Twitter account, which is run by Organizing for Action, Tweeted at Perry, thanking her for publicly supporting the Affordable Care Act.

There was no word on whether Obama and Perry talked about aliens, a subject she told GQ she wanted to take up with the president if their relationship deepened.

"I see everything through a spiritual lens,” she says. “I believe in a lot of astrology. I believe in aliens," she told GQ. “I look up into the stars and I imagine: How self-important are we to think that we are the only life-form? I mean, if my relationship with Obama gets any better, I’m going to ask him that question. It just hasn’t been appropriate yet.”