Local companies tap into growing demand of telehealth market

Telehealth defined Telehealth, a term that is replacing telemedicine, is the provision of medical preventive and treatment services remotely through telecommunications devices and other technology. Services that fall under its umbrella can be as simple as the use of email for communication or videoconferencing to complex treatment such as monitoring the recuperation and compliance with postoperative instructions of recuperating patients at home.

As telehealth expands under the demands of Obamacare, a number of local companies in Southeast Michigan are projecting big growth in 2015 and beyond.



Executives of Wixom-based Health Care Net Inc., Orion Township-based Jems Technology LLC, Plymouth-based Interactive Frontiers Inc. and St. Clair-based Max Life LLC say sales opportunities have picked up dramatically the past two years.



"There are lot of telemedicine companies out there, focused on devices and technology, but we are a solutions provider and are there to help hospitals and other providers reduce readmissions and reach their patients," said Steve Shaya, M.D., medical director with Health Net Connect, the telehealth subsidiary of Wixom-based J&B Medical Supply Co. Inc.



Besides hospitals and specialty group practices, telehealth devices are increasingly being used by home health agencies, health insurers, nursing homes, community mental health agencies and medical device makers, with the goal of improving care and reducing costs.



Health Net has sold or leased several hundred of its VideoDoc telehealth units, with more than 2,700 users projected by the end of next year, Shaya said.



VideoDoc allows physicians to remotely examine patients and monitor vital signs in homes and from hospitals. The units, which come in 10-inch and 17-inch models, are priced at $2,500 to $5,000 per kit, but can be leased for $150 to $200 a month in a three-year contract, depending on the chronic diseases.



This past summer, Health Net signed a preferred vendor contract with Dell Inc. to help market and develop software interfaces with its VideoDoc system, Shaya said.



Health Net also has worked with clients that include St. John Providence Health System, Molina Healthcare of Michigan, United Auto Workers, Hurley Medical Center, Detroit Medical Center, Blue Care Network and the University of Michigan, Shaya said.



Shaya said Health Net also is developing a preferred vendor relationship with the United Nations to deliver telehealth units to rural areas in remote parts of the world to connect providers there with urban medical centers.



During the next two years, Shaya said, Health Net plans to issue an initial public offering to finance expansion nationwide. In 2013, Health Net generated more than $1 million in revenue, with projections this year to exceed $18 million, he said.



Like Health Connect's VideoDoc, Max Life Inc. offers its Advanced Telemedicine for Pre-Hospital Diagnosis and Care unit that can be linked to wireless devices such as stethoscopes and EKG machines to transmit data to hospitals or physician offices, said Frank Ferlito, co-owner and director of product development.



Max Life started off selling security video cameras to businesses, but five years ago the nine-employee company began developing a device for the medical field, Ferlito said.



"We thought physicians could assess patients early on in ambulances and that might save lives and reduce costs," he said.



Launched in June, Max Life's device is priced at $20,000, depending on the peripheral devices, and includes a two-year wireless connection with Verizon Wireless and software updates, Ferlito said.





Related Links