New space provides wide variety of options for sixth through 12th grade

Wesley Turner, 18, left, Michael Magdaleno, 15, middle, and Chris Kilee, 18, right, play Rock Band 2 on the WII in the Teen Center at the Boulder Public Library on Thursday. ( MARK LEFFINGWELL / Daily Camera )

Boulder Main Public Library Teen Space Location: Second floor, northeast corner of the Arapahoe side of the library Hours: Monday 2 p.m. to 6 p.m., Tuesday - Thursday 2 p.m. to 8 p.m., Friday 2 p.m. to 5:30 p.m., Saturday 1 p.m. to 5 p.m., Sunday, 1 p.m. to 6 p.m. Ages: Entering sixth grade through senior year of high school Info: teens.boulderlibrary.org Boulder Main Public Library Renovation The $3.7 million renovation started in late February and is scheduled to be completed in November The teen space is the first part of the renovation to be completed and open to the public. The next phases of the renovation include a new children's area, new wiring to accommodate modern technology in the computer area, redesigned fiction, reference and magazine sections, additional meeting space and a cafe. The fiction section goes into storage in August and won't be back until October or November. Library patrons who check out fiction books now will receive extended due dates to keep books through October. More info: tinyurl.com/boulderlibraryremodel

Rowan Harper works quietly on a Lego Minecraft set while two other boys play Guitar Hero on a Wii and a girl reads on a sofa by the window in the light-filled northeast corner of the Boulder Main Public Library.

Harper, 13, a student at Manhattan Middle School, has been at the library's new teen space three times in the first week it has been open, starting with Tuesday movie night.

"It is really nice," he said. "It is very homey. It makes you feel really comfortable."

That's just what Boulder library officials want for the new space, which was developed with input from some 30 teenagers who met with the architect and from the Boulder Teen Advisory Board that represents youth interests at the library.

"I think of my bosses as the teens," said teen librarian Crystal Niedzwiadek. "I really try to listen to them."

The old teen space held a few computers and tables in a tiny, windowless room off the bridge over Boulder Creek. The new teen space is three times as large and looks out over Boulder Creek from the leafy tops of trees.

There are computers and gaming systems, cozy couches, lots of tables and chairs for solitary pursuits and group work, art supplies, vinyl records and a record player and a coffee and tea station.

In August, the Foundry, a technology and media lab with recording equipment and a 3-D printer, will open within the teen space.

The amount of space and the variety of activities is key to making the space work, Niedzwiadek said. The old area was dominated by a relatively small group of boys who used the computers for gaming. Those boys and that activity are still welcome in the teen space.

But teens with other interests and many girls were hesitant to come into the space. Niedzwiadek said the new space creates a new energy that she hopes will be welcoming to a broad cross-section of teenagers.

Niedzwiadek said she's trying to get the word out about the teen center and work with young people to plan programs that will appeal to their peers. So far, Tuesday movie night has been the most popular.

Teens don't have to be quiet in the teen space. Adults and younger children aren't allowed, and they are encouraged to be themselves and explore their interests.

"They can use their normal voices here," Niedzwiadek said.

The teen fiction collection will be just outside the teen space, close at hand but still available to other library patrons.

Jake Snow, a Fairview High School senior who sits on the library's teen advisory board, said there is no other area in the community that is open to all teenagers, free and indoors. He's thrilled with the new space.

"It's cool," he said. "It's comfortable. There are a lot of options if you like things other than video games."

The teen space is the first part of the $3.7 million renovation of the Boulder Main Public Library to be completed and open to the public.

The rest of this phase of construction includes the completion of two study rooms by the end of the month and the temporary reference area in the northwest corner of the second floor of the Arapahoe side.

Work is already underway to raise the floor and run new wiring for computers in the second floor reference area. When that re-opens to the public, materials will be on lower shelves that let in more light, and there will be lots of comfortable reading areas.

The new children's area by the ramp to the bridge is scheduled to be completed by October.

A new cafe on the bridge should be open by then too. Library officials are trying to finalize the vendor contract and hope to announce the vendor soon.

The front area of the library, which includes the current children's space, will be renovated in the fall to house adult fiction and media, as well as additional meeting rooms.

Library and Arts Director David Farnan said the teen space seeks to serve a marginalized population within the larger community but also meets the library's goals for remaining a relevant community resource.

"The reason people come to the library isn't to get a book," he said. "It's to become the person they are going to be once they are done digesting that book. That's part of what this space does."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355 or meltzere@dailycamera.com