Local man mentors medical team for U.S. speed skaters

2014 Winter Olympics When: Feb. 7 through 23 Where: Sochi, Russia Visit: olympic.org

Patients have remained loyal to Lafayette chiropractor Eric St. Pierre during the past year despite the doctor's many absences.

In 2013, St. Pierre has taken trips to Utah, Italy and Russia requiring his patients to be flexible with their schedules while he's away -- a sacrifice, he said, most patients are willing to make in the name of the Olympic games.

On Feb. 2, St. Pierre will leave for another three weeks to tend to eight United States short-track speed skaters competing in the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia.

Lafayette chiropractor Eric St. Pierre treats a client at ESP Sports Medicine on Thursday. St. Pierre is part of the medical team caring for the United States short track speed skaters at the 2014 Olympic games in Sochi, Russia. (Kaitlyn Strutt / For the Times-Call)

St. Pierre, 34, is working as a consultant for the speed-skating medical teams this year after a successful stint as a trainer for the short-track speed skating U.S. team at the 2010 Vancouver games.

After turning down an opportunity for another contract with the team to focus on his practice -- ESP Sports Medicine located in the South Pointe Medical Center in Lafayette -- the team's program director brought St. Pierre on as a consultant.

"It's a huge commitment and I have to take a lot of time off to work with the athletes before and during the games," St. Pierre said. "It's a lot of work but worth it to be part of the team again."

Advertisement

Guy Thibault, the short-track program director, competed on the Canadian speed-skating team in the 1988 and 1992 Olympic games before becoming a coach and eventually the director for the U.S. team. Thibault said the team has hired a few trainers since losing St. Pierre, but no one has been able to fill his shoes.

"Eric had the credentials we wanted and the personality that fit," Thibault said. "He's the best guy for the job and since he couldn't take the job, we asked if he would mentor our trainer, who doesn't have as much experience as Eric. He'll be there to support and mentor the trainers for all of the speed skating trainers."

St. Pierre will be available to assist other teams, as well, with experience working on bobsled and skeleton athletes in the past, he said.

The team St. Pierre cared for won six medals during the 2010 games, including a silver and bronze for Apolo Ohno and bronze medals in the men's and women's team relays, according to olympic.org.

Since leaving the Olympic team in 2010, St. Pierre has been focused on his patients, which is not that different from caring for Olympic athletes, he said.

"Whether it's arthritis or a sports injury, we focus on soft-tissue driven recovery," St. Pierre said. "We're looking for quick recovery and preventing injury by eliciting a healing response."

St. Pierre hasn't forgotten about the Olympic athletes during the past four years. Several of them have traveled to Lafayette and stayed with St. Pierre while they receive treatment, he said.

"It's not unusual for me to have an Olympic athlete crashing at my place every now and then," St. Pierre said. "It's hard as hell for the athletes, so much sacrifice, that I feel obligated to be a part of that and to be there for them."

Speed skating events run throughout the Olympics, giving the athletes time to recuperate between events, St. Pierre said.

There won't be much recovery time for St. Pierre during the games as he watches, breathless from the sidelines.

"I hold my breath every time I watch them," St. Pierre said. "Being a part of the team and the competitive nature of the games, competing against other countries, it's a lot of pressure but it's something that I'm lucky to be part of."

Community reporter Whitney Bryen can be reached at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.