The success of Bernie Sanders' insurgency is a marvel and an achievement.

His showing is a mark of the anger and frustration felt by so many Americans over the abuses of capitalism that led to the crash of 2008. With the help of millions of voters, especially the young, he has broadened a political debate long hemmed in by the dominance of conservative assumptions and stifling progressive aspirations.

Sanders has put a progressive alternative to Obamacare (a single-payer system) back on the political agenda. He has offered a sweeping plan to provide free public college education for all Americans, and spoken indefatigably about the corrupting influence of money on our political system.

After hearing an endless stream of preposterous attacks on President Barack Obama as a socialist, we now know what the real thing looks like. And many Americans now realize that the words "democratic socialism" refer to popular movements in attractive places (Denmark, Norway, Sweden) and not to the old Soviet Union.

But there is another reality about Sanders' effort. He has lost the Democratic nomination to Hillary Clinton. He was defeated not through trickery or manipulation but in the democratic way: by voters.

In apparently winning Kentucky while losing Oregon in Tuesday's primaries, she pulled to within less than 100 delegates of the majority she needs. The Democrats' system of rewarding delegates proportionally means that -- as a matter of pure math -- Sanders cannot prevail.

Advertisement

Sanders has certainly earned the right to compete to the last primary, as Clinton did against Barack Obama in 2008. But it is time for Sanders and his supporters to recognize that they share with Clinton and her backers the imperative of preventing Donald Trump from becoming the next president. Sanders would violate everything he stands for if he did anything to ease Trump's election.

And a certain bitterness is setting in on the Democratic side that really could be damaging, exemplified by the angry fracas at the Nevada state Democratic Convention on Saturday. The over-the-top reaction of Sanders' supporters over a couple of delegates who won't affect the outcome speaks to the urgency of peacemaking.

The questions for Sanders and Clinton should not be what his terms of surrender are or what "concessions" Clinton ought to make. To cast matters this way implies a zero-sum game. What they need to find, to use the venerable labor movement term, is solidarity.

The core policy differences between them relate less to goals than to the speed and means through which they're achieved. Both favor universal access to health insurance, both want to make higher education far more affordable, and both want a big increase in the minimum wage. But in all these areas, Clinton advocates step-by-step approaches and questions the practicality of Sanders' initiatives.

Their meeting point should be around a concept offered by Michael Harrington, the legendary American socialist: "visionary gradualism." It's not a slogan but a steady approach to lasting reform that takes into account the urgency of undertaking change, the difficulties of achieving it, and disciplines that democracy imposes.

Sanders wants the party to have a more ambitious vision. This is exactly what Clinton must show voters she has. For both of them, coming together should reflect their shared commitment to taking the country in a direction very different from the one Trump offers.

E.J. Dionne Jr. is a Washington Post columnist.