SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

President Obama is warning business leaders and government employees that there will likely be “misinformation” published on his new trade agreement, although he promised to fulfill his vow to post the text publicly for everyone to read.

“People are going to have plenty of time to go over it. I suspect that there will be some misinformation that is propagated around this, as there usually is in these debates,” he said.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Obama met with a number of business leaders at the Department of Agriculture to promote the deal, as well as the Executive Vice President of the Chamber of Commerce, the President and CEO of the Black Chamber of Commerce, the CEO of the Asian/Pacific Islander American Chamber of Commerce, and the CEO of the National Gay and Lesbian Chamber of Commerce.

Also in attendance were the president of the National Chicken Council as well as former Sen. Chris Dodd, the Chairman and CEO of the Motion Picture Association of America.

“This week marks an important step forward, but there’s going to be a long, healthy process of discussion and consultation and debate before this ever comes to an actual vote,” Obama said. “And we committed properly that we would post this agreement, every crossed ‘t’ and dotted ‘i,’ on a website so that everybody is going to be able to look at it.”

Republican presidential candidates have already spoken out against the deal, as Donald Trump said it would “place American jobs and the very livelihoods of Americans at risk.”

Gov. Mike Huckabee also decried the deal.

“Once again, American workers are getting punched in the gut by Washington because this deal is a handout to insiders, interest groups, Obama’s allies and Asia,” he said after negotiators announced the deal.

Democratic presidential candidates Sen. Bernie Sanders has already spoken out against the deal calling it “disastrous” while Hillary Clinton has indicated that she has yet to read the full agreement.

“I will definitely have a position,” Clinton said earlier this week. “I certainly think that people have good opinions and I’m looking at all of them.”