Emergency crews are urging extreme caution to drivers following heavy rain that inundated many areas. With many creeks and rivers rising well above flood stage, many roads are deemed impassable.

"We've still got a lot of roads underwater here in the county," Clarke County EMA Director Eddie Ivy said. "We're expecting a crest in Enterprise later today, with a crest at Shubuta later tomorrow, above flood stage in both locations."

Early Saturday morning Clarke County Emergency Crews responded to County Road 120, where a driver's vehicle was quickly being submerged after being swept off the road.

"We had a situation earlier today that could have been very bad, just because someone decided to drive across a flooded roadway," said Ivy. "The current washed his car off into the ditch.

The victim of the incident was transported to a local hospital and treated for hypothermia, but you can see in this video where he was stranded holding onto his car waiting for help to arrive.

"We're urging people not to go into roadways that are flooded," said Ivy. "Mainly because of a public safety standpoint and because it creates a wake and pushes water into people's homes that might not have been flooded already."

Ivy says it's important to heed warnings about roadways. He says there have been several instances where people have driven past barricades and into flood waters. Other than going to jail if caught, he says it's not a smart thing to do.

"The main thing is, if you come to a piece of road that's covered with flood waters, even though you think hey i can drive through that because it doesn't look deep, don't," said Ivy. "What you don't know is the conditions under the water, has the road eroded away, or is there a hole there."

Until water recedes and roads are safe, emergency crews are heeding everyone to obey any warnings.

Here are some driving flood facts:

- It only takes 6 inches of water to cause most vehicles to stall or lose

control.

- In a foot of water, most vehicles will float and be carried away,

especially in swift moving water.

- Roadways concealed by floodwaters may not be intact.

- Once water has receded, still use extreme caution. Roads may have

weakened and could collapse under the weight of a vehicle.

- The large majority of deaths due to flash flooding comes from people

driving over flooded roadways.