ASSOCIATED PRESS

WASHINGTON -- Traditional valentines are often paired with chocolate or flowers, but the White House would rather see them coupled with Obamacare. The Obama administration launched an aggressive campaign Friday targeted at women and young people, urging them to spread the word about signing up for coverage under the health care law.

The effort includes a two-day social media push, using the hashtag #ACAValentines, with valentines and graphics that link to HealthCare.gov -- the online portal where consumers can shop for coverage under the health care law's exchanges. Outside groups such as Young Invincibles, the National Women’s Law Center and Moms Rising have launched online media campaigns of their own to reach moms and women, in particular.

The National Women's Law Center, for example, created three graphics designed for moms to send to their adult kids with a reminder about the March 31 enrollment deadline. The group even created a website, WordofMom.org, that enables moms to nudge their kids where they're most likely to be found -- on Twitter, Facebook or email.

The campaign is timed with National Youth Enrollment Day, scheduled for Feb. 15 -- a day the administration and allied groups have dedicated to getting young people to sign up for insurance. The youth bloc is critical to the law's success, since younger, healthier individuals would pay premiums that would help offset the cost of elder, sicker policyholders.

"With just 45 days to go before the deadline for open enrollment through HealthCare.gov, the White House is working with stakeholder groups to launch a social media campaign encouraging moms and women to send their loved ones Affordable Care Act Valentines today, as a way to urge their kids or family members get covered," an administration official told The Huffington Post. "As you know, research shows that moms can wield the most influence in helping their family members, especially their adult children, make health care decisions – and this Valentine’s Day campaign is another creative way we are hoping moms can help us with the enrollment push."

Young Invincibles has played a particularly large role in setting the stage for National Youth Enrollment Day and plans to hold over 100 events across the country on Saturday, spokesman Colin Seeberger said. The group is relying on celebrities to expand its reach. The valentines created by Young Invincibles feature stars like Beyonce, Neil Patrick Harris and Adam Levine, all vocal supporters of the Affordable Care Act.

The Social Security Administration plans to take its service offline from 3 p.m. Saturday to 5 p.m. Tuesday for scheduled maintenance. Although Healthcare.gov will remain online throughout this period, some of its functions that rely on Social Security data -- such as determining if consumers qualify for a tax credit -- will be unavailable during this time.

As a result, the administration has extended the enrollment deadline for March 1 coverage from Feb. 15 to Feb. 18 for those who are unable to complete their eligibility determinations by 3 p.m. Saturday. Seeberger said even though the application process will be on hold after 3 p.m. on National Youth Enrollment Day, Young Invinicibles and other groups will be armed with paper applications and other means to collect information from consumers who want to sign up.

Overall, enrollment in Obamacare has continued to pick up steam after the health care law's rocky debut. The administration announced Wednesday that about 1 million people signed up for private insurance in January, bringing the tally for enrollment under the exchanges to roughly 3.3 million. But adults aged 18 to 34 made up just 25 percent of total enrollment in private insurance plans through the end of January, meaning the administration has work to do before reaching its target of 38 percent.

A number of celebrities joined the Valentine's Day campaign Friday and shared messages on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to their millions of followers, including Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Eva Longoria, Mindy Kaling, Sarah Silverman and Pharrell Williams.

Make sure you and your family #GetCovered! Sign up for affordable healthcare here:http://http://t.co/JGoKZzP9AD — Eva Longoria (@EvaLongoria) February 14, 2014

You have insurance NOW right?

#GetCovered

http://t.co/DA0fEzAm70 — Sarah Silverman (@SarahKSilverman) February 14, 2014

Tell your friends, family, cousins, cousin's friends, cousin's friends' family to #GETCOVERED http://t.co/7t6a4DCKZn — Pharrell Williams (@Pharrell) February 14, 2014

Happy Valentines Day!#getcovered http://t.co/6RrkgblZJF — Mindy Kaling (@mindykaling) February 14, 2014

What do I think about when I think about Valentine's Day? Health care. Make sure ur loved r covered. #GetCovered at http://t.co/QxFs9bmFfc — Julia Louis-Dreyfus (@OfficialJLD) February 14, 2014

Encourage your special someone to #GetCovered today! http://t.co/IYg5hurqib RT! — Russell Simmons (@UncleRUSH) February 14, 2014

My love my dad, & I'm so glad he's covered. Make sure your loved get covered too.… http://t.co/y7VRtPrmLl — Aisha Tyler (@aishatyler) February 14, 2014

This article has been updated to add details about Healthcare.gov functions that won't be available during the Social Security Administration maintenance period.

Also on HuffPost: For the person you love most in the world, and then some Etsy/rhiannonhope





Available for $3.37 on Loving someone more than Kanye loves himself means you're ready to express your eternal devotion. This may or may not be the best way to do it.Available for $3.37 on Etsy For your very best friend Etsy/Letterquette





Available for $3 on This simple ode to Tina Fey and Amy Poehler is the perfect way to tell your best friend that you care. After all, who said Valentine's Day is just for couples?Available for $3 on Etsy For yourself Etsy/ohgoshCindy





Available for $4.22 on Valentine's Day doesn't have to be just for celebrating those around you! Give yourself (and Mindy) a pat on the back for being the greatest person in your life.Available for $4.22 on Etsy For your perfect new girlfriend Etsy/awkwardmoment





Available for $5.25 on Has there even been a more genuine or crazier showing of affection than Tom Cruise jumping up and down on Oprah's couch screaming about his love for Katie Holmes? Nope. Use this one.Available for $5.25 on Etsy For your single friend Etsy/NaughtyLittleCards





Available for $5.06 on Looking to be both blunt and culturally relevant? Miley's your girl.Available for $5.06 on Etsy For your incredibly cool husband Etsy/PeanutsForLaura





P.S.: Kudos to the woman confident enough to align herself with the great Queen Bey.



Available for $3.50 on Do you have a man in your life who is happy to be with you whether you're sunbathing on a yacht, sitting courtside at a Brooklyn Nets game or dancing seductively while singing in front of millions of viewers? This one is for him.P.S.: Kudos to the woman confident enough to align herself with the great Queen Bey.Available for $3.50 on Etsy For your long–awaited lover Etsy/seasandpeas





Available for $4.25 on This subtle nod to Justin Timberlake's "Sexy Back" is the perfect way to tell your love interest that they're doing something right.Available for $4.25 on Etsy For the practical guy Etsy/RelativeArt





Available for $12 on Haven't found a valentine that's both beautiful and useful? Your answer has come in the form of a refrigerator magnet decorated with George Clooney's face. Oh, and hearts.Available for $12 on Etsy For the old soul Etsy/CaricaturesByCobb





Available for $4.50 on Nothing says "I love you" like a crooning Willie Nelson caricature, right? After all "Valentine" is a 1993 hit by this country superstar: "you're the sweetest of all sweethearts won't you give your heart to me." Who could say no to that?Available for $4.50 on Etsy For your aspirational lover Etsy/ohbrenna





Available for $4 on Do you and your love aspire to be Kim and Kanye atop a stationary motorcycle? That dream could be yours with some "Bound 2" inspired love notes. Uh–huh, honey!Available for $4 on Etsy For the super fan Etsy/greatpaper





Available for $2.95 on This collaged card has just the right amount of "psychotic stalker" flavor to spice up its intimate color scheme. If you're planning on spending Valentine's Day dreaming of Bieber at his Miami arraignment , this one's for you.Available for $2.95 on Etsy For your school–girl crush Etsy/StevieProjects





Available for $5 on Britney's youthful braids and famous lyrics remind you of the days of frilly scrunchies, boy bands, and secret admirers. Now if only you had one…Available for $5 on Etsy For the film–buff Etsy/TurtlesSoup





Available for $3.85 on Gwyneth Paltrow's dark eyes burn through this "Royal Tenenbaums"–inspired valentine. Inside, the card reads "I love you," with the perfect attitude and suspense loved by many a Wes Anderson fan.Available for $3.85 on Etsy For the tween in your life Etsy/DelightInvite



Available for $1.49 on Don't know what to send to your friends to express both your love for them AND Harry Styles? Never fear, this valentine is customizable -- that's what makes it beautiful.Available for $1.49 on Etsy