Topics: 1970s, Death Wish, Dream City, mass transit, New York City, nyc, Subway, the french connection, The Taking of Pelham 123, Innovation News, Entertainment News, News

In 1975, facing the prospect of municipal bankruptcy, New York City Mayor Abe Beame moved to lay off nearly 11,000 police officers, firemen and other uniformed personnel — and sparked one of the more bizarre controversies of the city’s history.

The Council for Public Safety, representing 27 labor unions, responded by printing nearly a million copies of a pamphlet called “Welcome to Fear City: A Survival Guide for Visitors to the City of New York.” Beneath a death’s-head cover, the text urged tourists to avoid the streets after 6 p.m., remain in Manhattan, and, emphatically, “never ride the subway for any reason whatsoever.”

Beame called the idea “a gross outrage”; and, in the end, the unions opted for the more moderate hand-out, “If You Haven’t Been Mugged Yet.” The macabre leaflets never saw the street.

The stunt itself may not be especially remarkable. (Just last year, for example, following a spate of deaths on the subway, the city’s Transit Workers Union 100 planned to hand out blood-spattered Metrocards to straphangers.) But if the tactics were textbook, the reaction from the mayor’s office was an expression of real concern, implying that the grim advice might be taken seriously.

How did America become afraid of New York? Sure, the city was dangerous, relative to its recent history — but it wasn’t more dangerous than other American cities of the era. The credit, at least in part, lay with Hollywood. On-location filming in the city tripled during the Lindsay administration, between 1966 and 1974. Doomed Gotham became not just the setting of the era’s great films, but their subject. “As reflected in good movies and bad, serious ones as well as forthrightly foolish,” the critic Vincent Canby wrote in 1976, “New York City has become a metaphor for what looks like the last days of American civilization.”

Within the extended metaphor, there was no more potent symbol of danger than the New York City subway.

The year of “Fear City,” for example, saw the release of two Hollywood films about murder and mayhem on the subway, “Death Wish”and “The Taking of Pelham 123.” Three years earlier, “The French Connection,” a drug trafficking thriller with a famous subway chase, became the first R-rated movie to win the Best Picture Oscar. Its poster showed a murder on the familiar covered stairs of a Brooklyn elevated station. Four years later, in “The Warriors,” director Walter Hill transformed the city’s proud transportation system into a deserted and fantastic gangland.

These movies prompted public conversations about reality and cinema. After “Death Wish,” a gruesome vigilante flick in which Charles Bronson’s character murders four muggers on the subway (and six above ground), smashed the house record set by “The Godfather” at an Upper East Side movie theater, the cultural critic John Corry confessed he felt “a tension on the subways now that there never was before.”

When “Pelham” was released, New York Times reviewer Nora Sayre wrote that it had captured the city’s “crisis mentality.” “The hijacking seems like a perfectly probable event for this town,” she wrote. “Perhaps the only element of fantasy is the implication that city’s departments could function so smoothly together.”

Revisit the ’70s subway films, as I have at the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s “Retro Metro” series, and these cinematic developments start to seem inevitable — inherent to the subway, rather than a product of the time. Straphangers are helpless, confined and exposed to the madness and violence of their companions. For the lawless, the underground is a playground and a ready-made escape route. The spatial peculiarities of the subway seem designed to host the dark dramas of the age.

Add to that the system’s lack of spatial or temporal context — midnight at a station in Queens looks exactly like morning in Manhattan — and you can see how any subway image seems to have come right from your local station. The subway is every New Yorker’s “second neighborhood.”