In a potentially far-reaching opinion, a federal judge in Portland has ruled that Providence Health Plan wrongfully denied insurance coverage for groundbreaking autism therapy for two Portland boys.

U.S. District Court Judge Michael Simon ruled that Providence's denial of coverage violated both federal and state mental health parity laws. The statutes require health insurers to cover mental health issues no different than physical issues.

At issue in the case was whether health insurers have to cover "applied behavioral analysis," an intense therapy for autism, which afflicts one of 88 children in the United States.

Brenna Legaard, the mother of one of the plaintiffs in the Providence case, said ABA therapy "is like someone has given my son a world decoder ring ... He can communicate so much better, he's less isolated and less depressed."

But ABA therapy is also expensive -- $30,000 to $50,000 a year.

The case also raises questions about the Oregon Insurance Division and what it's done, and hasn't done, on behalf of Oregon consumers. It's received 34 complaints from consumers since 2008 about denials of coverage for ABA autism therapy. In 23 of the 27 cases reviewed by an external panel of experts, the panel overturned the insurance company's denial holding that ABA coverage was not experimental or medically invalid, but is the new standard of care.

ABA therapy has become so mainstream, the Oregon Legislature unanimously passed a bill requiring health insurers to pay for it in 2013. The requirement doesn't become effective until 2016.

And yet patient advocates say the insurance division has done little on behalf of consumers beyond convene the external reviews. It has the authority to step in with more forceful requirements, but has not done so.

Laura Cali, head of the insurance division, said she's made insurance coverage of autism therapies a top priority. The division will review Simon's decision over the next couple weeks to determine how to proceed. "This is absolutely an important issue," she said. "If we feel there is clear support that there has to be coverage for this, we have avenues we can pursue. There are still companies out there denying coverage."

Part of the autism advocates' beef with the insurance division stems from that 2013 legislation.

The bill presented a challenge to the rollout of the Affordable Care Act in Oregon. The act allows insurers to get reimbursement from individual states that pass new mandates for specific new therapies. The insurers argued the ABA therapy legislation represented a new mandate. That would have forced the state, not the insurers, to pay for the coverage.

Insurance division staffers penned a draft legal opinion in April 2013 agreeing with the industry that the ABA coverage bill was indeed a new mandate. The draft opinion wound up in the hands of a lobbyist for Regence BlueCross BlueShield of Oregon.

The insurance division memo was not shared with the treatment advocates, who argued the leak illustrates the cozy relationship between the insurance division and the companies it regulates. Cali said she's not certain how the draft memo found its way to an insurance company lobbyist. It happened before she was named head of the department about a year ago, she said.

Legaard, her husband and another Portland family sued on behalf of their young sons, who were not identified in the lawsuit beyond their initials. They claimed Providence's denial of coverage violated the Employee Retirement Income Security Act.

"This is one of the first decisions that interprets the scope of the federal mental health parity law," said Keith Dubanevich, a Portland attorney representing the two families in a class action suit that includes about 40 autistic children and their families.

"What the law says is, if you break your leg, Providence is required to pay for treatment," said Dubanevich of the Portland firm Stoll Berne. "In the same way, if you have depression or autism, they're also obligated."

ABA is an early, intensive type of behavioral interaction that helps people with autism to perform social, motor, verbal, behavior and reasoning functions that they would not otherwise be able to do. While expensive and time-consuming, it offers a new potential for meaningful treatment. The New York Times Magazine ran a story last August about ABA headlined "The Kid Who Beat Autism."

Providence denied coverage to the two families saying ABA was experimental.

The parents appealed to the insurance division, which convened a panel of doctors, who sided with the parents that ABA was the appropriate treatment. Providence then denied coverage under a different policy exclusion for treatment of developmental disabilities.

"Because of the broad-based Developmental Disability Exclusion, Providence covers mental health conditions at a different level than medical conditions in violation of the parity obligations," Simon ruled.

Providence is reviewing the Simon decision, said company spokesman Gary Walker. "We understand the needs of children with autism and their families," he said.

Months before the verdict, Providence had reversed course and started covering up to 25 hours a week of ABA therapy for its customers as of January.

Paul Terdal, a Portland parent of two sons with autism, said ABA has been an enormous help for his children. His younger son progressed normally until his 15th month, only to regress to near-total unresponsiveness. ABA has allowed him to recover a degree of normalcy Terdal thought would never happen.

He fought his health insurer, Kaiser, for two years, much as the parents fought Providence in the more recent case. After twice losing at the administrative appeals level, Kaiser reversed its policy and now covers ABA therapy, Terdal said. Kaiser officials didn't respond Tuesday to requests for comment.

In the Providence case, the judge partially granted the plaintiff's motion for summary judgment. The case now goes to the remedial phase where damages, if any, will be determined.

The slow pace of the ongoing debate about ABA therapy is agonizing to parents. ABA therapy works best for youngsters, toddlers even. Legard's son is 7.

"It took us 18 months to win coverage," she said. "That's time he'll never get back. This fight has cost him the time when his brain was the most plastic. There's not anything anyone can do to undo the damage done to that kid."

-- Jeff Manning