SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

The Louisiana State Senator who made history when he left the Democrat Party and became a Republican — Elbert Guillory — is running for Congress.

“After careful consideration and hours of prayer I have decided that I will run for the United States Congress,” Guillory begins in a video announcement.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“Not since I joined the Navy in 1964 have I felt such a great calling to serve my country. I joined the Navy because radicals were trying to spread communism throughout the world and I wanted to stop them”

Guillory’s video message invokes the words Martin Luther King, the “injustices of Jim Crow,” his service in the U.S. Navy, the “so-called Great Society,” the American experiment, the importance of personal responsibility, and the government “disease masquerading as the cure.”

Guillory says of his military service and the state of America:

Wearing that uniform I felt that no one could tell me that I had to sit on the back of the bus,“Freedom is being threatened once again. In 2016, America will be at an important crossroads. 50 years since the genesis of this so-called ‘Great Society’ it has come time once and for all for Americans to decide which nation we will be. This is a battle of ideas between the way the world has always been — where one small group of elite delve out food and supplies to the legions of poor people — or a brave new idea now just over 200 years old: the American experiment.

Guillory asks Americans to suspend for a moment what he calls the symptoms — Obamacare, Omnibus, Congress, Obama — and address the greater problem.

“If America is to survive, Americans must once and for all realize that government is NOT the solution to our problems. Government IS the problem,” he says.

Guillory goes on, entreating:

Power in America still resides with the people. It is our responsibility to take back our government; it is our responsibility to take back our country. We have a duty to preserve America. Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty, because the salvation of America won’t begin in the Oval Office, it will not flourish in the Supreme Court, it will not begin on the floor of the Congress, it won’t even begin in the voting booth. The deliverance of our shining city on the hill must begin in one place and one place alone — the mirror. “You and I have a rendezvous with destiny and that time is now.

Guillory is seeking election to Louisiana’s 4th Congressional District. Republican Rep. John Fleming will vacate the seat as he seeks to replace retiring U.S. Senator David Vitter. The former Louisiana State Senator made his initial campaign announcement in front of property that his grandfather once worked as a slave, according to The Advertiser.

Guillory has released several video shorts on issues including the use of the N-word, the defense of second amendment rights, and his decision to leave the Democratic Party and become a Republican.

See the full announcement here:

Follow Michelle Moons on Twitter @MichelleDiana