A beautifully executed 1940s period drama about the men and women involved in the top-secret Manhattan Project is at once transporting and provocative.

Visually stunning, at first it seems a dreamy trip to the past with a range of engaging characters and a Big Band soundtrack. Below the surface, it is a nightmarish accounting of the moral dilemmas of the scientists at the time, moving us to ask the same profound questions.

“Manhattan,” premiering July 27 on WGN, works its magic through a talented cast and a taut script. No zombies, no dragons. Just a well crafted, historically based drama that conveys the anxieties of the U.S. during World War II, the bias against women and minorities in general and female scientists in particular, the super secrecy of the project and the runaway egos at war in an unnatural little village, “Harvard with sand,” in the New Mexico desert.

The first two episodes left me craving more.

In the same way that “Masters of Sex” uses science as a backdrop, “Manhattan” features scientists in the desert of Los Alamos, N.M., racing to develop the world’s first atomic bomb, while wrestling with themselves about the moral implications of their research.

In Los Alamos, which didn’t exist on any map, the military kept secrets from the recruits, the husbands and wives kept secrets from each other, the race was purportedly against the Germans and Japanese, but in fact it was also against the other guys in New Mexico, working to develop the bomb first.

The scientists were treated as genius babies, there to work but not to express opinions. Occasional blasts in the desert were to be ignored.

This may have been the original “don’t ask, don’t tell,” where staff was expected to keep up the pretense of a patriotic little town in the middle of nowhere. Credit creator-writer Sam Shaw (“Masters of Sex”) and director Thomas Schlamme (“The West Wing”) with bringing that world to life in a truly affecting way.

John Benjamin Hickey (“The Big C,” “The Good Wife”) is magnetic as Frank Winter who, along with his high-IQ team, has been recruited for a project so classified that he can’t know what it is.

Olivia Williams (“Rushmore,” “The Ghost Writer”) is charming as Frank’s wife Liza Winter, a scientist in her own right whose interest in botany will lead to frightening discoveries about the local environment.

They are the central couple, but others have equally riveting stories.

Battles over status, romance and personal secrets complicate the lives of the super-smart patriots tasked with inventing the recipe that will allow the U.S. to obliterate parts of the world. They labor over formulas on chalk boards, lose sleep over the implications of what they’re doing, test their theories with bombs in the desert and lie to friends and family about what they do all day.

Daniel Stern (“Home Alone,” “Home Alone 2”) plays the more senior boss Glen Babbit, using his connections and experience to mentor the young scientists. (He plays Babbit as particularly ancient.)

Ashley Zuckerman plays Charlie Isaacs, a wunderkind who learns the art of deception as he maneuvers the politics of Los Alamos. Rachel Brosnahan (“House of Cards”) plays his wife Abby, who initially can’t believe she’s landed in this place and wants to bolt; she gains confidence and becomes a leader among the other wives.

Katja Herbers (“De Storm”) as Helen Prins, one of the few female scientists, is an enigma in early episodes; her colleagues can’t figure her out and, thus far, neither can viewers. Her story has great potential.

The accomplished supporting cast includes Harry Lloyd (“Game of Thrones”) as Paul Crosley, Michael Chernus (“The Big C,” “Orange Is The New Black”) as Louis “Fritz” Fedowitz, and Eddie Shin (“Men of a Certain Age”) as Sid Liao.

Nevermind the vintage cars, music and WWII-era wardrobe. They add to the charm, but this drama goes well beyond the visual appeal of a period piece.

“Manhattan” finds rich drama in its characters’ dilemmas. Along the way it explores the very real fear of losing the world war, examines the price of secrecy within families and on the part of government, weighs the evolution of gender roles and reminds us of the place of science in American history.

Setting up unexpected conflicts, the story roots its fictional characters firmly in historical fact.

If viewers sense modern relevance in the story’s concerns about government secrecy or the push-pull of science and morality, that is a very intentional coincidence.

Joanne Ostrow: 303-954-1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp