Chef Dan Catanio, a native Californian and graduate of the Culinary Institute of America Hyde Park New York, has set up shop in Roseville to offer a series of cooking classes, which begin Saturday and continue on weekends through March at the commercial kitchen of Les Vignobles Gourmet Specialties.

Catanio said the four courses will focus on “culinary foundations” of different subjects: two courses on the five classical “mother” sauces, including Béchamel, tomato, Hollandaise, Espagnole, and Volute; one course on Italian cooking, including traditional dishes like eggplant parmesan and linguine la buca di mare, how to sauté entrée-style pastas, make a soft polenta and different sauces to accompany chicken dishes; and one on hors’ doeuvres and appetizers.

Classes are limited to eight students each, and two have already filled – the first sauces class, on Feb. 28, and the Italian cooking class on March 14. Catanio said Tuesday there were two spots left in the second sauces class March 7 and six open in the appetizers class March 21, though he may schedule more depending on demand.

Catanio said his students need only know basic food preparation to participate.

“I show how to make classical stuff (with) food items in our local community instead of having to spend a tremendous amount of money on high-cost items,” he said. “I’m going to make it as simple as possible, where they can really apply simple skills and get a great result for something that could be a classical-looking dish.”

Having completed his apprenticeship in 1980 as sous-chef of the Waldorf Astoria New York, where he cooked for celebrities like Frank Sinatra and prepared several presidential inaugural dinners, Catanio has been a personal chef for the Clintons in Little Rock, Ark. and the opening chef at the Hilton Hotel Pleasanton.

After working for six years at a casino in Oregon, he moved to Roseville to be closer to family and started Mealz, a culinary company for cooking classes and catering.

Catanio said he has two other projects brewing in Roseville: He is looking for ways to locally market a vegan-friendly, gluten-free, dairy-free Italian panna cotta ganache dish – “A lot of people have dietary needs, you know” – and hopes to find a grant to turn a commercial kitchen into a training center to teach Placer County inmates basic food safety and preparation to make them employable upon release.