Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Health insurer Cigna's CEO says that we have a massive health burden in our country. But he lists 3 activities that he says should be pursued to help ease that burden. USA TODAY

Buy Photo Health insurance networks such as Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield's Omnia plan are here to stay, Senate President Stephen Sweeney said Monday. (Photo: Bob Karp/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

TRENTON - Health insurance networks such as Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield's Omnia plan are here to stay, Senate President Stephen Sweeney said Monday, and lawmakers should turn their focus from stopping it to figuring out how to provide consumers more tools to make health care more affordable.

Speaking at a Senate Commerce Committee hearing, Sweeney, D-Gloucester, said debate caused by Horizon's new plan has missed the bigger picture. Obamacare is changing the health care industry and the state, with the nation's second-highest premiums, needs to keep up.

"We can no longer afford a health care system that rewards the number of patients who enter a hospital or doctors’ office – almost like a sports team is rewarded for bringing fans into the stadium," Sweeney said. "The idea is to keep patients out of the hospital, not to bring them in."

Sweeney's comments were part of dueling positions that came to light here throughout the day without regard to party affiliation.

MORE: Christie administration OKs Horizon plan

MORE: Key Republican joins Dems against Horizon Omnia

Buy Photo Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey's Omnia insurance plan has caused a political firestorm. (Photo: APP file photo.)

Two tiers

They were in response to Omnia, a health insurance product rolled out for 2016 by Horizon that offered lower out-of-pocket costs to consumers who go to so-called Tier 1 health care providers, including hospitals owned by Barnabas Health and Meridian Health. They can go to Tier 2 providers, including CentraState Healthcare System in Freehold Township, but they would pay more.

The fight was bound to happen. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, nicknamed Obamacare, made sure nearly all Americans had health insurance and began to "bend the cost curve," economic-speak for taking money out of a system that had grown so fast that it made up 17 percent of the economy.

Horizon executives have said the Omnia plan is precisely what the law had in mind. The insurer would work with health care providers in its top network to deliver care more efficiently.

But its rollout has caused knock-down, drag-out fights between Horizon and hospitals in Tier 2. There have been Senate hearings, anti-Horizon billboard campaigns and lawsuits filed by both sides. And there have been bills introduced that would require insurance companies to disclose the standards they use to create their tiered networks.

An Assembly panel approved a bill that would create a task force to study tiered networks.

MORE: Horizon sues hospitals in Omnia billboard fight

Buy Photo Assemblyman John Wisniewski, D-Middlesex, introduces bill to halt enrollment in Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey's Omnia plan. (Photo: MICHAEL L. DIAMOND/STAFF PHOTO)

'Behind closed doors'

"We have to be very concerned when we see these choices being made behind closed doors,” Assemblyman John Wisniewski, D-Middlesex, said at a press conference. He introduced a bill that would freeze Omnia's enrollment until lawmakers could get a better handle on the standards Horizon used.

The issue hits close to home. Wisniewski was joined by Sen. Raymond Lesniak, D-Union, who was miffed that his own hospital, Trinitas Regional Medical Center in Elizabeth, was relegated to Tier 2. He pulled up his pants legs to show the fine work his doctors performed on his knee surgeries.

The lawmakers said they weren't necessarily opposed to tiered networks, per se. Only the way Horizon introduced its plan.

MORE: Hospitals: NJ must stop Horizon's Omnia plan

MORE: Horizon won't drop controversial insurance

David DeSimone, senior vice president for CentraState, said after the press conference that the health care industry is trying all sorts of strategies to lower cost and improve care, including tiered networks.

Horizon should have taken a cue from Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina, which also has a tiered plan, but explains the standards and gives health care providers a chance to make enough improvements that it can be included in Tier 1, he said.

"Everybody is given what the criteria is, how they score and the ability to improve," DeSimone said. "That's what's missing in New Jersey."

Said a Horizon spokesman: "Tiered networks have been offered in New Jersey for the last five years, and Horizon has been more transparent than any other insurer about the criteria we used to create our tiered network."

Buy Photo The state Senate Commerce Committee meets in Trenton Monday to discuss bills that would tighten oversight of tiered health insurance networks. (Photo: MICHAEL L. DIAMOND/STAFF PHOTO)

Similar plans

It's true. Both AmeriHealth New Jersey and Aetna have introduced tiered plans without causing a wave. But Newark-based Horizon is the state's biggest health insurance provider with 3.8 million members. It has more than half of the individual insurance market, according to the New Jersey Department of Banking and Insurance.

MORE: Aetna customers will save money at Meridian

Its tiered network plan threatens to tip the scales. And those on the wrong end could see their revenue begin to erode.

But can you have it all? In the age of Obamacare, can you both lower the cost of health care and make sure every health care provider flourishes?

Speaking at the hearing, Sweeney said New Jerseyans pay the second-highest premiums nationwide and lawmakers should look for ways to rein them in. Not only should insurers disclose the methods they use to create networks, but also physicians should disclose their costs and hospitals should disclose their profits, he said.

"I look forward to a healthy discussion in the upcoming months and want to work with the committee for reform I can support before July 1," Sweeney said.

The audience applauded until state Sen. Nia Gill, the chair of the Commerce Committee and a member of Sweeney's own party, admonished them and put a stop to it.

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1p2iVL6