This is the last of a series of stories on problems with health care that were brought to the attention of Call 12 for Action. Do you have an issue? Call our volunteers 11 a.m.-1 p.m. weekdays at 602-260-1212 or file a complaint at call12.azcentral.com.

The Republic | azcentral.com Sat Nov 23, 2013 7:18 PM

As controversy swirls around the Affordable Care Act and the problems for Americans seeking health insurance under it, many covered under Medicare are facing issues of their own.

Consumers shopping for Medicare during open enrollment, which runs through Dec. 7, are suffering from sticker shock over plan prices that take effect in January. That includes doubling of some premiums for prescription drugs.

Mesa resident Robert Johnson said he isn’t just shocked by prices. He is scared the increases in premiums will leave him unable to pay for the medicine that is keeping him alive.

“Everybody is worried about Obamacare. But what about people on Medicare?” said Johnson, a 58-year-old former computer programer who receives disability because of an immune-system deficiency disease. “I have insurance. I’m on disability. But if I can’t get the medicine, I’m dead.”

Medicare specialists agree that Johnson and others in his situation have a right to be concerned. They say patients who depend on certain drugs under Medicare plans are always vulnerable to price hikes and rising premiums.

Ritch Steven, past president of the Arizona AARP, said the type of drugs Johnson seeks are “notoriously, horrendously expensive” and that his insurer can drop coverage of a drug or increase costs without warning.

“The costs he is running into have nothing to do with the Affordable Care Act,” Steven said.

Johnson said calls to his insurer and to the drug manufacturer initially went nowhere, with company representatives disregarding his calls and offering no alternatives other than to suggest shopping for other plans. As the open-enrollment deadline looms, Johnson said he has grown desperate.

Johnson said he is required to pay a $50 copay for prescription drugs under his current Medicare Advantage Plan, which he has through Abrazo Health Care.

Under the 2014 plan, Abrazo will require Johnson to pay 20 percent of the drug’s cost out of pocket. Based on his calculations, that could cost Johnson $1,000-$3,000 per week based on the price of the drug, which he can’t afford.

The drug, called Hizentra, is self-administered through an infusion pump and is used to treat primary immunodeficiency, genetic disorders that prevent the immune system from functioning properly.

Johnson, who suffers from hypogammaglobulinemia, compared his situation to the boy in a bubble, although he doesn’t have to live in isolation. Johnson said he was diagnosed when he was 6. He, his brother and two nephews were part of a National Institutes of Health study of the disorder in the 1960s.

He said the disorder manifests itself differently in each afflicted person. The drug helps him stave off infections and prevents him from becoming sick.

“It is my immune system in a bottle,” he said. “An average person goes to bed at night and your body replenishes your immune system. My body doesn’t do that.”

Hizentra is manufactured by CSL Behring, a global pharmaceutical company headquartered in Australia. Company representatives in the United States said last week that there is little they can do to help Johnson.

Sheila Burke, CSL director of communications in Maryland, confirmed that Johnson’s price estimates “could be” accurate but would not provide the actual cost of the drug. “Some of these (immune-deficiency drugs) are priced at a higher price point,” Burke said.

She encouraged him to sign up for assistance through PSI, a non-profit government-subsidized program that assists eligible patients with drug costs. She said enrollment through PSI will begin in January.

However, Burke acknowledged that she could not guarantee that Johnson would be eligible or that the drug he needs would be covered under the assistance program, saying “the product and the therapeutic area that is covered” often varies.

Abrazo officials offered more hope. After being contacted last week by Call 12 for Action, officials with the company called Johnson and offered to try to help him find a cheaper, comparable drug and to work with him to reduce his copayments.

“The health plan makes every possible effort to manage each member’s unique health-care need,” Abrazo spokeswoman Lisa Schmidtke said.

“Although I am not at liberty to discuss the specifics of any member’s case, I can tell you that we often will research therapeutic options that might be more affordable for our members. In addition, we explore financial-assistance options for our members through various services that are available if a member qualifies.”

Steven, who volunteers with AARP on Medicare and other health issues, said most people sign up for Medicare Advantage plans because of the low-cost options. But he said that can be a double-edged sword when someone requires a specialized drug.

“Abrazo has the authority under Medicare Part D to change costs. That’s their call,” Steven said. “They can drop coverage of a drug. They can do that and you are out of luck.”

Steven said individuals in Johnson’s predicament need to fight for help. He encouraged Johnson to contact his doctor and appeal in writing to Abrazo.

“If the doctor feels this is a lifesaving medication, he can advocate through a letter that (the insurance company) ‘needs to make this available to him,’ ” Steven said. He said most people on Medicare can’t afford to shop the open market for insurance, which is a key component of the Affordable Care Act.

Medicare is government health insurance for people age 65 years and older and for those on disability.

According to the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation website, of 36 million people enrolled in Part D Medicare plans, about 22.7 million are in prescription-drug plans.

“The average premium (weighted by enrollment) is expected to increase by 5 percent across all (prescription-drug plans) from 2013 to 2014, unless many new or current enrollees select lower-priced plans,” the website states. “Enrollees in two of the most popular (prescription-drug plans) will experience 50 percent premium increases if they stay in the same plans in 2014.”

Johnson said he can’t afford other options and can’t qualify for low-income plans because his Social Security disability income is too high. Johnson said he believes the changes in Medicare are affecting thousands of Americans and he hopes that his story will raise awareness about the issue.

“I’m facing death. It leaves me quite annoyed,” he said. “I’m not doing this for me. I’m 58 and I was supposed to be dead more than 30 years ago.”

Robert Anglen and Veronica Sanchez lead the Call 12 for Action team. Reach the reporter at robert.anglen@arizonarepublic.com.