The great Babe Ruth. a Boston Red Sox who moved on to become a New York Yankee. The Boston Red Sox had a little team turnover after they won the 1918 World Series, four games to two. Among the players they unloaded was George Herman Ruth, who ended up on the Yankee roster in 1920. The Red Sox didn’t win another pennant until 1946. The Yankees were in the Series six times in eight years with Ruth on their side. Don’t tell a Red Sox fan turnover doesn’t matter. And don’t tell the folks at PayScale Human Capital that, either. They just put out a tome dispelling myths about turnover. And they make a compelling case that the impact of turnover is much trickier to measure than one might think. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

Myth No. 1: Low turnover is always good This may work well for the boys and girls in the C-Suite when they present data to shareholders. But the floor managers know that low turnover can be a sign of complacency, of a lack of will by management to set higher standards and hold people to them, and a willingness to tolerate bad behavior. “Employees stay at companies for all kinds of reasons, and those reasons may have nothing to do with gratitude for a great employer or a desire to perform well,” the myth-busters say. “Perhaps your employees:

Myth No. 2: Turnover is always bad Yes, it can be bad, if you’re the Cleveland Cavaliers and LeBron James just went south. But more often than not, turnover that is the result of astute management is healthy and gets the organization fresh and responsive. “Sometimes change is desperately needed, and that means some heads have got to roll,” say the PayScale folks. “Whether employees are fired, retire, or self-select out of the transformation to come, the point is that turnover can be a fantastic opportunity for employers to select, place, and develop employees (both incumbent and new) who are enthused about the company and the direction in which it’s heading. Some turnover is actually good for the company — especially in the case of overpaid, under-performing employees.”