Therese Everly District 1 hospital board candidate (Photo: Special to news-press.com)

Obamacare. The Medicaid expansion fight. Even the prospect of medical marijuana.

Southwest Florida's health care industry continues to face big issues and significant transformation. So, it is probably not surprising that this year's races for five open seats on Lee Memorial Health System's elected governing board has again drawn a large number of candidates — 10 this time around.

The 2014 election cycle for the non-partisan political posts has also been notable for its spending and visibility. Candidates have spent about $106,000 so far, largely on advertising, nearly twice the level seen in such races over the last decade.

Most of the candidates say they favor the expansion of Medicaid as envisioned by the Affordable Care Act, a major priority for the health system. They largely oppose the legalization of marijuana for medical uses. And all said they are keenly aware of the continuing financial challenges the hospital system faces, particularly continuing cuts from the taxpayer-supported Medicare and Medicaid programs.

All expressed support of CEO Jim Nathan, whom they would directly supervise.

Hospital board members will soon have to decide on how best to expand health care offerings in the Bonita Springs/Estero community, in lieu of a state-rejected hospital. The fate of the aging Lee Memorial Hospital — whether it should be shuttered or renovated — also looms on the horizon.

The 10-member elected Board of Directors oversees a $1.3 billion budget for the public Lee Memorial Health System, which operates nearly 95 percent of the hospital beds in Lee County and a variety of specialty health centers and clinics.

They directly supervise Nathan, and are often the final say on tough health policy questions. Members serve four-year terms and will earn $14,130 a year in 2015.

A look at the races:

District 1

This district is made of up of most of northwest Lee County, including half of Cape Coral, as well as Sanibel and Pine islands. Longtime incumbent Marilyn Stout did not run so she could run for Lee County School Board.

Two candidates are still actively campaigning for the one open seat in this district: Victor Dotres, a Fort Myers resident and computer instructor at Estates Elementary School in Collier County; and Therese Everly, a registered respiratory therapist from Cape Coral.

Dotres has not participated recently in a formal candidate forum. He said he has focused on smaller community gatherings and church events to get out the vote. Dotres, who ran unsuccessfully last year for the Lee County School Board, said his main priority is making sure regular citizens have a voice. He would also like to see the board meetings regularly televised.

"I think we have plenty of doctors, plenty of nurses, representatives of the administration," he said. "What we need is maybe the patient advocate, the citizen representation."

Everly said she wants to be an active participant who regularly asks questions about hospital administration decisions. She said she also wants the public to get more involved and follow board meetings more closely. Another priority: Keeping the health system financially sound.

"Right now we are in a strong financial position," she said. "We have to move forward and try and remain ahead of the curve. We have to look at services we offer."

District 2

This voting district encompasses heavily populated areas of east Cape Coral and Fort Myers. Five candidates, including incumbent McGovern, are running for the two seats.

Political newcomer Timothy Akin, a 26-year-old project engineer for construction firm DeAngelis Diamond (builder of Park Royal Hospital and other local health care projects), said he thinks its important to have younger representatives. He said he also brings badly needed construction experience.

"I offer a very unique perspective," Akin said. "There's never been, nor is there anyone running now, that has a facilities type of perspective on things."

Candidate Donna Clarke, a former state Representative from Sarasota, recently moved to Lee County to be closer to family. Clarke, who was chairwoman of the House Health Access and Financing committee, said she has concerns about current proposals to expand the Medicaid program. She said she favors it, but only if every Florida county can have a say about how it would be implemented.

She said the health system needs to seek more funding and expand programs for seniors — such as those to prevent falls, encourage better nutrition and those that would help Alzheimer's disease patients here.

"That's how we're going to improve the wellness of this county," she said. "Our population is more and more responsible for their own health care. They want to be involved."

McGovern (Photo: Special to The News-Press)

Nancy M. McGovern, a registered nurse for the last three decades, was first elected to the board in 1998 and has previously served as vice chairwoman of it.

McGovern pointed to a number of health system achievements in recent years to bolster her case — successful fund raising for a new children's hospital in south Fort Myers, the opening of three health system-sponsored medical clinics for low-income residents and continuing care for recently discharged, but still frail, patients.

She said the primary role of the board is oversight of the health system's administrators.

"But we definitely do not want to get involved in day-to-day operations, because that's micromanagement, and I've always been against that," she said.

McGovern said the medical community should do more to provide mental health services to children and adults.

Tom Presbrey is not an incumbent, but this radiologist has been a fixture at hospital board meetings for years to represent the community's physicians. Presbrey has raised much of his $29,000 in donations from physicians.

"I've got the trust of the medical community. I've got the trust of independent physicians, the hospital-based physicians," said Presbrey, explaining his decision to run. "I think I can make an impact and do something more on some of the issues people have."

Presbrey said the health system will soon have to decide what to do with the aging Lee Memorial Hospital, home to the region's trauma center, near downtown Fort Myers. He said the health system needs to work closely with the region's physicians in deciding such health care matters.

Fred Schaerf is a nationally prominent Alzheimer's disease researcher, who operates Neuropsychiatric Research Center of Southwest Florida. He has conducted a long list of medical trials, including those for Alzheimer's, depression, Parkinson's disease, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. He said he's running to bring more outside perspective, particularly one with expertise in mental health issues.

"I think the board needs more medical leadership, especially in my specific area," Schaerf said. "I think it's time a neuropsychologist gets on the board."

Schaerf noted a significant percentage of people going to the regions emergency departments have untreated mental illness. He also pointed to Lee County's high suicide rates — 15 per 100,000 residents, compared to the state rate of 13.8, according to the Florida Department of Health.

District 4

This district represents the eastern most areas of Lee County, including Lehigh Acres. Three candidates are running for two seats, including incumbents Champion and Hansen.

Champion (Photo: Special to The News-Press)

Champion, a Lehigh Acres retiree, is finishing her first term. She has primarily focused on working with the health system's volunteer and hospital auxiliary programs.

She said the health system will soon need to address over-crowding at its hospitals. The state rejected a health system plan to build a Bonita Springs/Estero hospital, and the existing Lee Memorial Hospital is aging and too small, she said.

"We need more beds," Champion said. "All the hospitals are completely full. The only alternative I see is to expand Gulf Coast (Medical Center) now."

Hansen is employed by Park Royal Hospital (Acadia Healthcare) as a Community Liaison in the Business Development and Marketing Department., is also finishing his first term.

He serves as the board's liaison to Park Royal Hospital, the county's only inpatient psychiatric hospital. Despite that hospital's opening in 2012, and other expansions of mental health care in the region, many people are still not getting the care they need, he said. Often they end up incarcerated or seeing care at hospitals, and not receiving care, he said.

Hansen (Photo: Special to The News-Press)

"Whether it's the stigma of mental health, whether it's the ignorance toward mental health, you can't just tell people to get better. You've got to provide the care and expertise," he said. "Half the people in jail shouldn't be there. Half the people coming into the ERs should not be there."

David H. Turkel, a physician with Radiology Regional in Fort Myers, said he's running to give physicians more representation. Among his top priorities: improving the health system's patient quality and satisfaction scores.

Turkel pointed to Lee Memorial's scores on the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems, a patient survey used nationally to assess how hospitals are doing. The health system beats Florida averages, but its hospitals are at or below some national scores.

While keeping expenses down are important, he said the health system should be willing to spend money on the staffing and equipment needed to improve hospital quality.

"If your families are going to the hospital do you want them to be just above average?" Turkel said. "Or do you think we need to quality of excellent?"

Connect with this reporter: @FrankGluck (Twitter)

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1wrF6Jz