A measure of the legacy of Army full-rank Gen. Charles “Hondo” Campbell, who died Feb. 8 at age 67, comes from the number of fellow general officers who plan to be at his memorial service today or were at his visitation Sunday. Add up their years of service and you’d likely easily total several centuries of service, longer than time this nation has existed.

Campbell, a California native who grew up in Shreveport and retired here, served 40 years and was the last continually serving general officer with Vietnam War combat experience. The officers honoring him, who could number a half dozen or easily more, all served 35 to 38 years, sometimes under Campbell, sometimes over him.

“The Army has lost one of its best,” said retired Lt. Gen. Joe Peterson, who served under Campbell from 2006-2010 at U.S. Army Forces Command, the service’s largest training, organizing and equipping unit. “I know of no one else more dedicated to his country, his soldiers and their families. He loved family, he loved God, he loved his nation and he loved the Army.”

Campbell spoke eloquently about Peterson when the latter retired in 2010, the same year as Campbell, who had been his boss at US FORSCOM. Peterson, who now lives in Arizona, will return the courtesy, as one of several general officers eulogizing Campbell at his memorial today at 11:30 a.m. at St. Paul’s Episcopal Church, 275 Southfield Road.

“He and I first became close at the command and general staff college in 1984,”Peterson said. “Hondo was a rare human being, probably one of the smartest officers we had in our Army, one of the most fit and the most dedicated.”

Campbell suffered a major stroke, one of several medical events that led to his death, returning from Korea after assisting in a mentoring position there. It happened years after Campbell, who served from 1970 to 2010, retired.

“Most of his career was spent outside the continental United States,” said retired Gen. Leon LaPorte, one of Campbell’s bosses, who also will speak at the memorial today. “He served multiple tours in Vietnam, in Korea, in Germany. No stranger to foreign lands, he was always at the tip of the spear of our forces.”

An accomplished ballroom dancer, taught by his mother, the late Erena Campbell, he also put off much of a personal life until late in his career, due to the demands of his job, LaPorte said.

“Right after we promoted him to brigadier general he met Dianne in Copperas Cove, Texas, and they ended up marrying,” LaPorte said. “He was a bachelor brigadier general in the U.S. Army, and that is a very rare individual.”

Peterson said Campbell could have relaxed and enjoyed retirement with a new bride but chose a harder path.

“He had a lot of choices at the end,” Peterson said. “He could have done a lot of things that would have been financially much better. But he served his country. I don’t think he would have done it any other way.”

It wouldn’t be a surprise to see retired four-star generals and former international stage players such as Tommy Franks or Ray Odierno at the service.

“We’d been very good friends over the years, but towards the end we got very close because he helped me all the time when I was commanding general in Korea,” said retired Gen. J.D. Thurman, who succeeded Campbell both at FORSCOM and in Korea. “I’d known Hondo throughout my entire career: We were both armor officers. He was just a great soldier, a great professional soldier and our wives were very close, they used to work together.”

Thurman was at the visitation Sunday at Osborn Funeral Home, but a prior commitment in Norfolk, Virginia, will prevent him being at the memorial today. But he said don’t be surprised if there is plenty of glittering brass there to send Campbell off his final billet.

After visiting with Campbell and talking with him recently, Thurman saw how Campbell was ailing and alerted Army leadership.

“It broke my heart,” Thurman said. “I called the current Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Mark A. Milley, and the former chief, Gen. George Casey, who Hondo worked for. Hondo had many friends. We’re all going to miss him. He always had good sage advice. He was a smart man and a guy you could trust.”

That trust worked its way down the chain of command as well as up, LaPorte said.

“Hondo was special, a servant leader,” LaPorte said. “He served the needs of his nation. He was thoughtful and caring, yet demanding and firm. He was empathetic, visionary but practical in terms of operational procedure. He was a devout Christian and that set the solid base of the way be behaved as a senior officer. He was a soldier’s soldier. He could relate to me as a four-star and go out into the field and relate to a private at the same time.”

He set the example, Thurman said.

“Hondo was a true man of character. Above all he was a Christian and he always looked after his soldiers. He was a man who dedicated his whole life to his country.”

John Andrew Prime wrote for The Times for more than 37 years, from 1978 to late 2015. He is the coauthor of a book on Barksdale Air Force Base and has contributed to books on area music. He is co-author of “Legendary Locals of Shreveport,” just published by Arcadia/History Press. Email him at japrime@bellsouth.net or visit his website at japrime.com.

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/opinion/guest-columnists/2016/02/21/perspective-general-hondo-campbell/80720688/