Topics: Argentina, Diego Maradona, GlobalPost, Video, World Cup, Media News, Life News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

LIMA, Peru — There’s a reason the World Cup is the planet’s most watched sporting event. It’s not just the thrilling battles on the pitch. Or the fact that soccer is simply the most popular sport around. Or even the multinational mega-party as fans from around the world come together to celebrate their national teams.

The tournament also has that unquantifiable ability to generate the kind of magical — and in some cases dastardly — moments that spectators remember for the rest of their lives.

Here, GlobalPost rounds up seven of the craziest:

2006: Don’t mess with Zizou’s sister

The greatest player of his generation, France’s Zinedine Zidane had masterminded his country’s 1998 World Cup triumph. Eight years later he again singlehandedly dragged France to the 2006 final, this time against Italy. But the magic stopped there. In the final act of his glittering career, Zidane, known as Zizou in his homeland, headbutted Italian defender Marco Materazzi in the chest, earning an inevitable red card. What prompted the headbutt? The kind of “yo mama” playground insult that no pro athlete should ever let get under their skin. In his own words, Materazzi had told Zidane: “I prefer the whore that is your sister.” Stripped of their talisman, France lost the match and the cup. Most French people, however, didn’t seem to mind. Zidane received a hero’s welcome on his return to Paris.

1994: A game of life and death

Colombia had long toiled in the shadow of Latin America’s World Cup winners, Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay. The 1994 tournament was supposed to change all that, with Colombia having such a strong team that even Pele, the Brazilian usually viewed as soccer’s greatest player ever, was tipping them for glory. But things didn’t go that way. Terrorized by threats from drug lords back home, Colombia first lost to Romania. Then, against the US, an own goalby captain Andres Escobar all but ended the South American nation’s dreams. Within days of returning home, with the World Cup still underway in the US, Escobar was gunned down outside a Medellin nightclub, shot six times in the back by a local gangster apparently motivated by Escobar’s error on the pitch. The cold-blooded killing shocked fans at home and abroad.

1986: Argentina’s Jekyll and Hyde

Probably the only challenger to Pele’s title of greatest soccer player ever, Argentina’s Diego Maradona epitomized the best and worst of his sport. Known for cocaine, booze, prostitutes, and offensive public statements off the pitch, he also possessed the kind of sublime skills on it that appeared to defy the laws of physics. His Jekyll and Hyde character was never clearer than when Argentina took on England in 1986, in a highly charged game just four years after the Falklands War. Argentina won after two goals by Maradona, the first scored with his hand — or by Maradona’s own cryptic, arrogant confession, the “hand of God” — and the second an outrageous individual effort that saw him dribble past the entire England defense before hitting the net, a goal later voted World Cup Goal of the Century.