McDonald's Corp (MCD.N) has temporarily closed its headquarters for the third year in a row as worker wage protests targeted the fast-food company's annual meeting, it said on Wednesday. McDonald's, based in Oak Brook, Illinois, has encouraged employees to work from home, spokeswoman Lisa McComb said in an email. The company will host the annual shareholder meeting at its headquarters campus on Thursday, with security personnel in attendance as usual, McComb said.

Warren Buffett is an Obama supporter, but he is still bullish on America even if Trump becomes president. He cited the fact that in his lifetime, GDP per capita has gone up six times. He thinks it will continue to rise for at least the next 50 years and that no presidential candidate is going to put an end to that.

At the annual Berkshire Hathaway meeting, Warren Buffett answered a tough question from a shareholder about Berkshire's substantial holdings of Coca-Cola shares. He said, "I elect to get my 2600 or 2700 calories per day from things that make me feel good."

Addressing the issue of climate change at his annual shareholder meeting, Warren Buffett said he doesn't agree that climate change is the most pressing issue facing the Earth. However, he does want to reduce our dependence on oil out of a fear that we're going to use "every last drop."

Yahoo Finance's Midday Movers is live each weekday at 12pm ET, covering all the latest news on the markets, the economy and the biggest stories of the day.

Stocks (^DJI, ^GSPC, ^IXIC) had an up and down morning on their way to flat as investors continue to keep an eye on developments out of Greece.

Get the Latest Market Data and News with the Yahoo Finance App

Here are some of the other stories Yahoo Finance is keeping an eye on today.

Obamacare ruling and healthcare stocks

The health care industry is now preparing for the possibility that Obamacare could soon be on life support. By next Monday, the Supreme Court is expected to decide whether millions of Americans are eligible for federal health insurance subsidies, a key provision of the law. What does the ruling mean to stocks in the sector?



New way to consider drug costs

A major organization of cancer doctors is calling on physicians to now consider the cost of drugs when looking at treatment options for the disease. The American Society of Clinical Oncology is creating what it calls a "value framework" to help patients understand the relative worth of new therapies as compared to established ones.

Amazon and the Confederate flag

The controversy over the Confederate flag following the murders of nine worshipers at Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston has landed squarely in the retail world. And while big stores such as Walmart (WMT) and Sears (SHLD) say they'll pull flag-related items off their shelves, sales of those items appear to be booming on Amazon.com (AMZN).

Taylor Swift / Apple saga continues

Is Taylor Swift a hypocrite? That's the charge being leveled against the pop superstar after she spoke out this weekend about Apple (AAPL) not paying royalties...a statement that led Apple to change it's tune. But now freelance photographer Jason Sheldon writes Swift does the same thing by limiting how her picture can be used. He says "Like Apple, you can afford to pay for photographs so please stop forcing us to hand them over to you while you prevent us from publishing them more than once, ever. Swift's team was swift to respond, saying Sheldon "misrepresented" the contract.