Over time most of us learn that there are no free lunches!

Someone always pays the costs of what we partake, whether it is Obamacare or Gov. Haslam’s “Tennessee Promise for two years of “free” community college or technical training for high school graduates.

Good old-fashion Maury County common sense tells us that when you add 50 million people without health care to the 260 million people who have some form of health care and then redistribute the total aggregate costs to all those paying health care premiums, then those who were paying for their health care coverage will undoubtedly have their premiums and deductibles increased to make up for the increased costs of those who didn’t have health care, and thus make it “affordable” to the people who didn’t have it.

The same common sense can be applied to the governor’s “Tennessee Promise” that proposes to move $300 million from the state lottery fund reserve to provide two years of “free” community college. U.S. Congressman Steve Cohen of Memphis, who sponsored the 2002 change to the state constitution to allow lotteries in Tennessee, makes a good point on the matter. The congressman objects to the governor’s election year idea, saying the “Tennessee Promise” would cost $34 million a year and would reduce the Hope Scholarship grants to college freshmen and sophomores at Tennessee’s four-year universities from $4,000 per year to $3,000 per year.

These are the same freshman and sophomores who worked hard to get at least a 21 on their ACT scores or maintained a “B” average on their grades to qualify for the grant money. The governor’s proposal would allow “all” students to obtain the “free” tuition, regardless of grades, as long as they graduated from high school. This approach not only redistributes the lottery revenue, it lowers the academic bar.

Where does the Hope Scholarship revenue come from? Study upon study tells us that about 80 percent of it comes from people who are below the poverty line in income and buy lottery tickets. In reality, it’s a tax on the poor, and the majority of these funds are distributed to the children of the parents who have incomes above the poverty line.

The governor’s Planning and Research Director Anne Buckle pointed out that college entry students who have to go into remedial college courses have only a 5 percent chance of graduating from college. So the dropout rate of these students we know will be very high.

Will that number change with “free” community college programs? Will the “Tennessee Promise” help Maury County increase its high school graduation rate in college-bound students? According to the Daily Herald article of Feb. 5, “State aims to grow student base,” 60 percent of Maury County’s high school graduates are attending college already. However, it’s not clear how many of these students finish college, nor is it clear how many of them, out of those who do graduate from college, come back home and find work in Maury County. They would help raise the number of workers in our workforce who have a college degree toward the attainment of the state goal of 55 percent from Maury County’s current 16.6 percent rate of the workforce with college degrees.

The Tennessee Department of Education website says that 72 percent of Williamson County High School graduates were eligible for Hope Scholarship grants in 2013. Among the other counties in the greater Nashville region, Sumner and Wilson counties had 44 per cent; Rutherford had 41 percent; Montgomery had 40 percent; Dickson had 39 percent; Cheatham had 34 percent and Maury County was in eighth place with only 33 percent.

According the article, the Maury County average high school graduation rate is 83.1 percent, with Giles, Lawrence, Lewis, Marshall and Williamson all ranking higher high school graduation rates than Maury County.

Excluding unit schools in Maury County, the state Department of Education lists Spring Hill with a graduation rate of nearly 94 percent, Columbia Central at 77 percent and Mt. Pleasant at 74 percent. This same state website, excluding unit schools, lists the top-performing elementary schools from 2013 in math as J.E. Woodard (Sunnyside area), Spring Hill elementary and Marvin Wright, with an outstanding average of nearly 66 percent of their students performing at or above proficiency, with the state average being 51 percent of the students at or above proficiency.

The three lowest-performing elementary schools in math in Maury County were Baker, Highland Park and Randolph Howell, with an average of 34 percent of students scored as proficient or above.

Why is the rate in the Columbia inner city schools nearly one-half the rate of the Spring Hill and Sunnyside schools? Study upon study tells us that if we swapped the teachers of the high-performing schools with those of the low-performing schools the percentages wouldn’t change that much at all. This is a system and school board problem, not a teacher problem, and we need a plan to fix it.

This year is an election year for 22 commissioners and six school board members, and we need to ask them what they will do to correct this problem. Beyond that we need to hold all of them accountable for our schools’ educational performance and progress.

◆◆◆

Mike Bennett is a retired autoworker who resides in Spring Hill. E-mail him at bennett6520@yahoo.com.