Sen. Ron Johnson: The senator’s federal lawsuit remains stalled. Credit: Mark Wilson

Ron Johnson and Shirley Abrahamson finally have something in common: Both have raced to federal court to advance their own interests.

The conservative Johnson, a Republican senator, lost another round last week in his quixotic claim that he has been harmed by Obamacare. A federal appeals court panel agreed with a lower court's decision to throw out Johnson's lawsuit, ruling that the senator didn't have legal standing to bring it.

And the liberal Abrahamson, the longest-serving justice in the history of the state Supreme Court, is seeking to preserve her job as chief justice. Voters approved a constitutional amendment earlier this month that would allow the court's justices to select their own chief, overturning a 126-year-old tradition. With four conservatives on the seven-member court, Abrahamson doesn't stand much of a chance of winning election. She has filed suit in the district court in Madison.

Now, I am certain that good lawyers can cook up fine legal arguments for either of these cases.

But in the court of common sense, they have very little to recommend them.

Senator Johnson has a deeply held belief that Obamacare is a terrible policy for the nation. He won election over former Sen. Russ Feingold in 2010, in part, by focusing on that issue. I respect his passion; many people in Wisconsin are right there with him. But this lawsuit is nothing more than another back-door attempt to attack a law that Congress passed and the president signed — a law that 16.4 million people are using to get health insurance.

What if instead of clogging the court's docket, the senator came up with a better law then persuaded members of Congress to pass it and the next president to sign it?

Judge Joel Flaum wrote for a three-judge panel of the 7th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals in Chicago:

"Respectfully, we do not see how Senator Johnson's reputation could be sullied or his electability diminished by being offered, against his will, a benefit that he then decided to refuse."

Nor do I.

As for Abrahamson, there is no doubt that the amendment Wisconsin voters approved on April 7 was aimed specifically at her, a strong woman whom some conservatives openly loathe. It's another example of the kind of vicious, hardball politics being played in Madison.

But the voters have spoken, and Abrahamson lost the argument.

Voters weren't persuaded that seniority is the best way to pick a chief justice. And they may not have liked the idea that a chief, once in possession of that title, retains it until he or she loses an election.

In ruling against Johnson's lawsuit last July, U.S. District Judge William Griesbach of Green Baywrote:

"There is nothing in the Constitution stipulating that all wrongs must have remedies, much less that the remedy must lie in federal court. In fact, given the Constitution's parsimonious grant of judicial authority, just the opposite is true."

It's an observation that applies equally well to both Johnson and Abrahamson.

David D. Haynes is editorial page editor for the Journal Sentinel. Email dhaynes@jrn.com Twitter: @DavidDHaynes