ALBUQUERQUE — In the process of becoming bowl eligible Saturday, Colorado State helped its in-state rivals, the Air Force Falcons.

The Rams’ 28-21 victory over New Mexico at University Stadium enabled Air Force to clinch the Mountain West’s Mountain Division title and claim a berth in the Dec. 5 league championship game against San Diego State.

The Falcons are 6-1 in league play after a 37-30 road win over Boise State on Friday. But now all other teams in the division, including the Lobos, have at least three league losses. If New Mexico had won Saturday, the division’s spot in the title game would have gone to the Lobos-Falcons winner next weekend.

The Rams, meanwhile, improved to 6-5 overall and 4-3 in the Mountain West, with a game at Fresno State remaining. Nick Stevens was 16-of-23 for 264 yards passing and Dalyn Dawkins rushed for 94 yards on 22 carries for the Rams, who won their third consecutive game.

Did Stevens mind doing a favor for Air Force?

“I don’t know how to say this,” Stevens said. “I was happy it was them because we beat them, mainly, but yeah, that’s what I was kind of thinking: ‘You’re welcome, Air Force.’ “

Asked the same question, CSU coach Mike Bobo responded: “No, not at all. Coach (Troy) Calhoun’s a great guy. They’ve earned it, they’ve deserved it. It’s not just, ‘Hey, we beat Air Force.’ You have to play a whole season, you have to play every game and it’s a credit to those guys, coming back and continuing to stick with what they do.”

CSU rushed for 221 yards, with true freshman running back Izzy Matthews (89 yards, 15 carries) supporting Dawkins’ productive might on the ground. Stevens hit clutch passes, including an 8-yard TD throw to Kivon Cartwright.

Down 21-20 entering the fourth quarter, the Rams took the lead with a 12-play, 92-yard drive, with Matthews accounting for 49 of the yards and going over from the 1 with 8:41 left. Stevens hit Joe Hansley for the two-point conversion that made it 28-21, and the Rams — with a Kevin Pierre-Louis interception at the CSU 29 snuffing out the Lobos’ final threat — held on.

Junior wideout Rashard Higgins had eight catches for 140 yards. His third catch of the game, a 13-yard out in the second quarter, was his 224th career reception — breaking the school set by David Anderson, who played for the Rams from 2002-05.

“How we started the year off, who would have thought we would be bowl eligible right now,” Higgins said. “That just (shows), never quit at whatever you do and always have faith.”

He said of the career record: “I know coming into this game, I needed a couple more catches, and I told myself … that was a goal I wanted to accomplish before the year was done. I’m glad it happened the New Mexico game.”

Bobo said CSU’s bowl eligibility “means a lot. … From where you were 2-4 and then 3-5 after the loss to San Diego State and you’ve got a lot of people wondering what’s going on. But I wasn’t wondering. I just wanted to reiterate to the guys that we were going to stay true to our standards and our disciplines of how we go about doing things. … I felt like nobody batted an eye, they answered the challenge and they kept working, and I’ve seen us improve every week.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei

Game balls

Deonte Clyburn, LB, CSU:

Had team-leading nine tackles Saturday at New Mexico, including seven solo, as the Rams contained the Lobos’ option attack.

Izzy Matthews, RB, CSU:

True freshman rushed for 89 yards, the majority of them coming on the Rams’ game-winning drive.

Rashard Higgins, WR, CSU:

Had eight catches for 140 yards and broke David Anderson’s school record for career receptions.

Terry Frei, The Denver Post