Law firm Patton Boggs LLP is laying off 10 lawyers and 35 staffers, the second round of cuts this year at the firm amid an overhaul intended to reverse declining profitability.

The layoffs, which were announced Thursday morning, will save the firm $5.5 million in salary and benefits, according to Patton Boggs managing partner Edward Newberry. “We’re doing all the things a firm should do to adjust to a very difficult environment,” he said in an interview.

Patton Boggs is also in merger discussions with at least two firms: Texas-based Locke Lord LLP and a smaller New York firm. According to an internal memo reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, the firm has not yet committed to a tie-up with Locke Lord but has begun “a thorough due diligence process” to evaluate the potential combination, and is in talks with “a well-respected firm in New York City. We also continue to carefully evaluate opportunities to combine with other firms.”

Known for its Washington, D.C., lobbying muscle, Patton Boggs has been ratcheting down on expenses and making other operational adjustments after disappointing financial results in 2012, when its revenue dropped 6.5%, to $317.5 million, and profit fell 14%.

Sixty-five lawyers and staff were laid off in February. More than 20 partners have also exited, though the firm has said some were asked to leave and some new partners have since come on board. As of August, Patton Boggs had about 465 lawyers.

This time around the attorney cuts are limited to junior lawyers at the firm’s New Jersey office, which had about 40 lawyers and had been the hub for a sizable litigation effort defending New York City and its contractors against claims relating to the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center. That work has largely wound down, and Mr. Newberry said the reductions there, which also include seven staff jobs, would bring the office size in line with the current revenue it produces.

Another 28 staffers are also being laid off across the firm’s other offices; Patton Boggs has six domestic locations and four in the Middle East.

“As the size of the firm has fluctuated,” Mr. Newberry said, “we are adjusting staff ratios to fit the size we are now. As a result we are returning to very strong profitability and poised to have a very strong year in 2014. We are very much on budget this year.”

In recent months a number of other big law firms have also trimmed staff ranks, including Silicon Valley’s Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, Arent Fox LLP, Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP, and, this month, Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson LLP.

Most have characterized the cuts as painful but necessary adjustments to an era when fewer support staffers are needed to support lawyers, as younger attorneys routinely type their own documents and manage their own calendars.

For example, from a Fried Frank memo on the cuts reviewed by WSJ:

“Today we have taken the difficult step to reduce our support staff by 29 people across the NY and DC offices. Like many other firms, we have taken this action to align our resources with evolving market conditions, technological advances and operational efficiencies… Those affected will be provided with severance pay, health benefits and career transition assistance. We thank them for their many contributions to the Firm and wish them the best in the future.”

Update: An earlier version of this post incorrectly said 36 staff jobs were cut, based on information supplied by the firm.