The endorsement of Hillary Clinton by Ohio Senator Sherrod Brown is a sign of the difficulty Senator Sanders is having persuading even ideologically similar Democrats to back him.

Change the conversation, change the world

Share this

Ouch. Senator Sherrod Brown (photo above) endorsed Hillary Clinton for president this morning, a move that must have smarted for presidential candidate Bernie Sanders, who has worked with the Ohio senator for more than a decade on progressive legislation.

When Bernie Sanders needed a cosponsor for left-leaning bills, Sherrod Brown was his go to guy, and vice-versa. Just a couple weeks ago the two introduced a bill together to make it easier for unions to organize. Earlier this year, they cosponsored a bill to repeal the so-called "Cadillac tax" on Obamacare. That was actually the second time the dynamic duo tried to do away with the "Cadillac tax," which hits members of labor unions especially hard. They introduced an amendment together to cut it from the original Affordable Care Act back in 2009 when the bill was being debated. And you may recall that earlier this year, Sanders and Brown led the fight to keep President Obama from having "fast track authority" over the TPP trade deal.

Senators Sanders and Brown were both elected in 2006, and have served together for fourteen years. Both are members of the Progressive Caucus, unabashedly pro-union and against free trade. And according to Vox, the two are close friends. That's why it must smart to discover Senator Brown has decided to back Hillary Clinton and not his old pal Bernie Sanders.

"From opposing unfair trade deals to fighting for a fair financial system, Hillary Clinton has shown she puts working families first," said Senator Brown in his announcement today. "She knows as president that her first job will be creating jobs for the middle class. I am proud to endorse her today because I know she will keep Ohio moving forward."

Senator Sanders (photo right) seems to have caught lightning in a bottle judging by the size and ferocity of his campaign crowds, but that popularity doesn't seem to have translated to endorsements by his fellow Democrats, even the ones who like him personally and agree with him on policy. To date, Hillary Clinton has received the endorsement of 34 of the Senate's 44 Democrats, 20 of the 188 Democrats in the House of Representatives, and 10 of the 18 Democratic governors.

In comparison, Senator Sanders has received the endorsement from exactly two major elected Democrats: Representatives Keith Ellison of Minnesota and Raúl Grijalva of Arizona, who co-chair the House Progressive Caucus. Even Peter Shumlin, the ultra-progressive governor of Vermont, Bernie Sanders' home state, endorsed Hillary.

As they say, politics ain't beanbag, and Sherrod Brown, senator for the all-important swing-state of Ohio, may see himself with a shot at the V.P. slot on the Hillary ticket. He'd probably have an even better chance of being chosen as a running mate by his old friend Bernie Sanders, but it looks like Senator Brown has made the political calculation that Bernie won't win.

There is still an outside chance that Senator Sanders could land the powerful endorsement of Elizabeth Warren, who enjoys rock star status among populists in the Democratic Party, and which could certainly be a game changer.

Senator Brown's photo is from his Facebook photo album

Bernie Sanders photo is from Richard Angwin via Twitter