Stock Market Headlines:

Stock futures are shifting lower this morning. Dow Jones futures were falling 42 points, Nasdaq futures were behind 8.75 points and S&P 500 futures were down 4.75 points. (CNN Money)

Headline equities of the Asia Pacific market closed mixed today as risk sentiments subdued amid sluggish U.S. markets in overnight trades and as the World Bank trimmed its forecast of the region's economic growth. (Business Standard)

The yen hit a one-month high against the euro today after Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe spoke about the disadvantages of a weaker currency and data showed a huge fall in German industrial output. (Reuters)

U.S. Business Headlines:

Walmart is taking one-stop shopping to another area: health insurance. (Associated Press)

Federal prosecutors in San Francisco have opened an investigation into controversial emails and other contacts between California regulators and Pacific Gas & Electric. (Los Angeles Times)

Many cars are now equipped with hands-free calling technology, but a new study found the features might not be as effective in reducing distraction while driving as motorists may think. (NBC News Connecticut)

Alaska Airlines has placed an order with Boeing for 10 next-generation 737-900ER (extended range) aircraft to replace its ageing fleet of 737-400, allowing the carrier to expand services from its Seattle hub. (Aerospace-technology.com)

Panasonic plans to initially invest billions of yen in Tesla's gigafactory in Nevada, which will research and produce lithium-ion batteries for electric vehicles. (ZDNet)

Technology Headlines:

Online retailer Amazon's tax arrangements with Luxembourg are being investigated by European regulators, becoming the latest global company accused of cutting deals with member states to gain an effective subsidy. (Reuters)

In the past three months, the price of the bitcoin has fallen nearly 50 percent - from about $630 per bitcoin to $320 per bitcoin, according to CoinDesk's bitcoin price index, which averages the prices on major exchanges. (New Zealand Herald)

Samsung may accelerate a push into wearable devices and home appliances that communicate wirelessly after its quarterly profit plunged 60 percent because of stagnating smartphone sales. (Bloomberg Businessweek)

Yahoo said Monday it has fixed a bug that was mistaken for the Shellshock flaw, but no user data was affected. (IDG News Service)

World Business Headlines:

A day after German industrial orders saw their biggest monthly drop since the height of the global financial crisis in 2009, its industrial output figures for August plunged by 4 percent, also the biggest fall in five years. (Irish Times)

A former senior banker at a leading British bank became the first person in Britain to plead guilty to a criminal charge in a continuing inquiry into the manipulation of a global benchmark interest rate known as Libor. (New York Times)

The Bank of Japan marked down its assessment of industrial production as dissent spread on the outlook for inflation. (Bloomberg Businessweek)

Chinese broadband supplier Huawei wants support for so-called 'Net Neutrality' regulations to be abandoned, arguing such requirements are hindering the development of Internet services. (TechWeek Europe)