Pastor Vincent James of Elim Baptist Church addresses those gathered Friday in the Mayor’s Gallery at the kickoff of the three-day Weekend of Hope, which is aiming to create better outcomes for young black men. (Photo: Matthew Glowicki)

A new initiative targeting some of the more criminally active, economically struggling areas in the Louisville metro launched Friday with the goal of reducing homicides and improving outcomes for young black boys and men.

The concept and the problems it seeks to address are not new, but organizers are hoping the Weekend of Hope will bring about a renewed commitment and innovative ideas.

“We talk about these big goals, but the solution to each and every one is one person at a time,” Mayor Greg Fischer said to those gathered Friday evening in the Mayor’s Gallery.

He said the efforts are a pilot, one that he hopes will find success and expand.

“This is all about you all,” Fischer said, pointing to the young black men in the audience. “We want to see you flourish.”

Friday’s event was a kick-off to a weekend of planning a long-term effort called Zones of Hope. The pilot initiative will target the California, Russell, Newburg, Parkland and Shawnee areas and focus on programming and community partnerships.

The zones were selected based on data showing employment, crime and education levels, said Anthony Smith, director of Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods.

The initiative received a one year, $226,400 grant from the James Graham Brown Foundation of Louisville, which Smith said will help hire a project manager and support organizers in each of the zones.

Smith said the funding, as well as focused consistency by the more than 50 organizations involved will help differentiate Zones of Hope from past efforts.

“We don’t believe this weekend alone is going to change everything and get people to buy into it,” Smith said in an interview. “We need to keep showing up. We have to show people this is different.”

Saturday, community members at meetings in four of the neighborhoods will create a work plan for furthering the Zones of Hope initiatives in their neighborhood into the future.

“Each neighborhood is different,” Smith said. “They have different vibes. They have different resources. Some need more than others. They might be experiencing some of the same things, but they’re different.”

Each neighborhood will create a report and share it Sunday at a closing event at the Kentucky African American Heritage Center.

Louisville Metro Chief of Police Steve Conrad said the recent shooting death of toddler Ne’Riah Miller highlights a need for violent crime to stop.

“We are out there doing what we do,” Conrad said. “But what we’re doing isn’t working. We have to figure out a way to go about this differently.”

He called on residents to have greater cooperation, trust and respect to help solve the violence problem.

“We can’t do anything without your help,” he said. “These children deserve to have a safe neighborhood so they can have a future.”

Casey Family Programs, a national organization that works to reduce the need for foster care by building up communities, first became involved in Louisville with the Cities United initiative.

The organization is now partnering with metro government to support Zones of Hope by funding a resource development employee to work on the initiative, said Carol Mizoguchi, director of strategic engagement and initiatives for Casey Family Programs.

Elim Baptist Church pastor Vincent James has been involved with the Zones of Hope initiative since its inception.

He said he hasn’t seen the same level of collaboration involved in the new initiative in former efforts, and that the plans generated by community members will be key in forwarding its goals.

“You have the opportunity ... to work with people who will put action behind it and boots on the ground to make it happen,” James said of the plans. “Tomorrow is where the real work takes place.”

Reporter Matthew Glowicki can be reached at (502) 582-4989. Follow him on Twitter at @MattGlo.

Want to take part?

Four community conversations will take place from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Saturday, Sept. 20. All are welcome.

California Community Center, 1600 W. Saint Catherine St.

Baxter Community Center, 1125 Cedar Court

Newburg Community Center, 4810 Exeter Avenue

Parkland Family Scholar House, 1309 Catalpa St.

Source: Office for Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1umjaNO