Would provide multiple pathways to measure success

MERINO — Buffalo RE-4J School District is considering creating an alternative assessment and accreditation system. Superintendent Rob Sanders spoke to the Board of Education earlier this week about the possibility.

Sanders spoke about a pilot program that could be allowed under the No Child Left Behind law. This pilot would require several districts across the state to come together and create an alternative assessment and accreditation system. Currently there are 12 districts that are interested.

The districts would have to partner with an institute of higher learning. According to Sanders, the University of Colorado and Fort Lewis College are interested. Districts would have to work with the colleges to create a new assessment and accountability system that would replace the current state system for a period of five years.

"We believe that the new system would be focused on the whole child and provides multiple pathways to measure success. It would be a system designed to better serve students, parents and community," Sanders said.

Later in the meeting, the board heard an update on the waiver the district filed to be exempt from the Performance Based Assessment portion of the PARCC assessment. The waiver was heard by the State Board of Education on Feb. 18; Sanders went and testified.

"We filed the waiver with full knowledge that there was a high likelihood that it would be denied. We went ahead because we could not sit idly by without trying to do something," Sanders told the state board.

Advertisement

"The decision to get into the PARCC consortium is one in a long line of decisions made in Denver that have a negative impact for rural districts. As we get into the testing season — we do not call it spring anymore! — we are frustrated because we are going to knowingly limit students' access to learning opportunities."

He pointed out that Merino's computer labs are connected to or contained in the schools' libraries. With students having to complete the assessment online both libraries and labs would have to be shut down for the last 2.5 months of school.

"We know this to be true because we tested 18 seniors in the fall and it took seven days," Sanders told the state board, adding that the district will have to test about 270 students in the coming weeks.

"This will impact our ability to check out books, do research, work as a group in the lab, impact keyboarding class and potentially impact our online foreign language class. We really should be rethinking our approach to testing when I know of one superintendent that has already opted his children out and I know of several more that are considering it."

The State Board decided to table the decision until the next board meeting to allow more districts to apply for the waiver. They also passed a resolution to not hold districts accountable when parents opt children out of the state assessments.

Elementary Principal Courtney Rank spoke about the PBA portion of the PARCC assessment during her report. The elementary is expecting to administer two assessments per day, with a total of two hours scheduled for each unit, during the weeks of March 9-12 and March 23-27. There will be three units in the English/language arts/literacy session and two units in the math session. March 30-April 3 will be designated for make-up sessions as needed.

In other business, Sanders gave an update on the teacher pipeline project with Boulder Valley District. Eligible teachers would be those that are currently student teaching or just graduated the previous year. The program is open to all Northeast BOCES districts.

This project would allow Merino to tap into Boulder's teacher pool to hire teachers. Those involved in the program would be required to successfully teach for two years in a rural school and then they would be guaranteed a position back in Boulder.

Additionally, a representative from Ameresco presented an option for the district's utilities and HVAC. There was an analysis of the district's current expenses related to energy consumption, the company claims the district can save approximately $488,000 over 12 years if they chose the option Ameresco presented. They payments would be approximately $40,000 a year.

The board will make a decision on whether or not to go with the company's suggestion at a future meeting.

Later, the board discussed the CTT consortium the district has been a part of for the past two years. The consortium has recently been re-evaluated, with several members toying with the idea of changing the focus of the consortium's time together to a more professional development approach.

As a result Sanders sent out a survey to staff and spoke to both principals and while the survey is about 50-50, the decision was made for Merino to pull out of the consortium.

"I am very proud of the work we accomplished while attending. We created a collaborative group of people that each person could rely upon for advice and look to for help," Sanders said.

The board also heard about a School Readiness Assessment. The READ Act requires that every kindergarten student have the assessment. The district is currently using Teaching Strategies Gold and the state has said that those that use TS Gold can get some of the money back for the purchase.

There was also a discussion around transcripts and why activities such as participation in sports and activities are not put on transcripts. It was also asked why the district doesn't have grade percentages on the transcript, as well as the grading scale.

It was explained that the transcript is a record of the students' academic accomplishment and not intended to be a list of everything they participated in while in high school. Sanders will look into why the district took the percentages off the transcript and see if the grading scales could be included in the transcript.

In other business, it was announced the district has a new food service director, Jonathan Lankford, who officially starts March 1, and the board approved Brent Fiscus as volunteer assistant boys basketball coach for the remainder of the season.

Callie Jones: 970-526-9286, cjones@journal-advocate.com