Topics: aol_on, Donald Trump, Elections 2016, GOP primary, News, Politics News

On Friday, the Washington Examiner published an opinion column by Philip Klein that becomes more and more astounding as you read it. Anyone looking for an example of the panic overtaking the Republican Party as Donald Trump’s presidential campaign continues to steamroll all comers could hardly do better than Klein’s piece. It is a window into the schism in the GOP that no one in the party seems to have any idea how to fix.

Here’s how the column opens:

For decades, liberals have created a caricature of Republicans as being more about bombast and white resentment than substance and principles. Should Donald Trump win the GOP presidential nomination, it would help validate this cartoonish portrait.

Set aside for a moment the hilarity of trying to deflect liberals’ broad caricatures of Republicans by…broadly caricaturing left-wing critiques of conservative policy. Conservative “substance and principles” are not mutually exclusive from “white resentment.” I would argue that the principles upon which some – not all – conservative policies are based appeal to and are rooted in white resentment.

For example, there is ample evidence that conservative attempts at ending the “welfare state” succeed in attracting white votes so long as the voters think of the welfare state as being benefits that go to poor black folks in the ghetto and not the Medicare and Social Security that keeps the Republican base of mostly older white voters alive and voting for the GOP.

Put another way, Ronald Reagan did not exactly suffer conservative opprobrium for his famous comments about a “Cadillac-driving welfare queen” and “the strapping young buck” using welfare money to buy T-bone steaks. Nor, to my knowledge, did he ever have to admit that the welfare queen was an exceptional case, a fraudster in Chicago who ran a years-long scam to collect benefits, and whom he used to smear black women on welfare in general. Meanwhile, his efforts to rein in Social Security and Medicare spending were done in part by congressional Republicans.

Ironic, then, that Klein later cites Reagan in positive terms and complains about liberals holding him up as an example of a “personality rather than substantive leader.” Oh, he was substantive all right. And that substance often took the form of dog-whistles to racial resentment. And he’s still the heroic president Republicans hold up as an example to be emulated by today’s candidates. Which they do in a variety of ways such as talking about how Democrats attract minority votes by promising “free stuff” and “goodies.” They do this while promising to protect Medicare benefits, which a majority of elderly white people rely on, while promising to cut food stamps, which are disproportionately used by poor blacks.

Klein continues:

To Republicans and conservatives who got involved in politics to advance a set of ideas — the type of people who get their kicks debating the finer points of tax policy, national security, and Commerce Clause jurisprudence — this liberal caricature has seemed utterly bizarre and intentionally dishonest.

Conservatives involved in politics, sure, but that is a subset of Republicans. Liberals are talking about the voters who are supporting Trump, of whom there are a lot more.