The Middlesex County Office of Health Services is reporting that a raccoon tested positive for rabies in Carteret in the vicinity of Hastings Place and Wedgewood Drive. (Photo: ~File) Story Highlights A raccoon got in a fight with an East Brunswick resident’s dogs

The raccoon died. It has tested positive for rabies

The dogs had been vaccinated for rabies and will receive a booster shot

A raccoon spotted in the area of Whitehall and Agate roads has tested positive for rabies, according to the Middlesex County Office of Health Services.

This is the first rabid animal reported within Middlesex County this year and the first rabid animal reported in East Brunswick, county officials said in a new release Friday.

On Wednesday, an East Brunswick animal control officer responded to a call about a raccoon which had been in a fight with a resident’s dogs.

The raccoon died and was sent to the New Jersey Department of Health Laboratory for testing. On Friday, the animal tested positive for rabies.

Two people were exposed to the raccoon and they were notified to consult with a doctor about being exposed. The dogs were vaccinated for rabies and will receive a booster vaccine from a veterinarian, and will be kept under a 45 day observation period.

In addition, a Middlesex County Office of Health Services’ registered environmental health specialist will be distributing rabies fact sheets in the East Brunswick area.

The Middlesex County Office of Health Services continues to monitor rabies cases within the township. Residents should report wild animals showing signs of unusual behavior to the police department. In addition, residents should avoid contact with wild animals and immediately report any bites from wild or domestic animals to the local health department and consult a physician as soon as possible. Residents should also make sure all family pets are up to date on their rabies vaccinations and licenses.

Rabies is caused by a virus which can infect all warm-blooded mammals, including people. The rabies virus is found in the saliva of a rabid animal and is transmitted by a bite, or possibly by contamination of an open cut. New Jersey is enzootic for raccoon and bat variants of rabies. Bats, raccoons, skunks, groundhogs, foxes, cats, and dogs represent about 95% of animals diagnosed with rabies in the United States.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1FISm17