Dec. 7, remember Pearl Harbor

Freehold, N.J.: My father, Joe Sr., served on the battleship USS North Carolina (BB-55) from 1940 to 1946. After Pearl Harbor, it was the only fully functioning battleship remaining in the United States Navy. Built in the Brooklyn Navy Yard, it sailed from Newport, RI, through the Panama Canal and to Pearl Harbor, while rescue operations were still underway. Nicknamed, “The Showboat,” she entered the harbor with her full complement of sailors in their dress whites, at attention, in honor of their fellow sailors who had died in the Japanese sneak attack. The North Carolina was the most decorated battleship in WWII and survived a torpedo hit in 1942 while protecting the USS Wasp, with the loss of four crewmen. The North Carolina is now fully restored and sits in Wilmington Harbor in her namesake state, open 364 days a year to the public, and serves as a memorial to all military men and women who gave their lives in WWII. Joe Benedek Jr.

Too much force

Brick, N.J.: The death of Eric Garner is a tragedy that affects every one of us. I’m sure it was not the police officer’s intention to cause his death, but was it necessary to use such force on a man just for selling cigarettes? I know he was a big man, but couldn’t they just have issued him a summons? It’s against the law, but can you compare it with murder, rape or assault? James Mack

Ditto

Kearny, N.J.: I’ll agree with all the police apologists that Eric Garner brought his own death on himself by not submitting to being handcuffed and arrested when one of them can tell me exactly what crime he’d committed that would justify his being forcibly taken into custody. It’s questionable as to whether he was even selling “loosies” when the police showed up too late to handle the fight Garner had broken up himself. But facts don’t matter to this crowd which justified a cop beating an elderly Chinese man bloody for the “crime” of jaywalking earlier this year. In case they don’t realize it, we don’t live in a police state; the U.S. is supposed to be a nation of laws in which citizens have rights, among them the right to not be arrested without cause. John Woodmaska

Sitting it out

Staten Island: Since the mayor has such a distaste for the NYPD, cops should do a blue-out. Then the demonstrators can protest freely and Mayor de Blasio can sit atop the Empire State Building playing his fiddle while New York burns. Joanne Clemente

Failed life savers

Coral Springs, Fla.: Aren’t the cops trained to administer CPR? Because as Eric Garner lay dying on the sidewalk, not one of them attempted CPR. Or did they think his life was not worth saving? This “dangerous criminal” committing the unspeakable crime of selling loose cigarettes had to be taken off the streets? I am disgusted! It seems as if New York’s Finest no longer are. Kathy Rosa

Here to work

Brooklyn: To Voicer Nancy Locke: I live in a Brooklyn neighborhood that is about one-half native New Yorkers and one-half immigrant — mostly Asian and Hispanic. I see my immigrant neighbors going to work every day. At the same time I have neighbors born here who are home and are collecting government assistance. Check how many new businesses have been opened by immigrants in the neighborhoods you name. They are paying plenty of taxes and working long hours. Exactly what is not law-abiding about these people? Lastly, I would suggest you make an effort to get to know some new people. Maybe your attitude would change. Cheryl Rosenthal

Straight talker

Brooklyn: To Voicer Mariann Tepedin: Obviously, you don’t read the Daily News every day, otherwise you’d know that liberal David Axelrod likened Chris Christie to Tony Soprano. And unless you were a fan of “The Sopranos,” you wouldn’t know who Tony was or that my comment was a compliment, because there is no duplicity in a mob boss or Christie. MaryAnne Zoleo

Panning Pan

Maspeth: Peter Pan did not want to grow up, but what is the Daily News’ excuse for not growing up? Can’t you give a break to an attempt to bring wholesome entertainment to families? What is so bad about a musical joy ride to an imaginary place where there is no gratuitous sex, bloodshed or violence? By shooting down these classic musical productions, you are doing a great disservice to a whole new generation of children who are already overdosed on the various housewives and Kim Kardashian. Is there no place for a sweet story, lovely music and just plain fun? Come on, Daily News. You must grow up! Carol A. Sym

Table stakes

Belle Harbor: If Kim Kardashian can bend over long enough, we can use her backside as a card table. Anybody for a hand of poker? Joseph Manello

Guilty as charged

Brooklyn: Why is the news media trying to act as if Bill Cosby is innocent of these sexual assault accusations? These victims, with everything to lose and nothing to gain, would not come out after all of these decades and lie about Cosby. Admit it, Cosby is a serial date rapist. Natherlene Bolden

Hillary the headcase

Astoria: Poor Hillary Clinton. Ever since she was under sniper fire in Bosnia years ago she has never really played with a full deck. She recently said in a speech that we should “respect and empathize” with our enemies. The same monsters who are killing innocent people and want to kill all Americans she wants us to respect and empathize with? Me thinks Hillary is cuckoo or has a screw loose. I, for one, have no respect for terrorists and personally don’t give a damn what they feel. She should tell that to the men and women who fought against those monsters and who currently are fighting. She wants to be President of what, ISIS? Minnie Mangenugas

The sweet science

Yonkers: I know that boxing is a dying sport, but do you have to put nails in the coffin? Not a word or a peep about the Bernard Hopkins-Sergey Kovalev fight? Warren Isaacs

Up in smoke

Bronx: To Voicer James Panzo: Thanks for the belly laugh (which I sorely needed) regarding Cheech and Chong. It was so appropriate. Mary Ferrara

A toll too high

Brooklyn: We used to enjoy taking trips on weekends to malls. But now with the Verrazano toll going up to $16, we will stay local. Billy Somma

Played for fools

Whiting, N.J.: Democrats led by President Obama hired Jonathan Gruber, a professor at MIT, to be the architect of Obamacare. He was paid $400,000, applauded by the entire Democratic Congress, and then went on TV several times and called all Americans stupid. I am a veteran of WWII who proudly served in the U.S. Navy alongside 4,183,466 other sailors fighting the enemy for all Americans, and we won. I was being paid $42 per month. I ask all the Democrats who applauded this person, Gruber, were we all stupid? Thomas Little

A man to admire

Forest Hills: I was saddened to read about Al Dark dying. While growing up in the Bronx in the 1950’s I admired him as an outstanding player. I also had his baseball card. He was never compared to Pee Wee Reese or Phil Rizzuto but was still an All-Star shortstop. Stewart Krieger

Seeing conspiracies

Bayside: When Rachel Noerdlinger had to finally go, Mayor de Blasio’s ranted that “something’s wrong” and equated the situation to the McCarthy era. What’s wrong is that his wife (who has no official position) had an assistant who is paid $179,000 a year by the taxpayers of the City of New York. I don’t think a police precinct commander makes that much. Kenneth J. Murphy

Going it alone

Brooklyn: When he goes up and down the steps of Air Force One, the President’s attitude seems to be “Hand rails? I don’t need no stinkin’ hand rails.” It’s the same with the U.S. Constitution. “Congress? I don’t need no stinkin’ Congress.” Wesley G. Forrest