On the ballot this November is Amendment 2, which could change the justice system in the state and potentially open the door for political grandstanding in a branch of government that was intended to be fair and impartial.

Amendment 2 has the potential to change how appellate judges are appointed in Tennessee. The Tennessee Plan created a system by which appellate judges were selected on merit. An important component of the Tennessee Plan is the retention vote. During the first statewide election following a judge's appointment, his or her name is placed on the ballot for a "yes" or "no" retention vote. This retention vote affirms or denies whether a judge will remain on the court for another eight-year term. Last year, however, our legislature eliminated the decades-old Judicial Nominating Commission, thus opening the door for the popular election of appellate judges.

The purpose of the retention vote is to allow the highest courts in the state to remain neutral and fair. The judges serving on these courts must be able to review each case and make thoughtful decisions based on the law — not pressure from one political party or another.

However, there is an organized effort to secure a majority of "no" retention votes during the Aug. 7 statewide election for three of the Supreme Court justices. This political scheming could create an opportunity for opponents to appoint new justices from the same political party and ideology, thereby injecting the same partisan politics that we have in our legislative branch of government.

In addition to the overt campaigning against these Supreme Court justices, there is the desire by many elected officials in the state to see Amendment 2 — which is on the ballot in November — fail. If approved by the majority of Tennessee voters with a "yes" vote, Amendment 2 would amend the Constitution of Tennessee and how appellate judges are appointed by requiring a gubernatorial appointment, subject to confirmation by the legislature, followed by a retention vote. Should Amendment 2 fail, alternative legislation known as SB 1896/HB 1767 would take effect, requiring all future appellate court justices be elected by means of a contested election.

The goal of appellate courts is to create a fair and impartial judicial system that will review each case for its merits and rule according to the law. Courts should be protected from the interference of politics. A fair and impartial court system further protects the rights of all Tennesseans. We live in a time where money, campaign rhetoric and ad buying many times dominate campaigns. It is critical that our courts are not subject to partisan politics and these tactics. That is why the Women's Political Collaborative of Tennessee has engaged in this issue.

The primary goal of WPCTN is the full and equal participation of women in government and the political process at all levels. This includes educating voters about the importance of participating in the upcoming retention elections, and discussing the importance of supporting a fair and impartial judiciary. It is critical that voters go to the polls and vote "yes" to retain the justices on the ballot, sending a clear message to those who seek to politicize our courts.

Nancy Krider Corley is an attorney, a member of the board of the Women's Political Collaborative of Tennessee and a member of the Lawyers' Association for Women.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/opinion/2014/06/23/amendment-threatens-impartiality-judiciary/11238437/