One of Marin's most respected nonprofits, Hospice By The Bay — formerly Hospice of Marin — may soon surrender its independence.

The board of America's second-oldest hospice is considering a "strategic alliance" with a another institution. A likely option sees the organization being absorbed by Sacramento-based Sutter Health.

The local hospice's board hasn't made a final decision but it has already vetted merger options.

One motivation, according to Hospice board president Dennis Gilardi, surrounds mammoth changes facing America's health industry, including hospice providers.

The hospice concept is that curative treatment is discontinued, pain managed and distressing symptoms controlled in patients diagnosed with six months to live. It's the humane way to handle life's final stage.

It's a terrific concept, but what was once a province of charities is now seen by some as a lucrative business that's become a $14 billion industry.

Over half America's hospice operations are for-profit. Expert at marketing, these bottom-line corporations put pressure on people-oriented operations like Hospice By The Bay. The agency serves Marin, Sonoma, Napa, San Francisco and Northern San Mateo counties.

Nationwide, 83 percent of hospice providers' income derives from Medicare. The recent federal sequestration's spending decreases forced cutbacks on the hospice industry.

The ongoing concern in this highly regulated industry is that competitive pressure and declining Medicare reimbursement rates are jeopardizing small community-based providers. Even a slight daily reimbursement rate decrease jeopardizes their business model.

The cost squeeze is a byproduct of Obamacare's coordinated efforts to rein in American medical care's out-of-control costs. Institutions are encouraged to join networks, similar to Kaiser's pioneering model, creating a vertical alignment of health care services.

The unintended consequence of this long-overdue cost-containment effort is that in a competitive environment, some changes will produce a less service-oriented type of care.

An alliance with a larger medical system, whether with Sutter or a similar large-scale operator, according to Gilardi, could facilitate "economies of scale, cost containment and (address) shifting sources of payment."

Kitty Whitaker, Hospice By The Bay's new CEO, indicates the Larkspur-based nonprofit has no debt, a $25 million fund balance and makes a small operating surplus supplemented by dedicated donors.

While it is now in solid financial condition, according to Whitaker, "Things can change quickly."

With medical trends shifting, Hospice's priority is its 40-year-long role of providing superb non-residential palliative care for those in the final stages of their life continues long-term.

Gilardi cites San Diego Hospice's messy bankruptcy. Once a top-rated operation, the Southern California nonprofit was squeezed by tougher reimbursement rates and ultimately torpedoed when it violated Medicare regulations. It went under, creating havoc for patients, staff and creditors. Scripps Health, San Diego's dominant hospital chain, took over its role.

Some fear that Sutter, with its bottom-line corporate culture, would be hard-pressed to retain Hospice's culture of quality.

Sutter left a bad taste for many Marinites when it was Marin General Hospital's contract operator. While technically not-for-profit, Sutter and its well-paid management benefit from a legal loophole not requiring it to provide any charity care to qualify as for its lucrative tax-exempt status.

Novato Community Hospital is also part of Sutter's chain.

Its hospice program is six times as large as that run by Hospice By The Bay. Despite that difference, Sutter, according to GuideStar.org, the nonprofit database, provides only one-half the charity care that Hospice delivers.

A Sutter takeover would fundamentally change the organization. The question is would that move be good or bad for Hospice's clients and its staff.

Hospice By The Bay is an attractive acquisition candidate. Well run, financially solvent, with satisfied clients, a dedicated staff, its high reputation would add luster to any brand, perhaps especially to one whose public image needs repair.

Columnist Dick Spotswood of Mill Valley share his views on local politics on Sundays and Wednesdays in the IJ. His e-mail address is spotswood@comcast.net