Topics: Editor's Picks, Genius grants, Junot Diaz, MacArthur grants, MFA, Thomas Frank, Thomas Pynchon, Tom Franl, Innovation News

It’s genius season again. From NPR to The New York Times they’re talking about where people were when they found out they had won the MacArthur Fellowship, our society’s most prestigious honor. Twenty-one of these so-called “Genius Grants” were announced two weeks ago by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation of Chicago; they carry with them a prize of $625,000, to be spent over the course of five years however the Genius in question wishes.

Over the years, stories on the subject have always seemed to start with the phone call from MacArthur HQ in Chicago. Where was the Genius when he or she got the call? What was it like to find out that someone was giving you all that moolah? The famous critic, it was reported, finds she must sit down. The Southerner lets rip with a yell. The cellist thinks it’s a wrong number. The bioengineer thinks it’s a prank. The radio pioneer, who’s visiting a remote Mexican village, has to make his way to the town’s only phone. Their lives have been changed! Here is my favorite, from a 1992 article about the Genius Grants in The New York Times:

“And once there was only a long silence, then a distant thump: the sound of a body hitting a laboratory floor in Cambridge, Mass., as a winner fainted.”

All harmless and amusing stuff, of course. No, the Parable of the Phone Call has nothing to do with brilliance, or merit, or creativity, or whatever it is the Genius Grants are supposed to commemorate, but one can hardly blame the press corps for dumbing things down in this way, decade after decade. After all, it humanizes these people who otherwise stand so high above the rest of us.

What I discovered, however, was that it isn’t only the press that pushes this silly narrative. It’s also the people who hand out the Fellowship themselves; they want you to know how their philanthropy affects its recipients in the most intimate and immediate way. The MacArthur website features videotaped interviews with Fellowship winners; in every one I have listened to, the Genius in question winds up telling about how he or she felt when the call came, and often in strangely religious language. “When I first got the call from the MacArthur Foundation,” says playwright Samuel Hunter, “it was sort of like an out-of-body experience.” “You hear about MacArthur fellows,” relates public defender Jonathan Rapping, “and you sort of think of them as people who walk on water and do great work. . . . So, it was disbelief.”

Why would the Foundation itself encourage us to heed the Parable of the Phone Call? In other situations, they are anxious to correct public simplifications of their philanthropic work—when we stupidly call it a “genius grant,” for example, rather than what it really is, a prize for “exceptional creativity.” But this business with the life-changing phone calls—this they approve of. How come?

*

In his 2005 study of prize-giving, “The Economy of Prestige,” the English professor James English takes note of the dizzying proliferation of honors and awards in recent decades—it’s “a kind of cultural frenzy,” he writes. “Just indexing all these prizes is a daunting task.” Indeed it is. In the course of researching this article, I discovered numerous distinctions I had never heard of before, including the American Creativity Association’s Special Achievement Award, a right-wing imitation of the Genius Grant called the Bradley Prize (every conservative newspaper columnist will eventually get one), and a literary honor that is named for Rob Bingham, a friend of mine who died tragically in 1999.

What James English tells us about the countless foundations and academies that make these awards is that they are not simply neutral observers, impartially recognizing merit from some lofty height. They are always engaged in a cultural project of their own—usually to establish themselves as authorities and their own concerns as correct ones.

In pursuit of that project, all award programs face the same problems. Because the reputation of the prize must itself be established for the academy in question to set about judging the merits of others, all prize programs—even the many “counter-prizes” set up to resist establishment prizes—lean toward convention. They tend overwhelmingly to reward people whose reputations are already made. Indeed, as the competition between prizes grows more intense, English tells us, the pressure to associate a prize with safe and unquestionably prestigious figures only grows. This is why competing prizes within a field always tend to converge on the same individuals, prize magnets who are fated to stagger through life under the weight of their accumulated laurels.

Prize programs are also subject to scandals and controversies—scandals over the many lousy choices that award juries make and controversies like the avalanche of derision that every year buries the Grammys. There is also the related problem of honorees who hold the whole prize racket in contempt—like Sinclair Lewis, who declined a Pulitzer in 1926; or Jean-Paul Sartre, who declined a Nobel in 1964; or George C. Scott, who declined an Oscar in 1971; or Thomas Pynchon, who won the National Book Award in 1974 but sent a comedian to accept it with a speech of solemn-sounding gibberish.

Well, no one has ever declined a Genius Grant, as far as I have been able to determine. (When Salon asked the MacArthur Foundation about this directly, they refused to comment on the subject.) Even Thomas Pynchon was “congenial and gracious” about accepting it, according to a story in the Chicago Tribune, when he got one back in 1988.

Nor have the Genius Grants ever been the focus of the kind of critical free-for-all that every year engulfs England’s Booker Prize—which, someone always finds reason to insist, has once again gone to the wrong goddam author. Virtually the only really persistent critics of the MacArthur are found on the cranky culture-war right, complaining about the honor being given—yawn—to the politically correct.

By and large, the way the mainstream media talks about the MacArthur Fellowships is the way the Foundation surely wants the media to talk about them, which is to say, in tones of reverence and admiration for the Geniuses in question. A cliché almost as common as the Parable of the Phone Call in genius journalism is what we might call the Delirious Apprehension of the Eclectic, in which the writer is simply amazed by the overwhelming diversity of the fields that have been honored. “They’re historians and scientists and one of them is a stringed-instrument bow maker,” as a gee-whiz NPR story from 2012 had it. “A neurologist who studies dementia. A jazz drummer who celebrates Latin rhythm. A remedial-reading teacher who writes poetry,” begins a Chicago Tribune account from 2011. And were those geniuses somehow to get together in one place—wow! Here is how that 1992 New York Times story described photographs of just such an event:

“Swimsuited policy analysts lounge at a torchlit poolside on Maui as a theoretical physicist lectures on infinity and galactic spirals. A historian of the Ottoman Empire and a biophysicist on a whale-watching cruise lean perilously over a boat rail, discussing whale song. A marine biologist scrambles up an active volcano’s rocky slope.”

And here, just for fun, is a passage from a Donald Barthelme story called “The Genius” that appeared in The New Yorker in 1971, ten years before the advent of the Genius Grant.

“The genius proposes a world inventory of genius, in order to harness and coordinate the efforts of genius everywhere to create a better life for all men.

Letters are sent out. . . .

The response is staggering!

Telegrams pour in. . . .

Geniuses of every stripe offer their cooperation.

The Times prints an editorial praising the idea. . . .

Three thousand geniuses in one room!

The genius falls into an ill humor. He refuses to speak to anyone for eight days.”

*

Here is where I should mention all the things I’m supposed to disclose. For many years I have known, and from 2010 to 2013 I worked for Harper’s publisher Rick MacArthur, whose grandfather started the MacArthur Foundation and whose father launched the Fellows Program. And: In 2005 I was paid to speak to an audience at the MacArthur Foundation on the subject of the culture wars.

*

The real promise of the MacArthur Fellowship program is that it does not require grant writing, or applications, or even achievement of a conventional sort. It could theoretically be used to bypass the world of foundation favorites altogether. It could single out worthy individuals who have been unfairly overlooked, lift them up, launch their careers, and force the world to pay attention. That even seems to have been one of the ideas for the program in the beginning.