Stat frat. Kiz, tell me you’re not another one of those guys who can quote every Peyton Manning stat in the book. There are two kinds of quarterbacks. One focuses on the numbers he will put down in the stat book; the other is focused on the numbers he will put up on the scoreboard. Manning is the former. Brock Osweiler is the latter. The latter wins Super Bowls. The former crumbles under pressure during the playoffs.

L.T., representing the 970

Kiz: There’s a great divide in Broncos Country that I didn’t see coming. Those who really love Osweiler often really dislike Manning. Why? Well, here’s my theory: Rocky Mountain raised, Osweiler was welcomed into the family from Day One of his NFL career. Hey, Brock: Can we buy you a beer? On the other hand, Manning — cerebral, a little distant and definitely not a cowboy — will forever be viewed by some fans as an Indianapolis Colt in Broncos clothing. Hey, Peyton: You ain’t from around here, are you?

Journalistic jerk. I found it interesting that you wrote a column about how Nuggets rookie Emmanuel Mudiay remains confident despite his struggles. You shed a national light on Mudiay being “the worst point guard in the NBA” and perhaps do worse damage to his confidence than his performance warrants. No one expects you to be the best writer in the world, but try not to be an un- warranted jerk.

Matt, roots for home team

Kiz: Yes, Mudiay is only 19 years old. He’s also paid $3 million to do a job. And, right now, he can’t do that job as well as teammate Jameer Nelson. If you’re coach Michael Malone, and you regularly sacrifice victories so Mudiay can learn from his mistakes, the strategy invites cynical eye rolls by the veteran Denver players who really do want to win. That’s one way a team quits on a season.

School of hardwood. Nice column on Mudiay. It needed to be said. He’s not ready to be where he’s at. Mudiay has a real shaky handle, a flawed, staggered-foot jumper and not enough hops to finish when he penetrates to rim. I know he’s young, and sounds like a great kid, but he wouldn’t be a starter for a lot of top Division I college teams. Just saying.

Terry, Highlands Ranch

Kiz: Mudiay is a prime example of why the NBA might be a wonderful place to get paid, but college is a far better place for a young player’s basketball education.

Table for two. And today’s parting shot throws respected, intelligent and (darn handsome, I might add) television journalist Vic Lombardi under the same bus as yours truly. We’re gonna need a bigger bus!

I have met the enemy, Kiz. You have a bad attitude about the Broncos. It’s OK to point out their weaknesses so they can improve, but to hate and condemn and spit on this team is a disgrace. You and Lombardi belong in the same pit: junk mail.

Andrew, bandwagon driver