JACKSON, MI – Jackson County health authorities are lauding this week's U.S. Supreme Court ruling upholding the legality of subsidies given to low- and middle-income Americans buying health insurance through federal exchanges.

"This ruling is great news for everyone who supports the mission of opening the door to healthcare for all," Molly Kaser, President and CEO of the Center for Family Health in Jackson, said in a statement.

Thousands of Jackson County residents, many or most of whom were previously uninsured, enrolled in coverage made affordable to them by tax credits, Kaser said.

Had justices decided differently, health insurance would have again been out of reach for many families. "It would have created a lot of chaos," Kaser said in an interview with a reporter.

The 6-3 decision, issued Thursday, June 25, bolstered the permanence of what has been an oft-challenged law and assured federally run exchanges, established in Michigan and 34 other states would stand.

In Jackson County, Medicaid enrollment has grown by 9,876 since President Barack Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law in March 2010, according to a statement from Allegiance Health. This growth has decreased the need for charity care from Allegiance, freeing resources to invest in programs and services that benefit all community members.

The ruling not only helps achieve the law's national coverage expansion goals, Allegiance President and CEO Georgia Fojtasek said in a statement. "But closer to home, this ruling means continued coverage and access to much-needed healthcare services for thousands across our area."

According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, a California-headquartered healthcare research organization sourced by Allegiance Health, almost 230,000 people in Michigan would have seen a 294 percent increase in their average premium cost.

Without the tax credits, the number of uninsured people in Michigan would have risen by an estimated 277,000, the Center for Family Health stated, citing the Washington, D.C.-based Urban Institute, which does economic and social policy research.

Kaser was "beyond anxious" about the long-anticipated ruling. "I was very, very relieved and please when the decision was announced. I wanted to get up and do a dance."

Kaser said people, now insured thanks to Obamacare, are seeking treatment for chronic or long-term conditions, such as Diabetes, they might have once treated themselves. Instead of only visiting the center or some other care provider when they have a problem, they are receiving preventative care.

As a result, "people are going to live longer," Kaser said.