How to End HIV in American Women

By Susan J. Blumenthal, MD, MPA, and Jennifer Sherwood, MSPH, Special to Everyday Health

To eradicate HIV, much more needs to be done to address the unique barriers to HIV prevention and care services faced by American women, as well as to combat the health inequalities that drive this epidemic. Ending the AIDS epidemic will require a concerted effort from government, policy makers, healthcare providers, and a broad range of community stakeholders. Together, we can ensure that women have all the tools they need to help them prevent HIV infection and get effective treatment if diagnosed.

Promising signs show that HIV infections are on the decline among U.S. women. New HIV infections dropped 21 percent between 2008 and 2010 – the first significant decrease after more than a decade of steadily rising HIV infection rates among women. And according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), rates of women’s HIV infections from heterosexual sex and injection drug use went down by 49 percent over the 10-year period from 2002 to 2011.

Despite this encouraging news, the progress needed to end AIDS in women in the United States isn’t rapid enough. Groups of highly vulnerable women are still being left behind. HIV/AIDS was the 11th leading cause of death in America for women aged 35 to 44 in 2013.

Higher HIV Risks for Black and Hispanic Women

Women represent one in four of the 1.2 million Americans living with HIV today. And one in five of the 50,000 people diagnosed with HIV each year are women. These statistics are worse for African-American and Hispanic women. Compared to the rate of new HIV infections for white women, the infection rate for black women is 20 times higher, and for Hispanic women four times higher. About two-thirds of all HIV infections among women are in African-American women, who constitute only 13 percent of the U.S. female population. In 2010, African-American women were 14 times more likely to die from AIDS-related causes than white women. These racial inequalities have persisted for decades.

Women’s vulnerability to HIV is complex. Women are more biologically susceptible to HIV infection than men, and in addition, women’s vulnerability to HIV is driven by social and economic factors. Poverty, sexism, stigma, and discrimination increase a woman’s risk for infection. These are barriers that prevent women from getting the information and services they need to prevent HIV and to seek proper care if they are HIV positive. Prevention and treatment of HIV among women must be comprehensive.

Women who are victims of violence and sexual assault are at increased risk of acquiring HIV, and these same factors contribute to poorer health outcomes. Research shows that women may face immediate violence from their partner after disclosing their HIV-positive status. Women also have higher lifetime rates of violence after becoming HIV positive

Increased HIV Risk in the South

Women who live in the Southern United States are more likely to reside in a state that has not expanded Medicaid under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA, or “Obamacare”). This means they are less likely to have access to healthcare. And health outcomes are worse for women diagnosed with HIV who do not have access to regular healthcare. They are also at greater risk for acquiring HIV. Limited access to healthcare, compounded by high poverty rates and lower educational attainment, further increases women’s vulnerability to HIV in the Southern region of the country.

As a result of these barriers and other factors, 65 percent of women living with HIV are not in regular care. Only about 32 percent of women and 29 percent of men have reached viral suppression, meaning the HIV virus is under control and no longer replicating enough to be detected with lab tests. Viral suppression is a key goal of HIV treatment that also dramatically reduces HIV transmission to others, by as much as 96 percent.

The inability to keep women in ongoing clinical care to achieve viral suppression is a significant gap in our nation’s response to HIV/AIDS.

Prevention, Vaccines, and a Cure: Keys to Eradicating HIV

Preventing HIV infection in women must be a cornerstone of our national efforts. A high-impact HIV prevention strategy using a range of tools is needed. This includes:

Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) – medication taken by people who do not have HIV but who are at substantial risk of acquiring it, to prevent infection.

Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) – medication taken for a short period of time by people who have been potentially exposed to HIV to prevent infection

Male and female condoms

Harm reduction services for people who inject drugs

These steps must be implemented with a focuson on those women at highest risk, including African-American women and women living in regions hit hardest by HIV.

We must also strengthen investments in research to find a cure for AIDS and a vaccine to prevent HIV infection, as well as to develop new prevention technologies for women. These new tools, such as long-acting microbicides and combination PrEP and contraceptives, hold the promise of significantly reducing HIV infections in the future. Another critical component for ending AIDS in women is expanding access to comprehensive health services that integrate HIV care, reproductive health services, and other interventions to increase the likelihood that women are engaged and retained in the health system.

Better Access to HIV Care

The good news is that today, women living in the United States have better access to care in several important ways:

Women have greater access to prevention, treatment, and care services than ever before.

Effective antiretroviral therapy for pregnant women with HIV has virtually eliminated mother-to-child transmission of the virus in America.

Routine HIV testing is now covered as a preventive benefit with no cost sharing or deductible under the ACA.

Lifesaving medications to treat the disease and other HIV services are provided under the ACA.

A woman cannot be denied insurance coverage because she is HIV positive.

A woman cannot be charged more for health insurance premiums than a man.

And if Medicaid expansion under the ACA were adopted by all the states – currently 25 states have chosen not to expand Medicaid – think of how many more women would be able to obtain HIV testing and treatment services. Think of how many more lives would be saved.

Women’s health matters. For all too long, women’s health was neglected in AIDS research, in clinical settings, and in public policies. But now the tide is turning. Let’s pick up the pace by taking the necessary actions to accelerate the remarkable progress that has been made to achieve an America without AIDS, for women and men, in the years ahead.

PHOTO CREDIT: Getty Images

Susan J. Blumenthal, MD, MPA, is former U.S. Assistant Surgeon General, and is the senior policy and medical advisor at amfAR, The Foundation for AIDS Research. She is also a clinical professor at Tufts and Georgetown Schools of Medicine.

Jennifer Sherwood, MSPH, is a policy associate at amfAR.