California recently passed a resolution mandating a minimum wage for all workers of $15 per hour. Consistently leading the country in minimum wage requirements, California has also taken strides through the years to help improve quality of life for the working class individuals, including home care providers.

However, according to some of these in-home care workers who receive compensation for their work through the state’s Medicaid system, it isn’t enough. Some have begun protesting City Halls across the state for medical insurance coverage as well as these increased wages.

Governor Brown recently revised a two-year budget plan that didn’t include any such provisions for providing medical insurance coverage for these workers. Martha Garcia was one of those in attendance at this protest. In-home care providers were those who made up the largest portion of these protesters.

According to The Sun (San Bernardino) article, In-home care providers rally for medical insurance in San Bernardino, written by Jim Steinberg:

“Garcia explained that she has concerns about diabetes in older age, as both her parents have high medical expenses because of the disease. Her husband, who works as an assembler in a Chino factory, does not have health insurance from his employer, she said. The couple has not looked into insurance options resulting from the Affordable Care Act.”

It may be important to highlight Garcia’s admission that she did not look into coverage through the public exchange known as the Affordable Care Act, which provides financial assistance to those individuals and families on a limited income. It’s not certain whether or not Ms. Garcia and others like her would be able to afford whatever out of pocket expenses would be required for this level of insurance.

Governor Brown has made it clear that there will be a complete stop in spending due to an economic downturn the state, and in larger part, the entire country, is facing. Without increasing spending, there is little hope that these workers and others like them will be gaining medical insurance coverage through the state.

Some of these protestors claimed that people don’t realize how hard the job they do is, and that it takes a significant toll on their physical health, which is why they need some type of medical insurance coverage.

There was no official word from Governor Brown’s administration or other government agent regarding the protestors, the challenges they face, or what could be done about their situation in the near future.