In her recent New York Times op-ed about the unrelenting, and largely unwarranted, pressure put on American women to breastfeed, political science professor Courtney Jung briefly noted a curious government policy: "Women who breast-feed are eligible for WIC for twice as long as women who do not breast-feed and they get an 'enhanced food package,' which includes vouchers for a wider range of more nutritious food."

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

WIC is the common name for the federal assistance program Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children, which provides certain foods—whole-grain bread, baby food, infant formula, and milk—as well as vouchers and support to 8 million low-income pregnant women, breastfeeding women, and infants and children under the age of 5. "The difference in benefits," according to Jung, "is intended to create incentives for poor mothers to breast-feed," which "seems more like punishment to me." Sounds a little Orwellian, right?

Most Popular

I called up Zoë Neuberger, Senior Policy Analyst at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities who specializes in food assistance programs, to ask her a few questions about this. She told me that while encouraging low-income women (who have lower rates of breastfeeding than the general population) to breastfeed is indeed part of the thinking, it is not the whole reason.

Part of the rationale seems to be economic: WIC provides formula to formula-feeding moms, which is the most expensive line item the program provides, making the packages for formula-feeding moms actually worth more than those intended for breastfeeding moms.

Neuberger also points out that after the first 6 months, children who are breastfed often need additional food to round out their diet, compared to those who drink formula, which is heavily fortified. (For instance, a child who is fed with iron-fortified formula is likely to need less meat in their diet, and the WIC packages can reflect this distinction. Likewise, formula-feeding moms have different—generally, somewhat less extensive—nutritional needs because they are not producing breast milk.) "Mothers who participate in WIC receive food that has been selected through a science-based process," Neuberger says. "These foods are tailored to meet the nutritional needs of women who use formula and women who choose to breastfeed." She added that all moms also get assistance in how to best feed their children, whether through breast or bottle.

Overall, the problem here seems less to do with the fact that the program provides incentives for women to breastfeed and more to do with the way in which breastfeeding continues to be viewed through a scientific lens divorced of cultural and social realities.

"There's deeply flawed logic to our government encouraging breastfeeding through one program when our laws do so little to provide support and security to working moms." Share

Tweet

Here's the thing: We'd all benefit from taking a break from debating breastfeeding as a matter of nutrition and get into why women are making the choices they make. There have been enough studies demonstrating that while breastfeeding is marginally better, it is most certainly not always best. The benefits of breastfeeding include reducing the risk of infection while the baby is breastfeeding and the fact that, for some, it is convenient and free. These are good reasons, sure, but in order to determine the overall good they must be weighed against the total cost, psychological or financial, of breastfeeding for the family.

To start, it's hard to really call breastfeeding "free." Considering we have no universal paid parental leave policy in this country, and women are not guaranteed payment for pumping or nursing breaks (including those mandated by the Affordable Care Act), there are distinct costs associated with breastfeeding. A woman might be economically penalized for taking the time to breastfeed or, if she's really committed to the idea of breast-feeding, need to quit her job. For a family on WIC assistance, those costs could lead to financial ruin. In other words, there's deeply flawed logic to our government encouraging breastfeeding through one program when our laws do so little to provide support and security to working moms.

Nevertheless, we carry on with these breast vs. bottle debates as if the question of nutrition is really what is at stake. I suspect this has something to do with a collective, sometimes subconscious, resistance to the rapidly changing makeup of the American family over the past few decades. While the rise of single mothers , primary breadwinner mothers , and dual-income households has us assessing how a family should be structured and what the responsibilities of a mother can and should be, the breastfeeding debate tells us how this reassessment isn't happening fast enough.

There are still as many false assumptions about what makes a good mother as there are ridiculous expectations. These standards to which mothers are held are largely born of our inability to wrap our heads around the fact that care-work, like breastfeeding, is work, and moms need time as well as financial and emotional support to make it happen.These are the issues we need to be discussing, the ones from which the breast vs. bottle debates all too often distract.