Corporate mergers and acquisitions in Texas declined dramatically during the first half of 2015, thanks to turbulence in the oil and gas industry.

While deal-making nationally increased to a near record-setting pace, M&A activity involving Texas-based companies plummeted 28 percent in the first six months of the year from the same period in 2014, according to Mergermarket, an independent global M&A research firm.

Businesses headquartered in Texas participated in 357 mergers, acquisitions, divestitures and joint ventures with a total deal value of $123.3 billion in 2015, compared with 498 such deals valued at $158 billion last year.

“Deal-making across nearly all business sectors — health care, technology, industrial, manufacturing and even restaurants — is strong and active,” said Rick Lacher, managing director of the Dallas office of investment bank Houlihan Lokey.

But not in energy.

Mergermarket data shows that M&A activity across the U.S. is up 21 percent so far this year and is on pace to meet the record levels set in 2007.

Between 2009 and 2014, Texas led the U.S. in corporate deal-making as oil and gas companies and private equity funds poured tens of billions of dollars into exploration and production as the result of discoveries in various shale plays.

But corporate lawyers and investment bankers say M&A among oil and gas exploration companies has been essentially nonexistent this year because of the decline and instability of crude prices. The only deals being announced in the Oil Patch, they say, are getting done mostly because of necessity.

“Many are mergers that involve two companies with financial challenges trying to see if two plus two could possibly equal five,” said Steve Davis, an energy M&A partner at Akin Gump in Houston. “There are a lot of companies that have a lot of money and kept their powder dry but are now looking for good buying opportunities.”

Bogged down in details

Lawyers and bankers say the oil and gas deals that are closing are significantly more complex and taking more negotiations to get both sides to agree.

“Sellers are finally willing to consider transactions at these lower prices as long as they eventually get to share some of the upside,” said Vinson & Elkins partner Steve Gill. “I think the fall is going to be red hot. We are going to see a lot of deal proposals after Labor Day.”

The oil and gas pipeline market, however, has not been affected by the downturn in prices.

“There is still a lot of infrastructure that needs to be built, and these companies have access to a lot of cash to make acquisitions,” said David Taylor, a partner at Locke Lord in Houston.

The largest transaction of the year so far came in January when Dallas-based pipeline giant Energy Transfer Partners acquired Regency Partners, another Dallas master limited partnership, for $18 billion.

Both ETP and Regency were already controlled by Dallas billionaire Kelcy Warren, who merged the companies to bring them under one corporate umbrella.

The top 20

Last year, more than half of the 20 largest corporate deals involved Texas oil and gas exploration and production companies — compared with just four of the top 20 transactions this year.

“There’s a strong belief that when the hedges that oil companies currently have in place roll off and the banks complete their fall redetermination of the value of oil companies’ borrowing bases, we are going to see a lot of activity,” Taylor said. “The oil companies will need capital and to lower their debt, and private equity firms will move in making strategic acquisitions.”

Some oil and gas companies need to either raise money soon through a joint venture with a private equity firm or face bankruptcy, said William Snyder, who heads the national bankruptcy and restructuring practice group at Deloitte in Dallas.

“There are several companies that can either kick the can down the road or kick the bucket,” Snyder said. “The banks are going to bend over backwards to extend debt because the same banks are holding the hedges, and, in many cases, the hedges are more valuable than the looming liabilities.

“The private equity firms have billions and billions and billions of dollars, but the deals just aren’t there yet,” he said.

Private equity firms

Tom Harris, a corporate partner at Haynes and Boone in Dallas, said private equity firms are flush with cash and eager to put the money to work.

“We are seeing a lot of private equity firms that are based here in Texas but are looking for good deals in Texas but also outside the state,” Harris said. “Most of the private equity funds seek good management teams and solid growth potential.”

The best example came in June when Dallas-based Lone Star Funds purchased New York real estate firm Home Properties for $7.6 billion. It is the fifth-largest deal of 2015 involving Texas-based businesses.

Scott Parel, a corporate partner at Sidley Austin in Dallas, said non-energy M&A is keeping lawyers and bankers busy in Texas and across the country.

“Everyone agrees that the Supreme Court’s decision upholding the Affordable Care Act will lead to a significant number of mergers and acquisitions in the health care space,” Parel said. “We are also seeing a ton of consolidation in the semiconductor and chip space.”

Parel points to NXP Semiconductors’ purchase of Austin-based Freescale Semiconductor for $15.9 billion in March.

The biggest deals

The 10 largest M&A deals involving Texas companies announced in the first half of 2015

Value (billions of dollars) Buyer (headquarters) Seller (headquarters) Law firms involved 18 Energy Transfer Partners (Dallas) Regency Energy Partners (Dallas) Latham & Watkins; Baker Botts; Akin Gump 7.6 Lone Star Funds (Dallas) Home Properties (Rochester, N.Y.) Gibson Dunn; Hogan Lovells 7.5 Crestwood Equity (Houston) Crestwood Midstream (Houston) Andrews Kurth; Simpson Thacher; Paul Hastings; Locke Lord 5.3 Various investors NGP Energy Capital Management (Irving) Thompson & Knight 3 Kinder Morgan (Houston) Hiland Partners (Enid, Okla.) Bracewell & Giuliani; Vinson & Elkins 2.2 Enterprise Products Partners (Houston) Pioneer Resources (Irving); Reliance (India) Locke Lord; Andrews Kurth; Vinson & Elkins; Latham & Watkins; Thompson & Knight 2.1 Noble Energy (Houston) Rosetta Resources (Houston) Skadden; Latham & Watkins; Bracewell & Giuliani 1.4 Murray Energy (Dallas) Foresight Reserves (St. Louis, Mo.) Kirkland & Ellis; Vinson & Elkins 1 Phillips 66 Partners (Houston) Phillips 66 (Houston) Vinson & Elkins; Latham & Watkins; Andrews Kurth 1 Quantum Energy Partners (Houston) LINN Energy (Houston) Vinson & Elkins; Latham & Watkins

SOURCE: Mergermarket