Not happy: Chris Snowden and his now-suspended son Kade in 2004. Photo: Darren Pateman

The father of former Cronulla forward Kade Snowden has taken aim at the club's 2011 coaching staff, saying the players have them to blame for unfairly being branded drug cheats.

The NRL confirmed that 12 past and current Sharks have been suspended for breaches of the game's anti-doping rules. One of them was Snowden, who was at the club during its controversial supplements program.

Snowden's current coach, Newcastle's Wayne Bennett, has laid the blame at the feet of Cronulla coach Shane Flanagan and his staff. He believes they failed in their duty of care to the players.

Chris Snowden, the father of the former NSW and Australian prop, believed the staff had a case to answer for allowing their charges to be placed in harm's way.

Advertisement

"I know [Kade] was angry at the coaching staff," Chris Snowden said.

"It's like the boss at work, you do what he says. The people are put in that position to look after you, as far as the footy goes. I don't know whether they lied or were told the wrong information.

"That was worrying him more than anything, that he was going to be branded a drug cheat.

"It is [unfair], a lot of people wouldn't know the circumstances behind the whole thing. You get in, you get told to do whatever from your coaches and trainers and you expect them to do the right thing, not have it the way it's finished.

"They still don't really know what they've done. They just get told to do this and that, which they do and you expect it to be right."

While the Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority took 18 months to table its evidence, the players had about 36 hours to decide whether or not to contest it.

However, because of the prospect of being rubbed out for two years and lingering uncertainty about the outcome, most accepted a backdated ban.

"The hardest part was going to his players yesterday, the team, telling them he's taken the deal and why he's taken it," Snowden said on Saturday.

"It was about putting them a bit more in the picture on how it panned out from day one. I know a lot of them wanted to fight it because they didn't want to be branded as drug cheats.

"It's been going on for nearly three years now. If they really had anything you'd think it would come out before this. That's what I'm thinking, it came up from higher up to get something done. It's made them look a bit silly."

The 27-year-old established himself as one of the game's premier forwards during his stint in the Shire, but his relationship with some Sharks supporters soured after a press conference called to trumpet his re-signing was cancelled. He subsequently signed with the Knights.

Snowden snr believes his son will now be the victim of more sledging on and off the field.

"I'm sure he will," he said.

"They all loved him down there at Cronulla but when they found out he was leaving they called him all names, before he even finished playing. It's just human nature, I guess."