Bernanke's refinance bid getting rejected might be best example yet of how messed up home loans are.

Former Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke. (Photo: Jose Luis Magana, AP)

As Federal Reserve chairman, Ben Bernanke made $199,700 a year. Since stepping down, he has been able to make more than that from a single speech.

It's hard to imagine someone who would be less likely to default on a loan. But the way mortgage applications are evaluated these days, Bernanke became a credit risk when he left the Fed last winter. Earlier this month, he disclosed that a request to refinance his home was rejected.

OPPOSING VIEW: Why lenders are running scared

While Bernanke didn't say why he was turned down, mortgage experts say the most likely reason is that he changed jobs. Not having an income from the same place for the past two years is considered a red flag.

Our concern isn't with Bernanke. Banks are undoubtedly clamoring for his business since he mentioned the rejection. But his experience might be the best example yet of how messed up mortgage lending is for people of lesser means and influence.

Eight years ago, virtually anyone with a pulse could get a subprime loan. No job? No assets? No problem.

Today, a guy who was one of the world's most powerful people can't get a loan because he decided to cash in after a life in academia and public service. Go figure.

The problem with home lending, both before the financial crisis and now, is that human discretion and common sense have been largely removed from the picture. Whether someone gets a mortgage used to be the domain of loan officers who would make thorough evaluations. Now it's all about whether applicants meet prescribed criteria.

Successful applicants generally need top credit scores and at least two years of W-2 forms from the same employer. The system discriminates against job changers, small-business owners and people who have considerable assets but relatively low incomes.

Much of this has to do with mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and their regulators in Washington. Thanks to their special support from government, the companies have become dominant forces in the business of buying and backing mortgages from loan originators.

Fannie and Freddie once made fortunes by taking big risks, knowing that taxpayers would rescue them if they failed. But since 2008, when they were bailed out and essentially nationalized, they have gotten a lot pickier. And so has the federal agency charged with making sure they never get in trouble again.

Lenders live in fear of not being to unload their mortgages or, worse yet, being forced to buy them back if Fannie or Freddie later finds some uncrossed "t" or undotted "i" it doesn't like. The mortgage industry would be healthier and saner if Fannie and Freddie were eliminated or turned into traditional companies with no federal charter.

But don't tell this to lenders. The very people who decry tight lending standards and heavy regulations are the first to oppose reforms. They love flipping their mortgages to Fannie and Freddie. And they love the subsidization of having taxpayers backstop the mortgage industry.

Their solution: Lighten up on the regulation while leaving the taxpayers at risk. This is no more sensible than denying a loan to Ben Bernanke.

USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1w1zcjd