CINCINNATI — Peyton Manning started looking like Peyton Manning. The Bengals in primetime started looking like the Bengals in primetime. All the expected stereotypes took hold during a third quarter unraveling into a blur of slants, screens, one-handed catches and three Denver touchdowns.

The Bengals defense, with the playoffs and one of the most important regular season games in Paul Brown Stadium history hanging in the balance, faced the prospect of needing to cool off one of the greatest quarterbacks of all time riding a hot streak into the fourth quarter.

With an assist from pouring rain the defense not only cooled Manning off, but delivered the game-deciding haymaker with three interceptions and two three-and-outs in the quarter to close out Cincinnati’s breakthrough victory.

“We weren’t going to be denied,” defensive end Wallace Gilberry said.

Manning had only thrown more than two interceptions in a game twice during his nearly three years with the Broncos. Yet, in one quarter, the Bengals picked him off three times and Dre Kirkpatrick took one to the house for a touchdown.

The four total interceptions were the most for Manning in a game since Dec. 5, 2010 while with Indianapolis. This was the first Bengals game with four interceptions since Sept. 9, 2010 against Baltimore.

Overcoming hurdles and exorcising demons don’t occur with ordinary. The Bengals defense pulled off the extraordinary just as the night crumbled before them. In previous losses against quality opponents and in primetime, players said a large part of the problem was teammates not responding well to adversity striking.

Situations don’t reach more adverse than squandering a 13-point halftime lead in less than a quarter against a sizzling All-Pro QB.

“We got settled down and stayed poised,” Gilberry said. “We huddled up and got together and laid it out, ‘Hey, this is what we got to do.’ We went out and executed.”

For a while, execution looked a long way off. In the third quarter, Manning went 12 of 16 for 168 yards and two touchdowns. He twice led touchdown drives of at least 79 yards and hit Demaryius Thomas six times for 110 yards in that quarter by itself.

Once the quarter flipped to the fourth, the game changed. That began with Adam Jones. He’d already changed the tone of the game as a returner, where he ripped off an 80-yard kick return and 21-yard punt return.

In this case, Jones undercut an out pass intended for Thomas and picked it off to seemingly set the Bengals up at the Broncos 23-yard line. Instead a taunting penalty, went against Reggie Nelson to take them out of field goal range. A three-and-out would force a punt.

It wouldn’t matter, though, as the Bengals held Denver to consecutive three-and-outs on the next two drives before Manning took over with 4:04 remaining, three timeouts and career game-winning drive No. 52 teed up perfectly. Until it wasn’t.

He attempted to throw short pass to Demaryius Thomas and Dre Kirkpatrick broke on the ball then sprinted 33 yards for a touchdown.

“It was a bad throw,” Manning said. “They had good coverage.”

For the last three-plus years the Bengals looked for their breakthrough moment in the spotlight to make the nation nod its collective head and utter belief in the Bengals. The 2012 first-round pick tucked his shining moment and this team’s season-changer under his arm as a frenzied jubilance overwhelmed PBS.

The wild element of Kirkpatrick’s interception was what occurred on the other side of the field. George Iloka slipped once, then slipped a second time attempting to get up as Julius Thomas ran free. Only, the throw went the other way and Kirkpatrick stepped in front.

“I put my head down and I knew Peyton wasn’t going to miss it, he don’t miss nothing,” Iloka said of his blown coverage. “I had my head down and heard the crowd yelling. I look up and Dre is running. God looked over me. (Manning) didn’t see it thankfully.”

The Bengals defensive party hit a second crescendo when Kirkpatrick dove for a second interception on the sideline during Denver’s desperation drive in the final minutes.

From there, the team could only share smiles and confident celebrations as they head forward toward a Sunday night showdown against Pittsburgh for the AFC North title. Few could have predicted the Bengals defense turning Manning from on fire to dumpster fire in a matter of a quarter, but it made all the difference in the biggest win of the season.

“It was a good day,” Jones said. “You smile on days like this when you come in and play the best quarterback in the NFL. We come out of here with four picks, win the game coming into the game as the underdogs.

“Everybody talking about what we can’t do at night time and this and that — it worked out for us today. We played good we showed the growth of the team and everybody kept their head down.”