People Moves of the Week: Evercore, Fried Frank, Blue Ridge Partners

Evercore hires managing director; Fried Frank taps new partner; Blue Ridge brings in Jim Ettamarna, the former vice president of strategy for Staples

Blue Ridge Partners — The McLean, Virginia-based consulting firm tapped Art Chivvis and Mark Hardy as managing directors and Jim Ettamarna (pictured) and Marten Leijon as principals. Prior to working at a namesake firm, New York-based Chivvis worked in JPMorgan Chase & Co.'s mergers and acquisitions department as a managing director. He was also a partner with McKinsey & Co., serving U.S. and European clients for 16 years. Hardy, based in Salt Lake City, was previously at Aurora Capital Group as a partner. Ettamarna joins as a vice president of strategy for Staples Inc. in Boston. Before that, he worked at Avery Dennison and McKinsey. Washington-based Leijon was chief executive of financial services firm Mix, and held leadership roles at McKinsey, ABN Amro NV and with European insurer Trygg-Hansa.

BTIG LLC — The New York financial services firm and investment bank has added Peter Saleh as a managing director. He joins BTIG from Telsey Advisory Group, where he covered the restaurant sector. Earlier in his career, Saleh worked as an associate at Nollenberger Capital Partners, covering footwear and apparel manufacturers. Previously, he worked for Cohen Specialists as an equity specialist on the American Stock Exchange.

Evercore (NYSE: EVR) — Jeffrey Rosichan has joined the investment bank's Menlo Park, California office as a senior managing director. Rosichan was most recently managing director and vice chairman at Deutsche Bank. Prior to that, he led the U.S. equity capital markets group at Banc of America Securities. Rosichan also held a similar role at Merrill Lynch, as head of investment banking in Hong Kong.

Fried Frank Harris Shriver & Jacobson LLP — The New York law firm enlists Julian S.H. Chung as a partner in the finance practice. Chung represents large financial institutions and borrowers in commercial lending transactions, focusing on senior secured finance for leveraged acquisitions. Previously, she was a partner at Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP.

Jackson Lewis PC — Richard Vitarelli comes aboard Jackson Lewis from McCarter & English. has over two decades of experience representing employers in all aspects of labor relations and employment law. Vitarelli previously served as outside general counsel to the Waterbury Connecticut Financial Planning and Assistance Board, a state takeover board created to restructure finances, labor agreements and post-employment benefits. He was a Commissioner of the Connecticut State Ethics Commission from 1997 to 2004 and served as Vice-Chair and Chair-Elect from 2002 to 2004.

Midcap Financial — The Bethesda, Maryland-based lender has named John Rosin managing director. Rosin comes to MidCap with over 25 years of asset based lending experience at various firms including AloStar Bank where he was a managing director, and GE Capital, as senior vice president.

Sidley Austin LLP — Charlie Wilson will be joining the law firm's Singapore office as a partner. Wilson has practiced law in Asia for 17 years. Previously, he was with White & Case Pte. Ltd. since 2009, also Singapore, as counsel.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: