At stake in immigration debate: Billions of dollars - Politico Congress is still fighting over funding the Department of Homeland Security, which is funded only until Feb. 27. Part of the battle are costly demands. From the story: "Immigration riders attached to the Homeland Security spending bill by the House GOP turn out to actually widen the budget deficit over the next 10 years, according to the Congressional Budget Office. As a result, the $39.7 billion measure will need a supermajority of 60 votes under Senate budget rules, even if Republicans get past the Democratic filibuster."

Cubans Convicted in the U.S. Face New Fears of Deportation - New York Times Now that the United States is moving to normalize relations with Cuba, one request the Obama administration is reportedly making is for Cuba to take back nationals convicted of crimes in the U.S. From the story: "The United States cannot deport...the vast majority of the 34,500 other Cubans who face orders of deportation, almost all of them for criminal offenses, because Cuba will not accept them back."

Obama faces high stakes in rollout of controversial immigration program - Los Angeles Times As the Obama administration prepares to roll out its new immigration plan, which could give temporary legal status to millions, the administration "knows it cannot afford another debacle like 2013's botched introduction of the Affordable Care Act." The plan is expected to present many challenges, including the processing of potentially millions of applications by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services.

University of Texas frat hosts 'border patrol'-themed party, students say - USA Today On another campus flap, this time in Texas. From the story: "A University of Texas fraternity is getting national attention for hosting a party that some are calling racist. On Saturday, members of Phi Gamma Delta, or Texas Fiji, hosted a 'Western' themed party at their fraternity house in Austin...Students were dressed in ponchos and sombreros. Some wore construction uniforms with Hispanic names written on them, while others donned military uniforms."

D.C., other cities debate whether legal immigrants should have voting rights - Washington Post The Washington, D.C. Council is weighing whether to allow immigrants who are legally in the U.S. to vote in local elections. From the story: "Most are sponsored by relatives or employers. They pay taxes and serve in the armed forces. Yet in all but a handful of localities, they have no voting rights." It's the third time in a decade that the controversial measure has been introduced.