By Adam Tobias | Wisconsin Reporter

MADISON, Wis. – The numbers are in, and they are anything but impressive.

And they eventually could alter what the average American pays for health insurance — but not in a good way.

Less than 900 Wisconsinites have selected a marketplace insurance plan through the Obamacare online exchange system between Oct. 1 and Nov. 2, according to a report released Wednesday by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Nationwide, the figures are not much better.

Just more than 106,000 Americans have selected a marketplace insurance plan during the same time frame, the study shows.

The Obama administration on Sept. 5 projected that 494,620 people would enroll in the first month.

While many are attributing the abysmal numbers to the glitches that have plagued the federal website, Tarren Bragdon, president and chief executive officer of the Florida-based Foundation for Government Accountability, views it differently.

Bragdon believes it’s because people are noticing that Obamacare is coming with few choices and expensive plans.

The typical Wisconsin citizen who purchases health insurance on the individual market is expected to see a 69 percent increase in their premiums, according to a report published recently by Forbes and the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research.

The average American will face a 41 percent hike.

“It’s not that people aren’t going and finding out more about the exchange plan, it’s that when they do, they don’t sign up,” Bragdon said.

In Wisconsin, close to 19,000 residents have completed applications for coverage for 34,678 people, including spouses and other family members.

But only 877 – or 4.5 percent — have actually selected a plan.

Brett Healy, president of the MacIver Institute in Madison, is not shocked by those numbers.

“The rollout of Obamacare has been an absolute nightmare in Wisconsin and around the nation,” Healy said. “The fact that only 877 people have signed up in Wisconsin shows that website glitches, uncertainty and costs that are much higher than originally anticipated are causing everyone to rethink Obamacare.”

Throughout the country, nearly 846,200 Americans have completed an application on behalf of approximately 1.51 million people.

But only about 13 percent of those 846,184 have chosen a plan.

And with less people opting in, the price of health insurance for those who do could ascend even higher.

Bragdon doesn’t believe that lack of success would fly in the private sector.

“Imagine if Sears has 20,000 people who walked through the door and only 800 people bought something,” Bragdon said. “You immediately would have a change in leadership and the company would probably go under.”

But Healy doesn’t foresee the Affordable Care Act being rescinded anytime soon.

“I think the only reason we are not having a serious debate about the outright repeal of the ACA is that the president and Congress exempted themselves from the law and they have no idea what pain and misery it is causing real Americans,” Healy said.

Contact Adam Tobias at atobias@watchdog.org or follow him on Twitter @Scoop_Tobias