Obama appears to have officially lost his strongest electoral base – young Americans – as one in two adults under the age of 34 now disapprove of his job performance in office according to a new CNN/ORC International poll.

The poll, which was released Friday, found that Obama approval rating has dropped to 45 percent among young Americans – and 41 percent overall, the lowest recorded by CNN/ORC International all year. The numbers also match similar findings reported earlier this month by USA TODAY and the Harvard Institute of Politics which show Millennials turning against the president.

“A majority of women and half of younger Americans, two key components of the Obama coalition that helped to elect and re-elect him to the White House, disapprove of Obama’s track record as President,” CNN Polling Director Keating Holland said.

Moreover, one in three Millennials disapprove of the president’s job performance because they believe he is too liberal.

“This President leveraged young people to win re-election, but has punished them with his policies,” Raffi Williams, a deputy press secretary at the Republican National Committee, told Red Alert Politics.

A large part of the reason Obama has struggled with Millennials over the past few weeks is Obamacare. Between the botched rollout and the emphasis that the president has placed on young adults to sign up for the expensive plans as a way of offsetting the costs for older, more sickly Americans has become the final straw ending their complicated love affair with the president.

The CNN/ORC International poll also tested Americans’ support for the bipartisan budget deal that passed Congress earlier this week – the first such deal to pass both chambers in more than four years. It found that Millennials were less likely than the average American to approve of the deal, 39 percent to 46 percent.

CNN/ORC International surveyed 1,035 adults nationwide via telephone from December 16-19, 2013. The margin of error for the study is +/- 3 percentage points at a 95 percent level of confidence.