CLEVELAND, Ohio - The percentage of workers 55 and older has steadily been climbing, nearing four-decade highs in recent years.

Why workers are staying -- often years past retirement eligibility - offers a study in both needs and wants.

Many keep working because they like what they do, and they still have much to contribute, said Craig Copeland, a senior research associate at the Employee Benefit Research Institute in Washington, D.C., and author of a recent report about the trend based on his analysis of federal employment data. More people, however, keep working because they must for financial reasons, he said.

Far fewer private sector employees have pensions, leaving them to rely on 401(k) plans, which may have not fully recovered from Great Recession fallout, he said. Even if 401(k) plans and other retirement savings are at pre-recession levels, the setback might have left many older workers off target from their goals.

"If you had a pension plan, you would be guaranteed that minimum," Copeland said. "You wouldn't have to worry about whether your balance went from $200,000 to $50,000 as you would with a 401(k). "

Being too young for Medicare and unable to afford medical coverage, as well as needing to pay down debt, also kept older workers on the job, Copeland said.

Since the late 1990s, as the percentage of older workers has increased, the percentage of younger workers has decreased. Copeland said it is unclear why.

"It appears either that older workers filled the void left by younger workers' lower participation, or that higher older-worker participation limited the opportunities for younger workers or discouraged them from participating in the labor force," he said.

Workers 55 and older have among the lowest unemployment rates, and those under 35 among the highest. For example, the national unemployment rate in May for those 55 and older was 4.6 percent vs. 6.7 percent for those 25 to 34. The overall rate was 6.3 percent. However, when older workers become unemployed, they tend to have a harder time finding work. Older workers are overrepresented among the long-term unemployed -- those who have been out of work for at least six months.

Copeland looked at labor force participation rates -- or the percentage of the population working or looking for work -- for two groups: those 55 to 64 and those 65 and older. His analysis covered 1975 through 2013. While 65 is commonly associated with being the age of retirement, many -- especially public employees -- are able to retire at least a decade earlier.

For those 65 and older, both men and women drove the trend. He said women were driving a lot of the trend for those 55 to 64 because they tended to be in less physically demanding jobs, where age is less of a factor.

In 1975, nearly 35 percent of the labor force was 55 and older, but that figure had fallen to about 29 percent by 1993. Since then, labor force participation for this group has risen steadily, peaking at 40.5 percent in 2012. In 2013, it barely declined, with 40.3 percent of older workers still in the labor force.

Age is only a number

Joseph Parnell went to work at the Cleveland Public Library in October 1974, while he was still in college. That means he could have retired by now.

"I enjoy what I do," said Parnell, 59, a librarian assistant at the Main Library downtown on Superior Avenue. "The job is still challenging enough for me."

Other reasons include the experiences of some of his former colleagues, who retired by 55. Many questioned him for staying on the job. But sometime as soon as a few months into retirement, he would hear from them. They often expressed concerns about finances or not feeling useful. They told him they should have kept working.

"I tease them, 'Why did you leave?'" he said.

Parnell has seen many changes in his nearly 40 years at the library, all but five of them spent in the Business, Economics & Labor Department. He remembers the days before personal computers when patrons frequently visited the library for stock quotes or information about mutual funds. E-books have meant even fewer. Face-to-face contact has been replaced by the general reference calls his department now answers.

Parnell remembers a time when card catalogs weren't something you accessed online, but by opening a drawer. Yet, he prides himself in relating to the latest the library has to offer, such as 3D printers. Parnell considers himself a bridge between the generations as well as a keeper of traditions.

He recalls helping some young patrons, and writing information for them in cursive, then handing them the slip of paper. The youngsters looked perplexed as they attempted to read an unfamiliar style of writing. Parnell offered a quick lesson on cursive writing, since it is no longer taught in many schools.

He didn't mind taking time with them.

"I am from a time when it was all about service," he said.

Parnell said he is not sure when he will retire, but probably no time soon.

"I still feel young and vibrant," he said.

Working longer at the expense of younger workers?

Copeland said the percentage of older workers has increased as the percentage of younger ones has declined. For example, in 1997, workers between 25 and 54 accounted for nearly 84 percent of all workers 25 and older. By 2012, that figure had fallen to nearly 74 percent. At the same time, workers 55 to 64 accounted for 12 percent in 1997, but 19.2 percent by 2012. Those 65 and older went from 4.1 percent to 7 percent.

"If you go back to the late 1990s or early 2000s, you actually saw the young and the old were joining the workforce at higher rates than they were in previous years, " Copeland said. "During the last recession, you see the (percentage) of older workers going up, and that of the younger workers has gone down."

As an older worker, Parnell said he could relate to the plight of younger workers. His son, Matthew, 25, has had difficultly finding permanent, full-time work since graduating college two years ago. But in Parnell's view, retirements wouldn't necessarily make room for younger workers. They may not want such jobs or employers may end up eliminating or not filling positions, he said.

The trend doesn't seem to be leading to inter-generational warfare. Sarah Lovenheim, communications director for the Young Invincibles, a Washington, D.C.- based organization concerned about high unemployment rates among young people, said job creation, educational and training opportunities are essential to employing young people, not retirements.

"The unemployment rate for young adults is better than it was during the Great Recession, but we still think we have a ways to go," she said. "The recession has had a rippling effect on young adults in the 18 to 34 category. Young adults are often the first to lose their jobs when there are cuts, while others are still struggling to enter the workforce. "

Lovenheim said bills that the Young Invincibles believe would help lower jobless rates among young people are stalled in Congress. One proposal would increase amounts for Pell grants to help defray college costs. College graduates have among the lowest unemployment rates. Another would increase funding for apprenticeship programs, making it easier for young people to land in-demand jobs.

Those who don't work, don't pay taxes, Lovenheim said. Her organization's report, "In this Together: the Hidden Cost of Young Adult Unemployment," released in January, says states are missing out on $1.1 billion a year in taxes that would have been collected if more 18 to 34-year-olds were employed. In Ohio, the figure is about $11.3 million.

Copeland said it is still unknown how long the older workers' trend will continue. For example, will the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, persuade older workers to leave the labor force, now that more will have viable medical coverage options? Is the slight decrease in the percentage of older workers between 2012 and 2013 the beginning of the trend reversing itself?

Regardless of what occurs, it will reaffirm that baby boomers, because of their large numbers, have sparked significant changes in the labor force since they entered it. Gen Xers, those born between the early 1960s and the early 1980s, are much smaller in number. Millennials are closer in number to baby boomers, but many of them have yet to enter the labor force.

"This trend is probably going to stay here for five to 10 years, with older workers being the predominant age group of workers," Copeland said.

As baby boomers move further and further past retirement eligibility, more will opt to retire, reversing the trend.

Parnell said that he has been at the library so long he encounters patrons he served when they were teenagers -- now accompanied by teens of their own.

"I have people say, 'You're still here?'" he said.

Parnell often just smiles, but he thinks, "Yes, and I'm not retiring anytime soon.'"