The Huntington Arms luxury apartments were completed in 1939. ( Carnegie Branch Library for Local History / Boulder Historical Society Collection / Courtesy photo )

Carol Taylor Boulder County History

In light of National Preservation Month in May, I'd like to call attention to University Hill, the most architecturally diverse neighborhood in Boulder.

When Boulder was founded in 1859, the town's activity was at Pearl Street. After the University of Colorado opened in 1877, folks still headed down to Pearl for business and entertainment.

The area now known as University Hill, or the Hill, was undeveloped pastureland for local farmers.

Another decade passed before a group of investors envisioned a neighborhood of fine homes within walking distance of the fledgling university.

University Place, with boundaries of College, Baseline, Sixth and 18th streets, was platted in 1890, according to preservation survey documents. Brothers Charles and Richard Fulton were appointed the exclusive real-estate agents for the new addition.

The first house was built for Mrs. Amelia Perry in 1891, a Victorian home that has since been demolished. Other Victorians followed.

Mount Saint Gertrude Academy, Boulder County's first Catholic school, opened in 1892, followed by the brick Sanitarium Boarding Home in 1893.

The Fulton Brothers' sales stalled when a nationwide depression in 1893 put thousands of Coloradans out of work. Still, the realtors believed in their dream and platted University Terrace between College, Pennsylvania, Ninth and Broadway during the economic slump.

The Texas-Colorado Chautauqua opened in 1898, and by its second season, an electric streetcar was up and running, bringing summer guests from downtown, directly through University Hill to the Chautauqua. The depression had lifted, and the Fulton Brothers' real-estate business boomed.

Advertisement

Wealthy New Yorkers John and Kate Harbeck built their summer residence, a large stone American Foursquare, less ornate than a Victorian, in 1899.

Craftsman bungalows became the rage and were constructed by the dozens in the early part of the 20th century on the Hill. Many were built for university faculty members and included large areas for entertaining.

In the 1920s, CU experienced a huge increase in the student population. Housing was scarce, and Boulder residents were asked to consider renting a room to a college coed.

National Greek houses authorized chapter houses for social fraternities and sororities in Boulder during this time based on student demand.

Glen Huntington had Boulder's sole architectural office from 1919 to 1939. Trained as a civil engineer, Huntington could design in any style requested, and he received many commissions from the Greek letter societies.

Sigma Alpha Epsilon chose a Mediterranean style for Huntington to build in 1923. The Pi Beta Phi sorority house was designed by Huntington in the Jacobian/Elizabethan style and was completed in 1927. Chi Omega sorority is in French Eclectic style, built in 1929.

When the time came for Huntington to design for himself, he chose an ultramodern, late Art Deco style. The Huntington Arms luxury apartments, built in 1939 at 12th and Euclid, was an investment and doubled as living quarters for the architect and his family.

Movies came to the Hill in 1950 with the state-of-the-art Flatirons Theater. Landmarked by the city in 2012, the building façade is significant for its "streamlined moderne" style.

One of Boulder's noteworthy architects, James Hunter, designed the Grace Lutheran Church in 1960 in his signature modernist style, featuring layered sandstone.

In the late 1960s and early 1970s, counterculture was in and traditional fraternities and sororities dropped in popularity. Some of these buildings were sold and repurposed. For example, the urban meditation community Marpa House, at 12th and Aurora, is the former Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity.

Victorians, bungalows, mansions and mid-century modern classics are found throughout University Hill. Dozens are now landmarked as significant for their representative architectural styles.