By Kay B. Day | Watchdog Arena

Most congressional races are standard competitions pitting an incumbent against a newcomer, but there is nothing standard about the race for a U.S. House seat to represent District 1 in Mississippi. A special election will be held on May 12 to fill the seat vacated after Rep. Alan Nunnelee died in February.

For starters, the field of competitors is flooded.

Twelve Republicans and one Democrat are vying for the seat up for grabs in the jungle primary in May. Candidates’ party affiliations aren’t listed by the State Board of Elections, but voters who turn out in a special election tend to know which party candidates belong to.

One Republican strategist said he’s “never seen anything like this.”

In an interview with Watchdog Arena, Sarah Hodges, president of the DeSoto County Republican Women, said of the race, “It’s the weirdest I’ve seen in my life.” That’s saying a lot because Hodges has been involved in political activism for more than 40 years.

In the highly contested race, another anomaly emerged. The candidates aren’t slinging mud. Hodges said she’s been “real impressed” by that.

Candidates hoping to replace Nunnelee come from a variety of backgrounds. There are attorneys, a county prosecutor, an executive at a helicopter company, a former mayor and a dentist. There is also a candidate who achieved celebrity status in political circles after he wrote a letter based on his experiences working in a hospital emergency room. That candidate is Dr. Starner Jones. The congressional race is his first foray into politics.

Jones drew national attention for a letter he wrote in 2009 as debate raged about universal health insurance coverage. The letter became popular on the Internet, so much so that Snopes.com vetted a version of it published by The Clarion Ledger (Jackson, Miss.).

Watchdog Arena conducted an email interview with Jones, including questions about the letter. The physician said, “The exact letter to the editor is not on Snopes.” Jones shared the short letter he originally wrote:

During my last shift in the ER, I had the pleasure of evaluating a patient with a shiny new gold tooth, multiple elaborate tattoos, an expensive brand of tennis shoes and a new cellular telephone equipped with her favorite R&B tune for a ringtone. Glancing over the chart, one could not help noticing her payer status: Medicaid. She smokes a costly pack of cigarettes every day and, somehow, still has money to buy beer. And our President expects me to pay for this woman’s health care? Our nation’s healthcare crisis is not a shortage of quality hospitals, doctors or nurses. It is a crisis of culture—a culture in which it is perfectly acceptable to spend money on vices while refusing to take care of one’s self or, heaven forbid, purchase health insurance. Life is really not that hard. Most of us reap what we sow.

As might be expected, Jones said he received praise and criticism for the letter. He said most people who responded agreed with him. After a reader wrote a letter to the paper to criticize Jones, the doctor didn’t back down. Instead, he doubled down in another letter, explaining that he had grown up “in a single parent home.”

He wasn’t a silver spooner as some assumed. “My family was poor. I was raised by a single mom with the help of my late grandmother in Pontotoc. It was there that I learned the core conservative values of hard work and self-reliance that have enabled me to prosper.”

For Jones, education was the “ticket to success.” He attended public schools and went on to graduate from the University of the South in Sewanee, Tennessee. He had an academic scholarship and he also worked to pay his expenses. He said, “After graduation, I left to go to medical school with everything I owned in three bags.”

Hodges confirmed that the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act bill, commonly called Obamacare, is a concern of other candidates, and most of the candidates view the economy and education as major issues. “We’re 49th in education,” she said of her state. “Young parents are concerned about Common Core.”

One characteristic controversial education policies share with the PPACA/Obamacare bill involve lack of transparency. Former Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi’s (D-Calif.) notorious remark about the passage of PPACA—having to pass a bill “to find out what is in it”—reminded voters that bills can be passed without members of Congress even reading it or remembering what was in it if they did read it.

Dr. Jones brings a unique asset to the table in that regard: he has a photographic memory. A physician who knows Jones confirmed for Watchdog Arena the doctor remembers what he sees, and he is famous among those who know him for reciting a lengthy well-known founding document.

Jones confirmed that in the interview, saying, “The Lord blessed me with a photographic memory and for that I am grateful. Reciting the Declaration [of Independence] is among my favorite pastimes.”

Because of his experience in healthcare, Watchdog Arena asked Jones if Americans are in the dark when it comes to healthcare costs that are a result of drug use, street violence, etc. Jones said:

“Yes, and the numbers are staggering. According to the Expert Review of Pharmacoeconomics & Outcomes Research, the annual cost of adult major trauma in the United States exceeds $27 billion. Drugabuse.gov estimates illicit drug use alone accounts for $181 billion in healthcare expenditures, loss of productivity, crime, incarceration and drug enforcement.”

The $27 billion figure dates to 2005 and the National Institutes of Health acknowledged that the figure is “conservatively estimated.”

Hodges, like other political observers, believes the May jungle primary will result in a runoff because, “Nobody is going to get 50 percent of the vote.”

The district favors Republicans, as Nunnelee’s double-digits victory in 2014 indicated.

As a newcomer to formal politics, Jones faces an uphill climb. Other than healthcare, he also sees the economy as a critical issue. Asked what problems he would tackle if elected, he said, “Jobs, jobs, jobs.”

He also believes in term limits. “We can’t continue to elect career politicians who are in perpetual reelection mode,” he said. “If we want to change the outcome, we have to change the players.”

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.