Colorado Citizens for Life, the statewide pro-life group that represents more than 37,000 pro-life families across the state, is announcing today its endorsement of pro-life Congressman Cory Gardner for the U.S. Senate.

Sarah Zagorski, the executive director of Colorado Citizens for Life, said: “Colorado Citizens for Life is proud to endorse Cory Gardner for U.S. Senate because his 100% pro-life record shows that he is dedicated to protecting the women and unborn children of our state. With over 14,000 abortions taking place in our state every year, it is critical that Colorado’s U.S. Senator is pro-life.”

During his tenure in Congress, Cory Gardner maintained a 100% pro-life voting record in the House. On 14 votes on abortion and pro-life issues, Cory Gardner has voted pro-life every single time.

On 80 votes on pro-life issues related to abortion and bioethics issues, as scored by the National Right to Life Committee, Mark Udall has a 0% pro-life voting record.

“Sen. Mark Udall has consistently shown the people of Colorado where he stands on abortion. From voting in favor of unlimited abortion funding for businesses like Planned Parenthood, to refusing to support parental consent laws for minors, Udall holds an extreme abortion-on-demand view. His recent pro-abortion television ad, “Backwards” which features a little girl and her mother, shows the citizens of Colorado just how far he will go to promote his radical abortion agenda,” Zagorski said.

Zagorski continued: “Sen. Udall’s votes have not only hurt common-sense protections on human life, but contradict the beliefs of the majority of Americans. In a 2012 Gallop poll, only 41% of people identified themselves as ‘pro-choice.’ This is because nearly 42 years after Roe, we know much more about the unborn child and abortion. We know that abortion hurts women physically and emotionally; we know that abortion painfully dismembers a human life; and we know that the only difference between an unborn child and you and me, is their size and location.”

She concluded: “Electing Congressman Gardner will bring Colorado closer to a pro-life future, where all human life is protected under law.”

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

List of Cory Gardner’s Pro-Life Votes in Congress:

1. January 28, 2014 – Voted for the No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Act to stop taxpayer-funded abortions.

2. September 29, 2013- Voted for the Blackburn Amendment to delay Obamacare programs that would subsidize purchase of health care plans including plans to cover abortions

3. June 18, 2013- Voted for the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act to protect pain-capable babies from abortion at 20 weeks fetal age.

4. May 16, 2013- Voted for the repeal of Obamacare law, which contains provisions authorizing federal subsidies for abortion and the rationing of lifesaving medical care.

5. July 31, 2012- Voted for the District of Columbia Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act to protect pain capable babies from abortion at 20 weeks fetal age.

6. July 11, 2012- Voted to repeal the “Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act” (PPACA), which contains provisions authorizing federal subsides of abortion and the rationing of lifesaving medical care.

7. May 31, 2012- Voted for the Prenatal Nondiscrimination Act, which would prohibit discrimination against the unborn on the basis of sex or race, and for other purposes.

8. October 10, 2011- Voted for the Protect Life Act, which amend the federal health care bill to include protections against federal tax funding of abortion, as well as strengthened conscience rights for health care providers.

9. May 25th, 2011- Voted for the Foxx Amendment, which would prohibit the use of funds provided for graduate medical education from being used to provide abortion or training in the provision of abortion.

10. May 4, 2011- Voted for the No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Act, which would close certain loopholes that give tax-preferred status to abortion, and would codify and strengthen existing conscience protections for pro-life health care providers.

11. April 14, 2011- Voted for the Pence Amendment, which would cut off all federal funds to the Planned Parenthood Federation of America (PPFA) and its affiliates, for the remainder of fiscal year 2011.

12. April 14, 2011- Voted to block funds for the Obamacare Health Law, which contains multiple provisions for the rationing of lifesaving medical care and authorizes federal subsidies for abortion.

13. February 19, 2011- Voted to cut off federal funds to Planned Parenthood.

14. January 19th, 2011- Voted to repeal Obamacare, which contains provisions authorizing federal subsides of abortion and imposed rationing of lifesaving medical care.