Christy Helton has looked up at the giant scoreboard at Coors Field countless times and viewed the image of her husband. She always saw a serious, no-nonsense ballplayer.

“It’s his game face,” she said. “Fans don’t really get to see the real Todd very often.”

But the softer side of Todd Helton emerged Monday afternoon when the icon of the Rockies’ franchise formally announced his retirement from Major League Baseball before the Rockies hosted the St. Louis Cardinals.

“It’s been an honor to be your first baseman for the last 17 years,” the 40-year-old Helton said at a jam-packed suite at Coors Field. “I have grown from a man, to a husband and into a father. We have seen the good times and the bad. It’s been a pleasure to share all of that with you.”

It was clear that Helton was talking, not just to the assembled Rockies players, coaches and staff members, but to his legions of fans.

“When I first got to the big leagues 17 years ago, I had an energy and a passion that was great,” said Helton, who first announced to The Denver Post on Saturday that he was retiring at the end of this season. “I’m excited to have that same passion as I start a new phase of my life.”

Maybe so, but Helton, who has been playing baseball since he was 5, will have a hard time letting go of the game of his life. He teared up several times, and his voice broke as he said good-bye. Among those in attendance was Matt Holliday, the current Cardinals outfielder who helped the Rockies and Helton reach the World Series in 2007.

“He was an elite player for a long time,” Holliday said. “He’s a Hall of Famer to me.”

Helton — who started at first base and hit fifth against the Cardinals — was joined at the podium by Christy and his daughters: Tierney, 11, and Gentry, 4.

Helton thanked many people, from original Rockies owner Jerry McMorris to former manager Clint Hurdle, who now leads the Pittsburgh Pirates.

Helton praised Rockies fans, breaking into his Tennessee drawl when he said,”Y’all have been a model of consistency.”

Helton joked, too, wondering how the women displaying the “Todd Helton, No. 17” sign in center field managed to hold up the banner night after night. He choked up when he talked about what he’s leaving behind.

“I’m going to miss walking out of the tunnel at night, walking past Charlotte (Johnson, who is in charge of the gate through which the players leave), saying good night, trying to figure out how I’m going to get a hit the next day or how we’re going to win a game the next day,” he said. “To me, that’s going to be the hardest.”

He also said he will miss working in the batting cage, where he honed his craft. He entered Monday’s game with a .317 career batting average, a .415 on-base percentage, 2,505 career hits, 367 home runs and 586 doubles (16th all time). His career average is the eighth-highest for any player since 1946 (minimum 5,000 at-bats).

After Monday night’s game against the Cardinals, Helton has just 11 games remaining in his career. Asked what he would like to do in the remaining games, he joked, “I’d like to hit about 40 more home runs.”

Asked about the possibility of being inducted into the Hall of Fame, Helton said: “Obviously it’s an honor to be even considered in that discussion, but that’s for a later date.”

Helton, who has had his share of injuries in his 17-year career — including a chronic lower-back problem that plagued him for the last decade — carries the reputation as a warrior. He touched on that when asked what advice he would give to young players coming into the majors.

“Tom Probst (the former team trainer and current director of medical operations) pulled me aside my rookie year and said: ‘Todd, you can be one of two players. You can be the guy that shows up and complains about being hurt, or you can go out and play.’ That always stuck with me.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp