Executive Briefing | by Sarah C. Threnhauser & Cody Brumgard| May 8, 2015

Almost 37 million Americans (about 70% of all Medicare beneficiaries) have their prescriptions covered by Medicare Part D. This is the federal program that subsidizes the cost of prescription drugs and premiums for prescription drug plans for Medicare beneficiaries. Of the 37 million, 23 million are enrolled in prescription drug plans (PDPs) and 14 million in Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans (MA-DP plans). The remaining 30% of Medicare beneficiaries without Part D coverage either receive prescription drug benefits from another source (retiree benefits, employer-sponsored plans, TRICARE, etc.), or they do not have any type of prescription drug coverage (see The Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Fact Sheet).

One unintended result of the creation of the Medicare Part D plans in 2006 is the “doughnut hole.” This is the amount of money that an individual has to pay between the Medicare Part D coverage limit on prescription drug benefits and the Medicare Part D “catastrophic coverage” threshold. After the beneficiary qualifies for catastrophic coverage, they only pay a small coinsurance or copayment for drugs that are covered for the rest of the year.

Why does this matter? Because almost all beneficiaries who receive coverage under Part D are affected by the doughnut hole, and beneficiaries expect their health care professionals and care managers to be able to explain to them how the system works and what they are expected to pay for prescriptions. So, how does Medicare Part D coverage work for beneficiaries?

The Deductible Phase – The beneficiary pays out-of-pocket for Part D prescription drug plan premiums, and 100% of the prescription drug costs until the plan deductible is met. Between 2005 and 2014, the limit on Medicare Part D plan deductibles was $310. For 2015, the limit on Medicare Part D plan deductibles is $320. The Coinsurance Phase – Once the deductible is met, the beneficiary pays 25% of the drug costs, while the Part D prescription drug plan covers the remaining 75% – until the beneficiary reaches the prescription drug coverage limit. Between 2006 and 2014, the coverage limit ranged from a low of $2,250 in 2006 to a high of $2,970 in 2013. For 2015, the coverage limit is $2,960. The Doughnut Hole Phase – The beneficiaries are now in the Medicare Part D coverage gap – the doughnut hole. Prior to the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), once in the doughnut hole, beneficiaries were responsible for the full cost of prescription drugs until they reach a yearly out-of-pocket (OOP) spending maximum. In an attempt to reduce this coverage gap and reduce out-of-pocket spending for beneficiaries, PPACA gradually moves the coverage gap costs to be shared by the beneficiary, the health plans, and the drug manufacturers. The end goal is that by 2020, beneficiaries will be responsible for only 25% of the costs for brand name and generic drugs – effectively closing the doughnut hole. Between 2006 and 2014, the yearly OOP maximum on spending to qualify for catastrophic coverage ranged from a low of $3,600 in 2006 to a high of $4,750 in 2013. For 2015, the yearly OOP maximum on spending to qualify for catastrophic coverage is $4,700. The Catastrophic Coverage Phase – After this maximum spending limit is reached, the beneficiary is eligible to receive benefits again through catastrophic coverage. Catastrophic coverage assures that an individual pays a smaller amount of their prescription drug costs – usually about 5% of the costs.

The Medicare doughnut hole coverage gap applies to all Part D beneficiaries (including those with mental health issues) — except for a small group that may qualify for exemptions. The Extra Help or Low-Income Subsidy (LIS), a program designed to help beneficiaries with limited income and resources cover like premiums, deductibles, and coinsurance. To qualify, beneficiaries must have a yearly income below $17,655 ($23,895 for a married couple), and have less than $13,640 in assets ($27,250 for a married couple) (see Medicare: Save on Drug Costs). For beneficiaries in the Extra Help program, Medicare may cover between 85% and 100% of the prescription drug costs and may also include $0 monthly premiums depending on the state’s plan. Additionally, low income individuals who are dually eligible for Medicaid may also receive assistance from their state to cover prescription drug costs to supplement Medicare coverage.

For a reference guide to this topic, check out What Are The Rules Of The Medicare Doughnut Hole?: An OPEN MINDS Market Intelligence Report. This report is free to all premium members – and can be purchased for $495 in the OPEN MINDS e-store. The reference guide answers a number of key questions:

What is the Medicare doughnut hole? Are low-income individuals exempted from the Doughnut hole? How did health care reform address the Medicare doughnut hole? How do you calculate the amount owed by an individual under Medicare Part D?

For questions on Medicare Part D, don’t hesitate to contact me at sthrenhauser@openminds.com.