EAST MARLBOROUGH >> The Unionville -Chadds Ford School Board and teachers in the district have accepted the recommendations of a fact-finder, paving the way for a new four-year contract.

The Unionville-Chadds Ford Education Association approved the terms of the fact-finder’s report on Sept. 6, and this week, the school board voted 8-1 to approve it. School director Keith Knauss voted against approving the fact-finder’s report.

“The UCFEA is excited to get back to educating our students, which is our greatest priority,” said Scott Broomall, UCFEA president. “The report is fair and reasonable and mindful of all stakeholders involved in the process. It’s important that we have a voice in our workplace, that we can negotiate terms and conditions of our employment. We are delighted to have the board vote to support the fact finder’s report.”

Under terms of the new contract, teachers will average an annual salary increase of 2.4 percent over the next four years. In the final year of the agreement a teacher starting in the district with a bachelor’s degree will earn $50,000 per year while a top of scale teacher with 16-plus years experience, a master’s degree plus 60 graduate school credits will earn $105,441.

Advertisement

Vic Dupuis, board president, said he was “elated” to see a contract agreement.

“We feel this contract is positive and fair to both teachers and taxpayers, and takes into consideration the continued economic pressures facing the school district as well as recognizes the hard work of our teachers,” he said. “It allows us to continue our focus on high academic achievement.”

Knauss said he voted against approval because he felt the salary increases would not be sustainable under the constraints of Act 1, which places a cap on how much school districts are permitted to increase taxes.

“The cost to employ our teachers goes from $33.6 million in 2014-15 to $37.5 million over the course of four years, or 2.8 percent (salary and benefits) each year for the next four years,” he said. “That is about a million dollar increase each year. Real estate taxes to compensate the teachers will have to increase 3 percent each year to fund the contract. And support staff and administration will expect the same 2.8 percent increases.”

Knauss said with the cost of living index up just 0.2 percent last year, and the Social Security cost of living adjustment up 1.7 percent, the pay raise for teachers is not justified.

“I would rather endure labor unrest now, than face bigger problems in the future,” he said.

While School Director Robert Sage agreed that the salary increase is “generous,” it is affordable and should be granted given that the district ranks as one of top academically in Pennsylvania.

“At UCF, our pay scale is currently higher than 95 percent of other districts in the state of Pennsylvania,” he said. “District analysis shows we can absorb the increases of this contract. Now we can focus our energy on improving our schools, and delivering high quality education to every student in a cost-effective way.”

Teacher and administrative salaries and benefits account for 72 percent of the district’s budget. Curriculum accounts for 14 percent, and debt service another 10 percent.

The agreement includes several measures that will help the district control escalating healthcare costs and provide stability in future budgeting. A new base healthcare plan, the will provide good benefits at reasonable costs. This agreement also includes a progressive tobacco surcharge, where those who use tobacco products will be required to pay a surcharge of $100 per month if not in a tobacco cessation program. The new agreement also includes the elimination of a so-called “Cadillac Plan,” as the district takes steps to eliminate the effects of the Affordable Care Act’s Excise Tax by 2018.

The new contract continues to encourage teachers to pursue masters and doctoral degrees by offering tuition reimbursement.

“I am elated the association has chosen to approve this, and I am equally elated that we have a consensus on this side,” Dupuis said. “This is people in the community working this out together.”