Boone Hospital Center is working out details of a petition opposing an effort by Nueterra and the University of Missouri Health System to build Columbia’s sixth hospital.

Boone Hospital President Jim Sinek told the hospital board of trustees Monday that a Boone Hospital Foundation board member has volunteered to coordinate the petition drive targeting a certificate-of-need application filed by Fulton Medical Center, the new name of the Fulton hospital co-owned since December by the Nueterra/MU Health partnership.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

The petition will be delivered to the Missouri Health Facilities Review Committee, which will meet July 13 in Jefferson City to consider the application that spells out plans for a 10-bed, $38 million hospital. The 51,500-square-foot facility at 4130 and 4150 Lenoir St. will displace residents living at Ed’s and Sunset Hills mobile home parks.

The application identifies a geographic region that excludes the population of Columbia and shows the planned Fulton Medical Center as the only hospital in the region, although five other hospitals are within four miles driving distance from the site.

Sinek has said the region determined by the application was “gerrymandering” and “an attempt to create a false impression that there’s a large population base that’s not being served.”

The certificate-of-need application says there would be “no impact” for hospitals closest to the proposed hospital’s service area.

Sinek said the wording of the petition will be finalized this week. He said hospital officials also plan to request a public meeting in Columbia with the health facilities review committee before the July 13 hearing in Jefferson City.

“It’s kind of a prelude to the official certificate-of-need hearing,” he said. Sinek said supporters and opponents would have a chance to speak at the local meeting.

Amy Leiker, vice president of global marketing for Leawood, Kan.-based Nueterra, said in an email that demographics and demand trends are always considered when building a new hospital.

“The expansion of Fulton Medical Center will provide residents in Mid-Missouri with another option for healthcare close to home,” she said. Leiker has declined to answer additional questions. Questions to MU Health officials are repeatedly referred to Nueterra.

Monday’s Boone Hospital Board of Trustees meeting also included an update from BJC HealthCare CEO Steve Lipstein about the health system’s growing footprint in the St. Louis region and beyond. BJC operates Boone Hospital through a lease agreement with the Boone County commission.

BJC’s system now includes 14 hospitals after the purchase of Mineral Area Regional Medical Center in Farmington and a partnership with Memorial Hospital of Belleville, Ill.

BJC HealthCare also has taken over operations and ownership of the St. Louis Regional Psychiatric Stabilization Center, a 25-bed adult inpatient acute psychiatric program in St. Louis.

Lipstein said BJC is strengthening its collaborations with other health systems at a time when University of Missouri Health Care is joining a new collaborative with the Mercy and Mosaic health systems. Lipstein said MU Health is also working to form partnerships with hospitals in Hannibal and Lake of the Ozarks.

“I think we can expect more collaborations,” he said. As a result of the state legislature not expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, some 700,000 Missourians are still without health insurance, he said.