Since the 1982 launch of CNN's Crossfire, there have been plenty of unforgettable moments, including some memorable faces. Thirty-one years later, we recount nine of our favorite Crossfire moments, from passionate debates to settled bets.

Crossfire returns to CNN on Monday, September 9 at 6:30 p.m. ET.

1. Frank Zappa on dirty song lyrics (1986)

Musician Frank Zappa, cleaned up in a suit and tie, engaged in a fiery debate about dirty song lyrics.

2. Then-Congressman-elect Paul Ryan (1998)



As we started pulling these tapes off the shelf, we were surprised to find so many guests who went on to become household names. In his 1998 appearance, Paul Ryan had not even begun his first term in Congress.

3. James Carville hides in a trash can (2002)

Then-host James Carville responded to the 2002 Democratic mid-term election losses in a way only Carville could.

4. Rush Limbaugh on burning the flag (1990)



In this clip, a "burning" debate raged between talk show hosts Rush Limbaugh and Bob Lassiter over the right to burn the flag.

5. Intense moment with anti-government group MOVE (1985)



During a 1985 eviction fight, Philadelphia police dropped a bomb on a row house occupied by a group called MOVE. Six months later, MOVE member Louise James Africa appeared on Crossfire to defend the group against allegations it threw garbage in the street.

6. Ku Klax Klan Grand Wizard makes an appearance (1982)



CNN’s Crossfire never has – and never will – shy away from controversy. Sooner or later, anyone who works on Crossfire hears about a 1982 episode where the guest’s views offended the hosts – and we warn you, those views are no less offensive or repugnant now, 31 years later.

7. Tucker Carlson eats Hillary Clinton's "shoe" (2003)



One of the biggest surprises occurred when host Tucker Carlson promised to eat his shoes if Hillary Clinton sold a million copies of her autobiography. She delivered.

8. Ambassador to the UN Jeane Kirkpatrick on the Middle East (1988)



Twenty-five years ago, U.N. Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick said something about the Middle East, including Syria, that’s as true now as it was when she said it.

9. Communist candidate discusses bid for VP (1984)



Activist and Communist party candidate for vice president Angela Davis appeared on Crossfire to discuss communism in America.