Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

GAINESVILLE, Fla. (AP) — John Force hugged and high-fived everyone at the starting line as daughter Brittany raced to her first professional victory 1,000 feet away.

A 16-time world champion, John then hopped on his scooter, put his wife and youngest daughter on the back and headed toward the other end of the drag strip. He steered with one hand and waved at cheering fans with the other.

When the three finally arrived, Brittany was waiting with the trophy in hand.

It was a Force family first.

Brittany earned her first Top Fuel win Sunday — the first in that class for ultra-successful John Force Racing — by beating Terry McMillen in the final at the prestigious Gatornationals.

“I’ve been chasing this for quite a few years,” the 29-year-old Brittany said. “I’ve been wanting it since Day 1. It took a lot of work and a lot of time to get here. It’s not as easy as you think it is.”

The Forces have made it look easy over the years.

John has 143 career victories, all in Funny Car. His youngest daughter, Courtney, has seven. And his oldest of three racing daughters, Ashley, had four before stepping away and becoming a mother.

Now, Brittany is on the board.

Throw in a few other drivers, and JFR has nearly 250 NHRA trophies back at the race shop in Yorba Linda, California. But Brittany is bringing home the first in Top Fuel, a class she never expected to be in growing up in drag racing’s first family.

“I thought every single one of them was insane,” she said. “It surprises me more than anything that I’m driving a Top Fuel car. … But the opportunity came along to jump in a Top Fuel car and I’ll try anything once.

“When it came down to it, I was like, ‘Oh man, what did I get myself into?’ It took a few months, working my way down the race track, and when I made my first full pass, I knew that everything I had gone to school for, all my plans, had completely changed and were out the window and I was starting my career in Top Fuel.”

As the only Top Fuel entry in Force’s four-car team, it wasn’t an easy transition.

Brittany was winless in her previous seven Top Fuel finals spanning 74 events.