The likely priorities of Incoming EU foreign-policy chief Federica Mogherini, left, are said to be different from her predecessor Catherine Ashton. The shift could be a factor that could leave Ms. Ashton continuing to play a lead role if needed in nuclear negotiations with Iran. Associated Press

Despite continued talk of progress in Iran’s nuclear negotiations with six major powers, there remains a significant possibility a final deal will not be done by the Nov. 24 deadline, paving the way for an extension of the discussions.

In Brussels, that is raising a question.

Who will play the role of Catherine Ashton, the outgoing European Union foreign-policy chief who has chaired the six party group and played negotiating partner to Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif? The answer seems to be: Ms. Ashton.

The British diplomat is due to step down from her Brussels post when a new EU executive takes over on Nov. 1. But the six power group — the U.S., the U.K., France, Germany, Russia and China — reached an informal agreement in July when talks were extended, that Ms. Ashton would stay until Nov. 24.

However, in recent weeks, as the possibility of a second extension of the talks has loomed, an understanding is forming that Ms. Ashton should stay on to see the job through, according to several people close to the talks.

Legally speaking, the United Nations Security Council handed the job of chairing the so-called P5+1 group, not to any individual, but to the EU’s High Representative for foreign policy. Theoretically that means the role should be taken up from November by Ms. Ashton’s successor in Brussels, current Italian Foreign Minister Federica Mogherini.

Ms. Ashton will hold a handover dinner with Ms. Mogherini and other EU foreign ministers on Monday evening in Luxembourg after chairing her final meeting of the bloc’s foreign ministers.

Ms. Ashton’s office won’t entertain questions about what happens if the Iran talks are extended beyond Nov. 24. The firm answer comes back: we are working to meet the deadline and won’t engage in hypotheticals about any form of Plan B. (Plan C, some would say since the talks have already been extended once.)

But privately, officials acknowledge this has been talked through. “They want Cathy to finish the job – beyond Nov. 24… and this is the understanding of the group as far as I can see,” said one person close to the talks. The arguments for keeping Ms. Ashton in place for a while at least are clear. She has organized this process for the last five years and enjoys good ties with most of the Iranians involved. Changing the team captain if an extension is required may ruffle negotiations at the very moment the talks are likely to come under heavy fire from skeptics in Tehran, Washington and elsewhere who argue that diplomacy will yield few results.

There are counter-arguments. Some believe Ms. Ashton’s role is no longer key. A deal depends fundamentally on agreement between Iran and the U.S. on key issues. In any case, Ms. Ashton’s able deputy Helga Schmid will stay in her role for the next few months. Ms. Schmid, who has been involved in Iran nuclear talks for the best part of the last decade, has a critical relationship with Iran’s Abbas Araghchi, the man who many see as the key player in the Iran team.

There’s another factor at play here: the wishes of Ms. Ashton and Ms. Mogherini. While the current EU foreign policy chief has made it clear at various points she’s looking forward to going home and enjoying some time off, she has invested a huge amount of time, emotion and determination in the Iran talks

People close to her say that even when the talks were seen as a diplomatic dead-end back in 2010 and 2011 under former Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Ms. Ashton believed she could play an important role in revitalizing the negotiations if given the chance.

If there is a short extension, Ms. Ashton may be very keen to try and see it through. That may suit Ms. Mogherini, said someone involved in the transition process. While the Iran role would provide her with some top-level experience and international limelight, the Italian foreign minister has set out a different vision of the EU post to Ms. Ashton.

She has given the impression that she wants to avoid having her schedule absorbed by one or two key negotiating files.

She has said she wants to focus on reviewing the EU’s foreign-policy process and priorities in her first 100 days and she has been clear that she sees one of her key tasks as integrating the EU’s foreign policy service better with the work of the rest of the European Commission team.

That means a heavier Brussels-based workload than for Ms. Ashton, who was on the road almost non-stop and rarely attended the weekly commission meetings. Of course, the talks may advance sufficiently to make the issue academic. But don’t rule out a continued Iran role for the foreseeable future for Ms. Ashton.

UPDATE: Ms. Ashton has confirmed the story. “I’ve been asked to stay on until it’s done,” she said when asked her if she may stay beyond Nov 24.