Can good design help heal the sick? The University Medical Center of Princeton realized several years ago that it had outgrown its old home and needed a new one. So the management decided to design a mock patient room.

Medical staff members and patients were surveyed. Nurses and doctors spent months moving Post-it notes around a model room set up in the old hospital. It was for just one patient, with a big foldout sofa for guests, a view outdoors, a novel drug dispensary and a bathroom positioned just so.

Equipment was installed, possible situations rehearsed. Then real patients were moved in from the surgical unit — hip and knee replacements, mostly — to compare old and new rooms. After months of testing, patients in the model room rated food and nursing care higher than patients in the old rooms did, although the meals and care were the same.

But the real eye-opener was this: Patients also asked for 30 percent less pain medication.

Reduced pain has a cascade effect, hastening recovery and rehabilitation, leading to shorter stays and diminishing not just costs but also the chances for accidents and infections. When the new $523 million, 636,000-square-foot hospital, on a leafy campus, opened here in 2012, the model room became real.

So far, ratings of patient satisfaction are in the 99th percentile, up from the 61st percentile before the move. Infections rates and the number of accidents have never been lower.

Often ignored by front-rank architects, left to corporate specialists who churn out too many heartless buildings, hospitals are a critical frontier for design. A British charity for cancer care, Maggie’s Centres, has taken one approach, enlisting a Who’s Who of stars like Rem Koolhaas, Frank Gehry, Snohetta and Norman Foster to devise bespoke facilities. In Brazil, the architect and urbanist João Filgueiras Lima, known as Lelé (who died in May, at 82) devoted his final years to a remarkable series of rehabilitation hospitals: simple, airy and visually arresting.

But maybe most interesting, some young design firms are getting into the act. Not long ago, Mass Design Group in Boston made headlines with a hospital in Rwanda — “way too cool to be a hospital,” The Atlantic cooed — that provoked some debate in professional circles about whether socially concerned design can also be Architecture with a capital “A.”

In many ways, this is the central argument in architecture today, with a new generation more attuned to issues of social responsibility and public welfare. The discussion has posed a larger, fundamental question about the role of architects, and to what extent they can or should be held responsible for how buildings work.

Several hundred decisions, major and minuscule, common-sensical and arcane, went into configuring the room. For starters, there are no double rooms.

Research shows that patients sharing rooms provide doctors with less critical information (even less if the other patient has guests). Ample space is given to visitors because the presence of family and friends hastens recovery.

Ditto the big window: Natural light and a view outdoors have been regarded as morale boosters.

There are also some fine points to the Princeton plan, like a sink positioned in plain sight, so nurses and doctors will be sure to wash their hands, and patients can watch them do so. A second sink is in the bathroom, which is next to the bed, a handrail linking bed and bathroom, so patients don’t have to travel far between them and will fall less often.

How much each or any of the design moves in the University Medical Center of Princeton contributed to reducing pain or improving patient approval ratings is not clear, which frustrates Barry S. Rabner, the hospital’s chief executive. He gave the example of antibacterial flooring, which cost $1 per square foot more.

“Sounds like a good idea,” he said. “So we did it. But that’s around a $700,000 difference. And where’s the evidence that it works?”