Jim Obergefell, the main plaintiff in the Supreme Court case on same-sex marriage, exits the Supreme Court Thursday after the court released four opinions -- none of which were his case. (Photo: Jennifer Calfas / USA TODAY)

WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court has made a frequent flier out of Jim Obergefell.

The Cincinnati man whose name graces the court's marquee case on same-sex marriage jets in and out of the nation's capital twice a week these days to watch the justices in action.

So far, he has yet to see or hear what he's been coming for: a ruling on Obergefell v. Hodges, the challenge by gay and lesbian couples on same-sex marriage bans in Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky and Tennessee. But that hasn't stopped him from arriving at about 7 a.m. each day of decisions, to ensure he's in court when the moment arrives.

It's a scene that's replicated here every June, along with tourists wilting in the humidity: Lawyers and plaintiffs mixing with regular citizens inside and outside the nation's highest court, waiting to witness history.

This year, the interest level is high for two cases — same-sex marriage and the latest challenge to President Obama's health care law, or Obamacare. Both attract fans and foes to the sidewalk in front of the court as well as the marble courtroom.

Lawyers from the nation's major gay rights organizations committed last week to be at court whenever a ruling could come down. That includes Mary Bonauto of Gay & Lesbian Advocates & Defenders (GLAD), who argued the Obergefell case, and James Esseks, who heads the American Civil Liberties Union's LGBT project.

Judging from how the court nearly always saves the biggest decisions for the end of the term, the lawyers knew the ruling on same-sex marriage was unlikely to come until next week. But they couldn't risk missing the moment.

That's how Obergefell feels.

"This case is so important to me and to millions of people across the country," he said from his place in front of the public line (another is reserved for lawyers admitted to the Supreme Court bar). "To me, the only place I could possibly be when that decision comes out is in the courtroom."

Obergefell married his longtime partner, John Arthur, in Maryland two years ago because they could not wait any longer. Arthur was suffering from ALS, or Lou Gehrig's Disease.

Arthur died three months after their lawsuit, seeking Ohio's recognition of their out-of-state marriage, was filed. Now Obergefell wants his name listed on Arthur's death certificate.

"Being here whenever the decision comes out is part of the promise I made to him," Obergefell said. "I need to be here."

So, apparently, do other Americans from all walks of life, transfixed by the same-sex marriage and health care cases.

Christine Weick, 51, of Grand Rapids, Mich., stood outside court with a sign reading, "God draws a line on gay marriage. Woe to those who cross it!"

A self-described Christian activist, she said she opposes same-sex marriage because she loves the Bible, the United States — and gay people.

"When the Bible says something is wrong, it's wrong," Weick said. "I do not want to … give them an OK to do something that is wicked in God's eyes, and then they are held accountable."

Barbara Fox, a history professor at Pima Community College in Tucson, couldn't resist being part of history Monday — even if it turned out that the justices were not ready to release their Obamacare decision.

"I've never been to the Supreme Court before, so this is incredibly exciting," she said. "It's something that I have been so invested in. It's an amazing experience that I won't forget."

Fox, 59, said the Affordable Care Act saved her life when she was battling stage IV breast cancer.

"I was able to get much better insurance at a much more reasonable price," she said.

Skyler Mays of Frederick, Md., and Austin Naughton of Washington, D.C., met Thursday outside court. Both wore T-shirts in support of same-sex marriage.

Naughton, a former social studies teacher, said Thursday he plans to be at court each day until the opinion is released. He had a rainbow flag in his pocket.

"It could happen anytime," Mays said.

The pair were joined by several women holding signs that read, "God said: One Man + One Woman," and other messages in opposition to same-sex marriage.

A woman stands next to a sign in opposition to same-sex marriage outside of the Supreme Court Thursday. (Photo: Jennifer Calfas, USA TODAY)

Brooke Baxter, 19, of Dallas, arrived in Washington after finishing high school. The trip was a graduation gift from her family to "witness history," she said.

Shane Crone stood outside court to honor his partner, who died four years ago. Because they were not legally married, Crone was unable to obtain his partner's medical records and was banned from attending the funeral by his partner's parents.

Crone's struggles after his partner's death were chronicled in the documentary "Bridegroom."

"When people say we should just be happy with the progress, the reality is every day we delay is so harmful to the LGBT community," he said. "The country is ready, and the majority of people do support it now. So I think it's inevitable what's going to happen behind those doors."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Lq3kxu