SPRINGFIELD - The results of a multi-year study that made long-acting, free contraception available to teens was headlined this week, with the New York Times referring to the results as indicative of "startling success."

Quoting information from the Department of Public Health and Environment in Colorado, where the study was done, the NYT article said the study resulted in a 40 percent drop in the birthrate among teenagers across the state. from 2009 to 2013. The rate of abortions among this group also fell by 42 percent. Births to unmarried women under 25 who have not finished high school also plummeted.

Two factors have been highlighted from the study. The fact the contraception was free, and that long acting reversible contraception, referred to as LARC, and with a failure rate of less than 1 percent, appears to be growing in popularity with younger women. This is true at the Springfield clinic of Planned Parenthood League of Massachusetts.

"Since 2009, PPLM's Springfield health center has seen the number of LARCs provided to patients triple - an increase that has been particularly profound among its patients ages 19 and younger," said Danielle Roncari, PPLM's medical director.

Roncari added that the "findings from Colorado's initiative are impressive and clearly demonstrate the tremendous public health benefits that are achieved when every woman has true access to the full range of contraceptive options, including long acting reversible contraception."

"PPLM is committed to providing every patient the care and information she needs to make an informed decision about which birth control method is best for her," said Roncari, referring to the fact that the Springfield clinic offers a range, including birth control methods in the form of implants, pills and shots as, well as fertility awareness.

Teen birth rates have been decreasing in Massachusetts (pdf) over several decades, and the commonwealth has one of the lowest rates in the country.

Holyoke has the highest teen birth rate in the state, and Springfield is second, though there are ongoing efforts to address reduce this by 10 percent by over the next five years.

Implants and intrauterine devices are the most effective reversible methods of birth control. An IUD is a small, T-shaped, plastic device that is inserted into and left inside the uterus, in some cases for 10 years. The birth control implant is a small flexible rod that is inserted under the skin in the upper arm for up to three years.

These methods can be costly and not every federally qualified health center offers on-site contraceptive implants, even though free contraception is mandated under the Affordable Care Act.

The Colorado study was funded by Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation.