Topics: From the Wires, News

EFATE, Vanuatu (AP) — The roof from what was once the home of principal Melizabeth Uhi and her staff is now folded over branches high in the trees that border her school. She’s now living with two other staff members in the only classroom that’s still habitable. And she’s running low on the rice she had before Cyclone Pam tore through Vanuatu a week ago, upending her life.

But Uhi is moving forward. She’s helped organize a community cleanup of the Manua Centre School grounds on the main island of Efate on Monday, and is determined that her 314 students will return to school as soon as possible.

A week after the cyclone tore through the South Pacific archipelago with winds of 270 kilometers (168 miles) per hour, people are focused on the task of rebuilding.

The signs of progress are everywhere. The road that rings the main island is now accessible to all vehicles following temporary repairs to bridges, and the cell network that’s vital to keeping people connected is gradually being restored on Efate and some other islands. On the sides of roads, crews have been repairing electricity lines and residents cutting tree trunks into fire-sized slices.

The task remains enormous. Many of the outlying islands still don’t have any way to communicate with the outside world, while tourism, vital to the economy, has taken a huge hit, with many operators fielding call after call to cancel bookings. Throughout Vanuatu, many people remain worried about the most basic necessities: water, shelter and food.

Around 65,000 people across Vanuatu are in need of temporary emergency shelter, according to the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which raised the death toll from the cyclone to 17 on Saturday.

Vanuatu and other small island nations face unique challenges in recovery due to their remote location and scattered populations, said Osnat Lubrani, the U.N. humanitarian coordinator for Vanuatu. Delivering services even when there isn’t a crisis is hard and expensive, she said.

“So certainly in a time of disaster, that makes things very difficult,” she said. “On the positive side, I think people are extremely resilient.”

Lubrani said the total price tag for the rebuild is still unknown.

Neighbors New Zealand and Australia quickly committed millions of dollars toward the relief effort. There’s also been millions more committed by other countries, including France, the U.S., the United Arab Emirates and South Korea. Relief agencies are also moving enormous resources into the region.