CLEVELAND, Ohio — After more than five years of gathering data, surveying residents and building community support, a countywide public health initiative called HIP-C, or Health Improvement Partnership-Cuyahoga, is finally releasing a plan to tackle the area's perennial poor health.

It has much of what you'd expect from a traditional public health plan: programs targeting the improvement of high blood pressure and other chronic diseases, efforts to improve access to safe places to exercise, and funding for more fruits and veggies for people who don't normally eat very well.

But at its core is the explicit acknowledgement that all of these well-intentioned programs will fail to improve health unless an underlying truth is recognized and addressed. In short — race and geography have a much greater influence on health than personal choice.

HIP-C's full plan is available online here.

It was the county board of health's work that in 2011 highlighted a startling local statistic. Residents of the predominantly white, middle-class suburb of Lyndhurst typically live 24 years longer than residents of Cleveland's largely black, low-income Hough neighborhood, only 8½ miles away.

It's the largest disparity in life expectancy in the county, but it's not unusual for our area. On average, those living in the more affluent suburbs away from the city live 20 years longer than those living in the urban core and the inner-ring suburbs.

"These fundamental disparities in health in our community are not [happenstance]," Martha Halko, deputy director of the county board of health told The Plain Dealer. "It's not a bunch of irresponsible people not taking care of themselves."

HIP-C began in 2010 as a collaboration between the Cuyahoga County Board of Health, the Cleveland Department of Public Health and Shaker Heights Department of Health, as a response to decades of bad health outcomes for county residents. The county has consistently ranked in the bottom third of the state in overall health, and significantly worse in areas such as infant mortality, teen births, low-birth weight infants and sexually transmitted infections.

Poverty and inequity are also disturbingly high in the county. More than half of Cleveland's kids are poor, the second highest rate of child poverty of any large city in the country. The county is in the lowest performing 10 percent nationwide in income disparities, with a wide gulf between those with the most and those with the least.

"We've always talked about this egalitarian ideal of everyone having the chance to be the best person they can be, given their own skills, abilities and capacities," said Gregory Brown, executive director of PolicyBridge and co-chair of the HIP-C consortium. But, he said, our cultural history has placed inordinate and inequitable barriers to this ideal in the path of minorities and the poor.

Some of these barriers, highlighted in HIP-C's 50 page report, include the historic practice of "redlining," a federal housing policy that provided "security maps" to banks which outlined areas deemed unsafe for home loans due to their high population of foreign-born or black residents. The policy, which lasted until 1968, effectively barred blacks and other minorities from home ownership and therefore from the ability to build wealth, concentrating poor people in specific neighborhoods.

You can see Cleveland's 1930's-era security map here.

The repercussions of this and many other policies are with us today, said Brown. The same neighborhoods that were redlined in the 1930's still house the poorest, sickest residents. They are also neighborhoods where waste has been dumped and the fewest education dollars are spent, he said.

A native Clevelander and Cleveland State University alumnus, Brown is also a member of Cuyahoga PlaceMatters, part of a national network that focuses on changing the policy and systems that perpetuate health inequities.

Accepting that our area's health disparities are not due to chance, lack of access to care, or poor individual choices may be a tall order for some, Brown and Halko allowed.

"We're operating in a very traditional narrative of public health and healthcare where we prioritize sick care and behavior change," Halko said. "So it's an individual's responsibility to just be healthy regardless of where you live -- that's actually work in itself, to try and change that understanding."

Buy-in is critical, proponents say

It's taken about five years of work, $300,000 in support from funding sources such as the St. Luke's Foundation, Mt. Sinai Health Care Foundation, and the George Gund Foundation, as well as many multiples of that amount in institutional support from member organizations to reach a plan of action.

The consortium's work has been intentionally slow, said Chris Kippes, epidemiologist with the board of health.

"We reached out to the community for the first time," he said. "We said to the public 'what matters to you?'"

HIP-C spent two years surveying residents about their health concerns and received about 7,000 responses. The 200-page report detailing this work was released in 2013, along with four priority areas for focus that most people wanted to see addressed. These were improving chronic disease management, connecting high-end clinical care with all who need it, eliminating racism as a social determinant of health, and increasing access to healthy food and active living.

The consortium also set out to recruit community partners. Since its inception, more than 90 organizations have joined HIP-C. These include large healthcare institutions such as the MetroHealth System and the Cleveland Clinic; small federally qualified health centers; banks such as PNC and the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland; Ohio's largest Medicaid provider, CareSource; libraries, universities, community development organizations, non-profits and media organizations such as ideastream.

"This was a very comprehensive and deliberate process," Kippes said. "Although that process significantly delayed [the plan], we feel that it's going to have a more meaningful and sustained impact because there's buy-in over this long period of time, and everyone has a sense of ownership over this."

HIP-C includes a subgroup dedicated to community engagement and communications, and a community member sits on the steering committee for the consortium.

Getting residents to "buy in" to the HIP-C plan is critical, but it's equally important for all of the county's numerous, diverse public health and healthcare actors to agree to the goals, message and structure of the plan. HIP-C is trying to get all these groups to work together, coordinating their use of resources, training and the delivery of services to residents.

The committee working on improving healthy eating and active living (HEAL), for example, is trying to coordinate shared-use agreements between cities and local churches or schools to make recreational and after-school facilities available in communities where these options are limited.

"If we want a vibrant county, every part of a county needs to be vibrant," said Erika Trapl, anchor of the HEAL committee and an assistant professor at Case. "You should not have to leave your neighborhood in order to have a healthy life."

Work already under way

Much of the more traditional public health work that HIP-C has included in its plan is, in fact, already underway.

Last year, HIP-C and the YMCA of Greater Cleveland each received nearly $1 million in federal grants to fund some of their priorities. The REACH grants, part of $7.9 million in funding to prevent chronic disease awarded through the Affordable Care Act, provide funding to increase access and opportunity for better nutrition, increased physical activity and improved chronic-disease prevention and management in 22 census tracts across six neighborhoods in Cleveland and East Cleveland.

Case Western Reserve University's Prevention Research Center for Healthy Neighborhoods, one of the consortium's member groups, is also working on improving access to healthy food with its FreshLink program. The long-term project has been studying what kind of food is available in low-income neighborhoods in the county (particularly Buckeye, Central, Hough and East Cleveland), as well as in schools. They've also been giving pregnant women "produce prescriptions" from their doctors that provide vouchers for fresh fruits and vegetables at local markets.

HIP-C's plan includes and expands on these projects, Halko said. The produce prescriptions, for example, will also be given to residents with high blood pressure to see if a convenient, simple way of accessing fresh food can help improve hypertension.

Some of the consortium's other goals over the next three to five years include:

closer collaboration between local healthcare providers and public health officials in assessing the health of the community

more involvement from Ohio Medicaid in strategies for preventing chronic illness

training corner store owners in low-income areas on healthy food options, certifying "healthy" corner stores

adopting a plan for a network of protected bike boulevards throughout the city of Cleveland.

Changing the narrative

HIP-C's most difficult goal, though, will be in changing the prevailing attitude, which holds that individual behavior change is enough to turn around the health of a community.

A subcommittee with the lofty goal of "eliminating structural racism" has been meeting alongside the three more traditionally health-focused committees, and hopes to increase awareness of the racial bias within and across society that has affected the health of the county.

"We have to do something differently," said Halko. "What we've done in the past has not impacted the differences in health outcomes that we're seeing."

Added Kippes: "The reason for that in a nutshell is because we've been focusing downstream on the individual health behaviors, [rather than] moving upstream to the policy to impact the unjust historical decisions that were made to put people of color and other minorities in positions really to not thrive and not be healthy."

Over the next few years, the group will educate member organizations and the community about the historical reasons for the current health inequities in our area, and member organizations will create policies and practices within their institutions that address racial bias.

It's an uncomfortable message for many people, Brown said. He knows that HIP-C's efforts to "change the narrative" about health in the community will likely be an uphill battle.

"The issue of talking about race and equity has never been comfortable. People feel they're being attacked personally," he said. "That's not what this is about. We're talking about who we are as Americans, and who we want to be as Americans."