Thursday's U.S. Supreme Court ruling in favor of the White House's position on the Affordable Care Act was widely hailed as a victory for President Obama and his signature domestic achievement.

But it may just as well prove to limit the president's authority on issues ranging from health care to immigration, as the Supreme Court's 6-3 decision appears to curtail powers the executive branch has long assumed.

The question in King v. Burwell centered around a single clause in the Affordable Care Act, which said subsidies given in the form of tax credits to help people puchase health insurance should be available to those who purchase on "an exchange established by the state.”

A literal interpretation of that clause would mean the more than six million Americans who purchased insurance from the federal exchange would not be eligible for subsidies.

The Obama administration had argued Congress could not have intended that outcome and in cases where the textual meaning of a law is unclear, it should be left to the executive agency, in this case the Internal Revenue Service, to decide how to interpret and execute the law.

That precedent was established in Chevron v. Natural Resources Defense Council, a 1984 Supreme Court case.

It's the reasoning the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals used in ruling for the Obama administration last year.

But in affirming the lower court's opinion, Chief Justice John Roberts, writing for the four liberals on the court and Justice Anthony Kennedy, eschewed that argument.

“Chevron does not provide the appropriate framework here,” Roberts wrote.

Instead, Roberts said that because the question before the court is of “deep economic and political significance,” the court must play umpire and determine Congress' intent.

In essence, Roberts went out of his way to narrow the scope of the Chevron decision, and five other justices went along with him.

“Chevron created tremendous judicial deference to the executive,” said Ted Frank, founder of the Center for Class Action Fairness, a nonprofit law firm. “That they discarded it here is a very significant constraint on the executive.”

The most immediate consequence is that the next president may not order the I.R.S. to deny subsidies to participants of a federal exchange. The authority to interpret this section of the law belongs to the courts, not to the executive, Roberts ruled.

“A key aspect [of this ruling] is that it leaves no wiggle room for a future administration,” said Larry Levitt, a senior vice president at the Kaiser Family Foundation.

But the implications could be even broader if Roberts is hinting at his desire to rebalance executive authority.

Because plenty of cases that reach the high court can be construed to have “deep economic and political significance,” Roberts' decision puts the onus on Congress to specifically delegate authority to the executive branch.

Without such a declaration, the justices will decide what Congress intended, not the president.

“What this means is that Congress, if it wants to delegate crucial questions to an agency, they’re just going to have to be clearer about it in the statute itself,” said Richard Hasen, a law professor at the University of California at Irvine and an election law expert.

Roberts has been critical of agency authority in the past.

In City of Arlington v. F.C.C., Roberts, in a dissenting opinion, worried over the growing trend of agencies amassing more power, and questioned “whether the authority of administrative agencies should be augmented even further ... to decide when Congress has given them the power.”

Roberts thought the answer was no and now, writing for the majority, has curtailed that administrative role.

This amounts to a small, but significant, win for conservatives looking for a check on the executive branch and for those who felt Chevron has been applied too broadly.

It may also mean a future headache for the Obama, or a future Democratic administration.

Frank cited a case working its way through the courts related to the president's immigration policy. The Obama administration has argued its agencies have the authority to enact a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.

Following Roberts' line of thinking, that would be a step too far for the executive branch.

It won't just be immigration. The Environmental Protection Agency, Securities and Exchange Commission and National Labor Relations Board all take cues from the White House and often choose to interpret acts of Congress in their own way.

Roberts, who served on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit that oversees federal agencies, would understand better than most the implications of narrowing Chevron, and what it might do to future challenges of executive authority.

“This has enormous reach in the way agency decisions have been reviewed in other areas,” said Jim Copland, a senior fellow with the Manhattan Institute's Center for Legal Policy. “It is clearly going to result in further litigation and potentially less scope for administrative law rulings.”

CORRECTION: This story initially misquoted Rick Hasen. He referred to the "statute itself" not "statue."