BOULDER, Colo. (AP) — The next time you order a drink at Firehouse Subs, take a close look at the cup. You might recognize the face looking back at you.

Boulder police Officer Jenny Paddock’s image now graces a series of drink cups served around the country to promote the fast-food chain’s foundation that helps buy equipment for law enforcement and emergency personnel.

The Boulder Police Department was awarded $11,531.32 from the Ironman Foundation and Firehouse Subs Public Safety Foundation in 2014, and used the money to buy 12 new police bicycles.

Paddock, who often bikes while on her patrol in downtown Boulder and was one of the people involved in securing the grant, said that officers carry about 25 pounds of equipment, so having the newer bicycles helped with their response time.

“Having a new, light-weight bike really helps in everyday response,” she said.

Founded in 1994 by firefighting brothers Robin and Chris Sorensen in Florida, Firehouse Subs has more than 900 locations across the U.S. and Canada, including a location at 1695 29th St. in Boulder.

In 2005, the Sorensens helped feed first responders in Mississippi after Hurricane Katrina devastated the area, and the brothers were inspired to create the Firehouse Subs Public Safety Foundation to provide money for agencies to buy equipment.

“They came back and often referred to (the visit) as a game changer, and they knew we were in a position to do more,” said Meghan Vargas, senior manager of foundation development for Firehouse Subs Public Safety Foundation. “We’re dedicated to improving the life-saving capabilities of our local heroes as well as improving the lives of the communities that they serve.”

To help raise awareness of the foundation, Firehouse Subs decided to feature several first responders from agencies around the country on its cups posing with their equipment. Vargas, who works in Denver, had worked with Paddock on the grant for the bicycles, so she knew who at least one of the subjects would be.

“We already had a relationship so it was easy to reach out to Jenny to see if she would be featured on our cups,” Vargas said.

Though Paddock was initially hesitant — “I’m shy,” she said — she agreed to be on the cup. While eating a sandwich at the Boulder Firehouse location this week, Paddock recounted going to her shoot and discovering the photographer wasn’t exactly used to taking photos of people.

“He normally does these,” Paddock said, pointing at a photo of a sandwich on one of the restaurant’s signs. “Then we had to figure out, how do you fit a bike and an officer in a profile on a cup?”

But after an hour-long shoot Paddock and the photographer got the shot they needed, and by the start of the year her photo was featured in Firehouse locations around the country.

It’s not the first time Paddock has gotten recognition for her work. She was also the recipient of the department’s City Value Award of Respect for her work with the homeless population.

“She’s been involved in a lot of good things in this community, not just this campaign,” said Boulder police spokeswoman Shannon Cordingly.

Vargas said the cup campaign’s goal is to raise awareness for the foundation, which provides about 70 percent of the donations by donating change, rounding up bills or even buying the restaurants’ recycled pickle jars.

“I thought it turned out well,” said Paddock, who has heard from friends as far away as Louisiana who spotted her on the cups. “I had a friend who was almost to the trash when she just looked down and said, ‘Wait a minute,’ and she takes a picture and of course posts it on Facebook and saying, ‘Hey, look who I found.'”

———

Information from: Daily Camera, http://www.dailycamera.com/