Dr. John B. Chessare

President & CEO

GBMC HealthCare System

GBMC HealthCare System is at the forefront of transforming care to improve health outcomes and care experience while reducing costs.

The effort is part of the health care system’s push to generate higher value for patients and employers under the leadership of Dr. John B. Chessare.

Chessare, who has served as president and CEO of the GBMC HealthCare System since 2010, said the health care system is making great progress towards its vision.

The health care system now includes 100 primary-care providers who keep extended hours during the week and weekend hours.

All are using the same electronic records and can access and update shared patient records.

“We’re trying to keep people out of hospitals,” Chessare said.

That includes the opening in December of GBMC’s first patient-centered medical home, which does not have a waiting room.

Fourteen sites in Baltimore County now are operating under a system of advanced primary care, Chessare said.

GBMC also was one of the first accountable care organizations in Maryland under the Affordable Care Act, and Chessare reports lower Medicare costs and the lowest severity adjusted readmission rate in the state.

As a pediatrician and former primary-care practicing physician, Chessare said his experience gives him an advantage in identifying problems in the health care field and fixing them.

“I lived trying to care for patients in a broken system,” he said.

He asserts that while the U.S. has the best trained medical professionals in the world, the outcomes are not as good as they could be because of a health care system in need of redesign.

A mentor early in Chessare’s career taught him “that health care could be so much better.”

“It’s just about leadership,” Chessare said. “We could save money in the present system and improve care, but it requires reforming, redesigning and changing systems.”

In addition to his work with GBMC, Chessare serves as a member of the executive committee for the Maryland Hospital Association, the Committee on Clinical Leadership of the American Hospital Association, and the Masters in Healthcare Administration Advisory Board for Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.