Topics: Editor's Picks, Happy new year, New Year's Day, Why is January 1 New Year's, Innovation News, Business News, Life News

Happy New Year! Little odd we are doing this now, right? A bit arbitrary really. Why did the West and then by extension the rest of the world agree that January 1 should be the first day of the year?

The first New Year celebrations marked the beginning of planting season, a date normally associated with either the spring or autumnal equinox depending on local climates. This is why Rosh Hashanah is in late September and Nowruz (the Persian New Year) is in March.

Originally, the Roman calendar followed this trend as well. Throughout the earliest parts of Roman history, the calendar year began on March 1, which was roughly the beginning of planting season. However, around the year 153 B.C.E., the date of the year’s inauguration was switched to January 1, the first day of the month dedicated to the goddess Janus. The two-faced Janus blessed new beginnings and so it makes sense that her month (added to the calendar roughly 600 years before by King Numa Pompilius) should commemorate the beginning of the year. More importantly, however, this move meant New Year’s Day now coincided with the beginning of the governmental year when the new consuls (from whom each year would take its name) would take office.

But despite the certain kind of logic in this move, January 1 calendric supremacy was far from assured. In 46 B.C.E., Julius Caesar oversaw a drastic and decidedly necessary overhaul of the Roman calendar. The ancient Roman calendar was based on a lunar system that had become grossly inaccurate over the centuries, not the least because politicians frequently altered it in order to lengthen their own terms in office or shorten those of their opponents. Julius Caesar gave the new solar-based scheme his name and crowned January 1 as the first day of the year.

As the calendar of the Mistress of the World, the Julian calendar enjoyed widespread use and influence, though January 1 seldom displaced local New Year observances. And after the Roman Empire’s conversion to Christianity, January’s association with the pagan Janus became suspect. So suspect, in fact, that in 567 A.D., the Council of Tours abolished January 1 as the New Year.

This began the date’s exile from New Year’s Day glory. Throughout the Middle Ages, Christendom did not have a unified day to mark the beginning of the new year. The annual switch-over was variously celebrated on March 1 (the old, pre-Julian Roman New Year), March 25 (the Feast of the Annunciation), December 25 (Christmas Day), and even Easter. In the Byzantine East, September 1 marked the first day of the year.