Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Boulder County District Attorney's Office warns of rental scams

District Attorney Stan Garnett is warning Boulder County residents of a recent spike in fraudulent Craigslist postings of rental properties.



The phony listings promise extra-low rent, such as $880 a month for a three-bedroom, two-bath home in Boulder. Recent reports have been received from Boulder, Aurora and Erie.



The scammer will advertise homes that are not being rented, or take real estate listings of homes from legitimate websites and use them to place ads. When a prospective renter responds, often the scammer will email a renter's application.



The application requires the prospective renter to provide a social security number, date of birth, driver's license number and financial history before seeing the property in person.



In the past, the scammer frequently asked the renter to provide a deposit to hold the rental property. These current scams differ, in that they appear to be an attempt to obtain personal identifying information.



Warning signs and red flags include immediate requests for personal and financial information, a request to wire a deposit to “hold” the property, long-distance arrangements, and landlords who claim to be unavailable to show the property.



If you have been scammed, contact your local law enforcement agency and contact the Community Protection Division of the Boulder County District Attorney's Office at 303-441-3700.

Advertisement









District Attorney Stan Garnett is warning Boulder County residents of a recent spike in fraudulent Craigslist postings of rental properties.The phony listings promise extra-low rent, such as $880 a month for a three-bedroom, two-bath home in Boulder. Recent reports have been received from Boulder, Aurora and Erie.The scammer will advertise homes that are not being rented, or take real estate listings of homes from legitimate websites and use them to place ads. When a prospective renter responds, often the scammer will email a renter's application.The application requires the prospective renter to provide a social security number, date of birth, driver's license number and financial history before seeing the property in person.In the past, the scammer frequently asked the renter to provide a deposit to hold the rental property. These current scams differ, in that they appear to be an attempt to obtain personal identifying information.Warning signs and red flags include immediate requests for personal and financial information, a request to wire a deposit to “hold” the property, long-distance arrangements, and landlords who claim to be unavailable to show the property.If you have been scammed, contact your local law enforcement agency and contact the Community Protection Division of the Boulder County District Attorney's Office at 303-441-3700.