Economy

On taxes, Carson has embraced the idea of a "proportional tax" system that would allow everybody to pay the same rate.

"We need a significantly changed taxation system. And the one that I've advocated is based on tithing, because I think God is a pretty fair guy. And he said, you know, if you give me a tithe, it doesn't matter how much you make," Carson said during the Fox News GOP primary debate last month. "So there must be something inherently fair about that. And that's why I've advocated a proportional tax system. You make $10 billion, you pay a billion. You make $10, you pay one. And everybody gets treated the same way. And you get rid of the deductions, you get rid of all the loopholes."

He's proposed significant budget cuts to reduce the deficit, writing in his 2011 book "America the Beautiful" that every government agency and department should have to cut its budget by 10 percent each year, "as long as necessary to bring the budget back into balance. This would mean there would be no sacred cows and no sparing of entitlements. No politician, agency, or special interest group could cry foul."

He's also spoken out generally against proposals to increase the social safety net, saying unemployment benefits, food stamps, and other forms of "welfare" create "dependency" that inhibits people from realizing their potential.

"It really is not compassionate to pat people on the head and say, 'There there, you poor little thing. I'm going to take care of all of your needs,'" he said in February at the Conservative Political Action Conference. "That's not compassion, that's the opposite of compassion. It's making people dependent. What real compassion is, is using our intellect to find ways to allow those people to climb out of dependency and realize the American dream."

Carson has continued railing against Obamacare, the issue that arguably made his name among conservative activists, calling it the "worst thing since slavery" and urging Congress to repeal it.

"Do I believe in health care for everybody? Absolutely," he told NBC News last year. "But I think there are much better ways to get there, which leave the care in the hands of patients and of doctors."

Carson has also taken a skeptical view of President Obama's push to combat climate change by reducing carbon emissions that heat the planet. "There's always going to be either cooling or warming going on," Carson told Bloomberg News last year. "As far as I'm concerned, that's irrelevant. What is relevant is that we have an obligation and a responsibility to protect our environment." He suggested the Environmental Protection Agency "should work "with business, industry and universities to find the most eco-friendly ways of developing our energy resources."