Planning to take their concerns to Board of Trustees Tuesday

If you go What: Public hearing concerning preliminary plat for Morgan Hill residential development When: 6:30 p.m. Tuesday Where: Board room of Erie Town Hall, 645 Holbrook Street More info: http://erieco.gov/index.aspx?NID=318

Correction: The original posting of this story inccorectly stated the way the Erie Planning Commission voted on the preliminary plat for the Morgan Hill subdivision.

Rankled by plans that show an access street connecting to the main road through their neighborhood, residents of Erie's Northridge subdivision are planning to pack the Board of Trustees meeting Tuesday to make their displeasure known regarding preliminary plans for a 215-acre residential development on the northeast side of town.

The site of the Morgan Hill residential development, located northwest of the intersection of Weld County Road 3 and Weld County Road 10.5, was annexed into Erie in 2008, according to town documents. The annexation agreement approved the area for 490 dwellings to be built into a single subdivision.

On Tuesday night, representatives of the Boulder-based Community Development Group will go before the town Board for a public hearing and first reading of a preliminary plat for the property, as well as a request to rezone it as entirely light residential.

The developer will likely be joined at the meeting by numerous unhappy residents of the Northridge subdivision, located directly to the south of the property.

Their concern, according to 14-year neighborhood resident, Jim Hoffmeyer, is that the preliminary plat shows a main access into the Morgan Hill area off of County Road 10.5 aligning with Fletcher Drive, the main road through Northridge.

A concern that roadway is already dangerous

Residents first learned of the planned road at a meeting with the developer in December. Since then, they have produced a petition signed by 125 neighborhood residents asking the town to ignore codes that mandate subdivisions are connected via street. That's because Fletcher Drive is a narrow, non-improved street without sidewalks and gutters, and, in the view of residents, would likely become a shortcut for people from Morgan Hill seeking a quick path into old town Erie.

"The petition ask for two things," Hoffmeyer said "One, that the exit from Morgan Hill not align with Fletcher Drive. And the second part is for the town to do traffic mitigation and traffic calming measures."

Hoffmeyer, who house is on Fletcher Drive, said the street is already dangerous. Because there are no sidewalks, children walk on the street to get to their school bus stops and the school buses stop in the middle of the street.

"We really think that traffic calming is needed right now because it's a dangerous situation," he said.

Fellow Northridge resident Jeff Wilkes said neighbors have invested significant time in building their case against the road alignment and have a 75- slide presentation ready to be delivered before the trustees on Tuesday.

He said 24 people spoke against the Morgan Hill preliminary plat at a Erie Planning Commission meeting because of the alignment plans.

Meeting minutes indicate the four commissioners at that hearing voted against accepting the preliminary plat.

In a memo prepared by town staff regarding Morgan Hill, officials wrote that the town code dictates "subdivisions shall be integrated and connected, where appropriate, with adjacent developments through street connections, sidewalks, trails and similar features."

The memo goes on to say the code also discourages cut-through traffic on residential streets, and the developer has proposed traffic calming measures aimed at discouraging such uses of Fletcher Drive.

'An understanding with residents that should work'

Jon Lee, the executive vice president of the Community Development Group, said that following the planning commission meeting, he went back to his engineering and traffic people to work out a solution to the alignment issue.

"We modified if further and eventually reached an understanding with residents that should work," Lee said.

The change would use signs and other measures to force all traffic exiting Morgan Hill onto County Road 10.5 to turn left, while leaving Northridge residents with the option to turn left or right off of Fletcher Drive, he said.

"The important thing is the solution doesn't violate any traffic standards," Lee said.

Wilkes agreed that the solution proposed by Lee should keep most through traffic off of Fletcher Drive.

It will be up to the Board of Trustees if it passes muster.

Fred Diehl, assistant to the town administrator, encouraged all residents with concern about the development to attend the board meeting.

"Residents with questions or concerns regarding the proposed Morgan Hill development are encouraged to attend next Tuesday's meeting so that they may provide testimony during the public hearing," Diehl wrote in an email.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328 or rubinoj@dailycamera.com