It’s a semiprivate affair in which local residents armed with flashlights, storage packers and wads of cash travel the area in hopes of scoring rare jewelry, Civil War relics or a first-edition Superman comic book.

Self-storage auctions have been taking place in Augusta for at least three decades, but have started gaining increased popularity in the past four years, with reality TV shows following groups of modern day treasure hunters who earn their livings through buying abandoned lockers and reselling the contents for a profit.

Like in Spike’s Auction Hunters and A&E’s Storage Wars, there are occasional jackpots, such as gold and firearms, but for the most part, local bidders say they find themselves stuck with photo albums, worn mattresses and outdated office furniture items that are worthless – at least to them.

“The mystery of what’s inside drives the sales,” said Lewis Brown of Harlem, who attended his first auction Friday at the U-Haul self-storage facility on Broad Street. “For me personally, I would like to see an item of high quality, or signs of valuable property, before I bid.”

Each month, there is at least one storage auction in the Augusta area, in which crowds of five to 15 people bid anywhere from $15 to $300 on rooms they cannot enter, cannot touch and have but a few seconds to view.

Through the end of November, the Web site, StorageTreasures.com, lists 78 units in Richmond, Columbia and Burke counties up for auction at a dozen facilities in Augusta, Evans, Hephzibah and Waynesboro.

Brown heard of the Broad Street auction through a friend and was willing to bid upward of $300 for lockers packed floor to ceiling by renters who were either evicted, or had died and were having belongings liquidated to close open estates.

“Nothing caught my eye,” Brown said. “The only worthwhile investment I saw was maybe a vintage girl’s bicycle in fair condition.”

Brown attended one of four Augusta self-storage auctions in which about 25 units were listed for sale, first at businesses on Wrightsboro Road starting at 9 a.m., and ending at a Broad Street location three hours later.

Though the events are technically public, their proceedings are private.

U-Haul and American Storage facilities prohibit sales from being photographed or filmed, and would not let a reporter with The Augusta Chronicle observe unless he intended to bid, for concerns the auctions, officially called self-storage lien sales, suggest the exploitation of other people’s misfortunes.

“While we understand that certain shows aim to make self-storage auctions into entertainment, U-Haul Company does not wish to make light of, or sensationalize, this aspect of the business,” spokesman Sebastien Reyes said in an e-mail.

According to the Georgia Self-service Storage Facility Act, storage-unit occupants late on rent for 30 days can have their personal property sold, if the facility’s owner gives them 14 days written notice and advertises foreclosed lockers for at least two weeks on a publicly accessible Web site that regularly conducts online auctions.

If no one purchases the property, the owner can dispose of the belongings.

Brown said after talking with his fellow bidders, he found some units are bought to resell its contents at a local flea market, an avenue he believes owners of abandoned units should take.

“You would think people who suspect they’re going to lose their storage units would get their belongings out and try to sell them,” he said. “It only makes sense to me.”