The state’s health care system scored on the high end nationally, according to a report by the Commonwealth Fund. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Wisconsin ranks in the top quarter of states for the overall performance of its health care system but performs dismally on several measures that track the care provided to African-Americans and Latinos, according to a report released Wednesday by the Commonwealth Fund.

The state's health system scorecard looks at 42 indicators of health care access, quality, costs and outcomes. The scorecard has been compiled by the Commonwealth Fund, which funds research on health policy, every few years since 2007.

Wisconsin — which has ranked relatively high compared with other states on the measures — fell to 11th in the rankings in the most recent report. It ranked seventh in the previous scorecard.

"At first blush, you would say Wisconsin is doing pretty well, and I would agree with that," said Patrick Remington, a physician and associate dean for public health for the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health.

But he also noted that health systems in other states are improving at a faster rate.

"Compared with other states," he said, "Wisconsin is falling behind."

The best-performing states were Minnesota, Vermont, Hawaii and Massachusetts.

The worst performing states were Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma and Mississippi.

"The scorecard shows where you live matters when it comes to your health care," David Blumenthal, a physician and president of the Commonwealth Fund, said in a teleconference Tuesday.

The Commonwealth Fund estimated that if every state were to do as well as the best-performing state, 84,000 early deaths would be prevented.

The report was the first done since the provisions to expand coverage in the Affordable Care Act went into effect.

The uninsured rate for working-age adults declined in almost every state from 2013 to 2014 and by 3 percentage points or more in 39 states.

At the same time, there was an almost sixfold difference in uninsured rates for low-income working-age adults across the states, ranging from 8% in Massachusetts to 46% in Texas.

Some of the measures on which Wisconsin does well include:

■The percentage of adults 19-64 who are uninsured.

■The percentage of people covered by Medicare who are readmitted to the hospital within 30 days.

■The percentage of children with a regular source of care.

The state's health care system performs dismal, though, on many measures for African-American and Latinos.

Poor health affects the quality of life for half the African-American adults in Wisconsin compared with 27% for the national average. The ranking was the lowest in the country.

On a number of measures, the state's performance was near the national average but could be improved.

They range from potentially avoidable emergency room visits for people covered by Medicare, for which the state ranked 22nd in the country, to hospital admissions for children with asthma, for which the state ranked 28th.

These are objective measures, he said, and should not be viewed as politically partisan.

"We have to start doing the right things. We have to start taking steps in the right direction," he said. "There are no easy solutions. But there are things we can begin doing."