“When he gets Trenton, when he gets Newark, when he gets Camden to be anywhere near as safe as New York City, then he might be able to criticize us,” NYPD Commissioner Bill Bratton said of Chris Christie

Gov. Chris Christie (left) and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio on Jan. 27, 2014, attending the Super Bowl Kickoff Spectacular at Liberty State Park. (Photo by Mike Coppola/Getty Images) (Photo: Getty Images)

When New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie questioned New York City’s low crime statistics this week, he “made a fool of himself,’’ according to New York City’s top cop.

“When he gets Trenton, when he gets Newark, when he gets Camden to be anywhere near as safe as New York City, then he might be able to criticize us,” NYPD Commissioner Bill Bratton said of the Republican candidate for president.

Bratton in a cable television interview pointed out that Camden’s murder rate is 10 times higher than New York’s.

See the interview: NYC top cop hits back at Christie

Christie, who is campaigning in Minnesota and Illinois Thursday, launched his attack Tuesday on MSNBC when he held up a New York Post front page referencing a shooting.

Mayor Bill de Blasio and wife Chirlane McCray had appeared on the program and touted the city’s low summer crime statistics.

“I’m just stunned — as are most people who live in this area — that this has been the safest summer in New York,” Christie said. “No one else believes that, except for the two people who were just on your set.”

Bratton shot back the next day as news made the rounds that the head of United Airlines resigned amid an investigation into his dealings with Christie’s former Port Authority chairman, David Samson.

“I think there’s a little scandal going on over there in New Jersey today that he’s looking to deflect attention from,” Bratton said. “Bridgegate has reared its ugly head with the United Airlines scandal...so maybe the governor is looking to deflect some attention away from that issue.”

Bob Jordan 609-984-4343, bjordan@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1EYORXH