PEORIA — A 69-year-old woman was found dead inside her home after it caught fire Saturday afternoon.

Firefighters were called to 1241 N. Kickapoo Creek Road at 3:28 p.m. Saturday and arrived at the home minutes later. Neighbors notified authorities about the fire, according to Larry Gilmore, chief of the Limestone Fire Department, and the owner’s vehicle was still at the house.

Sharon E. Williams, 69, was pronounced dead at 4:52 p.m. at the home she lived at alone, according to Peoria County Coroner Johnna Ingersoll.

Firefighters searching for Williams were given information about where she might have been inside the home, Gilmore said.

Williams was found in what may have been the dining room, said Ingersoll. An autopsy is planned for Sunday, when tests will be done to determine if Williams was alive when the fire started.

Firefighters held up a blue tarp as the body was removed from the home Saturday evening. Neighbors gathered around the area, and one man quickly said, “That’s my friend’s mom,” as he ran past a county deputy. Another woman nearly collapsed against the side of a car after asking about the deceased.

Gilmore said when the first firefighter arrived, flames could be seen coming out the back of the house. When an engine arrived, the home was engulfed in flames.

A water main burst when firefighters attached a hose to a hydrant in front of the house, and one farther down the street, at the corner of Kickapoo Creek Road and Farmington Road, had to be used. Gilmore said firefighters had entered the home, but were called out because of the extent of the fire. The fire also caused explosions, possibly from oxygen tanks inside the home. No firefighters were injured.

Firefighters from five departments fought the fire, with more than 25 firefighters there at a time.

The house was destroyed. A damage estimate and cause of the fire were not available Saturday evening.

Braley Dodson can be reached at 686-3196 and bdodson@pjstar.com. Follow her on Twitter @BraleyDodson.