These days, Obamacare only tends to make the news when the Republicans talk about repealing it. Every now and then we hear stories about enrollment numbers, or growth rates in premiums and deductibles.

And of course, Obamacare has become one of the proxies in the culture wars as the provision requiring insurance plans to cover contraception again finds itself before the Supreme Court.

But Obamacare, known more formally as the Affordable Care Act, is an immensely complicated law with countless moving parts. Many parts of the law are not as well known as the provisions that make the headlines. And as recently released data from the Department of Health and Human Services show, one particular part of the law appears to be making a significant impact by making us safer and healthier.

Reducing Hospital Readmissions

One of the goals of the ACA was to improve hospital practices. In particular, members of the administration’s healthcare team were worried that hospitals were not doing enough to keep patients safe while in the hospitals themselves.

The problem is one of incentives: Hospitals and doctors make more money by seeing patients more frequently, and treating them for more conditions. This doesn’t mean doctors are going out of their way to make people sick, or that they’re purposely negligent. But as long as its not in a hospital’s financial interest to keep us optimally healthy, we can expect that they will fall short of this ideal.

Which brings us to hospital readmissions. When patients enter the hospital with a serious medical procedure, if proper procedures are not followed, they’ll be more likely to end up back in the hospital shortly thereafter.

A family member of mine, for instance, has been readmitted to the hospital on two separate occasions following minor surgeries that resulted in pneumonia. Others may be at risk if their vitals haven’t been properly checked or if they are given unclear instructions for self-care following a procedure.

Following various best practices can help reduce these instances. So the ACA included an incentive for hospitals to adopt these procedures: If patients were readmitted to a hospital within 30 days of their original stay for pneumonia, heart attack or heart failure, hospitals would receive lower reimbursement rates for the costs of readmission.

Since this makes readmission more expensive for hospitals, it gives them a powerful financial incentive to make sure patients stay healthy after leaving the hospital. And according to the data from HHS, it seems to be working remarkably well:

As the chart shows, hospital readmission rates dropped precipitously after the law was enacted. Readmission rates even dropped for conditions that weren’t targeted by the law, which suggests that the best hospital practices improved patient safety all over.

Questioning the data

Kevin Drum at Mother Jones was so impressed by this data that he almost didn’t believe it. After all, the chart above is exactly what any policy maker is hoping for: a swift and dramatic demonstration that a policy had it’s desired effect right after implementation. It’s rare to see such clean, decisive data.

The HHS blog post on the subject mentions that some have worried that hospitals might simply be reclassifying readmissions as “observation stays” so that they could make just as much money without looking like they had to readmit patients. But the data show no corresponding bump in observation stays at hospitals to correspond to the drop in readmissions.

According to the HHS, an estimated 565,000 hospital admissions were avoided because of this change. That means we saved money on health care, and people were healthier for it.

Photo Credit: Andy Gradel