The top official in Illinois overseeing health insurance plans through Obamacare has left her job after just five months, raising questions about who will oversee the program as thousands of residents prepare to sign up for the third year of enrollment this fall.

Karin Zosel departed Aug. 7 as executive director of Get Covered Illinois, the state's Department of Insurance confirmed Friday.

Zosel took a job as vice president for institutional advancement at MacMurray College, a private college near Springfield with about 500 students, according to a press release issued this week by the college. She previously worked at MacMurray as director of annual giving for about a year before taking the job with Get Covered Illinois in March.

Zosel was not fired or asked to leave, said Alissandra Calderon, spokeswoman for the Illinois Department of Insurance.

"Karin Zosel has been instrumental in leading Get Covered Illinois for the past six months," Calderon said in a statement. "We appreciate her leadership throughout her time with Get Covered Illinois and wish her well in her new endeavor."

Zosel declined to say why she left her state post after five months. During that time, she was paid $49,218.25.

"What I can say is that I am grateful to have had the opportunity to serve Illinois residents and help position Get Covered Illinois to continue providing consumers with the tools and resources they need to access affordable, quality health coverage," she wrote in an email.

She added that she felt "very passionately" about the mission of higher education and was "thrilled to have the opportunity" to return to MacMurray College.

This marks the latest disruption to the organization created to promote health insurance sold under the federal Affordable Care Act. Last month, Get Covered Illinois eliminated most of its staff in a move the group attributed to decreased federal funding.

Fifteen positions were eliminated, and the Department of Insurance absorbed the program, which had been part of the governor's office.

The state said it is seeking a replacement for Zosel.

"We are committed to providing Illinois consumers with the tools and resources they need today and look forward to the next open enrollment period," which starts Nov. 1, the department said in a statement.

About 294,000 Illinoisans had health plans that were purchased through the federal marketplace as of the end of March. More than 700,000 Illinoisans have signed up for Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act's expansion of the program.

Zosel graduated from Yale University in 2004 with a degree in political science. She worked as an intelligence officer for the CIA for nearly a decade.

Crain's Chicago Business first reported her exit.

jrussell@tribpub.com

Twitter @johnrussell99