A coalition of advocates for Medicaid expansion again pressed its message to Gov. Robert Bentley today, saying the governor's decision to reject expansion is endangering lives.

After a State House news conference, they delivered a fake arrest warrant to the governor's office accusing Bentley of reckless endangerment.

Sen. Hank Sanders, D-Selma, said the move was symbolic, but also conveyed the seriousness of the issue.

"It's criminal when you allow folks to suffer when they could get medical care and be healed or be cared for," Sanders said. "It's criminal when people suffer all kind of pain needlessly and they could get medical care and deal with it. It's criminal when you allow hospitals in these rural areas to close."

Jennifer Ardis, spokeswoman for the governor, declined comment.

Bentley has said for more than two years that he opposes expansion as allowed under the Affordable Care Act.

The governor has pushed for reforms that he says will slow the growth in Medicaid costs and improve care -- changing Medicaid to a managed care system.

But advocates with the Save OurSelves Movement for Justice & Democracy, which has held rallies, marches and press conferences for more than a year, say the need for expansion is urgent.

Paul Nelson of Coden said he could not get treatment for a potentially life-threatening blood clot in his leg because he did not have insurance.

Nelson, 63, lost his job and insurance in 2013. He tried to buy insurance through the Affordable Care Act market, but couldn't afford it. With no income, he did not qualify for premium subsidies.

Nelson said he meets others in the same situation in Coden, a community in south Mobile County that depends heavily on the seafood industry and has suffered setbacks from hurricanes and the BP oil spill.

"I'm one of quite a few people that I've talked to in the area with basically the same kind of conditions, same situations," Nelson said.

"They don't have health insurance because one way or another they don't qualify for a job because of their health conditions, so they have no income. And by having no income, you have no health care."

John Zippert of Eutaw said he has served on the board of a Greene County hospital and nursing home for 20 years. He said it sees a stream of uninsured patients, many of whom would be covered under Medicaid expansion, many in situations similar to Nelson.

Zippert said the hospital is losing money because it is obligated to provide treatment to the uninsured. And he said the Affordable Care Act, because it assumed states would expand Medicaid, is reducing payments to hospitals to offset the cost of uninsured care.

Zippert said the 20-bed hospital is in danger of closing.

"It's a moral issue. The lives of people are in danger," Zippert said.

Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government will pay states most of the cost of expanding Medicaid to cover people earning up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level, about $15,650 for an individual and $32,250 people for a family of four.

Studies have estimated that expansion would add about 300,000 people to Alabama's Medicaid rolls.

About 1 million people already receive some level of Medicaid benefits in the state.

Nelson said the lack of health insurance contributes to Alabama's high level of usage of prescription pain medications.

Nelson said many people turn to pain pills because they can't afford the treatment to get well.

"They need to be taken care of, and I don't mean months from now," Nelson said. "Because every day we're losing people here in Alabama due to the fact that they don't have health care for one reason or the other."