Art and Design

Aesthetic comfort: Emily Floyd’s vocabulary of geometric shapes. Photo: Christian Capurro

Far Rainbow

Emily Floyd

Heide Museum of Modern Art

7 Templestowe Rd, Bulleen

Until July 13

Emily Floyd has a brilliant theme and a flawless technique. Her works are monumental, prolific and ambitious. They occupy space in a subtle way, both delicate and imposing. Her sculptures, wall objects and prints have a signature aesthetic presence in the same way that they have absorbing and sustaining subject matter.

Floyd’s exhibition at Heide effortlessly fills the enormous spaces but also has intimacy. Her vocabulary of simple geometric shapes reconciles a daunting modernist abstraction with the reassuring air of a nursery. The aesthetic comfort that she generates is congruent with her frame of reference, which is learning and teaching, especially in junior years.

Artist/lecturer Emily Floyd. Photo: Chris Hopkins

Floyd has a native gift for seamless manufacture and also a keen awareness of the pedagogical application of toys for learning. Her sculptures are often conceived as letterforms, suggesting that the elements could be rearranged to spell various words. Other works recall the imaginative and logical processes of putting blocks together toward an improvised purpose.

Advertisement

Numerous works contain reflections on utopian educational theory that take you to fraught ideologies about minding children, organising labour and reforming gender relationships.

Many works resemble posters and some reproduce archival records of social movements around childcare from the 1970s. An example reads like a manifesto, declaring that early childhood rearing should occur through collectives. It should not be left to private families, where traditional maternal roles are reinforced and female social inferiority is perpetuated.

This heroic epoch of radical thought has had some impact in educational practice, where alternative methods from the early 20th century - especially Steiner or Waldorf and Montessori schools - induced some of their active learning paradigms upon the old disciplinarian school system, which was dominated by fear rather than creativity.

To find these discourses in art is a thrill, with great historical resonance and contemporary relevance. I get a similar thrill from Damiano Bertoli’s Associates at Neon Parc, which revives the typography of urban activism in Italy from the 1970s, spread out upon Memphis backdrops to represent all the public energy that we find so scarce today.

The only problem in Floyd’s project is that sometimes her symbolic language loses coherence by translating too many references. Any given work might suffer from allegorical overload, where science fiction is mixed with art history and pedagogical archetypes and social movements, which clutter the meaning in contrast to the simplicity of the forms.

An example is Nomadic shepherds, which is analysed in an excellent essay by Sue Cramer. The overlapping circles and colours of the work “bring to mind children’s hoops, quoits and the interlocking circles of the Olympic Games logo”. That’s all good; but then “they also relate to Steiner’s Eurythmy … in which participants wear single colour gowns and, through their flowing, often circular movements to music, create harmonious relationships.”

Finally, through the title of the work, we’re referred to “collective forms of governance practised by nomadic shepherds in Rajasthan”, as if a “diagrammatic model of social organisation” and a network chart that reflects the work of American artist and educator Sister Mary Corita.

That’s a lot to take in. But, in spite of the multiplicity of references, the work is often too literal, as in Modern ladies. The impressive female forms draw from Picasso’s Demoiselles d’Avignon but within the language of sculptural abstraction, a la Barbara Hepworth, where the figures have no head but the breasts function a bit like eyes.

So far so good. But the semantic overload enters when piles of letters are plonked beneath the crutches. The artist is quoted: “I replaced Picasso’s bowl of rotting fruit near the women’s sexual organs with piles of letters, to give the women a voice and to give the sense of something abject that disrupts the symbolic order in the way that feminism does”.

Maybe the letters themselves make a pun on the idea of being too literal. Floyd herself acknowledges a more poetic imperative, reflecting on Dostoevsky’s preference for narrating experience over dialectic. To be poetic, a symbol has to lurk within the form, to stalk the form, to weigh upon it with a perverse inherence. To reach that level of semantic poignancy is Floyd’s next challenge.

robert.nelson@monash.edu