In 2012, Longmont Police Officer Greg Ruprecht was part of a team called to the house of a military veteran after the man's wife called 911, citing a domestic disturbance and shots fired.

The responding officers set up a perimeter "in the shadows," as Ruprecht put it, but the suspect was able to exit the house "through a side door without being seen." After the man peacefully surrendered, he told Ruprecht he had seen all the officers hiding.

Learn more What: Veterans Helping Veterans Now Where: 600 Terry St., Longmont Contact info: 303-772-9777 or email info@vhvnow.org Info: vhvnow.org

"That was a wake-up call to the officers, and to the department, that we have a lot of returning veterans and some might have some trouble," Ruprecht said. "These instances could be on the increase."

So on his commander's suggestion, Ruprecht, who served in the Army during the Persian Gulf War, turned to Veterans Helping Veterans Now to serve as a liaison and to offer his help.

Veterans Helping Veterans Now was founded in 2007, coincidentally stemming from conflicts that can arise between veterans and law enforcement. The founder and current board member, Vietnam veteran and Longmont resident Ray Meyers — having been in and out of jail — was working with incarcerated veterans to get them help in jail and assist them in finding community support post-release.

Now, eight years later, the Longmont center has grown into one of the few free resources in Colorado for veterans who need help and a place where veterans can volunteer to help heal other veterans.

The center, which looks like an idyllic suburban home in the 600 block of Terry Street, cheery yellow paint and white picket fence included, now offers massage therapy, group therapy with a psychotherapist, a transportation program to take veterans to their VA medical appointments, a writing workshop and more. All free and open to any veteran, the center's services increased 22 percent in 2014 and 34 percent the previous year. More than 50 percent of the clients are from wars that pre-date the Iraq War, and 80 percent of clients also volunteer, working with other veterans.

"They are a minority group and they have unique needs and challenges," said Trisha Dittrick, executive director of Veterans Helping Veterans Now. "All the services we provide here are niche services they can't get elsewhere. Every single program has been at a veteran's request because they want and have looked for that service and haven't been able to find it elsewhere."

A major part of the program is not just healing veterans but building connections between veterans and civilians, to create a more cohesive community, instead of one where veterans feel isolated.

Isolation is a major issue facing veterans.

Veterans Helping Veterans Now programs manager and Marine veteran Dan Janosko, left, meets with Navy veteran Coren Benson, 20, on Monday. Veterans Helping Veterans Now is at 600 Terry St. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

"We had two (veterans) at the same time that had significant suicidal ideation and were very isolated and not doing well," Dittrick said. "They started coming here regularly and just plugging in and building a sense of community and connection."

Ruprecht's role

Ruprecht sees his role as someone who can identify veterans who may be in those trouble spots and help them get help. This, in turn, helps him, as a veteran, feel more connected.

"I've gained a lot of insight into my personal things," he said. "But I wasn't aware I was doing that (isolating myself and drinking a lot) until (another veteran) talked about it. I had a lot of personal revelations."

Dittrick said that kind of insight is central to VHVNow's purpose.

"We're completely unique," Dittrick said. "It's a really simple model, it's veterans helping veterans. The thought is people get better through volunteerism. People get better by helping other people. It gives them a sense of purpose and meaning."

Ruprecht has found new purpose through being a part of the organization. His veteran status and extra knowledge helped him defuse a potentially dangerous situation with a veteran who now is incarcerated.

The officer was called to the veteran's house after a pizza delivery driver said the man refused to pay for a pizza. Ruprecht was able to read and respond to the man's behavior in a way that diffused the situation safely.

Veterans Helping Veterans Now programs manager, and Marine veteran, Dan Janosko, left, meets with Navy veteran Coren Benson, 20. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

"I got a real, crawling-skin feeling (about him)," Ruprecht said. "He goes to put on his boots (to come outside), and I think, 'He's getting ready for battle. He wants to fight me.' As he started coming out, I saw his tattoos and was like, 'Oh, you're a Marine!' That chilled it off."

Ruprecht connected with the veteran, who would not leave his house or speak with non-military persons, for months after that, trying to find a way for him to seek help at VHVNow. The man was arrested on suspicion of attempted murder before he was able to seek help.

VHVNow and public safety

That kind of knowledge, dedication and the connection veterans can build with civilians through the help of VHVNow is huge for a community, even just in terms of public safety.

"It's definitely made it safer," Ruprecht said. "From a public safety standpoint with the vets that we have helped and stopped from something happening. All these vets are community members. It's not cops against them; we need to help them so they don't hurt other people. I care about vets. They are our community."

For the past six years, VHVNow has been hosting a community awareness series to better connect veterans with their community. At first the series offered only a veteran speaker, but recently the organization switched the format to bring together groups of veterans and civilians.

"Volunteer veterans pepper the groups," Dittrick said. "It brings people into relationships with each other. That's the most healing aspect."

While the veterans will keep helping each other with VHVNow, the organization knows that getting civilians involved, and making Longmont a community of veterans and civilians will have the largest impact, and create better healing.

Cody Nichols, a veteran from Iraq, said it best.

"As a veteran in a military, you do everything by the book," he said. "Here they do everything by the heart."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones