More options: Share, Mark as favorite

The Congressional Research Service (CRS) released a report at the end of last month on government benefit receipt among American families and individuals. The report looked at nine of the largest need-tested benefit programs, including tax credits (the earned income tax credit and the additional child tax credit), food assistance, housing assistance, utility assistance, child care assistance, and general cash assistance. Health insurance (through Medicaid or Affordable Care Act subsidies) was not included. The report used data from the US Census Bureau, supplemented with data to correct for underreporting of benefit receipt.

Here are a few of the major findings:

Government safety net programs help many non-poor families. According to the report, 135 million Americans (or 40%) were eligible for one of the nine programs in 2012 and approximately 33% received at least one benefit. In contrast, 46 million Americans or 15.0% were in poverty (according to the official measure) in 2012, highlighting the fact that government safety-net programs serve a much larger population than those considered poor. But, not surprisingly, the largest share of spending (76%) was on poor families.

Just over half of government aid recipients do not (or cannot) work. Over the past two decades, the government’s social safety net has shifted toward work-based policies, most notably with expansions to the earned income tax credit and the additional child tax credit (the refundable portion of the child tax credit). The result is that families (with or without children) with an adult worker made up 48.7% of government aid recipients in 2012, according to the CRS. Families with no workers and a disabled member (27%) or a member over age 60 (19.1%) were the two other main categories. The remaining families were not disabled, aged, or working.

The vast majority of poor families with children and non-working families with children receive government aid. Among families with children below 50% of the official poverty line, 97.5% received at least one need-tested benefit, as did 98.6% of those between 50-99% of the official poverty line.

In terms of work effort, 91% of families with children with no adult workers received at least one need-tested benefit, as did 86% of families where the most work among adults involved only part-time, full-year work.

Most unmarried-mother families receive government aid. In 2012, 78.9% of families headed by a single female received at least one need-tested benefit, according to the CRS. But many married families with children also received a benefit. According to the CRS, 38.7% of married families or single male headed families received at least one benefit.

Most families participate in one or two programs, but a small percentage participate in many programs and receive a lot of benefits. According to the CRS report, 41.4% of all recipient families receive benefits from only one program (SNAP is the most popular, followed by the EITC) and another 26.5% receive benefits from only two programs, suggesting that the majority of families have other resources coming into the home. However, a small, but notable percentage (14%), receive assistance from four or more programs and the median amount is $12,000 per year for those participating in four programs and $17,000 per year for those participating in five or more.

Some families receive very high benefits, likely making work less attractive. But most families with a working-age and non-disabled adult receive only modest benefits. The CRS report found that the median annual benefit was $3,300, but a sizeable percentage (25%) received over $9,000 in annual benefits in 2012 and some received up to $40,000 in annual benefits. These high benefit amounts were concentrated in disabled and older families. According to the report, “Families containing non-aged, non-disabled childless adults also received relatively small amounts of need-tested benefits.”

Another interesting conclusion from the report:

Families with children without an aged or disabled member who also lacked an adult worker were a relatively small group in 2012 (fewer than 1 million families). However, they were the most likely group to be in the top 25% of families in terms of benefit amounts received, with 44% of such families having benefits of $9,027 or more.

This group (families with children who are not working but could be) is the primary target of work requirements and other policies aimed at increasing work in public benefit programs. Although they are a seemingly small share of all benefit recipients, they still represent almost 1 million families and account for a disproportionate share of spending. The CRS report confirms that efforts to increase work among this group are still needed.