The Healthy Democracy Road Show rolled into Spartanburg on Wednesday singing “When the state steals Medicaid” to the tune of “When the Saints Go Marching In.”

The mobile rally in support of Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act is on a 10-city tour organized by the Progressive Network. The tour targets the nearly 295,000 registered voters in South Carolina who the Network said would have been eligible for Medicaid under the ACA if South Carolina had accepted the expansion.

Gov. Nikki Haley declined federal funds to expand Medicaid enrollment, and has called the ACA an example of federal overreach and said South Carolina cannot afford to share the costs of the Medicaid growth.

The Healthy Democracy Road Show is a nonpartisan event aimed at bringing awareness to a specific issue — Haley's rejection of Medicaid expansion denied health care coverage to about 300,000 people in South Carolina, said Brett Bursey, Network Director. According to a 2012 study by Harvard University published in the New England Journal of Medicine, people die at a faster rate in states that do not expand Medicaid coverage. In states that expand Medicaid, there are fewer deaths, particularly among the elderly, minority, and low-income, because of access to preventative care, according to the study.

“State Medicaid expansions to cover low-income adults were significantly associated with reduced mortality, as well as improved coverage, access to care, and self-reported health,” the study's abstract states.

Several participants at Wednesday's rally said the decision not to expand Medicaid was politically motivated and damaging to South Carolina.

“We have an administration now who are playing politics with people's lives, which is dead wrong,” said Hoyt Wheeler, vice chairman of the Progressive Network. “Speaking of dead, that's what some of these people (who can't get health insurance) are going to be.”

Gloria Hill was one of only a few people who attended the rally, but she is one of a much larger number of people who found out she would not be able to get health care coverage with the Affordable Care Act. She is a homemaker who is raising her grandchildren and suffers from diabetes, high blood pressure and glaucoma. Hill said she really needed health care assistance.

“I'm crushed,” she said. “I haven't been to see my doctor in a year.”

Rep. Harold Mitchell, a co-chairman of the Progressive Network, said many of Spartanburg County's nearly 19,000 residents who would have been eligible for Medicaid under the expansion live in his district. He accused Haley of playing in national politics.

“It's political games because she's been able to go around the country and say she's the governor whose been able to stand up to President (Barack) Obama,” Mitchell said. There's a misperception the people affected don't work, but they do, Mitchell said.

“These are people who work every day, but their employers aren't covering them. … How can you grow business with a sick workforce?” he said.

The state would have to begin paying for a portion of Medicaid costs in 2017, and the state contribution would gradually increase to 10 percent in 2020, but by that time, Bursey said, the economic impact of the expansion would have created thousands of jobs and the corresponding increase in state revenue would more than cover the cost.

Health care overall would also become more affordable as people with health insurance would have access to regular care and would be less likely to seek treatment in emergency rooms, where the cost is passed along to those with insurance, Bursey said.

Michael Thompson, a Democrat challenging Rep. Mike Forrester in House District 34, said he is “conservative to be running as a Democrat,” and said accepting expansion makes sense for South Carolina.

“The numbers are clear. People can say whatever they want about ACA and the deals that get cut in Washington, but once these deals are cut, you have to run the numbers and do what's best for South Carolina,” he said.

More from Felicia Kitzmiller: Twitter | Articles