By GRETCHEN REYNOLDS, New York Times News Service

Wearable technology -- those wristbands, watches and belt gadgets that track your every move -- holds tremendous promise for improving health and physical performance.

But as often happens, the technology has outstripped the research, and scientists are still struggling to understand whether the monitors work as promised, how to keep people motivated to use them, and exactly what the devices are supposed to accomplish, anyway.

To measure the accuracy of activity trackers worn on the wrist or waistband, researchers from Arizona State University conducted two studies, with equivocal results. The research, presented last summer at the annual meeting of the American College of Sports Medicine, tested the devices against bulkier, high-tech masks placed over volunteers' faces to measure oxygen consumption. These are considered the scientific gold standard for determining energy expenditure.

After asking participants to engage in activities like exercise, playing games and housework, the researchers found that the trackers were able to record some but not all of the subjects' movements. The devices reliably tracked forward motion; they counted how many steps volunteers took while walking or jogging, and accurately determined corresponding energy consumption.

But the trackers were inept at measuring volunteers' more subtle movements, such as when they stood, played Scrabble or used a broom to sweep up around the lab.

Overall, the results suggest that consumer activity monitors "do not detect light-intensity activities very well," said Glenn Gaesser, a professor and the director of the Healthy Lifestyles Research Center at Arizona State University.

The devices rely on mathematical equations that "were developed using activities easy to measure, such as brisk walking or jogging," he said.

The Food and Drug Administration does not regulate these devices; no outside agency or reviewer vets their accuracy. But the trackers are precise.

Tomorrow a device will over- or under-calculate a person's movement and energy expenditure to the same extent that it did today. A user can rely on these monitors to track patterns and watch how they change over time, Browning said.

But activity trackers cannot promise to change behavior.

Today's monitors often incorporate motivational components, including social networking and friendly electronic reminders from an integrated electronic nagger to get up and move. But no long-term, peer-reviewed study has shown that people using activity trackers become and remain more active.