Anacostia is a neighborhood in Southeast Washington, D.C., where life spills unassumingly onto the sidewalks in front of barber shops and cafes, churches and liquor stores, schools and small businesses. It’s a working-class community alive with the synergy of folks just getting by, grabbing at pieces of joy along the way.

Authenticity is its culture, particularly compared with other parts of the city being blitzed by gentrification. Like many urban enclaves, financial and social factors complicate residents’ pursuit of happiness.

The black population in the District is 49.5 percent. The black population in Anacostia is 94 percent.

The median household income in the District is $64,267. The median household income in Anacostia is $32,262, down by nearly $3,000 in the past two years.

The D.C. unemployment rate is 7.7 percent. Anacostia’s is 35 percent.

Those statistics distilled into real life mean there are many black people in a relatively small area making a lot less money, if any money at all, than other people in the District, this as rents approach prohibitive figures citywide. The number of apartments and condominiums in the District commanding rents of $1,000 or more per month has doubled in less than 10 years, but cost-of-living increases, for most people, are the stuff of wishful thinking and yet-unanswered prayer.

It’s a cocktail of stressors that exacerbates the urgency of the need for mental-health care. But the people who need it generally can’t afford it. It’s an issue in Anacostia as much as it is in Philadelphia, Detroit, Chicago, Baltimore and other metropolises where too many black people are suffocating under the pressures of being broke.

Satira Streeter, executive director of Ascensions Psychological and Community Services, has been an advocate for mental health in Anacostia for more than 10 years. Because it is a nonprofit entity, Streeter’s organization is a model for making clinical psychology available to communities in urgent need.

Many of her colleagues wouldn’t slide out of bed for the $25 co-pay her office charges clients, much less venture into some of the city’s most economically and socially challenged neighborhoods for that amount of money, and her colleagues have told her as much.

“One of the things we do that’s different is accept Medicaid and all insurance companies. But if you don’t have insurance, what do you do about your mental-health care?” she said.

It’s been a running question since Streeter, a psychologist, founded the practice in 2004 specifically to help African Americans handle the systemic effects of poverty and racism. She’s seen an uptick in clientele since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, the so-called Obamacare, which has helped her treat more people for depression—the condition she sees most often—and take on individuals and families. Such care can be life-changing for the people with the insight to seek it and the means to pay for it.

“I had a client just yesterday who said, ‘Yes, I have insurance, but I can’t appropriate $25 for the co-pay for therapy when I have three children. If I have to make a choice, the mental-health care will have to go, even though I need it.’ They have to make a decision to provide for the physical needs of their families,” Streeter said.

It’s another unfortunate consequence of financial struggle that feeds the cycle of disadvantage. And yet there is also such a thing as not being poor enough.