Longtime Longmont High coach back in his own space after eight years at the LAC

Trevor Pickett, 13, a student at Flagstaff Academy, lifts while working out Thursday at No Limits Sports Performance and Fitness in Longmont. ( Matthew Jonas )

No Limits Sports Performance & Fitness Location: 1140 Boston Ave., Longmont Phone: 303-485-2550 Website: www.power -speed-strength.com

LONGMONT -- A longtime Longmont athletic trainer and his wife have opened their own new free-standing gym after operating for eight years in rented space at the Longmont Athletic Club.

Chad and Cheri Parish opened No Limits Sports Performance & Fitness in an industrial building at 1140 Boston Ave. a few weeks ago, just in time for the arrival of some high water.

Luckily for them, their gym was spared from damage, unlike some other businesses along Boston Avenue by the St. Vrain River.

Their 4,500-square-foot space features tall ceilings, a garage door they can open in the summer and prime exposure to the St. Vrain Greenway, which was perfect advertising for their club. Or it was, until the flood of three weeks ago.

That stretch of the greenway won't be reopened anytime soon, but fortunately for the Parishes, that garage door is a loading-dock door, 48 inches off the ground.

Early on the morning of Sept. 11, when Cheri Parish arrived to open for the day, she could see the St. Vrain River -- which is just on the other side of the parking lot and bike path -- when she got out of her car.

Advertisement

"I pulled in and just saw it cresting the grass, where usually you couldn't see it at all," she said.

Parish called her husband. He came down to find two phone messages from the Longmont Police Department ordering an evacuation of the area. In the short time it took him to gather a few things, the water started coming over Boston Avenue.

He was barely able to make it out, Chad Parish said.

During the height of the storm, Chad Parish took a picture that showed the river rushing through his parking lot, flirting with the bottom of the dock doors.

Chad and Cheri Parish opened No Limits Sports Performance & Fitness in an industrial building at 1140 Boston Ave. a few weeks ago, just in time for the arrival of some high water. ( Matthew Jonas )

When he hiked back in on Sept. 15, he was relieved to find the 48-inch clearance was enough to protect his business.

Many of his neighbors along that stretch of Boston Avenue were not nearly so lucky.

Fitness the

old-fashioned way

It took the Parishes a year to find the right space for their business.

"For what we wanted, we were looking for industrial space," Chad Parish said. "And most of the industrial spaces were really rough."

"All the other places we looked at, we would have either had to add a bathroom or build a door or something like that," added Cheri.

They limited their search to Longmont because of their deep ties to the community, Chad Parish said.

He has been the track and field coach at Longmont High School for 14 years and, outside of school, involved in teaching fitness professionally since the late 1990s. He and two other Longmont High teachers founded Longmont Sports Warehouse at 120 Ninth Ave., but closed it in 2004.

In 2005 they moved their business into the Longmont Athletic Club, and within the next year, the Parishes had bought out the other partners and owned No Limits Sports Performance & Fitness outright.

While being in the LAC brought their business extra exposure, it limited their growth because the LAC itself was a membership club, the couple said.

"And I think it gives you a certain level of credibility when you have your own space," Chad Parish said.

While No Limits is in a new building, Chad Parish has always maintained a throwback approach to fitness training.

There are no treadmills or ellipticals, and the one exercise bike they have is old-school -- no computer in sight.

There are also no televisions. What you will see are a lot of free weights, a high-tension pulley machine and an indoor track.

"Our belief is that an athlete gets their cardiovascular treatment through movement -- running, jumping, throwing things. Just movement in general," Chad Parish said.

Through his association with the school district, Chad Parish has long trained young athletes, helping maximize their performance in a variety of sports. But he and his wife want to branch out to training adults -- not necessarily to enhance their sports performance but to help them improve their fitness and their overall health, Chad Parish said.

No Limits Sports Performance & Fitness offers both group and private classes for adults. Other amenities offered at the new location include nutritional consultation for all ages and a physical education program geared toward home-schooled kids, Parish said. He has also organized Longmont's only track and field club, offering high school athletes a sanctioned way to compete in the off-season, he said.

"We train the old-fashioned way," he continued. "The way they used to before they had treadmills and bikes and things like that."

Tony Kindelspire can be reached at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com.