4367462

Kansas Republican Pat Roberts is jumping on a political fumble committed by his challenger, Independent Greg Orman, who included Kansas political luminary Bob Dole in his criticism of the “clown car” of politicians who are backing Roberts in the state.

“Few individuals have done more for Kansas and this country than Senator Bob Dole,” begins a phone call commissioned by the Roberts campaign which will go out to more than 1 million Kansas voters.

“But yesterday Greg Orman attacked Bob Dole and called him a clown. Why?” the narrator asks. “Because Bob Dole has been crisscrossing Kansas in support of his friend Senator Pat Roberts. And Greg Orman doesn’t like that.”

Orman’s unforced slip occurred Friday as he was discussing the laundry list of Republicans who have stumped for Roberts in Kansas – a list that includes Dole, U.S. Sens. Ted Cruz, Mike Lee and Rand Paul, as well as New Jersey Gov. Chris Cristie and former presidential candidate Mitt Romney.

“It sort of seems like a Washington establishment clown car to me,” Orman said.

“You know, every day a new person comes out of that car. You know, ultimately we have gone out and we have brought our case to the voters of Kansas, and everywhere I go, I hear the same things. Kansans think Washington is broken.”

While some of the out-of-state politicians may have been fair game, Dole is nearly untouchable in the plain state.

The 91-year-old former presidential contender and World War II veteran served Kansas in the U.S. Senate for 27 years and is currently in the midst of a “farewell tour” which will take him to all 105 counties.

With the statewide phone call, Roberts hopes to convince voters that if Orman will disrespect Dole then he is not in line with their values.

“Greg Orman is finally showing Kansans his true colors,” the robo call continues. “He is pro-abortion, pro-amnesty, pro-Obamacare and he doesn’t respect American heroes like Bob Dole.”

After Orman made the comment on Friday, the Roberts campaign responded, calling it “slimy.” Dole was not pleased either.

“I don’t think I’ve ever been called a ‘clown’ before,” he said Friday. “I’m disappointed by Mr. Orman’s statement.”

Orman defended his remarks on Saturday, saying Roberts “distorted his words,” according to the Kansas City Star. Orman also called Dole “a great example of bipartisanship.”

The latest Fox News poll has Orman leading the incumbent by one point.

LISTEN:

Follow Chuck on Twitter