ValuePenguin.com: Visualizing the Uninsured And The Affordable Care Act

Most people realize the cost of car insurance varies based on where you live. But as a new interactive map makes plain, so will the cost of health insurance sold through the new Obamacare marketplaces.

There is a simple reason for that, said Jason Wu, chief analyst of ValuePenguin, the consumer finance research website that compiled the map: "It's one of the few ways companies are allowed to charge more," he said.

Medical care in any given county may be more expensive because of the cost of real estate there, or because of the demographics of its residents.

In New Jersey, the cost of a benchmark "Silver" plan for a young adult is around $260 a month, before subsidy, in most counties. In Hunterdon County, however, it runs $323 a month.

That extra cost makes Hunterdon unique in another way: it has the highest income eligibility cut-off for subsidies. In the state's other 20 counties, a 27-year-old earning $35,000 wouldn't qualify for any subsidy; in Hunterdon, he or she would be eligible for a tax credit of $46 a month.

Tinkering with the map's variations will show that the federal subsidy quickly vanishes for young New Jersey residents earning more than $30,000.

"If you make over $30,000 a year, you're not going to get much of a subsidy. So they idea of their getting a subsidy has probably been oversold," Wu said.

The map also reveals the huge variation in how many companies sell Affordable Care Act plans in each state. For example, residents of most Nevada counties will have just a single company's products available for purchase.

Selection can vary even from county to county, as the unlucky folks of Florence County, Wisconsin may soon discover. While residents in the adjoining county can pick from five companies selling 99 different policies , they have their choice of just two policies sold by the same company.



By contrast, New Jersey has three companies offering 35 different plans.

Hudson (22.4 percent) and Passaic (20.6 percent) have the highest rate of uninsured residents, while Somerset (9.8 percent) and Hunterdon (7.3 percent) have the lowest.

New York shows up as having big subsidies available in every county. There's an explanation for that, said Wu. New York bans insurers from pricing their policies based on age. As a result, all policies sold there are quite pricey. That, in turn, means New Yorkers end up qualifying for larger subsidies to pay their big premiums.