A weeklong campaign to enroll thousands of community college students into health plans launched in Los Angeles on Monday to encourage young adults to sign up for Obamacare before March 31, or else face penalties under the federal law.

At least 50 percent of the 150,000 students who attend classes at the nine-campus Los Angeles Community College District are uninsured and would likely qualify for Medi-Cal or a lower tiered health plan, said Mike Eng, a member of the Los Angeles Community College District Board of Trustees.

Eng, a former California assemblyman, spearheaded the effort to create the weeklong event with Covered California, the state’s health plan exchange.

The campaign kicked off during a press conference at L.A. Trade-Technical College, where an estimated 1,500 students are uninsured.

“The message I have is health and education are the two biggest investments you can make in yourself,” Eng told the crowd of young people who gathered at the campus.

Eng said he remembers working in an emergency department for three years while he was a college student. He said he doesn’t want to see families go through what he saw then.

“There were people using our emergency rooms as clinics,” he said. “I’ve seen people die, whose death could have been prevented.”

Isiahne Henderson, 23, said she has used the emergency department recently and she admitted it was time to enroll in a plan that gave her consistent health care. She said she was worried about cost, but didn’t want to face a penalty.

“I need it because I know there are consequences,” said Henderson, a child development major at Trade Tech. “I hope it will make a difference with my health care.”

From Oct. 1, when Covered California officially opened, until January 31, at least 26 percent of the 626,210 who enrolled into health plans were between the ages of 18 and 34, and the majority have been eligible for subsidies, said Peter Lee, executive director of Covered California.

Various efforts have been launched to convince the “young invincibles,” that they too must be covered under the Affordable Care Act.

Lee told students it was time for them to be part of history by enrolling. He also warned them that if they remain unenrolled they face a $95 federal tax penalty. But it goes deeper: if they are uninsured and use the emergency department, they could be billed up to $150,000.

Advertisement

Lee said low income college students who are not covered under a parent’s plan still believe health insurance is unaffordable.

“That’s a myth,” he said, adding that for some students a health plan can cost as much as a monthly cell phone bill or a gym membership.

“We’re going to do everything we can,” he said, of enrolling Los Angeles’ college students. “This is the building period.”

Enrollment counselors and educators plan to be at each campus this week, including Pierce, L.A. Harbor, LA Mission, and Southwest community colleges.

Meanwhile, the Covered California website, which had been down since Wednesday, was back online Monday, officials said.

“The site had been offline since Wednesday afternoon to address database configuration errors possibly brought on by a software malfunction during scheduled maintenance on Feb. 16,” according to a statement. “Covered California and the California Department of Health Care Services are assessing the cause of the malfunction, which does not involve any security compromises.”