Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina started a three-day swing through the Granite State Wednesday with two town halls in Lebanon.

Click to watch News 9's coverage

The former CEO spoke with first-in-the-nation voters but didn't always agree with them.

Despite getting just five percent of support in the latest WMUR poll, Fiorina said she will take New Hampshire and take down Democratic opponent Hillary Clinton.

“I know the truth is, in your heart of hearts, you cannot wait to see me debate Hillary Clinton,” said Fiorina.

More than 150 people packed a Lebanon auditorium to hear Fiorina speak, but some also came for her unrestrained opinions on prominent Democrats.

“The answer to crony capitalism is not more big government, because big government favors the big. The answer to crony capitalism is less government,” said Fiorina. “And that is why we must repeal Obamacare. Because it is a classic example of crony capitalism.”

Fiorina didn’t hold back her opinions on some Republicans either.

“This is what politicians do, they distract. President Obama doesn't have a plan to defeat ISIS, so he talks about gun control and climate change,” said Fiorina. “Donald Trump doesn't have a plan to defeat ISIS so he talks about banning Muslims.”

In a new WMUR/CNN Granite State Poll released Tuesday, 32 percent of likely voters say they will vote for Trump in the New Hampshire Republican Primary as opposed to just 5 percent of support for Fiorina.

Fiorina mapped out her blueprint for America’s success, which she says includes defeating the terror group ISIS, repealing Obamacare and securing the border.

One town hall attendee asked Fiorina why she didn't support clemency towards undocumented citizens in the country for peaceful purposes.

“On this, respectfully I must disagree,” Fiorina responded. “And I will tell you why: When we become a nation that does not enforce the laws we have, then no one cares about the laws we have.”

Fiorina will be in the Granite State until Friday and she will visit six additional New Hampshire towns.

For a full list of events visit the WMUR Candidate Tracker.