The weekly jam session at the Savoy Music Center honored the late Cajun fiddler Milton Vanicor. (Photo: Freddie Herpin, Daily World)

Cars lined the shoulder of westbound U.S. 190 toward Eunice Saturday morning. The people who parked outside the Savoy Music Center carried in songs, instruments and memories.

Many were the musicians with whom Cajun fiddler Milton Vanicor used to play. After they shared coffee, boudin links and Boudreaux jokes, they sat in a large, ragged ring around his customary chair at the weekly jam and serenaded his memory with some of his favorites.

“Valse Criminelle” (The Convict Waltz). “‘Tit Yeux Noir” (Little Black Eyes).

“J’ai Passe Devant Ta Porte” (I walked past your door). That one became a heartfelt sing-along.

A framed black-and-white photo of the fiddler occupied the chair. Vanicor, who continued to play in the traditional manner he learned as a boy, died in June, a couple of weeks shy of his 97th birthday.

Nearly 70 years separated him from one of the many guitarists in the room who described Vanicor as a good friend.

“He played with my great-grandfather, (legendary Cajun songwriter) Iry LeJeune,” said Kegan Navarre, a high school senior from Jennings.

“He was a great person and a phenomenal fiddle player,” Navarre said. “He was one of the best people to learn from.”

The jam reflected generations of listening and learning.

“It’so good to see the older musicians with the patience to teach the younger ones,” said the fiddler’s daughter Jeannette Aguillard, who drove from Lake Charles. “It’s not far,” she said, and later she and her sister Linda Marcantel took up guitars to join the jam.

Vanicor became a Saturday morning regular after his wife Odille died in 2008. In his final years, he won acclaim in the world beyond Acadiana for his CD “Un Souvenir de Milton Vanicor” and, as Ann Savoy put it, as “a live wire” at the jam sessions in her husband Marc’s store.

Another regular, Terry Lieux, recalled that on his 95th birthday party in the store Vanicor “danced with all the women. He dances better than me, and he’s older.”

The organizers briefly interrupted the music for more formal tributes.

Marc Savoy called Vanicor “perhaps the last of the old-time Cajun fiddlers.”

Carl Brazell, a retired broadcasting executive who breaks out his accordion sometimes, said he couldn’t get enough of Vanicor.

“From his early youth until the day he died, he played his fiddle with particular fervor,” Brazell told the crowd. “He didn’t let contemporary influences affect the way he played.”

The mayor of Eunice, the lieutenant governor and the St. Landry Parish Tourism Commission sent proclamations.

“Whether he knew it or not, we were about to adopt Milton so he could vote for us,” former Eunice mayor Curtis Joubert joked before he granted Vanicor, who lived in Welsh, honorary citizenship in the Prairie Cajun Capital of Louisiana and a key to the city of Eunice.

It’s not unusual for visitors from far and wide to make pilgrimages to the Savoy Music Center. Saturday’s tribute attracted Beatrice Vanicor Cormier, the fiddler’s niece, for the first time.

“My son said on Facebook there’d be a little memorial for Milton, so of course I wanted to be here,” she said as her brother Orsey Vanicor sweetened the tunes with his pedal steel guitar.

She hinted that this visit would not be her last. As Cormier laughed through tears, she exclaimed, “Our Cajun roots are comin’ out today!”

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/news/local/2015/08/29/tunes-tears-tributes-milton-vanicor/71389528/