Politics

GOP Sen. Richard Burr Plans 2016 Bid, Amid Retirement Rumors

The office of United States Senator Richard Burr (R-N.C.) confirmed on Tuesday that the senator plans to run for a third Senate term in 2016, amid speculations of his looming retirement, according to a National Journal interview.



During the interview, Burr denied rumors that he would retire after his six-year term. However, Burr is focused on the November election.



Like Us on Facebook

Rachel Hicks, Burr's spokeswoman, said in an email to The Associated Press that the Senator's immediate priority is "regaining a majority in the Senate" for the GOP.



A GOP Senate majority would mean a better leadership track record for Burr, political experts believe.



At present, Burr is already a ranking member of the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee.



Last year, he made headlines for describing the Republicans' idea of de-funding Obamacare by a federal government shutdown as the "dumbest idea" he had heard.



He also voted to cancel the policy that prohibits bisexuals, gays and lesbians from openly joining the military.



In contrast, Burr also had a share of criticisms, particularly for bickering with the veterans' group.



He was also criticized for blocking judicial nominee Jennifer May-Parker, whom he once recommended to President Barack Obama.



However, a 2016 Senate campaign for Burr could mean discouragement among seven other Republicans to run. Included in the list of potential candidates are Rev. Mark Harris and Greg Brannon.



Though it seems too early to forecast the 2016 elections, political insiders of North Carolina, which is considered a swing-state, are looking ahead.



According to National Journal, Democrats prefer that Burr's seat be included in the ballot.



Burr was first elected in 1994 to the U.S. House. Ten years later, he won against Democrat Erskine Bowles and occupied John Edwards' former Senate seat. He won again in 2010, against Elaine Marshall.



©2016 Chinatopix All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission