Eleven years to the day after she won her first World Cup podium at age 19 in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, Lindsey Vonn tied Annemarie Moser-Proell’s women’s record for career World Cup wins there on Sunday.

At a picturesque setting in Italy’s breathtaking Dolomite Range that is one of her favorite venues, Vonn captured win No. 62 with a margin of 0.32 seconds over Elisabeth Goergl of Austria. Vonn can pass Moser-Proell Monday in a super-G at Cortina.

“When I won my first podium here I never thought I would make it this far in my career,” Vonn said during the post-race press conference. “That was the first time I thought I could be a contender. Never in a million years would I have believed I could tie the record.”

Sunday’s win didn’t come easily. Snowfall over the past two days and warm temperatures made for tricky race conditions.

“The snow was really soft and I’m not good when it’s soft,” said Vonn, who started youth racing on a 300-foot hill in Minnesota’s Twin Cities before moving to Vail at age 12 to join Ski Club Vail. “I’m from Minnesota and we used to race on ice. I wasn’t very fast on the top.”

Photos: Lindsey Vonn’s 62 World Cup victories

Even though the top of the course at Cortina usually plays to her strengths, Vonn was ninth fastest at the first of three intermediate splits. Almost a half-second behind Goergl, Vonn caught her at the third split. Vonn’s top speed exceeded 78 mph and averaged just under 60 mph over the course of a 1.65-mile run.

Two years ago this month, Vonn seemed on the brink of shattering Moser-Proell’s women’s record with a shot at the all-time record set by Sweden’s Ingemar Stenmark (86). On Jan. 26, 2013, she picked up her sixth win of that season, putting her only three behind Moser-Proell, but 10 days later she blew out her right knee racing super-G at the world championships in Schladming, Austria. She reinjured the knee the following November.

She would go 23 months with a victory, missing most of the 2013-14 season including the Sochi Olympics. Sunday’s win was her third this season, with previous wins coming in December at Lake Louise, Alberta, and Val d’Isere, France.

Now, the pressure is off.

“Now I feel like from here on out I’m already tied for No. 1 and will continue to win races,” Vonn said. “I just want to do my best. Now I’m just focused on doing the best I can.”

If Vonn doesn’t win Monday, she will have two more chances to break the record before coming home for the world alpine championships in Vail Feb. 2-15. A downhill and super-G are scheduled next weekend in St. Moritz, Switzerland, where Vonn has won four times.

“I’m so happy,” Vonn said. “It’s been a long road. The last two years, with both of my knee injuries, have been tough but I’m back and I’m winning and 62 feels pretty awesome.”

John Meyer: 303-954-1616, jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer