Suspect could be linked to robberies of 2 sandwich shops last week

A Boulder Police officer dusts for fingerprints while investigating a robbery at Lolita's Market and Deli on Wednesday on Pearl Street in Boulder. (JEREMY PAPASSO)

A man fitting the description of suspects in two recent armed robberies at Subway and Quiznos sandwich shops in Boulder is believed to have been involved in a robbery at Lolita's Market on Christmas Day, police said.

At 3:50 p.m., an armed suspect took an undetermined amount of cash from the west Pearl Street grocery store and left the building on foot, heading east down Pearl, said Sgt. Jim MacPherson, of the Boulder Police Department.

No one was injured.

The suspect was described as a Hispanic male, 5 feet 8 inches to 5 feet 10 inches in height, who wore a white wrap around his head, a red-and-black striped shirt and blue jeans, MacPherson said.

The suspect had a gun in his waistband.

In initial police scanner reports, the suspect was described as a white male wearing a white bandana and sunglasses.

Police officers and K-9 dogs searched for the suspect. A dog tracked the suspect east to 11th Street, but lost the trail, MacPherson said.

"It's the same description of the man who had robbed Quiznos and Subway," MacPherson said.

On Dec. 18, a man approached the counter at Quiznos, 1606 Conestoga St., and demanded cash from the lone clerk. The suspect told the employee he had a gun and would shoot her if she did not comply, the clerk told police.

Two days later, on Friday afternoon, a man walked up to the counter of the Subway at 2539 Arapahoe Ave., demanded cash and lifted his shirt to show what the clerk described as a "bulge." The suspect left with an undisclosed amount of cash.

In both cases, the suspect was wearing a white cloth or white towel to cover his face.

The suspect in the Subway robbery was described as a white male, 5-foot-6-inches tall to 5-foot-7-inches tall and between 20 and 30 years old. He was wearing blue jeans and a white-and-blue striped, hooded sweatshirt and a cap with ear flaps. His eyes were possibly blue or green.

The suspect in the Quiznos robbery was described as Hispanic or Indian, between 5-foot-9-inches and 6 feet tall, and skinny. He was wearing tan or khaki shorts, a grey hooded sweatshirt, brown flat shoes with no socks, a dark blue or black jacket and a dark blue or black knit hat.

He also was wearing black gloves with three white circle or diamond-shaped patterns on the knuckle area.

The reported Christmas Day robbery would be the second to occur at Lolita's in two weeks.



At 10:48 p.m. on Dec. 9, two suspects wearing black hooded sweatshirts demanded cash from the clerk at the small grocery off Eighth and Pearl streets.



The two men stole cash and cigarettes before leaving on foot and heading south along Eighth Street.