WASHINGTON — The White House on Wednesday said that next week’s launch of the health insurance exchanges won’t go forward without snafus — but that they will launch whether the federal government is shut down or not.

“Newsflash: There will be glitches. When glitches occur, we will fix them,” said David Simas, special assistant to the president. “But the phones will be opened and manned, government shut down or no government shut down.”

Oct. 1 begins a six-month open enrollment for anyone who wishes to buy health insurance on the state exchanges. They will be able to review plans and sign up for one beginning that day at healthcare.gov, and the coverage will begin Jan. 1.

The Affordable Care Act provides subsidies for millions of low and middle-income families to bring the costs of the plans down. People who already have insurance through their employers can keep their plans and in most cases won’t be eligible to buy plans on the exchanges. Nor will people already covered through Medicaid, Medicare or Medicare Advantage. Immigrants here without legal documentation can buy coverage through the exchanges, Simas said, but they won’t receive any government subsidies.

Simas spoke to reporters Wednesday to amplify the findings in a report released in morning by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. That report, previewed by colleague Jim Landers in this morning’s paper, showed that on average premiums for the plans that are sold through the exchanges have come in 16 percent lower than expected.

Some rates for typical clients in the Dallas area were also revealed, though what an individual will pay will vary on factors, such as age, location and what kind of coverage they want.

“For example, the report shows that a 27-year old living in Dallas who makes $25,000 per year will pay $74 per month for the lowest cost bronze plan and $139 per month for the lowest cost silver plan, taking into account tax credits. And he or she will be able to choose from among 43 qualified health plans. For a family of four in Dallas with an income of $50,000 per year, the lowest bronze plan would cost only $26 per month, taking into account tax credits.

The Department of Health and Human Services released a report Wednesday that lets individuals who will be shopping for policies for themselves to see what they’d pay, and what kind of choices they’ll have.

You can go to this link to plug in your particulars — like your age — to get a sense of what prices come attached to which levels of coverage.

Simas told reporters that for about 6 in 10 of Americans who currently have no coverage, basic plans purchased on the exchanges will cost less than $100 per month, after subsidies from the government. He said that number would be closer to eight in 10 if all states had embraced Obamacare and expanded Medicaid as encouraged by the legislation.

“In those states that have been the most cooperative, where everybody has been all-in, more insurance companies have played,” Simas said. “And that has resulted in better competition and more affordable coverage. In those states that have chosen to not be as helpful, no surprise, fewer insurance companies have engaged.”

The report was a reminder that for all the attention being paid in Congress about efforts to defund the new law, it’s moving ahead quickly.

Simas said funding to some 8,000 community health centers across the country has already been delivered, money designed to allow those centers to have staff on hand beginning Oct. 1 to help people sign up for the new coverage.

Phone lines operated by contractors will be open for questions and walk-throughs for those who want to complete the enrollment over the phone.

He said it will take eight to 10 minutes for an individual to go through the selection process — including comparing scores of plans with different prices and different coverage levels.

In 90 minutes of talking about the plan, the White House made a convincing case that Obamacare will make buying health insurance easier, better and cheaper for more than 40 million Americans without coverage, and for millions more who buy their own often very costly individual plans without the help of employers.

In addition to making the premiums more affordable, the new insurance rules will prevent insurance carriers from excluding high-cost customers. Pre-existing conditions won’t be grounds for denial any more, he said, noting that in some states — like Kentucky, one in three people who look for insurance on the individual market are denied for pre-existing conditions. In Texas, that number, he said, is 20 percent.

That’s all over now, he said. “Underwriting is gone. It’s over.”

What the White House did much less effectively was to offer solid assurance that Americans who have insurance already through their employers won’t see any changes they won’t like.

For years, President Obama’s central message to Americans who already have insurance has been: Under the Affordable Care Act, you can keep what you have.

But Republicans have hammered at that message, pointing to instances where some companies have either dropped coverage for employees, reduced hours of some jobs to avoid providing coverage, or announced that premiums have gone up due to the healthcare act.

At a briefing with reporters from around the country, special assistant to the president David Simas said that reports that employers are dropping insurance as a result of the new law should be taken in context: Over the past decade, the percentage of businesses offering insurance to employees had already dropped significantly, down from 68 percent to 50 percent, he said.