Mike Klis, veteran Denver Post Broncos beat writer, begins a television career Monday at KUSA-Channel 9.

And his move is more than career change for a talented sports reporter. It provides a graphic example of how the TV outlet constantly works to cultivate a following as “the Broncos station.”

Some may wonder why 9News needs another reporter on the Broncos beat. Hardworking veteran Rod Mackey covers this turf well.

News director Christy Moreno puts the move in a station perspective, saying, “Covering the Broncos is a year-round job.”

She added that Klis, who covered the team for The Post for 10 years, will be on “the Broncos beat.”

“His knowledge about the team and the NFL in general is invaluable.”

Mackey will still be involved in Broncos coverage and other sports stories.

This current relationship between Channel 9 and the Broncos, first signed in 2011 and renewed two years ago, is billed as a “partnership” — an expensive one, as far as Channel 9 is concerned.

The station has never published details of the financial agreement, which covers many aspects of Broncos activities.

Examples: One-on-one interviews with John Elway, the first local locker room access to players after games and cooperation with players and organization members when it comes to interviews and producing weekly programs such as “Broncos Huddle,” “Broncos Tonight” and “Broncos Game Day Live.”

Perhaps the most important, and profitable, part of the agreement allows KTVD-Channel 20, a sister station, to broadcast preseason games not covered by the national networks.

This summer, KTVD will televise — in prime time — all four contests: Aug. 14 at Seattle, Aug. 22 at Texas, Aug. 29 vs. San Francisco and Sept. 3 vs. Arizona.

Since Broncomania builds steadily during late summer. the four games will draw a hefty advertising response while not disturbing Channel 9’s national advertising schedule load on NBC.

Being an NBC affiliate also adds to Channel 9’s prestige and pocketbook.

In recent years, “NBC Sunday Night Football” has been the most-watched network series in prime time, producing over-the-top ratings and strong advertising support.

This shouldn’t change during the upcoming season. And the Broncos are in the mix three times: Sept. 27 at Detroit, Nov. 1 at home against Green Bay and Nov. 29 at home against New England, a Tom Brady-Peyton Manning duel that could set an all-time audience figure for the NBC series, nationally and locally.

Such is the profit and power of being “the Broncos station.”

Meanwhile, KCNC-Channel 4, Channel 9’s major audience ratings challenger, is not sitting on the broadcasting sideline.

CBS4,’ once “the Broncos station,” has its own local coverage agenda.

Led on-air by the aggressive Vic Lombardi, the station continues to produce weekly seasonal Broncos programming while not trampling on Channel 9’s corporate toes.

And from strictly a game-viewing perspective, Channel 4 will be “the Broncos station,” broadcasting 11 of the 16-game schedule on CBS, including the season opener on Sept. 13 in Denver against Baltimore, where Broncos coach Gary Kubiak was the offensive coordinator last season, and a Thursday night game Sept. 17 at Kansas City against the Chiefs.

Fox Sports and ESPN each have a Broncos game. The former will cover Minnesota’s visit to Denver on Oct. 4. ESPN has the Cincinnati BengalsBroncos clash Dec. 28 in Denver, marking the 24th consecutive season the Broncos have been on “Monday Night Football.”

So it’s a big season for Broncomania — and for “the Broncos station.”

Longtime Denver journalist Dusty Saunders writes about sports media each Monday in The Denver Post. Contact him at tvtime@comcast.net.

Tebow will have a job somewhere

Tim Tebow has TV job security even if he doesn’t make the Philadelphia Eagles’ roster.

ESPN executive vice president John Wildhack recently sent a national e-mail memo saying, “Tim Tebow has a home at ESPN when his playing career is done.”

Wildhack cited Tebow’s analyst work last season on the network’s SEC Channel, praising his “work ethic and passion for football.”