Tesla Motors' price drops after CEO Elon Musk admits stock is 'kind of high right now'

Executive says investors 'often get carried away' with his company, leading to an overvaluing of stock prices

Just a day later, shares of Tesla Motors fell more than 3 percent

The company's value has risen nearly 17 times since its initial public offering in 2010



Is he the most honest CEO or the naivest one?

Elon Musk freely admits Tesla Motors is overvalued because investors 'often get carried away' with his company.

'I think our stock price is kind of high right now, to be totally honestly,' Musk told CNBC on Thursday.

Tesla stock fell more than 3 percent just a day after the remarks. closing at $277.

Yet Musk hardly has a reason to be concerned: the company's price has skyrocketed nearly 17 times from its initial public offering price in 2010.

Just this year, shares have increased by a whopping 90 percent, according to CNBC.

CEO Elon Musk says Tesla Motors is overvalued right now because investors 'often get carried away' with his company

Musk (left) made the remarks in Nevada while announcing the state would be the site for Tesla's $5 billion battery factory. Gov. Brian Sandoval (left-background) says the move will bring Nevada some 6,500 jobs



Musk says investors should be in it for the long run.

'If you care about the long-term, Tesla, I think the stock is a good price,' he told CNBC. 'If you look at the short term, it is less clear.'



Musk made the remarks to CNBC on Thursday as he announced that Nevada was the location chosen for Tesla's gigantic lithium-ion battery plant, which is expected to bring down the cost of Tesla Model 3 by $2,800.



The $5 billion facility, called the 'gigafactory,' is expected to bring 6,500 jobs to the state and $100 billion in economic benefits, according to CNBC. In return, the state offered Tesla up to $1.3 billion in tax breaks.



Also vying for the plant had been Arizona, California, New Mexico and Texas.

'The biggest single factor was time to completion, because unless the gigafactory is ready when we need to produce the mass-market affordable electric car, the vehicle factory will be stalled — so time to execution was extremely important,' Musk told CNBC.

'Nevada was in the lead, I would say number one, in time to execution.'

The factory is expected to open by 2017.

Musk (center) talks to reporters after announcing that Tesla Motors would build its 'gigafactory' in Nevada

Security guards at the gate to the site Tahoe Reno Industrial Center about 15 miles east of Reno, Nevada. Tesla Motors has selected the site in Nevada for a massive, $5 billion factory