Republican candidates for the newly drawn 13th Congressional District gathered Thursday for a town hall during the Davidson County Tea Party's monthly meeting at Tricia's Catering.

Nine candidates participated in the program, which invited members of the community to meet and learn more about each candidate and their priorities. Candidates also received an opportunity to address the crowd, many applauding House Bill 2 and warning of Islamic extremists while calling on voters to take note of the June 7 special primary, which is expected to draw low voter turnout with just one race on the ballot.

Candidates in attendance were Chad Gant, Julia Howard, Harry Warren, John Blust, Vernon Robinson, Dan Barrett, Andrew Brock, Jason Walser and Ted Budd.

“The people of the district need to be able to talk to and hear their candidates,” said Eddie Gallimore, president of the county's tea party. “I don't know that they can do anything to get the voters to the polls, but what they can do is what they're doing now, meeting the people. These people in here are going to the polls … and that's the people you've got to get to, and hopefully they'll get to some of their people. That's all we can hope for.”

As the event's first speaker, Robinson, called out congressional leadership for lacking a willingness to fight for conservative bills under the Obama administration. If elected, Robinson said he would publicize his votes on congressional bills on Twitter and Facebook and explain his reasoning behind his votes.

“We have one sacred obligation and that's to leave, to our children and grandchildren, an America at least as free as the one we were born in,” Robinson said. “We've utterly failed in that obligation. If you send me to Congress, I'll fight with you to meet that obligation.”

Gant, who recently graduated from the Charlotte School of Law, called on his Christian conservative background as a foundation for his political standing. Gant said the political process is still new to him, admitting that he was surprised at how many candidates the 13th District drew, but said he is ready to protect and serve.

“I would like to go to Congress to fight against (the Obama) mentality,” Gant said. “If a bill comes across my desk, I would like to see us progress because we got to the point where we are incrementally, and I'm not the type of person that's going to say 'the only bill that I'm going to approve is to abolish Roe v. Wade.' (But) that's a goal of mine.”

Howard, a member of the North Carolina House of Representatives representing Davie and Forsyth counties, urged that citizens of the state want to be left alone by the government and to feel safe in their daily lives. Howard called for voters in attendance to look at her legislative track record when voting in the June primary.

“I've had some tough issues that I have carried proudly,” Howard said. “I don't have a wishbone, I've got a backbone, and I will take it to the floor wherever we go. To stand and say 'I will go to Washington to fight, fight, fight,' I hope I don't even have to say that to you. I hope you already know it.”

Warren, a state legislator representing Rowan County in the House of Representatives, cited national security, the economy and government overreach as priorities in his campaign. Warren said he plans to hold a town hall in the district every quarter, if elected, and wants to personally write a newsletter to citizens to keep them informed during his service.

“I believe that all the problems we have facing our nation can be solved if we send people (to Washington) who have the resolve to work, not the resolve to get along, the resolve to get things done,” Warren said. “I have that resolve. I can make you that commitment.”

Blust, a member of the North Carolina House of Representatives representing Guilford County, cited his experience in the legislature as the reason he can “stand the heat” in Congress and spoke on his service in the United States Army as a show of his determination and track record of leadership. Citing big banks as the problem, Blust called for action by Congress to right America's economy.

“I've studied things for years. I've followed the Congress for years,” Blust said. “I believe in conservative principles and values. They will still lead to prosperity and freedom and a great America, if you follow the fundamentals.”

Barrett, a Davie County commissioner, called out the Affordable Care Act as a law needing to be repealed, but admitted that battling health care costs nationwide will be a challenge. On national security, Barrett called for America to regain its stance as a global leader adding that he will listen to citizens in his district to find a solution.

“One of us is going to be representing you in Washington, and I think it's important for all of us to take this as information and use it the right way,” Barrett said. “One of the things I think maybe I bring to the table is I'm a pretty good listener, and I think that's important.”

Brock, a member of the North Carolina Senate representing Davie, Iredell and Rowan counties, called liberal politicians in the state “warped,” citing abortion laws as a primary foundation of his conservative stance. Speaking on the district, Brock said the 13th District is “not a safe seat,” calling for voters to stand together during the election.

“I wish we could take everybody running up here and give everybody a seat in Congress because it would be a heck of a lot better than a lot of the people we've got representing us right now,” Brock said. “I'm worried that if we don't stand together after this primary … this thing will fall.”

Walser, a former employee of the LandTrust for Central North Carolina, spoke on the shrink of the middle class, calling out entitlements, and citing small businesses as the answer for America's economy. Walser urged for an ease on small business owners in “red tape” issues, calling a lack of jobs the most pressing issue facing the Piedmont. Walser also cited military spending as an area for potential savings.

“How do we get there? I hate to say this because I don't think it's going to make you all very happy to hear,” Walser said. “It's going to take some really tough decisions. We've got to look at Social Security; we've got to look at military cuts. … I don't have all the answers. I like to listen, I like to get information.”

Budd, an entrepreneur who owns Pro Shots on U.S Highway 52 in Rural Hall, spoke of his career working in small business including the family janitorial business, The Budd Group. Speaking of his three children, Budd urged voters for the need to leave the world better for the next generation than it was found. Calling himself “a true outsider,” in the political game, Budd said his goal is to serve.

“The words were spoken by Christ, and he said 'to whom much is given, much will be required.' We've been given a whole lot. We've been given tremendous freedoms by those who've gone before us. We've been given an amazing country, we've been given amazing opportunities. I just don't want to lose that for the next generation.”

During last month's special filing period, 22 total candidates, 17 GOP, filed for the new district. Remaining candidates not in attendance Thursday have been invited to the tea party's May 12 town hall.

Mat Batts can be reached at (336) 249-3981, ext. 227, or at mat.batts@the-dispatch.com. Follow Mat on Twitter: @LexDispatchMB