In this July 8 photo provided by the United Nations, United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon reaches for ice floating in the waters off Longyearbyen, Norway. Ban visited the Kongsfjorden and Blomstrandhalvoya glaciers to see the effects of Climate change firsthand. Credit: Associated Press

By

Editorial page editor David D. Haynes got it right when he said, "Climate change is real, and humans are responsible....The science is clear." He then muddied the waters by inviting Joe Bast of The Heartland Institute to argue the exact opposite.

I appreciate Haynes' commitment to the "marketplace of ideas" and his willingness to publish a piece so completely at odds with his own position. The editorial pages need to express a variety of viewpoints. Even in matters of fact, there can be subtleties and qualifications that require different perspectives to be fully understood. But I was appalled by the degree of falsehood and distortion in the Bast piece.

As a new year dawns, readers deserve better. So here is my attempt to check the worst of Bast's whoppers. (The online version has links if you want to dig deeper.)

Whopper No. 1: "(Heartland's) work is credible and respected in the climate science community." This is just not true. Heartland is a policy "think tank," not a scientific organization. The world's most cited scientific journal, "Nature," explicitly rejects Heartland as a "serious voice on climate science."

"...The Heartland Institute's climate conferences...are curious affairs designed to gather and share contrarian views, in which science is secondary to wild accusations and political propaganda."

Whopper No. 2: "There is no 'consensus' on the human impact on climate." "Consensus" means "general agreement." Among publishing climate scientists, the overwhelming majority (97%) agree that the warming over the past century is very likely due to human activities. The U.S. National Academy of Sciences and dozens of other national academies and scientific organizations have affirmed the same thing.

Whopper No. 3: "...The only part of the science that is 'clear' is that the impact of humans on the climate is tiny compared with natural variability." It is true that the Earth has been much hotter (and much cooler) than it is at present. But Bast jumps right into public policy in his next sentence. Over public policy time frames of years to decades, the human impact on climate is not only substantial, it exceeds natural variability.

Whopper No. 4: "There's no reason to believe the results (of warming) would be any less beneficial in coming centuries (than they supposedly were in the past)." There are many reasons to believe that the warming we are now experiencing poses serious problems. Certainly there are some who will benefit. The warming we have had in Wisconsin in the past 50 years has extended the growing season, for instance. But careful evaluation of the costs and benefits of warming shows costs significantly outweigh benefits as temperatures continue to rise.

The truth is, just as Haynes said, climate change is real, and humans are responsible. This poses many real risks to our interconnected world. As the National Academies of Science of the United States and 12 other countries put it, "The need for urgent action to address climate change is now indisputable."

Many "skeptics" of climate change are driven at root by skepticism of government. Fortunately, there are outlets for conservatives who respect science and take risks seriously. This September, 12 House Republicans sponsored a resolution urging conservative environmental stewardship. Nonprofits working to support these efforts include RepublicEn, Conservatives for Responsible Stewardship, the libertarian Niskanen Center and Citizens' Climate Lobby.

Avoiding serious climate change will require some big changes. We need ideas from across the political spectrum on how to make those changes fairly and efficiently.

Americans deserve better than the distortions from Bast and Heartland. Science has given us the chance to tackle a big problem while there is still time. Let's take that chance, together.

Mike Arney lives in Wauwatosa.