Obamacare has lost its punch as a political weapon against Democrats, U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz said Thursday as she touted benefits of the health care law and urged people to sign up the next time enrollment opens.

If the Weston congresswoman is correct, it's a departure from the 2010 midterm elections when Obamacare was a tea party rallying cry that helped mobilize Republicans who delivered devastating blows to Democrats.

"This isn't even an election year issue now," said Wasserman Schultz, who travels the country aiding her party's candidates as chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee. "This election certainly won't turn on the Affordable Care Act."

Still, Presdient Barack Obama's administration is minimizing the political risk. After last year's botched rollout with a failed website for signing up, the fall 2014 enrollment period for 2015 coverage was delayed. Originally scheduled to begin Oct. 15, it's now set to start Nov. 15 – after the Nov. 4 election.

Wasserman Schultz said the delay "was nothing related to the elections." Rather, she said it was a prudent move "to make sure all the kinks are fully ironed out with the website" after last year's problems.

State Republican Chairwoman Leslie Dougher was skeptical of that explanation. She said by email that Obama does "what's politically expedient."

Wasserman Schultz said the reason Republicans tried to stop the law from going into effect a year ago is that they knew once peopel got health coverage they would want to keep it. "They knew that when Americans got that peace of mind they were never going back."

Dougher said she, and the voters, don't see it that way. And she criticized Democratic governor candidate Charlie Crist's support for Obamacare. "Charlie Crist and Barack Obama are completely disconnected from the pain that Florida families are feeling because of Obamacare," she said. "This failed law has hurt many Florida families with its higher taxes [and] higher premiums."

Wasserman Schultz was joined at her news conference by Suzanne Boyd, 54, of Cooper City.

Two weeks after her husband died of cancer in 2012, Boyd learned that she and her two daughters would lose the insurance coverage they'd had through him. She found coverage, but then developed lymphoma and said she was eventually dropped by the new insurer because her illness was a pre-existing condition.

Boyd, whose illness is now remission, said she couldn't get the final radiation treatments she needed until she got insurance through the Affordable Care Act.

"I'm telling you, Obamacare did not come soon enough," she said.

Wasserman Schultz, a breast cancer survivor, said Republicans want a return to the "nightmarish days" Boyd faced. "They want to make women like Suzanne and women like me fight our insurance companies for coverage while also fighting for our lives."

aman@tribune.com, 954-356-4550.