Podemos Detener el VIH Una Conversación a la Vez or We Can Stop HIV One Conversation at a Time was launched today! This new national communications campaign from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the latest addition to the Act Against AIDS portfolio, encourages Hispanics/Latinos to talk openly about HIV and AIDS with their families, friends, partners, and communities.

Only 16% of the U.S. population, Hispanics/Latinos are disproportionately affected by HIV and AIDS, accounting for 19% of the 1.1 million people living with HIV in the United States and 21% of new HIV infections each year. If current trends continue, an estimated 1 in 36 Hispanic/Latino men and 1 in 106 Hispanic/Latina women will be diagnosed with HIV at some point in their lifetime.

Every conversation matters when it comes to HIV and AIDS, and this campaign highlights the role of conversation in lessening the stigma and shame that is often associated with HIV. We Can Stop HIV One Conversationat a Time is CDC’s first communication campaign specifically developed for the general Hispanic/Latino community to combat this disease and encourages open conversation about often taboo topics.

Hundreds of Hispanics/Latinos from across the country and key Hispanic/Latino community organizations were engaged by CDC to help in the development of the campaign. The Hispanic/Latino men and women seen in the campaign are from culturally diverse backgrounds and help to highlight the important facts and messages that can prompt open conversations about HIV and AIDS across the Hispanic/Latino community. Campaign resources, including a dedicated campaign website, provide facts and practical tools and tips to help families and friends begin or continue important conversations about HIV prevention, awareness, testing, and treatment.

We invite each of you reading this blog to help promote the One Conversation at a Time campaign. There are a number of actions you can take:

To learn more about One Conversation at a Time, visit www.cdc.gov/OneConversation.

For inquiries about One Conversation at a Time, email ActAgainstAIDS@cdc.gov.