Obamacare enrollment up in Pennsylvania

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Uninsured people in Pennsylvania are enrolling for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act at a faster pace this year than last, but federal data released Tuesday suggest the Obama administration has a challenge signing up young adults.

The government said 422,284 people in Pennsylvania signed up for insurance coverage on the federal insurance marketplace between Nov. 15 and Jan. 16, with 81 percent of them receiving subsidies to help lower their monthly premiums.

Over last year's six-month open enrollment, 318,077 people in the state signed up. Nearly 90 percent of those have renewed for 2015, according to information released by the Department of Health and Human Services.

Of the total sign-ups so far this year, 278,707 were renewals, and 143,577 were uninsured people who were enrolling for the first time.

“Pennsylvania is in the top six states in terms of growth relative to other states,” said Chris Sloan, a manager at Washington-based consulting firm Avalere Health. “It's doing pretty well.”

An average of 71,000 Pennsylvanians a month have selected plans for the first time this year on Healthcare.gov, the online exchange set up under the Affordable Care Act. During last year's six-month open enrollment period, the average was about 53,000 people.

“The thing to watch is the next few months is just because you renewed doesn't mean that you're going to keep paying,” Sloan said. “The numbers are a little inflated right now.”

Last year, about 16 percent of the 8 million people who signed up for coverage by the end of open enrollment were dropped because they didn't pay premiums, the final step in securing health insurance.

Western Pennsylvania numbers were not available. The region's two largest health insurers, UPMC Health Plan and Highmark Inc., declined to release their enrollment figures.

Thirty-one percent of sign-ups in Pennsylvania so far this year are younger than 35, the same percentage as last year. Insurers need young, healthy people to offset the higher cost of covering older adults, who tend to need more medical treatment.

Nationwide, 9.5 million people signed up for the first time or renewed their coverage through Healthcare.gov, the website for Pennsylvania and 36 other states, and 13 state-based exchanges, the Obama administration said.

The total surpasses the administration's estimate that at least 9.1 million would have coverage by the end of open enrollment on Feb. 15. But it's still too early to say if the goal has been met because people may not pay premiums.

Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell said she's “encouraged by the strong interest we've seen so far.”

The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office said in estimates released this week that it expects enrollment in the exchanges to average about 12 million people during 2015.

Based on the rate of renewals and sign-ups this year, Sloan said he expects the final number of Americans with coverage through the federal and state exchanges to be closer to the CBO's estimate.

“It's becoming clear that the way this growth is going, and if we see a bump up at the end, it's going to beat that estimate,” he said.

The Associated Press contributed. Alex Nixon is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-320-7928 or anixon@tribweb.com.