x of x An aerial view shows a damaged bridge across the Tawi River on the outskirts of Jammu, India, on Monday. Six days of rain have left more than 120 people dead in the region's worst flooding in more than five decades, submerging hundreds of villages and triggering landslides, officials said. Channi Anand/AP

x of x Smoke rises above Little Yosemite Valley Sunday in the Yosemite National Park area in California. About 100 visitors were evacuated by helicopter when a wildfire that started weeks ago in the park's backcountry grew unexpectedly to at least 700 acres, officials said. Yosemite National Park/AP

x of x As part of a photo essay released Monday, Palestinians sit outside the classrooms of a U.N. school where families live after their homes have been destroyed by Israeli strikes in Gaza City. With nearly 100,000 Palestinians having no home to go back to, the U.N.-run schools are still housing thousands just one week before the school year is scheduled to begin. Khalil Hamra/AP

x of x Workers wearing protective equipment stand inside the contaminated area at the ELWA Hospital run by Doctors Without Borders on Sunday in Monrovia, Liberia. Dominique Faget/AFP/Getty Images

x of x Serena Williams hugs the championship trophy after defeating Caroline Wozniacki of Denmark during the championship match of the 2014 U.S. Open tennis tournament Sunday in New York. Mike Groll/AP

x of x Lewis Hamilton of Great Britain and the Mercedes team celebrates following his victory at the Italian Formula One Grand Prix on Sunday in Monza, Italy. Adam Pretty/Getty Images

x of x President Barack Obama visits Stonehenge after leaving the 2014 NATO Summit in Newport, Wales, on Friday. Charles Dharapak/AP

x of x A woman sits in front of the J.M.W. Turner painting "A Disaster at Sea" in a new exhibition at the Tate Britain gallery Monday in London. The exhibition, entitled "Late Turner - Painting Set Free," is the first to concentrate on his final period of work (1835-51), or from the age of 60 until his death. Oli Scarff/Getty Images

x of x Devotees carry a boy and dance as a large statue of the elephant-headed Hindu god Ganesh is carried toward an immersion in the Arabian Sea on the final day of the Ganesh Chaturthi festival in Mumbai, India, on Monday. Rajanish Kakade/AP