Los Angeles, CA, Sept. 22, 2014 /3BL Media/ – Participant Media’s Tag division, which offers full-service cause marketing, production and consulting services for leading global brands and foundations, is increasing its capabilities with the addition of Karla Ballard as Senior Vice President, Client Services. Reporting to Tag’s General Manager, Christopher Gebhardt, Ballard will lead client relationships and strategic development for Tag, focusing on foundations, corporations, and the entertainment industry.

Tag helps brands and foundations create social impact by developing strategies, programs, and content for clients such as American Express, Disney, Intel, The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation, and the Omidyar Network.

“Karla brings years of experience developing creative campaigns to affect widespread social impact and we are thrilled she’s joining Tag to help us continue to grow the group’s capabilities and client-base, which already includes some of the world’s best-known and most-respected brands and foundations,” said Gebhardt.

Prior to joining Tag, Ballard was Senior Partner, Director of The Impact Studio at Ogilvy & Mather West, leading the Affordable Care Act influencer campaign and Sony Pictures Television accounts.

Ballard is an appointee to the Federal Communications Commission's Committee on Diversity in a Digital Age, a team that managed a national broadband adoption campaign aimed at diverse communities, implemented by a coalition including the NAACP, National Council of La Raza, National Urban League, Asian American Justice Center and the League of United Latin American Citizens. Previously, Ballard worked at the One Economy Corporation, a global non-profit that leverages technology to improve the lives of underserved communities. She has been a visiting speaker at Harvard and has years of experience organizing grassroots coalitions.

About Tag

Tag offers full-service cause marketing, production and consulting services for leading global brands and foundations, building on the expertise and multi-platform reach of its parent, Participant Media.

Participant Media (http://www.ParticipantMedia.com) is a global entertainment company founded in 2004 by Jeff Skoll to focus on feature film, television, publishing and digital content that inspires social change. Participant's more than 55 films include Good Night, and Good Luck, Syriana, An Inconvenient Truth, Food, Inc., Waiting for ‘Superman’, The Help, Contagion and Lincoln. Participant launches campaigns that bring together government entities, foundations, schools, and others to raise awareness and drive people to take action on issues from each film or television show. Pivot (http://www.Pivot.tv), the company’s television network, is available in 45 million homes, serving passionate Millennials (18-34) with a diverse slate of talent and a mix of original series, acquired programming, films and documentaries. TakePart (http://www.TakePart.com) is Participant’s digital news, lifestyle magazine and social action platform for the conscious consumer. Through its films, social action campaigns, digital network, and its television network, Participant seeks to entertain, encourage and empower every individual to take action.