When Jessica Steinhart gave birth to her son Lyle in January, she thought the breast pump she needed would be covered by her husband's health insurance.

But her husband is a public school teacher, and city employees’ insurance companies don’t pay for the $300 lactation device despite a new provision in the Affordable Care Act that requires many plans to cover it.

"Why would it be any different for city employees? I'm angry," said Steinhart, 34, of Park Slope. "I can't even secure the tools that I need in order to return to work."

Steinhart's husband is a public school teacher, and as a city employee his insurance will not cover the $300 device despite a provision in the Affordable Care Act requiring many plans to cover it. (Debbie Egan-Chin/New York Daily News)

The Obamacare provision covering breast pumps and other preventive-care services kicked in starting Jan. 1, 2013.

The city is not violating the new healthcare law because plans already in effect before Obamacare passed can be exempt from some of the law's regulations.

The city is not violating the Obamacare provision requiring breast pumps because plans already in effect before Obamacare passed can be exempt from some of the law's regulations. (Debbie Egan-Chin/New York Daily News)

Aligning to Obamacare’s requirements to cover such services without co-payments — which could cost tens of millions — will be part of negotiations starting this week between the city and unions, officials said.

"We recognize this is an important issue," city spokeswoman Marti Adams said.

Steinhart is angry that she cannot secure the tools that she needs in order to return to work. (Debbie Egan-Chin/New York Daily News)

"The city is not legally required to cover breast pumps, but once they lose grandfather status, they will be required to provide it," said Anna Benayo, senior health policy analyst at the National Women's Law Center. "It's not about a date and time the plan has to be ungrandfathered. It's more about changes in the plan that trigger whether they lose that status."

Doctors say the breastfeeding tool helps women who can't be with their baby all the time, especially for those who need to return to work quickly.

Steinhart's current breast pump is drying on green. Aligning Obamacare’s requirements to cover such services without co-payments will be part of negotiations this week between the city and unions, officials said. (Debbie Egan-Chin/New York Daily News)

They also say nursing helps reduce a host of health problems, including respiratory diseases and childhood obesity.

N. Tanya Ohly, an instructor in obstetrics and gynecology at Columbia University Medical Center, argues that moms who can't get breast pumps covered by their insurance are facing a major disadvantage.

"It's already overwhelming to take home a newborn," she said. "And then to sort out the details of your insurance plan and whether you can get a breast pump, it's extremely aggravating."

clestch@nydailynews.com