The report card is sure to make IRS Commissioner John Koskinen squirm. POLITICO Pro IRS service degraded, taxpayers to pay price

Many taxpayers face being abandoned this tax season by an IRS grappling with budget woes, according to a watchdog report released Wednesday.

National Taxpayer Advocate Nina Olson’s several-hundred page annual report to Congress paints a daunting picture of an agency deteriorating to “unprecedented” poor service levels that are “getting worse.”

Story Continued Below

“As the nation’s advocate for taxpayers, I feel compelled to speak up about the degradation of service provided by the IRS in all aspects of its work, primarily in its pre-filing and filing activities but also in its enforcement activities,” she wrote.

The report card is sure to make IRS Commissioner John Koskinen squirm. While the agency chief has warned time and time again that service would crumble as Congress slashes the agency budget, Olson questioned IRS decisions on what to cut, suggesting reductions elsewhere would have been less harmful to the taxpayer.

She also blasted the IRS for failing to put in place measures that hold employees accountable, recommending for example that managers approve tax liens and that IRS employees be required to put their names and contact information on audits.

Congress has shaved the IRS budget 17 percent since fiscal 2010 when adjusted for inflation, all while the agency is dealing with more returns than ever before. Each year it fields phone calls from about 100 million people. They’re also now implementing Obamacare.

Koskinen for months has warned that the expanded mandate and budget cuts, a GOP priority, would cripple the agency’s ability to do its job, warning on Tuesday that half of taxpayers won’t be able to get through on the phone during this tax season — and only after waiting half an hour.

In 2004, the IRS answered 87 percent of calls after having people on hold for an average of only 2.5 minutes.

Two of Olson’s big recommendations — more funding and congressional oversight — are likely to fall on deaf ears in the GOP-controlled Congress. The IRS still has a black eye over the tea party targeting controversy, but Olson said the agency still needs funds to serve taxpayers.

“Everyone is in collective denial about what inadequate funding for the IRS means to taxpayers,” she said.

While the Olson report will give Republicans plenty of ammunition against their least favorite agency, she also criticized them.

It may seem ironic she calls for more oversight — Congress held dozens of lengthy hearings to grill IRS officials amid the tea party saga. But she said lawmakers are hyper-fixated on the most headline-grabbing issues, to the detriment of others.

Her suggestion: Focus “not just on the issue du jour but on all the routine work the IRS does.”

“Bipartisan, dispassionate congressional hearings on these issues … would help create a framework for what the IRS needs and how it should operate in order to gain the trust of U.S. taxpayers,” she wrote. “Now more than ever, congressional involvement is needed to repair the damage and place tax administration on a better path forward.”

She also asks lawmakers not to scapegoat the agency as a whole for the actions of a few: “[C]asting the entire agency and its employees as an out-of-control agency in response to the actions of a few, no matter how deplorable those actions may be, is harmful to taxpayers and to tax compliance.”

While she thinks the IRS can operate more efficiently, “the only way the IRS can assist the tens of millions [of] taxpayers seeking to speak with an IRS employee is to have enough employees to answer their calls,” she said.

She blasted the agency’s recent decision to stop answering “complex” tax law questions on the phone and at walk-in centers. The IRS is training employees to only answer “basic” tax questions and directing taxpayers to the IRS website if the question goes beyond that.

And after tax season ends, employees are being told to not answer any tax law questions — despite the fact that 15 million taxpayers obtain filing extensions or file later in the year, Olson said.

That’s a huge decrease in taxpayer assistance, she said, citing a GAO study showing tax law questions answered by taxpayer assistance centers fell 86 percent from 2004 to 2013, with the sites answering 110,000 inquiries, down from 795,000. In 2004, the sites answered almost 600,000 questions outside of tax season; now they’ll answer none.

“We think it is a sad state of affairs when the government writes tax laws as complex as ours — and then is unable to answer any questions beyond ‘basic’ ones from baffled citizens who are doing their best to comply,” Olson said.

Olson says it will cause the agency more harm in the long run: “Taxpayers will be unable to talk with IRS employees about making payment arrangements, resulting in automated and unnecessary liens and levies and leading to expensive downstream activities like levy releases and lien releases and withdrawals.”

She also chided the agency for its decision last year to discontinue the longtime practice of helping hundreds of thousands of low income, elderly and disabled taxpayers prepare their tax returns at IRS walk-in sites.

“All too often, the message the government is sending to U.S. taxpayers doing their best to comply with the law is, ‘We’re sorry. You’re on your own,’” she said.

Joining with the GAO and Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, Olson questioned how the IRS came to decisions to cut these services, arguing the agency “lacks a clear rationale for taxpayer service budgetary allocation decisions.”

She said her office is trying to work with the IRS to create a ranking of taxpayer service activities most needed by taxpayers but is facing “limitations imposed by the lack of available data have delayed implementation.”

The lack of taxpayer service goes against taxpayer rights reforms Congress enacted in the 1990s and 1980s, which the IRS has “resisted,” Olson said.

The result is that taxpayers aren’t getting the help they deserve, she said.

For example, the IRS’s offshore voluntary disclosure program of taxpayers who came forward to admit they may have avoided taxes, “still violates taxpayer rights,” she says. The IRS in 2014 “streamlined” the program after critics said it was actually punishing small count taxpayer more for unreported taxes than those who evaded large swaths of taxes intentionally.

IRS now allows so-called benign actors to pay smaller penalty, but “the IRS will not allow those with signed closing agreements to benefit from the most recent changes, thereby punishing taxpayer who came in early.”

Another taxpayer rights proposal IRS has overlooked, she said: A 1998 congressional mandate to assign a specific employee to examination cases so taxpayers have a point of contact inside the IRS, and a old congressional requirement that IRS employees put their names, phone numbers and employee IDs on audits, for accountability.

She’s also recommending managerial approval for tax liens for overdue taxes to ensure people don’t get treated unfairly.

And she’s asking Congress to give social welfare groups and other tax-exempt entities the ability to seek declaratory judgments from courts to resolve disputes about their tax exempt status. Currently only charities, 501(c)(3)s, can do so if the IRS denies their application, fails to answer it 270 days after the application is filed or if their exempt stats is revoked.

Her top legislative priority, a Taxpayer Bill of Rights, would fix many of these problems, she said.

The House passed such a bill last Congress but the Senate never acted on it, and though the IRS adopted it on its own in the spring of 2014, Olson says it should be codified because the agency isn’t living up to the standards currently.