Sunshine Cruz's destiny was inevitable.

She belongs to one of showbusiness' most prominent families and some of her relatives are Tirso Cruz III, Geneva Cruz, Ricky Belmonte and Sheryl Cruz. With her fair skin, beautiful body and bee-stung lips, Sunshine was a shoo-in for stardom. But before that happened in a big way, she got married and had children and family life became her priority.

In 2012, Sunshine started appearing in soaps and variety shows again. In 2013, her marriage fell apart and Sunshine's career went into full blast.

She and her three daughters—Angelina Isabelle, Samantha Angeline and Angel Francesca—moved to another house in another part of Metro Manila.

Because she is now a single parent, Sunshine's priorities have shifted.

"I am now more health-conscious. If I am not busy, I sleep longer, more than eight hours. Sleep is really important for me because it keeps me alert, fresh-looking, and beautiful,” says Sunshine.

She believes good sleeping habits can be helped by lying on a quality bed. Sunshine uses a queen-size Uratex premium bed (Sleep Comfort Memory Mattress).

"It’s so comfy, not too soft and not too hard. It’s just perfect, so when you wake up, you don’t feel any ache or pain in your back and neck.”

Sunshine and her family have always relied on Uratex when it comes to beds.

"Our beds in our ancestral home are made by Uratex. When I got married, our bed was also Uratex. Now that I’m a single parent, it’s still Uratex," she says.

The actress' three daughters use the Uratex Perfect Serenity Anti-Mosquito Mattress.

As Angelina Isabelle puts it, "We bond all the time in bed. We like watching scary films."

"We like watching TV before bedtime. Then we pray and go to sleep," says Samantha Angeline.

"I read and surf the Internet," shares Angel Francesca.

The girls, according to Sunshine, even have a schedule on who gets to sleep with their mom on a certain day.

Sunshine also memorizes her scripts and goes on Instagram and Twitter. She describes herself as an "introvert who can stay in my room all day."

"When I was single, I would just stay in my room the whole day and lie on my bed. Sometimes, I would just go out to watch the shows of my dad in hotels and then go home.”

Uratex recently kicked off its “Mobile Sleep Solutions,” a campaign that aims to educate Filipinos in Metro Manila and nearby provinces on how to get the best of sleep health.

Uratex sleep experts go around in a customized, air-conditioned van transformed to mimic a cozy bedroom environment and tell the public about the 10 commandments of sleep hygiene for adults, the benefits of good sleep and the many exciting products that best suit the needs of customers when it comes to their sleeping needs.