Students protested against an acid attack on a woman in Srinagar on Dec.12. Farooq Khan/European Pressphoto Agency

A senior police officer overseeing the investigation of an acid attack on a young Indian doctor earlier this week said it is “one of the most twisted cases” he has ever dealt with – allegedly involving a jilted suitor who sought to disfigure the victim because she didn’t return his affections.

“This is a case that will shake everyone’s conscience,” said Tajinder Luthra, joint commissioner for Delhi police.

On Tuesday, two masked men threw acid into the face of a 30-year-old doctor while she was riding a scooter in Delhi, snatched her purse and fled. The woman, who hasn’t been identified publicly, suffered chemical burns on her right hand and face and is at risk of losing vision in her right eye, Mr. Luthra said.

The robbery was a sham aimed at misleading police, said Pushpendra Kumar, deputy commissioner of police for western Delhi. Mr. Kumar said the real motive for the crime was far more complex.

On Thursday, police arrested a friend of the victim, another medical doctor, who police allege masterminded the attack – so that he would be able to woo the woman, who had earlier rebuffed his romantic advances.

“The motive was rejection by the girl. The spurned doctor wanted to marry her by winning her over after he nursed her back to health,” said Mr. Kumar.

Police also arrested two men on the motorbike, both minors under the age of 18, who were allegedly hired by the doctor to carry out the attack as well as a 20-year-old friend of the doctor who police say acted as an intermediary.

None of the accused, who are in police custody, could be reached for comment on Friday. Police said they didn’t yet have legal representation.

Studies suggest India has one of the highest incidences of acid violence. Women are often targeted for turning down advances by men, rejecting marriage proposals, and other kinds of domestic disputes.

“Men want to teach woman a lesson generally,” Mr. Luthra said of assaults with acid. “In this case also the accused wanted to teach her a lesson that ‘you are not choosing me. You are going to suffer for it.’”

The country’s top court has passed laws trying to restrict sales in order to prevent acid attacks.

In 2013, the Supreme Court of India said anyone under the age of 18 should be barred from purchasing hydrochloric, sulfuric or nitric acids, which are often used as cleaning products. Stores were also directed to keep details of quantities sold and addresses and identities of buyers.

Mr. Luthra said the source of the acid used in this attack is still under investigation.