Please enable Javascript to watch this video

WENTZVILLE, MO (KTVI) - Missouri and the city of Wentzville offered tax incentives to help lure production to St. Charles County. In 2011, GM announced it was investing $380 million in its existing plant to produce the Colorado and Canyon.

"It's nice to have the confidence of a worldwide brand like GM investing now half a billion dollars,” said Gov. Nixon.

More than 1,600 jobs are expected to be added in Wentzville as a result of the truck production. There are also jobs created from sub-suppliers connected to auto production.

“They go out to eat in our local restaurants, they buy homes in here, they go to the local vendors to buy products and services,” said Wentzville Mayor Nick Guccione. “So it’s helped us tremendously.”

Workers at Stefanina’s Pizzeria and Restaurant said deliveries to the GM plant keep them busy.

“It’s very busy, we send a lot of food over there,” said Samantha Gnade, bartender and server. She believes the new pickups will be a hit with consumers.

“It’s not a full sized truck. It’s not an SUV. It kind of fits a different market,” said Gande.

Guccione believes the city’s tax incentives and it’s educated workforce were key factors in GM investing in its Wentzville plant.

“I look forward to working with GM for a long, long time.”

Fact about the GM Wentzville plant

Date Opened: 1983

Employment: 1800 hourly, 300 salary

Shifts: Two full shifts, with Stamping 3rd shift

Union representation: UAW Local 2250

Current Products: The world’s best full-size vans, the Chevrolet Express and GMC Savana

Upcoming Products: GM’s next generation mid-size pickup trucks, the 2015 Chevrolet Colorado and GMC Canyon, scheduled to launch later in 2014.

Recent Investments: GM announced the investment of $380 million in November 2011 for the launch of the new mid-size pickup at Wentzville, with the potential to create or retain 1,260 jobs. Investment included funds for a new body shop along with other plant improvements to support the new truck launch.

GM also announced the investment of $133 million in June, 2013 to add a third stamping press to the Wentzville plant, with the potential to create or retain 55 jobs.

Both the current product full-size vans and the new mid-size trucks will be built concurrently on the same assembly line.

Product Updates: New 2015 Chevrolet Colorado revealed at Los Angeles Auto Show in November 2013. New 2015 GMC Canyon revealed at North American International Auto Show in Detroit January 2014.

Follow Jeff Bernthal on Facebook and Twitter:

Jeff Bernthal on Facebook

Jeff Bernthal on Twitter

Email: jeffrey.bernthal@tvstl.com