Between now and its annual meeting on Feb. 24, the Council of Smaller Enterprises will tell members about a shakeup underway at the 43-year-old small business support group.



What appears to be a restructuring includes a closer integration of COSE with the Greater Cleveland Partnership, its parent organization. Many of the COSE staff that handled marketing, membership development and government advocacy are moving over to the staff of similar GCP units.



In the process, it appears that about 20% of the former COSE staff have left the organization in the last year.



The leaders of COSE and GCP declined to be interviewed by Crain’s Cleveland Business about the changes but issued the following statement via email: “Like any successful business or organization, chambers of commerce must adapt and be nimble to continue to meet the needs of our members in an evolving market. We will soon be updating our members on some organizational enhancements, but it would be inappropriate for us to talk to the media about those changes before communicating with our members.”



No current or former employees contacted were willing to discuss the changes on the record. But some members and several current and former employees and contractors were willing to discuss anonymously what they are seeing.



“It’s long overdue,” said a current employee, who declined to speak on the record without approval from top management. “It’s now time for us to evolve a little bit.”



Another former COSE worker, who has followed the job reassignments, said, “I think this is the direction COSE is headed — less autonomy within the GCP empire.”





The move leaves COSE with 12 employees listed on its website, most of whom handle one of two COSE programs: one that helps members save energy, and another that helps them improve their worker safety and workers’ compensation programs.In fact, where GCP once had nine COSE departments listed on the staff directory dropdown on the GCP site — among them units listed as advocacy; brand, marketing and communications; business operations; events; external relations and market development; and membership sales and service — there is now only a single, generic COSE listing.COSE employees who handled event planning, marketing and membership sales now are listed under comparable GCP departments.Megan Kim, who had been COSE vice president of business operations, now is GCP managing vice president for membership development and marketing. Brynn Popa, formerly COSE’s vice president for external relations and market development, now is GCP vice president for business and community engagement.A comparison of the staff directories on the GCP and COSE websites with those from April 2015 indicates that COSE went from a staff of 33 to the current 12, though 14 people formerly listed as COSE employees now are listed as GCP employees. Seven people listed as COSE employees a year ago no longer are part of the GCP/COSE staff roster, suggesting a 21% shrinkage of the former COSE staff.A current employee said it made sense to pull the two organizations together as COSE membership shrank. With the onset of the Affordable Care Act, the COSE group insurance program no longer was companies’ only option for affordable health insurance.COSE membership had held at over 15,000 members for years, with the cost of membership offset by the savings on health insurance. For a long time, it was the only place the smallest businesses, including one-person shops, could be part of a low-cost group insurance program.A year ago, The Plain Dealer, in a story about the 2015 annual meeting, reported that membership was down to about 9,000.Two years ago, COSE leaders were more willing to discuss what, in retrospect, sounds like a similar shakeup.Rion Safier, now and then the volunteer board chairman of COSE, said then that the goal was to be the place small businesses turn to first when they’re looking for help. He said the hope was that COSE would help small firms gain access to capital and for identifying and attracting skilled workers.It’s unclear whether the current changes are a continuation of that strategy, a shift to a different strategy or simply a cost-cutting effort.Speaking to Crain’s in 2014, John Hexter, a longtime member and former COSE board member, lauded the new approach and said he hoped the changes then underway would convince small business owners of COSE’s relevance when it comes time to renew their memberships. Hexter had left the board in 2006 over disagreements with the direction the organization was taking.“The next 24 months are critical to the renewal process,” he told Crain’s then. “They’ve got to make it clear that there is something different at COSE and it’s worth investing in.”Contacted recently, Hexter emailed that he was not aware of any significant changes underway.