Senate Republicans initially elected in 2010 will have to face the voters after causing six years of gridlock. Seven seats the party holds are in states Barack Obama carried twice, as is every Democratic seat. Thus, Democrats have a solid shot at picking up the four seats they need for a majority if they win the presidency (with the vice president breaking ties).

Two potential rematches also feature a wide ideological divide between strongly conservative first-term Republicans and progressive Democrats. Former Pennsylvania Rep. Joe Sestak upset party-switching incumbent Arlen Specter in the 2010 primary and nearly won despite the wave. Former Wisconsin Senator Russ Feingold authored the 2003 campaign finance restrictions and was the only senator to vote against the 2001 Patriot Act.

Republicans are also defending Obama’s old Senate seat in Illinois after a 2010 upset. If progressives want to ever win a majority, they absolutely must carry these states that have voted Democratic in the last several presidential races. They also must be pragmatic, recognizing that sometimes solid progressives might not be able to win.

Florida Senator Marco Rubio is expected to run for president, likely leaving his seat open. While many progressives admire Rep. Alan Grayson, his polarizing style makes him a very poor candidate, as evidenced by his self-defeating 2010 Taliban Dan ad. In a swingy state, even moderate Rep. Patrick Murphy provides a strong opportunity to move policy leftward. With several tough states to defend in 2018, there’s the possibility of another bad midterm if Democrats hold the White House. The party needs every seat it can get next year to hold a majority for long.

While the Senate will be closely fought, the House is almost a foregone conclusion of continued Republican control. Slightly over half of the districts were drawn to favor Republicans, while just over a tenth were drawn for Democrats. Largely due to gerrymandering, a majority of the districts voted for Mitt Romney. Consequently, in 2014 Republicans won their largest majority since 1928.

Democrats need to gain thirty seats for control in 2016. However, with twenty-six Republicans holding seats Obama carried, and only five Democrats in Romney seats, Democrats will very likely make gains. Even a smaller minority improves the party’s bargaining position and builds a bench for higher office. If 2016 becomes an election cycle like 2008, Democrats might even win a majority.

There are also lessons progressives can learn from tea-partiers on the importance of primaries and open safe seats. Over the last several decades, Republicans have steadily moved to the right. This has frequently happened recently when an incumbent retires or is defeated in a primary, with his or her replacement being a more conservative tea partier. Progressives have often lacked an equivalent disciplined, national organization.

An open Senate seat in Maryland is an opportunity for the Warren wing of the party to demonstrate its clout. Rep. Chris Van Hollen, a member of the house leadership, already has the support of Harry Reid. Rep. Donna Edwards, one of the most progressive members of Congress, is running as well with the backing of Daily Kos. Edwards also increases demographic diversity in a body sorely lacking it.

In the House, Illinois Rep. Dan Lipinski’s 3rd district voted for Obama by thirteen percent. Despite that, he voted against Obamacare in 2010 and has one of the worst records on abortion rights among congressional Democrats. Can you imagine Republicans letting a pro-Obamacare congressman stay in office? Progressives must be willing to vigorously primary wayward incumbents in safe seats.

Progressives have legitimate concerns about Hillary Clinton, both ideologically and as a campaigner. But nothing is gained from tilting at windmills by hoping for a nonexistent, doomed primary challenge. Conservatives realized long ago the presidency is not the only game in town. The last six years are evidence enough that Congress is essential too.