Though the complexities of Obamacare have been a boon to benefit consultants nationwide, New York consulting firms have seen especially strong growth in employment over the past year.

New York accounted for 10.5% of consultant jobs created nationally in the past year, though the local consultant workforce constituted just 5.3% of overall employment among the city's largest benefit consulting firms, according to Crain's research.

Eight of 10 new jobs created last year at Chernoff Diamond & Co. were in the New York area. Nearly a third of the Segal Group's 40 new jobs last year were created in the region. And for Alliant Insurance Services, 20% of its new jobs were here.

"Buyers in the New York area are more sophisticated and more demanding," said Steven Lewis, executive vice president of Willis Group. "They have higher expectations for all of their advisers of benefits, or any other services."

Though Willis Group's local consultants have clients in all 50 states, its New York clientele is a "big driver" in its growth. The firm created eight new jobs in New York, while headcount remained flat firmwide.

The biggest percentage disparity between local and nationwide hiring was at National Financial Partners Corp., which reported 29% growth in New York-area professionals in 2012 from a year earlier to 310, compared with 3% to 2,540 nationwide.

See how the firms stack up against each other in the table below.

To find out how many local professionals work at each firm, as well as which other services each offer, check out Crain's list of top benefit consulting firms.

Data includes full-time and full-time equivalent benefits professionals in New York City, Nassau, Suffolk and Westchester counties in New York; and Bergen, Essex, Hudson and Union counties in New Jersey. The list excludes professionals who work outside of this area but whom the firm considers to be part of its New York-area practice.

Additional research by Suzanne Panara.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments