Rod Lansberry has embraced this dilemma before — and how. Last season, the Arvada Center artistic director headed into theater’s cavernous vault, dug out and dusted off “Man of La Mancha,” the musical with the impossibly corny, and just as stirring, anthem “The Impossible Dream (The Quest).”

The production was a winner.

Now comes another oldie, “Camelot,” which runs through Oct. 6.

Theater loves its revivals, but some works feel creakier than others. Which didn’t halt Arvada patrons from voting “Camelot” among the shows they most wanted to see produced.

So how does a director go about refreshing a classic like Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe’s “Camelot”? Thoughtfully. With care. And, it turns out, with a small dose of willed ignorance.

“I’ve always been a big fan of King Arthur and the legends,” Lansberry said on the phone. “But I can also tell you I’ve never seen a production of ‘Camelot.’ I’ve never seen the movie. Purposefully, for this period of going into the show, I stay away from anything like that.”

That’s something of an achievement for a theater pro. The 1960 stage production boasted a legendary cast in Richard Burton as King Arthur, Julie Andrews as Guinevere and Robert Goulet as the round-table knight Lancelot. The original cast album reached the No. 1 spot on the pop charts in 1961, propelled by Lancelot’s “If Ever I Would Leave You” and Guinevere’s “I Loved You Once in Silence.”

“I haven’t even listened to the cast album. I don’t want those ideas in my head. I want a clean start,” said the director.

He encouraged a similar tactic for his actors: David Bryant Johnson (Arthur), Melissa Mitchell (Guinevere) and Glenn Seven Allen (Lancelot). “I contacted the cast and said, If you want to go through the score, through the book, OK, but don’t set the character. I want to work with you and find that character with the four of us — so it comes more naturally.”

While Lansberry has avoided versions of Lerner and Loewe’s musical, he’s spent ample time poring over their source: T.H. White’s 1958 novel “The Once and Future King.”

“There’s so much contradiction between T.H. White’s book and Lerner and Loewe’s approach to it and to the reality of what King Arthur was. My whole approach is what I refer to as ‘historical fiction.’ “

Lansberry flirted with taking a page from HBO’s “Game of Thrones,” which is set in a fantasy epoch rife with medieval-seeming machinations. “I’d only seen some of the clips and some of the commercials. I thought that’s a great look.” Then he saw the show, which famously turned a wedding feast into a bloodbath. “O my god, it’s the most gory thing I’ve ever seen. I had no idea,” he says. “OK, let’s leave that part out. The look is similar to what I want but not the action.”

Being the artistic director of a theater company requires an agile grasp of one’s audience. Nudge but never shove might be a description of the mission to remain innovative but also respectful, especially when presenting a known work.

“Whether it’s ‘Man of La Mancha’ or ‘Chess,’ I really try to create a new experience. One of my buzz phrases is, ‘You may have seen a production before, but you haven’t seen it at the Arvada Center,’ and I try to live true to that.”

Lansberry has cast the lead roles with younger actors, he says, “in part, because of the life expectancy of the setting.” It also provides a more logical progression of the love triangle. “They’re younger so their feelings and emotions aren’t tainted by years of experience.”

There is one thing he knew not to touch, however.

“If you go back to the original book, Lancelot — whom everybody knows as Robert Goulet or some amazingly handsome man — was ugly. He’s described as having big ears, a pocked face. There was nothing attractive about him, and I thought, ‘That won’t play.’ ” He laughs. “They’re just not going to go there.”

Lisa Kennedy: 303-954-1567, lkennedy@denverpost.com or twitter.com/bylisakennedy

“CAMELOT.” Book and Lyrics by Alan Jay Lerner. Music by Frederick Loewe. Directed by Rod A. Lansberry. Starring David Bryant Johnson, Melissa Mitchell, Glenn Seven Allen and William Thomas Evans. Through Oct. 6 at the Arvada Center, 6901 Wadsworth Blvd., Arvada. 7:30 p.m. Tuesdays-Saturdays; 2 p.m. Saturdays-Sundays. Tickets, $53-$83, via arvadacenter.org.