The Who’s Who winners take a look ahead at the opportunities, concerns and excitements in their fields, and how they personally plan to get involved.

John Warren

“We have a tremendous opportunity to really build what we call the Rental30 product and have a billion dollars under assets within two years. We have a revolutionary product, we’ve beaten the market out there, and it’s a huge market. And we have amazing capital providers that enable us to originate as much as we can originate.”

Robert Hughes III

“I think how technology influences real estate and how people use their real estate is definitely changing, and will change how we develop real estate going forward. Things like driverless cars, or even Uber – it has an impact on parking revenue and demand. That’s a big component of any real estate development. Technology also allows for fewer desks in offices, or fewer square feet for less stock in retail. So we just keep up with what’s coming and try to build as much flexibility as you can into your development model so you are prepared for when those trends come.”

Minor Mickel Shaw

“I do hope to be involved with the discussions around workforce housing in our community, individually or through my work with the Hollingsworth Funds. I think we are at a critical point with this discussion and we have the opportunity to make a real difference. Our growth must be the right kind of growth, strategically planned. And we must be sure that all of the citizens in our community have the opportunity to succeed and have a good quality of life.”

Mike Ferney, President, Worldwide Communications and Services, ScanSource

“One of the big issues facing our industry, like many others, is consolidation. That is, we are seeing our customers and vendors buy each other, resulting in fewer players, but making those that remain larger. This creates both opportunities and threats, as leadership teams change, and partner programs change. It makes me, personally, want to spend more time with my top customers and vendors, to strengthen our relationships, and find more opportunities to drive growth together. Never underestimate the importance of personal relationships.”

Pamela Evette

“Government regulation always is a concern. What other regulations will the government impose on employers that will make it harder for them to grow? With ACA [Affordable Care Act], for example, that put a huge burden on people. It’s just trying to find a good balance and trying to make sure that as a national group [National Association of Professional Employer Organizations] we champion for our clients and make representatives and senators and house leaders aware of what they’re doing on a business level. As a PEO we connect with a ton of businesses – we have hundreds and hundreds of clients, and we feel the impact, from small to medium to large.”

Todd Horne

“On the [Spartanburg] Chamber side, we’re in the early stages of creating a five-year community and economic development vision, which is something we’ve needed for a while. That will wrap up in the fall. Fifty-two community leaders are helping to draft that plan. On the Clayton [Construction Co.] side, I’m excited about our team and the growth we’ve experienced over the past few years. The growth is planned and strategic, and the construction industry is doing well, so it’s exciting to see the activity. We could grow as big as we wanted to right now, but we have to make sure we do it the right way.”

Peter Barth

“For the education space, there are a lot of challenges, mostly around college debt. I think we’re in the very early stages of a huge shift in education because … at this point if you go work at a major tech company, they probably don’t care about your college degree, they care about if you can do the specific skill. I think you’re starting to see that in sales and marketing and other fields where things change frequently. Which is why Iron Yard works. We can change out the tooling from one 12-week session to the next, and we develop a really tight relationship with the employer who’s telling us what they want to be taught.”