UPDATED (5:50 p.m. March 26): Added more detail about the circumstances of the potential violations and additional comment from Colorado Ethics Watch.

Wayne New, one of five candidates running for City Council to represent central Denver’s District 10, says his campaign “overlooked” a couple campaign finance rules by not printing disclosures on campaign signs or fully listing the spending on his finance reports.

The possible violations were called out this week by a left-leaning watchdog group. Colorado Ethics Watch in Wednesday’s complaint asked the Denver Elections Division to determine if New violated finance rules for four large campaign signs he’s had up in and near downtown, at parking lots owned by a supporter, since at least early February. They’re blown-up versions of his yard signs.

None of them had a required printed disclosure saying “Paid for by Wayne New for City Council.” And New’s recent finance reports don’t list the full expenditures or in-kind contributions related to the creation of the signs, Ethics Watch says.

New says his campaign reimbursed supporter Buzz Geller, who co-owns Paradise Cleaners as well as the parking lots, for $417.57 in costs for the creation of the signs. He said his campaign erred in not putting the campaign disclosure on the signs themselves.

He said his mailers, door hangers and ads also have omitted the disclosure that his campaign paid for them, also by mistake.

“My whole team overlooked it, which now is pretty obvious that it should have been done. It is being corrected,” New wrote in an e-mail to The Denver Post.

But Ethics Watch’s complaint also questions whether New should list the use of the parking lots for the signs as an in-kind contribution by Geller’s Paradise Land Company, which owns the lots. New says the boards on which the signs are affixed aren’t normally used for advertising, so there would be no market value.

However, Luis Toro, Ethics Watch’s director, says there may be value in using the private land regardless. The signs are much larger than an average yard sign, and similar-sized signs on Geller’s parking lots have been used to promote them for redevelopment.

“We think this is a real, substantive violation,” Toro said.

So far, New is the only Denver municipal candidate to have been called out by Ethics Watch. New has donated to the presidential campaigns of Republicans Mitt Romney and John McCain and to the Republican National Committee. Ethics Watch has tended to challenge activities by Republicans more often than Democrats, but Toro says it was not aware of New’s political leanings and didn’t research them before filing the complaint.

New has come under attack in the liberal-leaning District 10 for his Republican support. He was asked by an opponent during a forum this week about his donations to the Republican candidates and about the 2016 presidential race, and New said those shouldn’t matter because Denver’s elections are non-partisan.

Peg Perl, senior counsel for Colorado Ethics Watch, said in the group’s news release Wednesday that New’s transgressions were important to call out.

“Timely and accurate reporting of in-kind contributions and expenditures is vital to ensure Denver voters have information about the candidates running for City Council,” Perl said. “Denver voters also have the right to know who is paying for public communications advocating for candidates with the proper disclaimers on those advertisements.”

In the May 5 election, New is running against Chris Chiari, Anna Jones, Travis Leiker and Chris Cornell Wedor for an open council seat. New is a former president of the Cherry Creek North Neighborhood Association. He’s been in the race the longest of any current candidate and raised the most money through February, but others were closing the gap.