Tax season is here and just this week the IRS began accepting 2014 tax returns. But, before you file there are some changes you may want to know about.

For the first time this year you'll need to report your health care information on your tax return.

During a press conference Friday morning at H&R Block in Eau Claire, tax specialists addressed the impact the Affordable Care Act may have on taxpayers and how it could affect their tax return and refund this year.

“This is the first year we're actually reporting health care information on a tax return,” said H&R Block tax preparer, Katherine Nelson.

Nelson said with the Affordable Care Act requiring all taxpayers to have health insurance, it also means reporting your health care information.

“There are three main groups that are going to be impacted by the ACA on their tax return this year,” said Nelson.

During the conference at H&R Block, Nelson addressed the changes. She said the first group affected are those who have healthcare through an employer, Medicare or the states BadgerCare program.

“Those who've had healthcare through an employer, we'll be able to see that in their W2 and then we'll be able to report that back onto their tax return,” said Nelson. “If they had healthcare through Medicare and BadgerCare we'll just need them to let us know about that so we can report that on their tax return as well.”

Nelson says for those who received their healthcare off the Market Place will be seeing a new 10-95A form this year

“This form really lets the taxpayer know how much their monthly healthcare premium was and the amount of their premium tax credit that they received and we'll be able to reconcile those amounts on their tax returns,” said Nelson.

She said to be sure to bring that 10-95A form with you when meeting with a tax preparer.

Finally, Nelson said the last group affected will be those who didn't have healthcare during

2014. They'll be seeing a potential penalty this year.

Nelson explained, “The amount of that penalty will be $95 or 1% of your household income. It's really important to remember it will be the greater of those two amounts.”

However, Nelson said to check with your tax preparer to see if you qualify for an exemption.

“They're based on your personal and financial situations and you can discuss those with your tax preparer to kind of discuss what exemptions might be available to you,” said Nelson.

Nelson says H&R Block is also offering a free Affordable Care Act tax impact analysis so taxpayers can better understand how the ACA may affect their tax return, and their refund.

The deadline to file is April 15th.