Dan Benavidez, with his book, "For All the Wrong Reasons," says he may write another book about his life since 1996. ( LEWIS GEYER )

EDITOR'S NOTE: The Times-Call's series Take Two revisits people we have written about in the past year. Take Two stories will run on Mondays.

Longmont community activist Dan Benavidez says he's been humbled by the positive reactions he's heard from readers of his book that was published last spring.

The book, "For All the Wrong Reasons," recounts Benavidez's personal experiences as a Latino man in a frequently racist world, including his some of the discrimination he encountered after arriving in Longmont in the early 1960s.

"It's a memoir," Benavidez said recently. "These are my memories."

But Benavidez said his book's review of his personal growth since childhood also underscores the positive changes he's seen -- and that others credit him with helping foster -- in this city.

Benavidez has said a catalyzing moment for him and for Longmont came in August 1980, after a rookie police officer shot and killed two unarmed young Latino men on Main Street during a traffic stop gone bad.

At the urging of civic leaders, Benavidez led a peaceful march on city hall, an event and approach his contemporaries have said probably prevented the community from erupting into violence and chaos.

That put Benavidez on a path to activism that included service as a Longmont City Council member.

He's served on the Longmont Police Department's Latino Advisory Council and as a volunteer for the Longmont Community Justice Partnership. Now, he is vice president of Eco-Cycle's board of directors and a member of the Longmont House Development Corporation board.

One of the points of his book, he said, is that "our community, all of us, came together to set that path, to break the barriers" between the white-majority population and the Latinos that long had been in their midst.

"We did it," Benavidez said of the Longmont leaders and other concerned residents. "And I mean 'We.'

"I've had people from other communities tell me," after they read his book, that "Longmont is a special place," he said.

Benavidez said he's heard from readers in other countries who've told him that his experiences resonate with their own.

"For All the Wrong Reasons," framed as a set of recollections Benavidez shared with his late mother, ends just before she died in 1996.

He said he left "volumes of stuff" from his youth and adult years out of the volume, as well as stories about the years since his mother's death, but that he may follow up with other books.

Benavidez received one of Boulder County CareConnect's "2013 Longmont Legends" award in September. That organization, which serves seniors and adults with disabilities, recognized Benavidez as this year's "Legendary Volunteer."

John Fryar can be reached at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com.