Rachel Barton Pine will play in Boulder for a second time on Saturday night. (Andrew Eccles/Courtesy photo )

If you go What: The Boulder Philharmonic performs "The Three B's" with violinist Rachel Barton Pine When: 7:30 p.m. Saturday, Jan. 11 Where: Macky Auditorium, 285 University Ave., University of Colorado-Boulder campus Tickets: $13-$70 Info: 303-449-1343 or boulderphil.org

Violinist Rachel Barton Pine has studied Alban Berg's Violin Concerto intensely since she was 16.

Pine so adores the piece that she has worked on it with conductor Pierre Boulez, an expert on Berg, and Richard Hoffman, the last living student of Berg mentor Arnold Schoenberg.

Yet, Pine rarely is asked to perform the 1935 concerto when she is engaged by orchestras. That is, unless she's coming to Boulder.

In what she calls a "random and wonderful" occurrence, Pine has been asked to play Berg's Violin Concerto for a second time in Boulder.

Saturday night, it will be with the Boulder Philharmonic at Macky Auditorium. In 1999, she was requested to play the work with the Colorado Music Festival.

The concerto Saturday night, the Boulder Phil's third subscription concert of the current season, is part of an interesting "Three B's" program assembled by Boulder Phil music director Michael Butterman. Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms typically are the "B's," but Butterman is replacing Beethoven with Berg.

Though the requests to play Berg in Boulder are unique enough, Pine described a certain "spookiness" connected to her performances of the concerto.

"The first time I performed it, in 1997, I decided to take an extra swipe of rosin on my bow," the versatile and engaging Chicago native said in an interview with the Daily Camera. "The tip fell off -- a really rare fluke caused by a flaw in the wood.

"I was able to grab an extra bow before performing. Had I not done so, it would have happened during the performance."

Then, in 2000, Pine performed the concerto with maestro David Shallon, who died of an asthma attack two weeks later at age 49. Berg had been plagued by asthma all his life, and he died at age 50 as a result of blood poisoning from a freak insect sting.

"It adds an extra layer for me when I consider the piece as a requiem," Pine said.

Both the Berg concerto and the Brahms Fourth Symphony, which will close the program Saturday, have direct quotations from chorales by J. S. Bach.

The concert opens with a short orchestral arrangement by Leopold Stokowski of a Bach sacred song and a brief piece by Gustav Mahler, another composer with an indirect, but poignant, link to the Berg work.

Pine's own essay about the concerto speaks of Berg's programs for the piece, and she talked about why these programs, and the emotional impact of the music itself, are what should draw an audience to a work that does in fact use Schoenberg's often alienating "12-tone" method.

"We don't generally talk about intense musical analysis of classical or romantic period works with lay audiences," Pine said, "but for some reason, we think we should do so when it comes to 12-tone compositions.

"I find it better to talk about the character of the music, the orchestral colors and its story."

Rachel Barton Pine plays a 1742 Guarneri del Gesu violin that personally selected for Marie Soldat to perform his concerto. (Courtesy photo)

The Berg concerto is an intensely beautiful piece. In addition to the Bach chorale quotation, it uses a folk melody from the Austrian region of Carinthia.

And it carries a beautiful story. Berg's inspiration for the substance of the concerto, which had been commissioned, was the death of Manon Gropius at age 18. Manon was the daughter of Alma Mahler Gropius (the widow of Gustav Mahler, who, like Berg, died at 50) and her second husband, architect Walter Gropius. Berg, who had a close relationship with Manon, titled the concerto "To the Memory of an Angel."

It was Berg's last completed piece, and he never heard it performed. The inclusion of the Bach chorale "Es ist genug" ("It is enough") is sometimes seen as Berg's premonition of his own death, thus making the concerto a "requiem" for its own composer, as well as for Manon.

But in addition to the explicit depictions of Manon Gropius in the work's two movements, there lies a hidden program that was discovered and deduced by applying Berg's obsession with number symbolism to the concerto. Pine sees this hidden program as a key to a deeper understanding.

The Bach chorale and the Carinthian folk song, along with numerological clues, provide musical connections to "forbidden" topics: Berg's love for his current mistress and for a daughter he fathered as a teenager with a family maid. Social convention prevented the composer from having a relationship with his natural daughter, and perhaps this was one reason he was so close to Manon.

Butterman said the music of Brahms, like the Berg concerto, makes an emotional impact upon the listener, who is unaware of the compositional complexity. The Fourth (and final) Symphony of 1885 is perhaps the composer's most rigorous major work, but it is beautiful and engaging throughout.

The symphony's finale is a series of variations on another Bach chorale, but "you don't need to know that to feel the massive power of the piece," Butterman said.

"If you feel that you have to start by explaining why you should like a piece, you're already in a hole," he continued. "In this case, with the Berg and the Brahms, the reverse is true -- hearing them often impels one to dig deeper into them."

Interestingly, Pine's violin, a 1742 Guarneri del Gesu, has a connection to Brahms, who personally selected it for the violinist Marie Soldat to perform his concerto.

The arrangement of Bach's "Komm, suesser Tod" ("Come, Sweet Death") sets the concert's tone. The Mahler piece, "Blumine," was originally one of five movements of the First Symphony but was discarded in 1896 after three performances and was long thought lost. It was rediscovered in 1966.

"It's a lovely, beautiful flower serenade that has traits of some of Mahler's other smaller symphonic movements," Butterman said.