South Korean army soldiers run during an arrest operation in Goseong, South Korea, Monday, June 23, 2014. Associated Press

A South Korean soldier’s shooting rampage over the weekend highlights the challenge for the military in ensuring the psychological health of the hundreds of thousands of mostly conscripted troops.

The army sergeant, in his early 20s and with a few months left until discharge, on Saturday killed five comrades and injured seven others, according to Seoul’s defense ministry. He was captured Monday afternoon after trying to kill himself during an armed standoff with troops.

While the ministry said it couldn’t pinpoint the reasons behind the violence, it said the sergeant was on a list of soldiers under watch for potential misconduct. Almost one-in-ten of enlisted servicemen in the soldier’s division have been categorized as a potential danger to themselves or others, according to ministry data.

The 22nd army division that the soldier belonged to is known as one of the tougher posts, bordering North Korea, increasing psychological pressure for those based there. A division is a unit that consists of between 10,000 and 30,000 soldiers. South Korea has around 650,000 soldiers.

South Korean men must serve in the military for about two years unless they can prove they are unfit for service, physically or mentally. Most of them enter the army and for the first time live in a strict hierarchy that can be challenging. Physical and verbal bullying is common, especially against those less successful at fitting in, experts say.

In July 2011, a marine corporal who claimed to have been hazed by others in his barracks went on a shooting rampage, killing four and injuring one more. In the next weeks, two marines hung themselves in separate incidents. In another deadly attack in 2005, a soldier assailant citing bullying killed eight by throwing a grenade inside his barracks while other soldiers were sleeping.

“There are a lot of soldiers under watch in general,” said ministry spokesman Kim Min-seok. About 7,000 men each year are either discharged or ruled unfit for service due to psychological illnesses, Mr. Kim added.

Those regarded as not fitting in can face being totally ignored by comrades, a treatment known as “the invisible man,” according to a 2012 report by the National Human Rights Commission, based on a survey of troops. Violence, or a threat of violence, remains a problem, the report added.

Experts say soldiers’ psychological troubles are viewed with skepticism by some due to suspicions that healthy men may abuse the system to get exempted from duty. Most officers surveyed said maladjustment was a problem caused by the individual, the report said.

The report calls the military’s counseling efforts insufficient, citing a lack of specialists to deal with soldiers’ problems.

The defense ministry and the military health center declined to provide details or comment on psychological support programs for enlisted soldiers.

Lim Tae-hoon, director at the Seoul-based activist group Center for Military Human Rights in Korea, said the system also implants a social stigma on those seeking help.

“Once you’re selected, everyone knows you have a problem,” he said. Information about soldiers’ troubles is often leaked and aired through the barracks as the records circulate among leaders, the report said.

There are few options for those who don’t want to live in barracks. Activists like Mr. Lim say the state should widely offer civil-service alternatives but the military has opposed, saying it will face a manpower shortfall. Conscientious objectors are sent to jail.

————————————————————————-

Also popular on Korea Real Time now:

Naver Scrambles to Tackle Kakao in Korea

Seoul to Get Double-Decker Buses to Ease Overcrowding