By Forrest Hershberger

News Editor

Colorado spends about $30 billion annually on healthcare, and it does not cover all of the state’s residents or all of the expenses. That is according to Owen Perkins, director of communications for Colorado Cares YES.

Perkins was the guest speaker at a Logan County League of Women Voters (LWV) meeting Sunday afternoon at Faith United Methodist Church. Perkins said Colorado Care found a way to reduce the cost to $25 billion and cover every resident in Colorado.

Perkins said the Affordable Care Act (ACA) made a significant impact on health insurance in Colorado. Prior to the law’s enactment, Colorado had about 800,000 residents uninsured, according to Perkins.

He said the number of uninsured still hovers at between 350,000 and 400,000. He says there are also about $750 billion wasted annually and a “huge” growth in administration.

“The bureaucracy has grown out of control,” he said.

Perkins said 20% of client premiums go to administrative costs. Medicare, meanwhile, is only about 4% administration, Perkins said.

He said in Colorado there is about $4.5 billion in waste associated with medical costs, nearly the same amount Colorado Cares says can be saved under the new program.

Perkins said in addition to the number of residents uninsured, the number of underinsured is also increasing. He defines underinsured as people who buy policies with premiums but with deductibles too high for the client’s budget. He said 62% of bankruptcies are medical expenses.

Amendment 69, the proposed change to medical services in Colorado, includes a new tax structure and will have to be explained in relation to the TABOR Amendment.

“It is a tax,” Perkins said. “It will be on the ballot as a tax.”

He said Amendment 69 will eliminate health insurance premiums. It will also address preventive and primary care coverage. There will be no deductibles or co-pays.

“All that is replaced by a payroll deduction,” he said.

Perkins said employees will pay a 3.33% income tax, and employers will pay a 6.67% payroll tax to provide for platinum level coverage.

Employers can choose to pay for more coverage, but they will not be able to offer less. Perkins said one of the clauses of the ACA is a state can only replace it if it offers a service the same or better than the ACA.

He said all businesses will be required to participate with no minimum staffing requirements. Self-employed workers will have to pay the full 10%.

Perkins said as an example under Amendment 69 a worker making $50,000 annually would pay $139 a month for health insurance and the employer would pay $278.

Perkins referred to it as a “nonprofit cooperative.” He said everyone is a member and the rates only go up if voters approve a rate increase. He added membership is residence-based, not citizenship-based.

“It’s not citizenship. It’s residency,” he said.

Perkins said another issue discovered in researching for Amendment 69 is the disparity between regions in Colorado. He said healthcare costs vary greatly across the state.

“That will go away. The state will be the same across the board,” he said.

Perkins said Amendment 69 will also save counties and municipalities costs as well. He estimated the program would save the City of Sterling about $1.25 million annually.

The coloradocares.co/amendment69 website defines ColoradoCares as a “resident-owned, non-governmental health care financing system designed to ensure comprehensive, quality, accessible, lifetime health care for every Colorado resident. ColoradoCare also replaced the medical portion of Worker’s Compensation, according to the website.

Beneficiaries temporarily living or traveling in another state will also receive coverage.

Perkins did say it is not a true single-pay system. There are exceptions including veterans, Tri Care and Native Americans.

The proposed taxes that would replace health insurance premiums will not take affect until 2019, according to Perkins. However, there will be a “small tax implemented” to finance the start-up costs.

He said private insurance companies will be able to continue.

Amendment 69 was first proposed by Democratic District 32 State Sen. Irene Aguilar, Perkins said.