By Dave Andrusko

My wife and I have settled into a routine of reading the front page of the Washington Post over coffee where we are regaled with stories about ObamaCare that are treated as breaking news when what they describe was known (or utterly predictable) two and three years ago—if not longer.

For example, Arianna Eunjung Cha and Lena H. Sun tell us today

“Americans who face higher ­insurance costs under President Obama’s health-care law are angrily complaining about ‘sticker shock,’ threatening to become a new political force opposing the law even as the White House struggles to convince other consumers that they will benefit from it.

“The growing backlash involves people whose plans are being discontinued because the policies don’t meet the law’s more-stringent standards. They’re finding that many alternative policies come with higher premiums and deductibles.”

For the moment let’s forget (a) that those often are MUCH higher premiums and deductibles; and (b) it is patently false to flatly state (as the Obama Administration does) that “only” about “12 million Americans, or 5 percent of the population” who buy individual polices” will be clobbered.

Variations of this and other….misrepresentations…are the staples of former and current Obama Administration staffers. I watched MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” this morning where Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel, former White House advisor for Health Policy, told a series of bald-faced lies so outrageous that the co-host shook her head, Joe Scarborough, the host, said more than once, “This is so beneath you” (worth noting is that Emanuel said “No, it isn’t”), and NBC News Chief White House Correspondent Chuck Todd offered a devastating rebuttal then rolled his eyes and smiled in utter frustration as Emanuel continued with the same talking points.

And getting a word in edgewise was very hard to do—because–as he did Sunday on Fox News Sunday–Emanuel would barely allow anyone else to speak. (You can watch part of the MSNBC exchange at www.youtube.com/watch?v=DP1TrsEiecg.)

But that’s just a small sample of the trickeration on display over the past couple of days.

The New York Times ran an editorial yesterday that was bad enough, because it laid the blame for the fiasco on the Republicans, but went on to compound its egregious error by insisting that President Obama had “misspoke” when (as the Times paraphrased him saying) “if you like the insurance you have, you can keep it.” Even by Times’ standards, that’s a whopper.

For his part Dr. Emanuel continued to recycle one of the more ludicrous talking points. After Todd pointed out what Obama had failed to say (and therefore left a radically inaccurate impression), Emanuel shrieked, “This is a political ad. You don’t put fine print in a political speech, Chuck. Get serious!”

Get it? Even if the President said the same thing dozens and dozens and dozens of times, you can’t expect him to get down into the political weeds, so to speak, and say what the health care exchange really means to countless millions of people. And if virtually everybody happens to come away with the exact WRONG interpretation of what would come to pass, hey, that’s life.

Just one other of many items that we could talk about today. We already know that the ObamaCare exchange was not tested carefully, let alone thoroughly or with plenty of time to correct errors. What we are getting more information about on an almost daily basis is they were warned they were headed into big trouble three years ago!

Here’s the lead from CBS News, quoting from an internal memo:

“CBS News is learning the Obama administration knew of the risks associated with the Obamacare rollout well before last month.

“Three years ago, a trusted Obama health care adviser warned the White House it was losing control of Obamacare. A memo obtained by CBS News said strong leadership was missing and the law’s successful implementation was in jeopardy. The warnings were specific and dire — and ignored.

David Cutler, who worked on the Obama 2008 campaign and was a valued outside health care consultant wrote this blunt memo to top White House economic adviser Larry Summers in May 2010: ‘I do not believe the relevant members of the administration understand the president’s vision or have the capability to carry it out.’

“Cutler wrote no one was in charge who had any experience in complex business start-ups. He also worried basic regulations, technology and policy coordination would fail.

“’You need to have people who have understanding of the political process, people who understand how to work within an administration and people who understand how to start and build a business, and unfortunately, they just didn’t get all of those people together,’ Cutler said.”

Please join those who are following me on Twitter at twitter.com/daveha. Send your comments to daveandrusko@gmail.com.