By Adrianna Pitrelli

TheStatehouseFile.com

INDIANAPOLIS — The crowd of nearly 5,000 went wild as former Indiana University men’s basketball coach Bobby Knight took the stage alongside GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump.

Knight called Trump a year ago, telling him he should run for president. On Wednesday night in the Pepsi Coliseum at the Indiana State Fairgrounds, Knight formally endorsed Trump.

“You folks are taking a look at the most prepared man in history to step in as president of the United States,” Knight said. “There has never been a presidential candidate prepared to the length that this man is.”

According to Knight, the U.S. military will get the utmost respect and support under the Trump administration. He said the military will also be the strongest in the world.

“To have his endorsement is an honor,” Trump said.

National security

Trump’s speech backed Knight’s endorsement. He plans to defeat ISIS in the early months of him taking office.

Securing the borders and building relations with foreign countries is what Trump said is important. He said he wants people to come into America, but wants to ensure they do so legally.

Trump said there is a large trade imbalance with Mexico of over $58 billion. Because of this, he said they owe us the wall.

“We are going to have strong, powerful borders,” Trump said. “We are going to build the wall—believe me.”

Cruz/Fiorina ticket

Just hours before Trump’s rally Wednesday, GOP presidential hopeful, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, announced businesswoman and former Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina as his running mate.

Some rally attendees were surprised by the early announcement, since candidates usually wait until they’re the nominee before announcing a vice presidential candidate. The announcement led those at the rally to speculate who could share the ticket with Trump. Evan Kennedy of West Lafayette would love to see Marco Rubio or Chris Christie as Trump’s potential nominee.

“I think he needs to get someone who is politically minded because we have the business minded leader in Trump,” said Kennedy.

Trump argued Cruz should not be choosing a vice president because he has no path to victory.

“He is the first presidential candidate in history who is mathematically eliminated and is choosing a vice president,” Trump said.

Sunday night Ohio Gov. John Kasich and Cruz announced they would be working together in an effort to stop Trump from receiving the 1,237 delegates needed to win on the first ballot at the Republican National Convention. Kasich suspended his campaign in Indiana in an attempt to clear the way for a Cruz win here. In return, Cruz suspended his campaigns in New Mexico and Oregon to try to clear the way for Kasich victories there.

Trump called Kasich and Cruz colluders and stragglers, since neither one of them mathematically have a chance to win.

“It is an act of desperation,” Trump said. “It shows weakness. Neither one of them have a path to victory.”

Saving jobs

Trump surprised the crowd with a visit from his son Don Trump Jr. Don Jr., as he’s called, said his father is a businessman and because of this, he knows how to create jobs and make deals.

The economy and job market has been an important topic amongst presidential candidates, with a special focus at times on the air conditioning company, Carrier.

“I am going to bring jobs back to our country. We are not going to let Carrier leave,” Trump said.

In February, United Technologies and Carrier announced they would be moving some production from Indianapolis to Mexico. The move is expected to eliminate at least 1,400 Hoosier jobs.

“They’re going to stay and we are going to have our jobs,” Trump said. “I want the jobs. I don’t back down. I’m working for you.”

Among the issues of foreign affairs and jobs, Trump also wants to cut Common Core, repeal and replace Obamacare, and protect the second amendment.

Trump said he does everything for the best interest of the country.

“I’m thinking of America first,” Trump said.

Trump will host another rally Thursday at the Old National Events Plaza in Evansville.

“If we win, we are going to make this country great again—greater than ever before,” Trump said.

Adrianna Pitrelli is a reporter for TheStatehouseFile.com, a news website powered by Franklin College journalism students.