There is something special that Kareli Lizárraga brings to the classroom, something beyond getting seventh-grade boys interested in reading “Romeo and Juliet,” though that’s saying a lot right there.

The something she brings is hope.

The notion of hope has been polluted by politics at the national level, but indeed, that is what Lizárraga, who came to this country illegally at age 4 from Mexico, imparts to her students at a Denver charter school.

Lizárraga is a University of Pennsylvania graduate, an articulate and engaging young woman who has gained temporary permission to work in the U.S. through President Obama’s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program.

The daughter of a welder and a restaurant worker, Lizárraga knows what it is to be poor and find her way to success.

She tells her students at STRIVE Prep-Sunnyside — many of them low-income minorities, some without legal status — about getting into the college of her dreams and becoming a teacher.

“At first a lot of my students were pretty incredulous,” she says. “They asked me: ‘Are you rich?’ “

Now, there might be some people who cannot get past the “without legal status” part of this story, but this 22-year-old Teach for America corps member has a lot to give.

Lizárraga is an example of the talented young people who have the ability and will to propel this country to greater things if only we will let them.

And by “we,” I mean our elected members of Congress who are dragging their feet on immigration reform.

Ask Lizárraga why she is doing this job and she talks about inspiring students the way certain teachers took an interest in her. She knows what it’s like to wonder about the future.

“Every day we tell kids, ‘You are going to go to college,’ ” she said.

And she is fluent in Spanish and knows some Arabic, which comes in handy when the seventh-graders in her reading class are inclined to behave like, well, seventh-graders.

“I can text your mom in English, Spanish and even a little Arabic if I catch you saying a bad word,” Lizárraga will tell them when they try to play her.

Tom Boasberg, superintendent of Denver Public Schools, said first and foremost, Lizárraga and another TFA corps member with deferred status, Alejandro Fuentes Mena, were hired to work in DPS because they are great teachers.

“I think beyond that, teachers who can really connect with the life circumstances of our kids, that’s a huge additional plus,” Boasberg told me.

DPS has taken some grief about hiring these two, but Boasberg is unapologetic.

“With the president’s order they are fully, legally able to work in our community,” he said.

Colorado is one of the first states to take TFA corps members who have temporary resident status through the DACA program.

As you may recall, DACA offers young people without legal status who came to the U.S. before they were 16 years old the opportunity to live and work here temporarily without fear of immigration action.

Incidentally, part of the stipends for these teachers is paid for with a grant from the Ben and Lucy Ana Walton Fund, part of the Walton Family Foundation.

Yes, those Waltons.

I wonder if this is the kind of thing critics are referring to when they decry the “corporatization” of public schools. If so, I think I like it.

It’s not often that you get a situation that is a winner all around, but that’s what we have here. It’s a wonderful thing.

E-mail Denver Post editorial writer Alicia Caldwell at acaldwell@denverpost.com. Follow her on Twitter: @AliciaMCaldwell