PALM BEACH, Florida – Rush Limbaugh, the top media voice for political conservatives, says recent behavior by Republican leadership is “too weird,” and he cannot explain why the GOP is refusing to oppose Democrats while at the same time targeting its own base.

“We are all inundated by each other, every day, with e-mails, phone calls, texts, what have you, of utter incredulity over what’s happened to the Republican Party. It’s just too weird, folks,” Limbaugh said on his national broadcast Monday. “There just isn’t any serious opposition to anything that the Democrat Party wants.”

“They’re not even going through the motions,” he complained. “They’re not even voicing phony opposition to Obama in order to placate the base. They’re actively targeting their own base. This is just too weird!”

Get the hottest, most important news stories on the Internet – delivered FREE to your inbox as soon as they break! Take just 30 seconds and sign up for WND’s Email News Alerts!

Limbaugh stressed he was specifically referring to the GOP establishment and not the candidates seeking the presidency.

“But just the establishment in Washington,” he noted, “you can’t distinguish the difference between Republicans and Democrats there. They are all aligned. They are glued together. But the difference now is, the Republican Party doesn’t even go through the motions of trying to convince its voters that they’re opposed to the Obama agenda.”

Limbaugh said Republican leaders are not even trying to motivate the base, or even “fool” them.

“I mean, they’ve had all these phony votes. For example, repeal Obamacare votes,” he explained. “They’re not even going through the motions of that ’cause they know that people see through it and that they don’t mean it. They’re not even trying. I don’t care what the issue is. The big three: Amnesty, Obamacare, Iran. Nothing! Zilch! No opposition to anything. Now, can anybody say that immigration, as being policed or not policed by Obama is helping America? Can anybody? They don’t even try to make the case that’s happening. I mean, even the amnesty supporters do not do it on the basis that it’s good for America.”

“They do it on the basis that it’s ‘fair; for the immigrants. They do it on the basis of social justice and fairness motivations and reasons. But they don’t do it it’s improving the country. The Iran deal. Does anybody think this is actually good for the United States? Yet there’s no opposition to it, no serious opposition.”

Regarding President Obama’s Affordable Health Care Act, Limbaugh asked: “Can anybody say that Obamacare is making health care better? Can anybody say that anything that Obama is doing is? Nobody even makes the case, other than Obama with some words now and then … that the country’s better off than it has been. They have to lie about employment numbers, they have to make things up. There’s not even any fake opposition to Obama.”

Limbaugh opined there was “something else going on to explain this,” and he didn’t believe it was just one thing.

While he noted many people think, “It’s because the Republican Party wants to finally get rid of the conservatives, get rid of its base,” Limbaugh said he didn’t doubt that, “but I don’t think that’s the singular explanation for this total lack of opposition.”

He began naming names of the Republican leadership, including Senate Majority Leader McConnell and House Speaker John Boehner, saying, “They have turned to mush.”

But the radio host is refusing “to believe they have undergone ideological transplants and have all become liberals or moderates. ‘Cause none of it makes any sense.”

He discussed the well-known political adage of “Follow the money.”

“We could speculate, you know, what does ‘follow the money’ mean?” Limbaugh wondered aloud. “Is there blackmail? Is there bribery going on or promises of financial wealth after retirement or whatever? Except these guys don’t retire and go home. They stay there. So I don’t know.”

Limbaugh noted the absence of strong Republican leadership “has created a giant void,” and that gap is being filled presently by billionaire businessman and GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump.

“Trump is filling the void, which is a partial explanation for why Trump is experiencing such overwhelming support,” said Limbaugh. “Because the people of this country are understandably fed up. They’re fed up with all. There’s no opposition to the gay-marriage agenda, and we have to listen to a Supreme Court justice tell us that if we oppose it, we’re bigots or whatever.”

“Admit it, folks,” he concluded. “What has you bamboozled, what has you frustrated is you don’t see any opposition to any of it at a level of power that could do something about stopping it. There’s plenty of opposition in your neighborhood, plenty of opposition in your town, plenty of opposition in your family, plenty of opposition in your friends, but there’s none where it counts.”