Photo

To the Editor:

Re “Your Cure” (news analysis, Sunday Review, Feb. 28):

Elisabeth Rosenthal is correct in criticizing the use of expensive drugs that are similar to and usually no better than less expensive or much, much less expensive alternatives, but she doesn’t note the primary villain. It is a physician who writes the prescription. Patients do not go to the pharmacy and order the medication.

An endocrinologist should know to say, “That new diabetes pill is O.K. but costs $600 a month, and a number of generics do about the same job.” A podiatrist should say, “Those drops to put on your toenail fungus cost $400 a month and cure less than 20 percent, while a generic toenail polish has about the same results and costs $10 a month.”

Physicians are too often obtuse about the cost of what they are prescribing, especially since they just had a nice dinner at the best local restaurant courtesy of the very same drug company, or they don’t want to spend time defending the equal benefits of the generic.

Patients may not like their TV-induced knowledge being questioned, and physicians may have to learn a little more and defend their actions with a brief talk (and even a reference to Internet use for more information). Physicians are not practicing good medicine if they cannot deal with misinformation in pharmaceutical advertising.

LONNIE HANAUER

West Orange, N.J.

The writer is a rheumatologist.

To the Editor:

Elisabeth Rosenthal raises important questions about advertising by private hospitals and drug companies and the mass manipulation of patients. All these should be rightly placed in their proper arena, as growing public health concerns. The mix of greed and the facade of medical legitimacy have congealed in the form of avaricious health care advertising campaigns.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In our political climate, as Republicans promise to repeal the Affordable Care Act and as Democrats debate the merits of a single-payer system versus an expanded version of Obamacare, it is discomforting to see that Big Pharma is keeping its watchful eye on the proverbial ball: manipulate public opinion, misinform patients about alternatives, drive up prices and privatize well-being through fear.

It’s been a winning formula so far. How about just being honest with people about options in their most vulnerable of times, when they are ill?

TALIA LUSTIGER-THALER

Brooklyn

To the Editor:

Does it escape notice that these ads have the same characteristic attributes — rapidly spoken disclaimers and unreadable fine print — as used car ads do?

Why are members of the medical profession not profoundly ashamed that they have allowed this second-rate hucksterism to dominate the media? Money, of course.

Medicine was a profession; now it’s a business. May the new generation coming into medicine lead it back to higher ground.

THOMAS H. WRIGHT

Vieques, P.R.

To the Editor:

We greatly enjoy the drug ads. Amid the chaos and violence of TV, these ads are often lovely visuals of couples walking on the beach, boating on the lake, exploring the village arts fair and other pleasant idylls.

Of course, we have no idea what medication is being touted. Our TV remote control has this “mute button.” We recommend its use for fast relief from chronic A.T.C. (annoying TV commercials).

Perhaps we need more ads urging people to “ask your doctor if diet and exercise are right for you.” (Disclaimer: Diet and exercise may not be covered by all insurance plans.)

JAMES HOGG

New York