Every single case worldwide is preventable, but vaccination is the only way.

One dose of the measles-mumps-rubella, or MMR, vaccine. (Photo: Damian Dovarganes, AP)

Measles is a personal enemy of mine.

My first assignment at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as a disease detective 25 years ago was to investigate a large measles outbreak in New York City. Many of the cases were children under a year old. Nationally, there were more than 55,000 cases, and more than 100 children died. By increasing vaccinations, we ended the New York outbreak – and the national outbreak was ended by a push to vaccinate every child by age 2.

But now I'm having, as Yogi Berra said, déjà vu all over again.

It's only February, and already we've had 141 measles cases in 17 states and Washington, D.C. At least 80% of the patients have been part of a large, ongoing outbreak linked to Disneyland. It's not clear how this outbreak began, although most likely an unvaccinated person brought measles to the United States after international travel.

Like this column? Get more in your e-mail inbox

This is a rough start to the year, especially after the lamentable record set just last year: 644 measles cases in 27 states. This was the most cases we had seen in the U.S. since we eliminated measles in 2000.

Worldwide, measles kills 17 people each hour of the day, most of them children. A lot more will become deaf or suffer brain damage. And every one of the 20 million cases of measles that people around the world get each year could be prevented.

Measles is probably the most contagious of all infectious diseases. From four days before through four days after the rash appears, people infected with measles virus can spread the disease to others. Nine out of 10 people who aren't immune will get measles if they are exposed to it. And the infectious person doesn't even have to be in the room: Measles can linger in the air for up to two hours.

So make sure you and your family are up to date on your measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine – the vaccine that protects against all three diseases. If you're planning to travel abroad, check with your doctor to make sure you're protected against measles.

It's not just about you and your family. In your neighborhood, in your place of worship, in your school, in your neighborhood childcare center, at your grocery store, throughout your community, there are infants too young to be immunized. And there are people with weakened immune systems who can't be immunized. Like young infants, they are vulnerable to infection — and likely to suffer severe, life-threatening measles if they are exposed. It's more than about protecting your family. It's the right thing to do.

Study after study shows that the measles vaccine is safe — and that it works. And cost shouldn't be a factor. For more than two decades, the Vaccines for Children Program has offered the MMR vaccine to children whose families might not be able to pay. And the Affordable Care Act requires all new insurance plans to cover vaccinations, including MMR, at no cost to patients. We've made progress in national MMR vaccination coverage — but one in 12 children in the United States is still not receiving the first dose of the MMR vaccine on time. This means many children remain susceptible longer than they should — and, when many such children live in the same community, outbreaks can and do occur.

Policies that allow people to readily opt out of vaccinating their children for non-medical reasons should change. It needs to be harder to not get a vaccine than to get one. If parents do opt out, they should do so only after understanding the full implications of putting their children and others at risk — perhaps by requiring that they meet with a doctor and their local health department, and that they renew that decision and process every year.

Just more than a year ago, CDC honored Dr. Sam Katz on the 50th anniversary of the measles vaccine, of which he was co-inventor. He humbly said he did not deserve the congratulations. Save them, he said, for the real heroes: those who make use of the vaccine and who work to make it universally available.

Be one of Sam Katz's heroes. More than 2 billion people have been vaccinated worldwide in just the last 14 years, saving more than 15 million lives. The simple truth is that vaccination isn't just the best way to stop measles — it's the only way.

Tom Frieden, M.D., M.P.H., is the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the Opinion front pageor sign up for the daily Opinion e-mail newsletter .



Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Ak1s3p