Loren Anthony, one of several Native actors who walked off the set of Adam Sandler’s Ridiculous Six movie, has created a satirical video poking fun at his walk off, entitled “Walk Off On You.”

See Related: Native Actors Walk off Set of Adam Sandler Movie After Insults to Women, Elders

Anthony, Navajo, told ICTMN that he made the video to show that Native people have their own sense of humor and now that Ridiculous Six was released on Netflix on December 11th, he had his own statement to make.

“It has truly been tiresome to see that Adam Sandler continues to get any sort of recognition for his movie which utilized only the type of satire that is truly offensive to native people.”

“I made this video as a main idea to speak out. For the past six months I’ve denied interviews and have not been speaking out about the movie at all and t here has just been so much negativity. I thought this video would help to turn that negativity into something positive to show’s true satire and parody.

“Natives do have a fun side that have got us through many hard times throughout the decades...this is just another fun moment,” Anthony told ICTMN.

In the video, Anthony indirectly tells Sandler that the filmmaker can have some frybread and roasted corn, can stay at his house and braid his hair, among other things.

“I truly just did this to laugh at the whole thing, Unlike the people that are watching his movie, “ says Anthony. “Some media outlets have reviewed it and labeled it as unwatchable.”

Watch the video “Walk Off On You,” Here:

Video of Walk Off On You [Official Video] by Loren Anthony

Lyrics:

You’re so ridiculous it makes me sad

I wanna laugh with you but your movies are bad

All I wanna do is walk off on you

You’re so out of touch,

It makes my heart ache

Our people shared genocide murder and hate

Oh, all I could do is walk off on you

I’ll burn some cedar for you

Give you some fry bread and roasted corn

I’ll burn some cedar for you

I’ll even let you braid my hair and stay in my home

So let me set the record to help you think

Natives are funny but you let your movie stink

You disrespected our culture

So I walked off on you

I had to walk off on you

Follow A&E, Sports Editor Vincent Schilling on Twitter - @VinceSchilling