When Matt Duchene and Ryan O’Reilly saw their names connected in the media last season, the headlines were not always very good.

Reports of some squabbling between the two occasionally surfaced, having to do with O’Reilly’s absence from the team because of contract differences.

After two days of Avalanche training camp, Batman and Robin would have trouble getting as much good press as a duo.

Duchene and O’Reilly dominated much of the action in Friday’s scrimmages at Family Sports Center. While Duchene has kept his position of center, O’Reilly is learning a new position, left wing, on a line with Duchene. The early results, including their showing in scrimmages Thursday, have Avs coach Patrick Roy smiling.

“Wow. I thought it was a nice clinic out there,” said Roy, when asked about their performance. “He and Ryan seem to work really well together.”

When the Avs drafted Nathan MacKinnon first overall this summer, O’Reilly was converted from a top-three center to a top-six winger. While Duchene has looked tremendous in camp, O’Reilly’s play has been even more noticeable. Not only has he been strong in open-ice, freewheeling situations, he has been tough to handle in the corners.

“Ryan is a smart guy. He’s so good along the wall,” Roy said. “He’s really making room for ‘Dutchy,’ and they’re clicking really well.”

Duchene’s line was often matched against MacKinnon’s line, with Jamie McGinn and Steve Downie, and was clearly superior in its 5-3 win in the scrimmage. MacKinnon, in fact, seemed a bit upset at his play in his first scrimmage of camp, saying it went “just all right.”

But Roy was happy with what he saw from his prized 18-year-old rookie, while acknowledging there is room for growth.

“I thought he was good. He started to feel more comfortable on the ice. His passes started to connect more and he looked good out there,” Roy said. “This is according to our plan. Sometimes, when you want to impress too much, the opposite happens. All he needs to do is be himself, and he’s going to be fine.”

Duchene can relate to what MacKinnon is going through. He too came to the Avs as an 18-year-old lottery pick, but now is a four-year veteran with advice to his fellow Ontario native.

“The pace is definitely faster, and he’s going to see he doesn’t have as much time with the puck as in junior,” Duchene said. “And the (defensive) zone thing to learn as a young centerman is really tough to learn. In junior, you have maybe one line that can make you work defensively, then the rest of the lines you’re able to kind of read what they’re going to do. At this level, you’ve got four lines that can do it. It’ll be an adjustment for him, but he’ll be fine. It’s going to take some time, but he’s got so much raw ability. He’ll get the timing down and he’ll be great.”

O’Reilly maintained he’s just happy to have a full training camp this season, as opposed to last season’s lockout/contract situation.

“It’s just nice to be with the guys and be working with them,” O’Reilly said.

Footnotes. Downie left the scrimmage early, but Roy said the forward was fine and would return Saturday. Downie missed all but two games last season with a knee injury. … Defenseman Erik Johnson scored two goals in his Black team’s win over the Blue.

Adrian Dater: adater@denverpost.com or twitter.com/adater