“PANTS on fire” is the lowest rating on PolitiFact’s "Truth-O-Meter". Alas, this badge of shame has done little to deter politicians and their acolytes from stretching the truth now and again. So some states have decided to take matters into their own hands. In Ohio, for example, anyone making a false statement about a candidate during a campaign risks jail time and a $5,000 fine. But does this violate the First Amendment rights of all citizens, including the deceitful?

In a Supreme Court ruling on Susan B Anthony List v Driehaus on June 16th, the justices unanimously furrowed their brows at Ohio’s ban without resolving whether it violates anyone's freedom of speech. The constitutional challenge to the state’s law came from two advocacy groups, and the justices gave them permission to press on. Lower-court rulings had found that the groups lacked standing to sue, since they did not face any imminent injury under the law. The Supreme Court, however, held that the “threat” of criminal prosecution for dubious campaign literature “suffices to create an...injury under the circumstances of this case.”

The dispute arose in 2010 when an Ohio congressman rankled at this billboard: “Shame on Steve Driehaus! Driehaus voted FOR taxpayer-funded abortion.” The message was courtesy of Susan B Anthony List (SBA), a pro-life advocacy group, and the allegation involved Mr Driehaus’s support for the Affordable Care Act (ie, Obamacare). Mr Driehaus, a Democrat who opposes abortion, says the billboard was a lie: under Obamacare, insurers may not pay for abortions with federal funds. (SBA dismisses this rule as an accounting gimmick, noting that Obamacare subsidises insurance that may then be used to pay for abortions.)

Mr Driehaus complained to the Ohio Elections Commission that SBA was misrepresenting his views and his voting record. The commission initially found in favour of Mr Driehaus but halted its hearing after SBA raised the constitutional objection. Mr Driehaus lost the election and withdrew his complaint, but the SBA and a gaggle of pro-free-speech groups continued to fight the law.

It is rare for Justice Clarence Thomas to pen a free-speech decision, as he did here. It is rarer still for the Court to reach unanimity on a first-amendment controversy that touches on abortion. Justices left and right coalesced around the worry that attempts to clean up political discourse will do more harm than good, stifling opinionated speech for fear of legal sanction. False-statement laws also give campaigners a tool to harass their adversaries: “Because the universe of potential complainants is not restricted to state officials who are constrained by explicit guidelines or ethical obligations,” Justice Thomas wrote, “there is a real risk of complaints from, for example, political opponents.”

The justices were more divided this week in Abramski v United States, a gun-control case. Bruce Abramski, a former police officer, bought a Glock 19 handgun for his uncle, Angel Alvarez. But when filling out a form asking whether he was the “actual buyer” of the gun, Mr Abramski said yes. This despite a clarification, in bold print, “warning” against any misinterpretation of that term: “You are not the actual buyer if you are acquiring the firearm(s) on behalf of another person.” Though Mr Abramski never intended to own the gun, he confirmed that he was its “actual buyer” and that his answers were “true, correct and complete.”

These lies caught up with Mr Abramski when federal agents searched his home for an unrelated crime and found a receipt his uncle gave him for the $400 gun. In his defence, Mr Abramski argued that he was not trying to procure a gun for a criminal; his uncle was legally eligible to buy one. This excuse fell on deaf ears. The district court gave Mr Abramski five years’ probation, and the appeals court for the fourth circuit upheld the sentence. Justice Elena Kagan, writing for the court’s liberal wing plus Justice Anthony Kennedy, agreed with the lower courts. Allowing a surrogate or “straw” gun buyer to purchase weapons for other people, she wrote, “would virtually repeal...the gun law’s core provision” of checking the backgrounds of people buying guns.

Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a testy dissent. “[I]f I give my son $10 and tell him to pick up milk and eggs at the store, no English speaker would say that the store ‘sells’ the milk and eggs to me.” Justice Kagan, an English speaker, issued this footnote retort: “If I send my brother to the Apple Store with money and instructions to purchase an iPhone, and then take immediate and sole possession of that device, am I the ‘person’...who has bought the phone or is he? Nothing in ordinary English usage compels an answer either way.” She adds that while the language is not without “some ambiguity”, the gun law is fairly clear on the meaning of “actual buyer”: “the man getting, and always meant to get, the firearm.” Only such a reading, she concluded, allows the gun laws to “accomplish their manifest objects.”

Dig deeper:

Is it wise to criminalise lies?