Employee Tirlochan Singh, a person with intellectual disabilities, works at Samples World Bistro, 370 Main St. in Longmont, on Tuesday. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

Longmont's restaurant scene has grown again with the much-anticipated opening of Samples World Bistro, a tapas bar, at 370 Main St.

But what sets the restaurant apart is its mission — to provide real world job experiences and long-term employment options for people with disabilities.

If you go What: Samples World Bistro When: Sunday-Thursday, 11 a.m. - 10 p.m.; Friday-Saturday, 11 a.m. - 11 p.m. Where: 370 Main St., Longmont

The new bistro is part of Sample Supports, which was established in 2010 to create a service agency focused on helping people with disabilities find jobs in Boulder County.

"We wanted to open a restaurant that would provide jobs for our guys in Sample Supports," said co-owner Mark Sample. "I wanted to take my passion for food and beer and mix it with my passion for social work and supporting people with disabilities."

Along with his wife Carmen, they bought the building two years ago and launched into an extensive overhaul of the property, which had been a retail shop. More than $1 million later they have opened their bistro business, with its unique staff.

Making a change

Historically, most people with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD) have worked in sheltered workshops. That term refers to an organization or environment that employs people with disabilities separately from others.

Mark and Carmen Sample are working to change that.

"We started in 2010 by initially providing residential services to people with IDD," Carmen Sample explained as she watched the weekday lunch crowd filter into the bistro. "We realized our clients didn't have jobs so we developed an employment program."

"A lot of people with disabilities end up with terrible jobs, like shredding paper all day or taking apart computers all day," she added. "Here they have cool jobs that they can be proud of. They are fully integrated."

National

There is a lot of demand for jobs. A number of advocacy groups report that an estimated 4.6 million Americans have an intellectual or developmental disability, including about 100,000 Coloradans. Finding jobs for them isn't easy, although it is getting better.

"Job opportunities have grown," said Josh Rael, executive director of Alliance, a nonprofit Colorado association dedicated to strengthening services and support for individuals with IDD. "But we still are not close to what we want to see."

Rael says there is always a need for more funding, and a federal push to employ the IDD community in regular work situations when an individual is able.

Samples World Bistro owners Carmen and Mark Sample. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

"A lot of this depends on communities, and businesses being willing to support and work with those with IDD," Rael said.

When looking across the country, Colorado is in the middle of the pack when it comes to the disabled working in a more integrated setting. According to Bob Lawhead, the CEO of Community Link in Boulder, 25 percent of IDD individuals are working at regular jobs outside sheltered environments here.

"We have a strong job market in this state," Lawhead said. 'So we've had good luck getting people jobs, in garden centers and places like Home Depot. There are opportunities."

Lawhead said that Washington state leads the way at 75 percent of IDD individuals working, with Arkansas at the other end of the spectrum at 5 percent.

"Colorado is doing it well. The state is very supportive of regular work," he said.

At the bistro in Longmont, T Singh is a 26-year old who works in the kitchen.

"I get to work with people now, and I enjoy it," Singh said during a break. "I have a good boss, I am proud to be here. It gives me enjoyment, and now I know I can work too."

Carmen says Colorado encourages this sort of approach for those with IDD, while other states don't.

"Many states only allow them to work in sheltered workshops," she said. "Boulder County is very progressive on this. The county is known for this. A lot of families with people with disabilities will move to Boulder County."

Ready and willing

Experts say that there are many employers in Colorado willing to hire the IDD individual, but it requires effort.

"They, both the employer and employee, have to have the support they need," said Marijo Rymer, executive direct of The Arc of Colorado in Denver. That support could be a job coach for the worker, or a social worker checking in with the worker, or support for the employer. Most of these services are paid for by state or federal agencies.

"The commitment of an IDD individual, their work ethic, is outstanding," Rymer explained. "But many do need ongoing support."

Nationwide, she said, there is a movement toward getting away from sheltered employment. But that effort is slow moving and needs more support at the federal level.

Rare

Programs like Sample Supports, with its own restaurant, are rare.

"The unemployment rate for the IDD community is over 80 percent, it's unbelievable," Carmen said.

"But the truth, is with our clients' disabilities it is difficult to maintain employment. It's difficult to train them, it's difficult to find them jobs, so we created all these options like this restaurant," she said.

"It's great because the regular restaurant staff has really embraced helping people with disabilities."

"Our crew works so hard here. They do such a great job, and they are proud of what they do," Mark added.

Customers on a busy afternoon are impressed with the menu and the beer selection.

"I'm having the hummus and green harissa and it is fresh, it's homemade, and it is excellent," said Longmont's Greg Mahnke. He's plans to come back in the evening to sample the variety of beers on tap.

The restaurant employs a regular restaurant staff of 50, and then another 50 or so from Sample Supports.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel