Pastor Traci Blackmon prays as Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton listens at Christ the King United Church of Christ in Florissant, Mo, near Ferguson.

June 23, 2015 Pastor Traci Blackmon prays as Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton listens at Christ the King United Church of Christ in Florissant, Mo, near Ferguson. Whitney Curtis/Getty Images

The newly official 2016 presidential candidate hits the road in Iowa on a campaign kickoff tour.

The newly official 2016 presidential candidate hits the road in Iowa on a campaign kickoff tour.

One big question looming over Hillary Rodham Clinton’s presidential candidacy has been what policy ideas she will propose to cast herself as a change agent without running against the sitting president she served.

Clinton began to provide an answer this week over two days of campaigning in Iowa.

Even without offering policy specifics, the Democratic front-runner sketched out a broad vision and ventured into new territory, particularly when she advocated adopting campaign finance reform to fix a “dysfunctional political system” and getting rid of regulations that inhibit the growth of small businesses.

Clinton defended two pillars of Obama’s domestic agenda, the call for comprehensive immigration reform and the health-care law. But on the Affordable Care Act, her embrace was more flexible than dogmatic. Clinton said that she wanted to “keep what works” but that she was open to changes, including the Republican idea of allowing insurance companies to compete across state lines.

Clinton’s opening act is a listening tour through the early primary and caucus states, and aides said she does not plan to start rolling out a detailed policy agenda until late spring or summer, but her Iowa swing offered a preview of what is to come.

With crowds of supporters waiting for her, Hillary Rodham Clinton stopped at a coffee house in Mount Vernon, Iowa. (Melina Mara/The Washington Post)

Rhetorically, Clinton is offering herself as a champion of everyday Americans at a time of economic renewal. But with deep anxiety coursing through the nation, she also is trying to channel voters’ desire for change.

“We’ve got to figure out in our country how to get back on the right track,” Clinton told a group of students and educators Tuesday in rural Monticello.

After chatting in a Le Claire coffee shop with a college student who is spiralling into debt, Clinton lamented, “People are struggling.”

And the next day in Norwalk, Clinton told small-business owners that although the economy had bounced back, “We need to do more than just get by. We need to get ahead and stay ahead.”

So far, Clinton has not pointed fingers at Obama. In fact, during a private meeting with local Democratic leaders in Mount Vernon, she likened the Obama recovery to the booming economy during husband Bill Clinton’s presidency to draw a favorable contrast to what she considered the poor economic records of the past few Republican presidents, according to one attendee.

However, Clinton did say she wanted to change the tenor in Washington, making a subtle contrast with Obama’s leadership style.

“I want to get things done,” Clinton said. “I’m willing to work with people who have good ideas, who are on any side of the political divide, but we have to start breaking down the divisions that have paralyzed our politics.”

Hillary Rodham Clinton listens to small-business owners during a roundtable discussion at Capitol City Fruit in Norwalk, Iowa. (Melina Mara/The Washington Post)

To that end, she advocated getting rid of “unaccountable money” in political campaigns, even if does so requires a constitutional amendment.

Obama’s unpopularity as well as history — only once in the past half century has a two-term president been succeeded by a candidate from the same party, President George H.W. Bush in 1989 — might persuade Clinton to break with the president. But she and her campaign advisers have decided to stand by Obama — in part out of necessity, considering she served as his first-term secretary of state.

Clinton’s loyalty to the president she once served will be tested once she reveals a robust menu of specific ideas that inevitably will draw some distinctions with the president’s policies.

“Even if politicians try very hard to imitate others, they’re going to fail because they have their own outlook and their own approaches, and I’m quite sure that she does,” said William A. Galston, a former Clinton White House policy adviser and senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.

Clinton signaled that health care could be one such area of differentiation. She defended the Affordable Care Act but left an opening to prescribe her own changes to the law. “Part of what I’ll be doing during the campaign is looking for ways that we keep what works . . . [but] figure out how we fill all these gaps,” she said Wednesday in Norwalk.

Clinton said she was considering a proposal that would allow insurance companies to compete across state lines. “If we’re going to have a free-market system, then we need a free market where we’ve got people competing on costs and quality,” she said.

Hearing that, Galston said, “I nearly fell out of my seat. I was surprised, because that has been an important plank of the Republican approach from the very beginning.” He said this was “a very prudent course,” because it signals to congressional Republicans that she is open to their ideas.

Andy Stern, a former Service Employees International Union president, said Clinton has come out with “a seemingly strong declaration that she’s for Main Street.” He singled out her support for free community college for qualified students, an Obama priority.

“The thematics are impressive and pretty clean. The policies and the people will tell the next chapters of the story,” Stern said. He said he wants to see whether Clinton is open to fresh, progressive thinking or whether the centrist economists from her husband’s administration will have her ear.

Clinton is likely to flesh out some foreign policy differences with Obama. She has said that in 2012 she advocated arming rebels in Syria fighting in the civil war there and that Obama decided not to heed her advice. The president eventually took that action, but not until after Clinton had left office and the war had escalated.

On Iran, the nuclear negotiations that are a pillar of Obama’s foreign policy record were set in motion on Clinton’s watch. She publicly supported the negotiations but also voiced strong skepticism that Iran could either make or honor an acceptable deal.

Clinton is in what aides call a “ramp-up phase,” road-testing only broad policy themes, which gives her campaign policy team, led by Maya Harris, Ann O’Leary and Jake Sullivan, time to craft detailed proposals.

A proud policy wonk throughout her life, Clinton spent considerable time pondering an agenda before deciding to run. Last fall, Sullivan led a thorough review of big challenges and potential policy solutions. The result was a 500-page briefing book, which Clinton took with her on Christmas vacation in the Dominican Republic.

But Clinton is sensitive to being accused of pronouncing policy from on high, so she is first absorbing input from citizens she encounters on the campaign trail, according to people familiar with the campaign.

For instance, one of these people said, Clinton was struck after several discussions during her first day in Iowa that nobody asked her about income inequality, the economic issue du jour among political elites and a core theme of her nascent campaign.

In her campaign announcement video, Clinton says, “The deck is still stacked in favor of those at the top.” It’s a line she repeated across Iowa.

“There’s something wrong when CEOs make 300 times more than the typical worker,” Clinton said in Monticello. Referencing her road trip into Iowa, Clinton added, “There’s something wrong when hedge fund managers pay lower tax rates than nurses or the truckers that I saw on I-80 as I was driving here over the last two days.”

David Axelrod, a former Obama strategist, said this is the tension that will shape the 2016 election.

“Plainly, the economic issue of our day is how the 21st century could regenerate a strong, thriving, secure middle class; how we create more economic mobility so that if you work hard you could actually get ahead; how do we do things that reduce the huge polarity in our economy?” he said. “That requires a real plan. That requires ideas. How she approaches that is absolutely essential.”

Dan Balz and Anne Gearan contributed to this report.