Two MBTA trains stopped outside a Boston station. (Photo: Elmer Cat)

Want to challenge injustice and make real change happen? That’s Truthout’s goal - support our work with a donation today!

A new Boston Globe story, The T's long, winding, infuriating road to failure, purports to be "the true story of the breakdown," a "a decades-long tale of grand ambitions and runaway costs."

Funny how this 2500 word article makes nary a mention of the huge losses that the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority made, along with many other easily duped transit authorities, on swap transactions that went massively against them in an environment of seemingly permanent low interest rates.

A March 2012 article in Alternet by Tom Ferguson provided an overview. Key sections:

The Refund Transit Coalition, a coalition of unions and public interest groups, put out a study that documented in stunning detail how Wall Street banks have for years been hustling American cities, states, and regional authorities out of billions of dollars. But save for Gretchen Morgenson's "Fair Game" column for the New York Times, the study drew almost no attention... Its starting point will be familiar to anyone who recalls the debate over financial "reform" of the last few years. In the bad old days of pre-2008 deregulated finance, bankers started pedaling hot new "structured finance" products that they claimed were perfect for the needs of clients who had thrived for decades using cheaper, plain vanilla bonds and loans. The new marvels – swaps and other forms of so-called "derivatives" whose values changed as other securities they referenced fluctuated in value – were often complex and frequently not priced in any actual market. Their buyers thus had difficulty understanding how they really worked or how they might be hurt by purchasing them. In many documented cases, buyers also had only faint ideas about how profitable these products were to the houses selling them. One befuddled Pennsylvania school board, for example, diffidently quizzed J.P. Morgan Chase: "The school-board official knew they were getting $750,000 for entering into a 'swaption' with J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. They wanted to know what was in it for the bank. They wanted to know the price. They seem like reasonable requests. 'I can't quantify that to you,' the banker told them. 'It is not a typical underwriting and I can't quantify that for you and there's no way that I can be specific on that.'" One popular product involved an "interest rate" swap built into a bond deal. In these, as the Transit study explains, some hapless municipal authority brings out a bond and commits to making fixed payments to buyers. That sounds like any other old fashioned bond offer. But here's the twist. In the swap version, the bank offers, for a handsome charge, to pay a variable fee to the issuer of the bonds. The idea was that the money could be used to make payments owed to the bond buyers. Payments were supposed to vary with the course of interest rates. The contrivances were heralded as protecting issuers against a rise in rates and saving them money on their payments. But there was a catch: If rates fell, then banks could make out big, while issuers faced disaster, because the latter still had to make the fixed payments on their bonds, while the banks' payments would shrink as rates fell. In effect, issuers were gambling on interest rates and betting they somehow knew better than the banks what was going to happen. And, ah, yes, the final touch: With old style bonds, you could refinance if rates fell; with the new fangled derivatives, the banks made sure to impose huge termination fees... The Refund Transit study concentrated on local transit systems. Some of its numbers are stunning. The study pegged annual swap losses at the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (Boston area) at $25.8 million and suggested that the MBTA will "lose another $254 million on these swaps" before they lapse. The study added that the MBTA was losing money on swaps even before the crisis, with total losses running in the "hundreds of millions" of dollars.

And it is not as if the Globe can feign being unaware of the swap losses. It ran this editorial, MBTA needs better terms on interest swaps, in June 2012: