Citizens United filed a lawsuit in Washington, D.C., on Thursday in hopes of having a federal court grant the conservative group access to emails exchanged between Chelsea Clinton and five top aides to her mother, White House contender Hillary Clinton, while the presidential hopeful served as secretary of state.

The Freedom of Information Act suit, first reported by Politico, was filed in U.S. District Court in Washington in an effort to uncover any correspondence that could further detail the former first daughter’s role with respect to her mother’s tenure in the State Department from 2009 to 2013.

On Twitter, Citizens United said the Clinton Foundation, a nonprofit formed in 1997 by then-President Bill Clinton, was the target of a “public corruption investigation” being launched by the conservative group.

“We want to see much more about what Chelsea Clinton was up to because she now has put herself out here on the campaign trail, along with Bill Clinton, as a lead surrogate,” David Bossie, Citizens United’s president, told Politico this week.

“She is somebody who has been a player, a senior adviser to her mother. … She is an officer, somebody with fiduciary responsibility at the Clinton Family Foundation,” Mr. Bossie said.

Previously released emails have already revealed that Mrs. Clinton exchanged emails with her daughter while secretary of state, including exchanges in which she attempted to explain the storming of a U.S. consulate in Benghazi in 2011. Citizens United has filed a FOIA suit in hopes of having further emails released, which the group wants to acquire for use in an upcoming documentary.

Specifically, the suit seeks emails that Chelsea Clinton; Clinton Foundation foreign policy chief Amitabh Desai; longtime aide to Mr. Clinton Justin Cooper; and the manager of the Clinton’s Chappaqua, New York, home, Oscar Flores, may had exchanged with Mrs. Clinton’s Chief of Staff Cheryl Mills; Deputy Chief of Staff Huma Abedin; Director of Policy Planning Jake Sullivan; Special Representative for Global Partnerships Kris Balderston; and Deputy Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Michael Fuchs, Politico reported.

Ms. Clinton, 35, was scheduled to be participating in a global economy forum in Atlanta on Thursday morning. Representatives for her mother’s campaign did not immediately respond to Politico’s requests for comment.