As a result of state budget cuts, more than 73,000 low-income Oklahomans with mental illnesses and substance use disorders are expected to lose some access, if not all access, to the state-funded services they depend on.

The Oklahoma Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Services announced Friday that the agency will cut an additional $13 million from its current operating budget.

In total, the state mental health department has cut almost $23 million from operations and services since January.

The budget cuts are in response to the state budget crisis that has forced agencies to slash their current operating budgets.

"It’s heartbreaking that we have to make these cuts," Commissioner Terri White, of the state mental health department, said in a statement. "It is not something that we want to do, but there are no other options at this point."

Oklahoma has the second highest rate in the nation of adults with serious mental illnesses. Meanwhile, the state spends among the least per capita on mental health.

Mental health leaders announced the cuts at the agency’s board meeting Friday.

The agency anticipates cutting the following from its current budget:

• A $7 million cut to contracted mental health and substance abuse services statewide;

• Rate cuts for multiple service levels and provider networks throughout Oklahoma, including cuts to rates paid for mental health inpatient care;

• Tightening an annual “cap” placed on psychotherapy services for individuals in treatment

The state mental health department receives matching federal money for many of the services that it's cutting, meaning the actual impact on the statewide treatment network will exceed $36 million, according to the agency.

White said that cuts will mean many Oklahomans will struggle to find services when entering the treatment system.

Additionally, there will likely be longer delays for those who do qualify for services.

For example, there are currently about 600 people on the waiting list for state-funded residential substance abuse treatment.

There will also be reduced treatment options for many Oklahomans already receiving care — and some that will lose services altogether.

White said the cost for treatment is much less than leaving people without care, and she said she worries about reversal of progress made by the state in recent years.

"As a state, we have made progress in the areas of prevention, and have nationally recognized programs that address children’s behavioral health and criminal justice diversion," White said. "It will be difficult to regain momentum once services are lost.

"We know that treatment works, but only when services are available. The impact of these cuts will be deeply felt by individuals, families, communities and the state as a whole."