Louisiana's gubernatorial candidates take almost every opportunity they can get to take a shot at Gov. Bobby Jindal, but typically the criticisms don't turn as personal as they did on Saturday morning (Aug.8).

All four major candidates had made overtures to fully funding the Louisiana State Police during an annual state trooper convention in Baton Rouge, when U.S. Sen. David Vitter mentioned there was one area of the state police budget he would consider cutting -- security details.

"I would cut the bodyguards and others. That has gotten way too inflated," Vitter told a crowd of dozens of state troopers.

Vitter then went on to say he thought the protection provided to the governor and his family was over the top. The senator remembers seeing "a caravan" taking Jindal's children to school several years ago. He thought it was excessive.

"I saw it first hand very soon after Jindal got elected," he said.

First Lady Surpriya Jindal was not amused by Vitter's comments, issuing a stern rebuke to the Senator publicly on Twitter a couple of hours later.

"David Vitter is free criticize my husband's ideas and policy decisions all he wants, but he needs to stay away from our children," she wrote.

At least two state troopers are assigned to Jindal, his wife and each of their three children at all times, but sometimes the protection can be heavier. Jindal's security detail has become a sore point politically -- because Louisiana is spending millions of dollars on sending the troopers outside of the state with the governor. Jindal is running for president, and spends more time away from Louisiana than other recent governors.

In June, the Louisiana Legislature voted to put restrictions on Jindal's state police protection while he is on the presidential campaign trail in Iowa and elsewhere. But the governor used his veto pen to remove those limitations a few weeks after they passed.

Recently, another gubernatorial candidate, Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne, started calling on Jindal to use his campaign cash -- not state funding -- to pay for the security he takes with him outside the state. Apparently, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, also a presidential candidate, has an outside group paying for his security detail, so he can avoid using Wisconsin's public money.

But Vitter also had some criticism for the security detail provided to the lieutenant governor, currently Dardenne, too.

"It is completely unjustified for the lieutenant governor to get state police [protection]," Vitter said during the state troopers forum Saturday.

Dardenne said he has declined the around-the-clock he is entitled to as lieutenant governor, though he does take advantage of his state troopers during the day sometimes.

"I use the protective service team on occasion, on a fairly regular occasion, but I don't use it 24 hours," Dardenne said, "I don't have any small children that need protection."

Vitter did not escape the state police candidates' forum without receiving some criticism himself. Dardenne and state Rep. John Bel Edwards, the only Democrat in the governor's race, didn't bring up Vitter directly, but made some opaque references to his prostitution scandal from 2007.

Speaking to a room of about 200 people, both Edwards and Dardenne mentioned the role state police play in investigating prostitution and human trafficking in Louisiana. While sitting next to Vitter on stage, Edwards said prostitution was "not a victimless crime."

. . . . .

Julia O'Donoghue is a state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. She can be reached at jodonoghue@nola.com or on Twitter at @jsodonoghue. Please consider following us on Facebook at NOLA.com and NOLA.com-Baton Rouge.