I grew up some 40 years ago in the small communities of the San Luis Valley in southern Colorado, where the arts usually meant whatever was playing at our local theater. But the arts are more than just the movie of the week. And today, thanks to public/private partnerships and grants from funding agencies such as the National Endowment for the Arts, some rural communities have the opportunity to participate in partnerships in creative placemaking that help to preserve cultural heritage as well as establish centers for access to the arts.

The arts are essential not only in their contribution to our quality of life, but also in their enrichment of our cultural engagement. However, support for the arts is tough business. When a community’s demands for social services, public safety, education and basic infrastructure compete fiercely for limited public funds, the cultural and arts initiatives are often considered unnecessary.

This is even more apparent in rural Colorado. Urban locales, because of their very natures, tend to fare better in support for the arts, in large part because of their population density. There is help for the arts in rural communities, thought, through programs such as those developed by the NEA. This year, a couple of Colorado’s high plains communities will receive significant and welcome support through the NEA’s “Our Town” program, which benefits arts programs in small communities.

The NEA recently awarded a $25,000 “Our Town” grant to Colorado’s M12, an interdisciplinary arts group based in Byers, for its “Action on the Plains: Contemporary Art in Rural Environments.” Action on the Plains is an artist-in-residence program in Colorado’s Washington and Arapahoe Counties, and is the result of a partnership between M12 and the Office of Washington County Colorado Commissioners.

The arts — and public funding for the arts — are part of what distinguishes a society. I’ve visited and lived in countries where the arts are a privilege of the elite, and where access to art and culture is both geographically and financially restrictive for those outside established cultural centers. Not only do these people lack a basic enjoyment of artistic expression, they are also deprived of entree into their own cultural histories.

I don’t want to see this happen here, and my concern is not all that far-fetched. With my own close ties to rural Colorado, I am keenly aware that some communities removed from large metro areas experience of a sense of exclusion, an out-of-sight out-of-mind frustration at their inability to access many sources of substantial funding for the arts. Public/private partnerships and collaborations between nonprofit and local government organizations are key to turning this deficit around.

Such partnerships in rural locales, however, continue to face significant challenges such as assembling adequate financing and ensuring program sustainability. In my hometown of Monte Vista, for example, attempts were suspended in February to establish a community center for the arts (in the same theater where the movie of the week was my local entertainment) because of conflicts between supporters and the city over ongoing maintenance of the venue.

he fate of this project remains uncertain.

Out on Colorado’s high plains, though, another effort at creative placemaking in rural communities is getting a significant boost. M12 will use its “Our Town” grant money to extend experiential art-making in and around the towns of Byers and Last Chance, selecting creative practitioners who work in an ever-expanding international dialogue about art practices in rural environments, an “interconnectivity” between the artists, the citizens, and the landscapes.

Programs such as Action on the Plains, which are rooted in less urban places, produce notable work that values the identities of Colorado’s often underserved rural communities, and they lay the foundation to challenge an urban-centric view of art.

Support and development of the arts in Colorado’s small towns is no easy task, and we can’t do it alone. Assistance from programs such as NEA’s “Our Town” grants, and partnerships such Action on the Plains are crucial in creative placemaking, partnerships that ensure the sustainability of the arts and promote the unique cultural identities of Colorado’s rural communities.

Andrea W. Doray is a communi- cation consultant, writer, and editor, and is a creative writing instructor at Lighthouse Writers Workshop. Contact her at a.doray@andreadoray.com.