Democratic presidential candidate, Sen. Bernie Sanders speaks at a rally at the Macomb Community College, Saturday, March 5, 2016, in Warren, Mich. (Photo: Carlos Osorio, AP) (Photo: Associated Press)

Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders claimed victory in the Kansas and Nebraska caucuses Saturday, while Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton prevailed in Louisiana, according to Associated Press projections.

The Democratic contests played out as Clinton and Sanders prepared for a Sunday debate in Flint, Mich, where the poisoning of the municipal water supply also threatens the state's political leadership.

"I believe that if we have the courage to look at our problems right in the face, not bury them, we can address them,'' Sanders told a crowd Saturday night in Warren, Mich. "We can resolve them."

"We have the momentum," Sanders said. "We have a path toward victory. Our campaign is just getting started and we are going all the way to the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia."

In Louisiana, with a large contingent of African-American voters, Clinton sought to build on decisive recent victories throughout the South, including in Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia.

"The stakes keep getting higher,'' Clinton said in Detroit, moments after the Louisiana race was called for her. "Instead of building walls, we're going to be knocking down barriers.''

By Saturday afternoon, Sanders' campaign had moved to Michigan and Ohio. There, he once again took aim at the corrupt influences of big money in politics and promised supporters that he would always confront the problems facing the U.S.

Both candidates and their campaigns were clearly looking beyond Saturday, before the results had been tallied.

In a Saturday speech in Detroit, President Bill Clinton sought to highlight his wife's long experience in government. He said candidate Clinton's plan to build on the Obama administration's landmark Affordable Care Act made more sense than Sanders' "Medicare-for-all'' plan.

Even as they highlighted their differences, the tone of the Democratic race remained decidedly civil, in sharp contrast to the Republican field. Saturday, Bill Clinton acknowledged Sanders' effort to call attention to the Flint crisis, though he credited Hillary Clinton with addressing it first, offering help to Flint Mayor Karen Weaver.

"She’s the best change maker I’ve ever seen,” Bill Clinton said. “You’ve got to pick a president.”

Heading into Saturday's round of voting, Clinton had 1,066 delegates to Sanders' 432, including super-delegates — members of Congress, governors and party officials who can support the candidate of their choice. It takes 2,383 delegates to win the Democratic nomination. There were 109 at stake on Saturday.

Contributing: Detroit Free Press, The Shreveport Times and Associated Press

USA TODAY