The first House Republican has backed President Obama's funding request to fight Zika just days after the country's first recorded death from the virus.

Rep. Vern Buchanan (R-Fla.) called on the White House and GOP leaders to end months of gridlock over the nearly $2 billion funding request, which has been flatly rejected by the vast majority of Republicans.

ADVERTISEMENT

Buchanan's support for the White House request comes after a Florida Republican, Sen. Marco Rubio , has already sounded the warning about the need for a robust Zika response.

Another Florida Republican, Rep. Carlos Curbelo, also introduced a bill last week to immediately move all leftover funding from the U.S. Ebola virus response into the Zika response, though he didn't say he would support the full $1.9 billion. More here: http://bit.ly/24jVlMT

Steny Hoyer says GOP has 'empty words' on opioids fight The House's No. 2 Democrat slammed GOP leaders on Monday for rejecting bipartisan pleas for more funding to fight opioid abuse.

Rep. Steny Hoyer (D-Md.) told a crowd at the American Hospital Association conference that Democrats have been working single-handedly to make more money available in the legislation slated to reach the House floor this month.

"Republicans have been unwilling to come to the negotiating table," Hoyer said at the American Hospital Association's annual member conference at the Washington Hilton. "Obviously policy without the ability to implement them are somewhat empty words." More here: http://bit.ly/1SVmDAJ

Only 4 House Dems join GOP drug-pricing letter A group of 242 lawmakers is calling on the Obama administration to scrap a proposal aimed at fighting high drug prices.

The proposal to change how Medicare pays for certain drugs has been controversial, drawing concern from both sides of the aisle in Congress.

However, only four House Democrats joined the letter on Monday calling for a complete end to the program. Democratic leadership had been working to get Democrats to sign a different letter, which expressed concerns but called for changes to the program rather than simply ending it.

The four Democrats signing the Republican-led letter are Reps. Brad Ashford (Neb.), Dutch Ruppersberger (Md.), Kyrsten Sinema (Ariz.), and Collin Peterson (Minn.). Read more here. http://bit.ly/1rrTB2I

Medicaid expansion debate postponed in Texas The Obama administration and Texas have reached an agreement to extend a temporary program that helps the state's poor access healthcare, postponing a contentious debate over ObamaCare's Medicaid expansion.

The deal reached Monday continues the state's full uncompensated care funding for another 15 months.

John Hawkins, senior vice president of government relations at the Texas Hospital Association, noted that the Texas legislature won't be in session, allowing it to even consider Medicaid expansion, until January 2017.

"There wasn't really an advantage for either side to try to create leverage [on this]," he said, adding that both sides agreed not to "blow up" the uncompensated care funding, leading to potentially harmful cuts, over the Medicaid expansion issue. Read more here. http://bit.ly/1OcoAok

Targeted cures: Join us on Wednesday, May 11 for Targeted Cures: A Policy Discussion on Treating Patients with Rare Diseases, featuring Energy & Committee Chairman Fred Upton (R-Mich.). Topics of discussion include: the public-private partnerships developing and delivering cutting-edge treatments and the path to making care accessible to the patients who need it most. Sponsored by PhRMA. RSVP here.

ON TAP TOMORROW

The American Hospital Association ends its member conference with a panel featuring CMS Administrator Andy Slavitt and Rep. Bob Goodlatte Bob GoodlatteIRS head vows to finish term despite impeachment push House Republicans press case for impeaching IRS commissioner Saudis scramble for Washington allies MORE (R-Va.) at 8:30 a.m.

The Pan American Health Organization will hold a briefing on the Zika virus featuring National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Director Dr. Anthony Fauci at 2:30 p.m.

WHAT WE'RE READING

Many healthcare customers will first learn of double-digit rate hikes about one week before the November elections. (Politico)

Seven of the top 10 most profitable hospitals in the U.S. are nonprofits. (AP)

Researchers found that biology – specifically, metabolism – helps explain why so many 'Biggest Loser' contestants regain weight. (New York Times)

The makers of OFF! Insect repellent says U.S. sales are up 50 percent compared to this time last year as Zika fears grow (Wall Street Journal).

IN THE STATES

California is trying to rein in a ballooning marijuana industry amid a complex web of consumer safety and business regulations (San Jose Mercury News)

The new federal regulations on managed care could be a game-changer for rural healthcare, with states now required to set "maximum time and distance" standards. (Governing Magazine)

ICYMI FROM THE HILL:

Dole Food Company is under scrutiny over accusations that it covered up a listeria contamination in its salad products

Send tips and comments to Sarah Ferris, sferris@thehill.com, and Peter Sullivan, psullivan@thehill.com. Follow us on Twitter: @thehill, @sarahnferris, @PeterSullivan4