Beverly Keel

There’s been great interest on Music Row at the news that TMZ, the celebrity news website and TV show, is coming to Nashville. While it proves that Nashville is an “It” city, some aren’t pleased because they want stars to be able to lead normal lives here.

For instance, Sheryl Crow once recalled running into Faith Hill at a Franklin boutique, and no one bothered either star. Keith Urban and Nicole Kidman are frequently spotted at Starbucks when they’re in town.

TMZ executive producer Harvey Levin says TMZ doesn’t have an office here yet, but he plans on having a full-time presence, with a photographer at the very least, “to get able to get some color and texture of the city and country music and of a really rich part of the country.”

“I think people in Nashville are great,” he says. “They are fun and there are a lot of stars there. It broadens TMZ. We get country people whenever we can in big cities, but when we went to Nashville a year ago and just experimented, we realized how fun it was. We decided it would be great for the show and for the website and it has been.”

Nashville stars are less edited than Hollywood celebs, he says. “They are fun and they are just not managed as much, and they’re real.”

TMZ’s focus isn’t about covering the most popular stars, but providing the most appealing content. (Hello, Kellie Pickler!) “You can have a huge star who is kind of boring and people don’t care, and you can have a much lesser star who is really entertaining and they resonate. The world order here is entertaining trumps all.”

Despite some locals who don’t want TMZ here, Levin says TMZ been well received. “All of the people we’ve had on the show, we’ve gotten feedback from people saying, ‘We love that. Thanks a lot.’ It has been great so far.”

I’ll admit that I’m among those who weren’t thrilled with TMZ’s plans. I’d hoped Nashville would stay paparazzi-free. However, I also read TMZ daily. Does that make me a hypocrite? Probably. It also makes me pretty normal.

While the Internet has taken documenting celebrity behavior to unprecedented (and invasive) levels, the interest in celebrities’ lives is as old as gossip itself. (Just ask Cleopatra researcher Karen Essex.)

MTSU psychology professor Tom Brinthaupt says gossip about celebrity behavior allows us to determine what we would do if we were in their shoes. “From a psychoanalytic perspective, one might argue that people are also sometimes dealing with their dreams and fantasies when they gossip about celebrities. For instance, it is easy to find instances of outlandish celebrity behavior that may tap into the repressed unconscious wishes or fleeting desires of the gossiper.”

Brinthaupt says gossip often includes spite or nastiness. (Example A: Kim Kardashian.) “This seems particularly relevant to gossiping about celebrities, if people are envious or jealous of these people,” he says. “It is also low-risk behavior, since gossiping about celebrities is much less likely to come back and haunt the gossiper than would talking about a friend or neighbor.”

Levin says the realness of Nashville stars reflects the key to TMZ’s popularity. “The reason TMZ has worked is because we are not red carpet. ... We talk to people about real things and fun things and they get to show their personalities.

“I just love the interaction that we get with some of the celebrities in Nashville. It’s fun. That is really what I’m looking for right now.”

Therefore, what happens in Nashville won’t stay in Nashville anymore. Don’t say you weren’t warned.

Journalist Beverly Keel is also a professor and chair of Middle Tennessee State University’s Department of Recording Industry.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/opinion/columnists/2014/06/15/beverly-keel-tmz-mesh-nashvilles-culture/10526287/