WAUKEGAN, Ill. & KENOSHA COUNTY, Wis.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--R&B Solutions (“R&B”) was recently awarded federal grant funds to work with residents of Kenosha County to better understand their health insurance options available through the Affordable Care Act Marketplace, often referred to as “Obamacare.” The federal grant funds allows R&B to employ individuals who are certified to assist residents with comparing, evaluating and enrolling in the health insurance options available through the Affordable Care Act Marketplace. R&B employees’ ability to assist residents with the enrollment process for health insurance coverage through the Affordable Care Act Marketplace is particularly important recognizing the often publicized issues with people not being able to access the healthcare.gov website to enroll in coverage through the Affordable Care Act Marketplace.

In an effort to make this community benefit available to as many Kenosha County residents as possible, R&B has established a relationship with United Hospital System, allowing R&B employees an easily accessible and convenient office located on-site at the Kenosha Medical Center Campus, 6308 Eighth Avenue, Kenosha. The R&B employees located at the Kenosha Medical Center Campus stand ready to assist Kenosha County residents with questions regarding the Affordable Care Act Marketplace, or with comparing, evaluating or enrolling in the health insurance options available through the Affordable Care Act Marketplace – at no cost to Kenosha County residents. R&B employees can assist Kenosha County residents to compare health insurance plans based on price, benefits, provider network, quality, and other important features to make a well-informed decision.

Kenosha County residents with questions regarding the Affordable Care Act Marketplace, or with comparing, evaluating or enrolling in the health insurance options available through the Affordable Care Act Marketplace are encouraged to call to setup an appointment to talk with an R&B employee about health insurance coverage options.

R&B employees are available at the Kenosha Medical Center Campus, Monday – Friday. Please call 262-656-2330 or 800-560-9106 to speak with an employee from R&B today or to schedule an appointment.

About R&B Solutions: (www.randbsolutions.com)

R&B Solutions is a leading Medicaid Advocacy corporation that both uninsured patients and medical providers alike have come to trust to solve many of the problems facing uninsured patients and the medical facilities from which they seek help. R&B Solutions offers a wide variety of solutions for medical providers to assist their patients. The company uses highly-trained patient advocates efficient in State Human Services processes, internally developed software, and years of legal experience to identify and assist the uninsured. R&B Solutions offers expertise in the field of Medicaid Advocacy, outpatient solutions, and RAMP (Rapid Application for Medical Programs), proprietary software that screens for Medicaid and charity eligibility. Founded in 1986, R&B assists health care providers and their uninsured patients across the United States.