Editor's note: a previous version of this post incorrectly stated the man in the video reportedly directed his remarks at a Jewish reporter. That is untrue. The video was taken by Kyle Bodgen, who was an attendee at the event. I regret the error.

After a Donald Trump rally in Cleveland late last week, a supporter carrying a Trump campaign sign was caught on video yelling, "Go back to Auschwitz! Go Back to F****** Auschwitz!" Kyle Bogden, who was outside of the event, took the video.

Presidential candidates aren't responsible for every supporter or person who attends their rallies however, growing anti-Semitism expressed at Trump events and in Trump supporter circles online is becoming increasingly alarming.

As Bethany Mandel recently asked, why won't Trump stand up to them? It's the easy, right thing to do.

On social media, it seems that while not all Donald Trump supporters are anti-Semites, many of the vocal and vicious anti-Semites seem to be Donald Trump supporters.”



That’s what Rick Wilson, a Republican strategist and writer often accused of climbing into the pockets of “The Jews,” told me recently.



The widespread anti-Semitism of Trump’s fans hit the news after the September 16 Republican debate, thanks to one of his biggest supporters, Ann Coulter, who tweeted, “How many f—king Jews do these people think there are in the United States?” when several candidates affirmed support for Israel during their closing remarks. Coulter’s comments, coupled with the anti-Semitism on display from her supporters — who immediately started the Twitter hashtag #IStandWithAnn — are becoming typical of Trump’s fan base.



The widespread anti-Semitism of Trump’s fans hit the news after the September 16 Republican debate, thanks to one of his biggest supporters, Ann Coulter, who tweeted, “How many f—king Jews do these people think there are in the United States?” when several candidates affirmed support for Israel during their closing remarks. Coulter’s comments, coupled with the anti-Semitism on display from her supporters — who immediately started the Twitter hashtag #IStandWithAnn — are becoming typical of Trump’s fan base.



What is most shocking on the heels of the general anti-Semitism of Trump’s fans and now with the mainstream exposure of them due to Coulter’s comments is the candidate’s radio silence on the situation. Trump is known for many things, but keeping his lips sealed is certainly not one of them.