More options: Share, Mark as favorite

John Yoo is a visiting scholar at AEI and a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, School of Law. He served as a deputy assistant attorney general in the Office of the Legal Counsel of the US Department of Justice from 2001 to 2003, where he worked on constitutional and national security matters. In this post, Mr. Yoo poses 5 questions to the 2016 presidential contenders on the relationship between the executive and judicial branches.

Do you believe that the Supreme Court correctly struck down state bans on gay marriage this year in Obergefell v. Hodges?

Obergefell has sparked such criticism among conservatives not just because of its position on gay marriage. The decision illustrates much that is wrong with the modern Supreme Court, which has arrogated to itself the power to make many of our nation’s fundamental social policies through its freewheeling interpretation of the Equal Protection and Due Process Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment. This runs counter to the Constitution’s basic design, which leaves most policies in the hands of the states and vests in the federal government control over discrete issues such as national defense and foreign policy, a national free market, and nationwide individual rights and political freedoms.

The Constitution’s text does not address gay marriage or sexual orientation, which means the Framers left the decision up to the 50 states. If the states can decide questions about life and death, as they do on euthanasia and the death penalty, they should regulate questions about marriage and family law generally.

Do you agree with the Supreme Court’s decision to uphold the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare, two years ago in Sibelius v. NFIB, and to save its tax subsidies this year in King v. Burwell?

Opposing Obergefell v. Hodges (see answer 1, above) does not mean that the Supreme Court must never exercise judicial review. The main purpose of the Court is to interpret and enforce the Constitution as it was written and understood by the Framers. And perhaps the most important task before the Framers was how to balance the powers of the federal and state government. The Constitution places careful limits on the powers of the national government, which are supposed to be narrow and specialized while leaving most decisions in the hands of the government closer to the people.

It seems clear that the Constitution did not give the federal government the power to take over large segments of the national economy and to use its powers over interstate commerce to force citizens to buy its approved products. And the taxing power, which the Court eventually relied upon, does not have the limitless reach granted by Sibelius — again, the very point of the Constitution was to place careful borders on federal power. In Sibelius, the Court read the Constitution to give the federal government a virtual police power to regulate anything.

What responses do you think are within the powers of president to oppose decisions with which you disagree?

The president, contrary to popular belief, is not bound by the opinions of the Justices as to the meaning of the Constitution. The president must carry out its judgments — which party won or lost a case — but he need not agree with the reasons of the Court as expressed in its opinions. Presidents such as Jefferson, Jackson, Lincoln, and FDR argued that the president was entitled to advance his own interpretation of the Constitution while carrying out his unique constitutional duties. A president could veto laws that the Court thinks constitutional, he can appoint officials who agree with him rather than the Court, and he can appoint judges who share his views rather than the Supreme Court’s.

With which Supreme Court Justice do you most agree? With which Justice do you most disagree?

Scalia, Thomas, and Alito focus on the Constitution’s text and history and retain a modest vision of the Supreme Court’s role in American society. Until the Obamacare cases, a nominee also could have named Chief Justice Roberts, but not after his decision to twice save national takeover of the healthcare market. In terms of disagreement, the four liberal Justices (Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan) have voted as a monolithic bloc on most controversial questions, such as gay marriage or Obamacare, and are interchangeably mistaken on interpreting the Constitution and expanding the Court’s control over society.

Whom would you appoint to the Supreme Court if a vacancy arose in 2017?

Presidents have made a number of choices that have gone terribly awry, starting with Justice Blackmun under President Nixon (if not Warren and Brennan under Eisenhower), followed by Justices O’Connor and Kennedy under Reagan, Justice Souter under Bush I, and even Roberts under Bush II. Maybe the error has been the practice of appointing stealth candidates or lower court judges, who seem swayed by media and academic opinion once on the Supreme Court. Better to appoint officials from other branches or the states who have undergone tough political battles and so won’t be fazed by academic or media criticism. Presidents once used to regularly appoint prominent politicians, such as senators, cabinet officers, and governors, to the Court — a practice to which they should return.