The SPY ETF Ended High after a Rebound in US Stocks PART 2 OF 4

Technology and Healthcare Sectors Advanced as Stocks Rebounded

Sector performances

All the component sectors of the SPDR S&P 500 ETF (SPY) rose on Monday, December 21, 2015, except for the utility sector. The following graph presents the percentage changes in the performances of the component sectors of the SPY ETF as of December 21.

Apple’s rebound

The technology sector, represented by the Technology Select Sector SPDR ETF (XLK), rose by 1.0% on December 21 as the stocks of Apple (AAPL), Microsoft (MSFT), and Alphabet (GOOG) (GOOGL) gained on the day. These stocks rose 1.2%, 1.3%, 1.1%, and 0.5%, respectively.

Apple’s (AAPL) shares were affected due to some concerns related to iPhone sales. On Sunday, Apple’s (AAPL) CEO, Tim Cook, criticized the United States’ tax policy and also defended Apple’s choice of China as a location for manufacturing. Additionally, Apple entered into an agreement with Ericsson that settled several patent disputes. Therefore, stocks of AAPL rebounded on Monday, December 21. Other stocks in the technology sector that advanced with large gains on the day were Avago Technologies (AVGO), First Solar (FSLR), Micron Technology (MU), Emerson Electric (EMR), and Qualcomm (QCOM). These stocks rose 4.0%, 3.7%, 2.9%, 2.9%, and 2.8%, respectively, on the day.

Healthcare sector

Stocks belonging to the healthcare sector bounced back on December 21 as an estimated six million people signed for Obamacare as disclosed by the US government on Friday, December 18. Those subscribers include 2.4 million new customers. As a result, stocks of Tenet Healthcare (THC), HCA Holdings (HCA), Universal Health Services (UHS), and Vertex Pharmaceuticals (VRTX) rose 11.6%, 4.9%, 3.6%, and 3.5%, respectively, on December 21. For more, read “Moving Average Analysis of the Healthcare Sector.”

Next, let’s perform a moving average analysis of the consumer staples sector that outperformed the market on Monday.