Buy Photo John Bel Edwards (right foreground) speaks during his gubernatorial campaign stop in Alexandira on Thursday in Alexander Fulton Park. (Photo: Melinda Martinez/The Town Talk)Buy Photo

Louisiana should lower its personal income tax rate and make up the difference in revenue by eliminating some tax breaks, gubernatorial candidate John Bel Edwards said Thursday in Alexandria.

"We've got to fix the budget by focusing on tax giveaways that cost too much and don't produce return on investment," Edwards said.

"I think we can lower tax rates and get rid of some exemptions and make our tax rates fairer and flatter, and over time produce more revenue as the economy grows.

"For example, our personal income tax rates right now are 2, 4 and 6 percent. They should be 1, 3 and 5 (percent), but we should give up some of the exemptions that we currently enjoy," Edwards said.

He said he'd like to see the corporate rate in Louisiana lowered as well, but eliminating some tax breaks would have to be part of the equation.

Edwards made a campaign stop Thursday at Alexander Fulton Park, better known as the mini-park, where he spoke to citizens for about an hour and then went across the street to talk to Mayor Jacques Roy in Alexandria City Hall.

He was accompanied on his campaign tour by his wife Donna.

Edwards, a 48-year-old state representative from Amite, is the only Democrat among the four major announced gubernatorial candidates. The other three – Public Service Commissioner Scott Angelle, Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne and U.S. Sen. David Vitter – are Republicans.

The primary election for governor will be Oct. 24, and a runoff, if needed, would be Nov. 21.

While Edwards was in the mini-park, a boy carried a sign that pointed at a man who stayed close to Edwards.

The sign, which had an red pointing arrow that the boy had focused on the man, said "This is the guy who the Koch Bros./David Vitter pay to record & track John Bel."

Edwards said the man is being paid by the Kochs, who are big GOP supporters, and Vitter to videotape him.

"One of my supporters wanted people to know who he was and what he was doing," Edwards said. "So as he follows me around, there's a sign that sometimes follows him around."

Edwards said he favors accepting additional Medicaid funds from the federal government as allowed by the Affordable Care Act.

"We would have saved $52 million in the fiscal year that started July 1 if we accepted the Medicaid expansion," Edwards said.

Gov. Bobby Jindal refused to expand Medicaid.

Earlier Thursday, Edwards campaigned in DeRidder and Leesville as part of his PutLouisianaFirst tour.

After leaving Alexandria, he was headed for a Joint Legislative Update with Rep. Kenny Cox, D-Natchitoches, at 5 p.m. in the Natchitoches Arts Center, 718 Second St. in Natchitoches.

Check back later today at www.thetowntalk.com for more about Edwards' visit to Alexandria.

Read or Share this story: http://www.thetowntalk.com/story/news/2015/07/09/john-bel-edwards-campaigns-for-governor-in-alexandria/29932635/