After more than a year without a permanent leader, Orlando Health has named a new president and chief executive officer.

David W. Strong hails from Raleigh, N.C., where he's been the president of Rex Healthcare, aprivate, not-for-profit health-care system with more than 5,400 employees. He will begin in early April.

"I'm thrilled about the opportunity. For me, it is a health-care system that has all the right ingredients," said Strong, referring to physicians, the board and the staff.

"The people that go into health care are people who are special. ... it's hard work, and my goal is, with the rest of the staff and leaders, to create an environment that people want to work there and it's the best place they've ever worked."

Strong, 50, arrives more than a year after Orlando Health's president and CEO, Sherrie Sitarik, stepped down during a tumultuous time. The health system had the largest layoff in its 100-year-history and was battling falling profits and disgruntled employees.

Since Sitarik's departure, Dr. Jamal Hakim, the organization's chief quality officer, has been acting as the interim leader of the organization, improving the finances and stabilizing the hospital's relationship with its workers.

In the face of a changing health-care landscape, the 15,000-employee system also briefly explored the possibility of merging with a bigger hospital chain, but it decided to remain independent.

Strong arrives from a state where, similar to Florida, the Legislature has decided not to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

"I would be an advocate of Medicaid expansion," Strong said. "It's valuable for patients and the state's economy."

Strong grew up outside of Oklahoma City, Okla., and has more than 20 years of experience in health-care management. He began his career in Baton Rouge, La., as vice president of operation and ambulatory care and executive vice president at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center.

He then moved to Mercy Health Center in Oklahoma City as CEO, where he expanded and renovated patient units and opened the Oklahoma Heart Hospital, urgent care centers and primary care practices.

Since 2004, he has been the president of Rex Healthcare, and CEO for system affiliations at the University of North Carolina Health Care System in Chapel Hill.

"We're very excited," said Dianna Morgan, chairman of the board of directors for the $2.1 billion nonprofit health system. "I think we have a bright future and we're excited to have someone who brings both the business acumen and skills but also is just a dynamic leader and we think he'll be a great asset to our community."

Strong said his first goal after arriving is "to spend a whole lot of time listening and then listening some more to community members, to physicians, to staff to understand what the opportunities and challenges would be."

Strong and his wife, Grace, have four children.

nmiller@orlandosentinel.com or 407-420-5158.