The crucifix in Quebec's National Assembly seems to be exempt from the government's secular initiative. (May 22, 2008) ( CLEMENT ALLARD / THE CANADIAN PRESS )

On Thursday, Quebec Premier Pauline Marois revealed that she would announce her government’s proposals for what she calls a “Charter of Quebec Values” on Sept. 9. This announcement will come weeks after the first bits of information — neither confirmed nor denied — leaked out, leading to a torrent of criticism and heated debate in Quebec and beyond. What’s it all about? Well, it probably won’t be about enacting significant policies. The most likely outcome is that nothing will get done, and even if legislation does emerge, it would most probably be watered down by court challenges or laden with so many exceptions as to make it virtually inoperable. Above all, this debate is an opportunity for parties and politicians to position themselves vis-à-vis an unpredictable electorate. One of the reasons the Parti Québécois has seized this issue is that Jean Charest’s Liberal government, after calling for a thorough review of religious accommodation, shelved the resulting 2008 Bouchard-Taylor report and left the issue in limbo, letting the PQ take the initiative on identity politics.

Article Continued Below

But, as a minority government, the PQ has not been in a position to make much headway in its quest to reunify sovereigntist and nationalist voters in the hope of getting a new shot at a majority. The Marois government’s project of “gouvernance souverainiste,” which has consisted of forcefully asserting Quebec’s policy autonomy, has not rekindled the sovereigntist flame, and its proposals to strengthen language laws was blocked by an opposition determined to deny the PQ any success on that front. The same will probably happen with any proposal emerging from the current debate on a charter of Quebec values, but not before all the parties maximize whatever political traction they can gain from it. The polls show that a sizable majority of Quebecers (mostly francophones) favour rules that set clear limits on religious accommodation and assert the secular nature of public institutions. But it’s an odd coalition.

Article Continued Below

On one side are progressives, closer to the PQ, who embrace Quebec’s break from its religious past and who particularly denounce the constraints on gender equality that result from the strict application of religious norms. On the other side are a dwindling number of more traditionally minded Catholics, who are witnessing the decline of their own prerogatives while other religions gain in strength, and who tend to lean toward the softer nationalism of the CAQ and the Liberals. Politicians have to tread lightly to avoid alienating these very different constituencies. This is why none of the major parties has endorsed the largely symbolic recommendation of the Bouchard-Taylor commission to remove the crucifix that hangs over the president’s chair in the National Assembly. To justify this glaring contradiction, the three major parties insist the object is a historical artifact. On closer examination, however, the history it refers to is one that most Quebecers wish to move away from, namely the late 1930s alliance between the Duplessis regime and the largely reactionary Catholic clergy. Politicians who repeat the “historical artifact” mantra keep a close eye on the polls, as a majority of respondents favour retaining this symbol. But if the PQ truly believes it can rally a majority behind its progressive vision of a secular state, it should remove the crucifix from the very spot where that secular state makes laws. As the debate drags on, opposition parties will cherry-pick the proposals that appeal to their nationalist base, while highlighting inconsistencies in the government’s positions and taking the PQ to task for bringing up divisive issues. In the end, it is highly unlikely that either opposition party would do the PQ the favour of assenting to any major element of its identity platform. Federal politicians have also entered the fray, seizing the opportunity to exploit the widespread intolerance in other parts of Canada for Quebecers’ assertion of their distinct identity. Most notably, Justin Trudeau didn’t hesitate to wrap himself in the mantle of his father’s vision of multiculturalism and play up prejudices with his outrageous comparison of the PQ’s alleged proposals with segregation in the American South a half-century ago — soon retracted but well heard. As stated at the outset, this debate is unlikely to lead to concrete legislative measures, although the truth is that this issue ranks far down the list of priorities for Quebecers. Unfortunately, however, the resulting cacophony will continue to divert attention from what Quebecers do regard as priorities, such as the slowing economy, on which all three parties should act in concert. Pierre Martin is a professor of political science at the Université de Montréal.

Read more about: