By Jill M. Williams

People think we fixed the cigarette problem in the United States. But smoking hasn’t gone away, although it may be less noticeable in your world. Smoking rates are disproportionately high among the poor, Medicaid recipients and those with behavioral health conditions, like mental illness or other addictions.

In fact, because of U.S. population increases in recent decades, there are roughly the same number of smokers now (43 million) as there were in 1964 (50 million), when the surgeon general launched the first report on smoking. But the burden has shifted to our most vulnerable citizens.

A new national report, "Broken Promises to Our Children: The 1998 State Tobacco Settlement 15 Years Later," details states’ allocation of tobacco settlement dollars and current tobacco control activities (online at tobaccofreekids.org).

New Jersey is one of the wealthiest states in America. However, the Garden State recently ranked last for tobacco control funding. New Jersey is the only state that currently spends zero dollars of state money to support tobacco prevention or treatment activities, despite collecting more than $700 million every year in tobacco taxes. New Jersey spends less to help smokers than much less affluent states such as Mississippi, Arkansas, Alabama and West Virginia.

This is something we all must reflect on. We may believe smokers are responsible for their own decisions. In truth, scientific evidence supports that nicotine dependence is biological like other addictions, which have a range of prevention and treatment activities supported by public funds.

Treating tobacco dependence is highly cost-effective. Massachusetts showed that providing Medicaid recipients with access to tobacco treatment resulted in fewer heart attack health claims within three years. Similarly, California experienced $3.60 in health care cost savings for every $1 spent on its statewide tobacco control program.

So a program that keeps young people from starting to smoke and helps current smokers quit almost certainly results in a return on investment in just a few short years. The problem is that our budget processes are often too shortsighted, answering only to the short term or next election cycle.

New Jersey once was a national leader in reducing smoking, including a high cigarette tax ($2.70 per pack) and comprehensive laws for clean indoor air. Despite this progress, significant disparities in smoking rates still exist and too little is being done to help socially and economically disadvantaged populations. Smoking rates are much higher in South Jersey (19 percent) compared with North or Central Jersey.

These data come from a 2009 report that is unfortunately already a few years old; no new data or current reports exist since 2009, when funding for the state’s Comprehensive Tobacco Control Program was eliminated after a decade of downsizing.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention identifies the essential elements of a state tobacco control program. This includes a variety of state-based and community programs to reduce the social desirability of tobacco use and target high-risk groups, such as youth and those with health disparities. A major component includes helping smokers quit.

Although states had to rely on free treatment services for smokers in the past, this need should diminish over time under the federal Affordable Care Act. Treatment programs are most effective when they are multipronged, including counseling and Food and Drug Administration-approved pharmacotherapy. Policy efforts include increases in tobacco excise taxes, comprehensive smoke-free workplace laws, greater restrictions on minors’ access to tobacco products and restrictions on marketing to kids.

New Jersey needs to reinstate funding for its Comprehensive Tobacco Control Program in 2014. Smoking hasn’t disappeared in New Jersey, but it has become a vital and costly issue for our most vulnerable citizens. As other states are moving ahead, we cannot be left behind.



Jill M. Williams, M.D., is a professor at Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School and chairman of the New Jersey Breathes coalition. Share your thoughts at njvoices.com.