An ad agency in Minneapolis has found an uncommon way to get its employees to work harder.

Colle+McVoy has built the TapServer, a keg machine that dispenses beer. Workers simply scan their magnetic card and the machine unlocks for those who have completed all their tasks and filled out their timesheets--on time.

Related: The New Workplace Trend: Smartphone Mini-Vacations

“The multi-keg beer deployment system uses RFID and custom-written software to verify whether you’ve stopped being a lazy git, finished your timesheets and earned your free pint,” reported AdWeek earlier this month. (Hopefully most are taking public transportation!)

This is not the only company going out of its way to motivate employees to work harder. It’s well known that companies including Google and other tech companies have free food or nap rooms available to workers.

Recently, some companies have come up with much more out-of-the-ordinary perks to motivate employees:

Lunch in the woods. Twitter added two century-old Montana log cabins to its San Francisco headquarters in April. The cabins serve as lunchrooms and office space.

“For Twitter, it’s just not something you can buy out of a catalog,” Olle Lundberg, whose firm designed the project, told the San Francisco Chronicle. “It helps to personalize and humanize the space.”

Egg freezing. Apple and Facebook captured attention earlier this month when they said they would help female employees pay to freeze their eggs.

“We want to empower women at Apple to do the best work of their lives as they care for loved ones and raise their families,” Apple said in a statement.

Related: How Men and Women Differ in the Workplace

Cars and diamonds. The generous boss of an Indian diamond polishing company has rewarded his more than 1,200 employees with cars, apartments and jewelry to celebrate early the Indian holiday of Diwali, the Guardian reported last week.

“It’s a refund of sorts to those who have stayed with us and helped improve our products,” the CEO told the British newspaper. “I know what it is like to have needs. When a worker is happy, he can do anything at all for you.”

Top Reads from The Fiscal Times: