Posted Thursday, December 10, 2015 11:45 am

He grew up helping his father serve pastrami sandwiches and knishes at Loeser’s Hebrew National Kosher Deli on West 231st Street. Now he is providing a different kind of care to residents at an emergency dental center a few blocks away.

Dr. Scott Loeser opened a walk-in urgent care dental clinic at 3509 Johnson Ave. on Saturday. He said it is the only facility of its kind in the city, filling a need that other medical facilities are unable to meet.

“Urgent care medical doesn’t take care of any dental issues. The same with an emergency room,” the dentist said. “That’s the big issue here — people don’t have any place to go. We’re open after hours. So when everybody else is closed, we’re open. We can handle anything.”

Dr. Loeser said the six-dentist staff divided between Johnson Avenue and his other urgent dental care office, in Scarsdale, can take cases ranging from mouth injuries to toothaches. An examination costs $100, with treatments like fillings ranging from $200 to $300. The dentist added that the Affordable Care Act, which has catalyzed major change within most of the health care industry, has had little effect on dental care in particular. He explained that the president’s policy requires health insurance for all, but only mandates dental coverage for children.

Dr. Loeser touted his new center as environmentally friendly, with LED lights and zero paperwork. All form are filled out via iPad, with documentation going to patients — and their dentists, if they have them — via email afterwards. The dental chairs in each of the three operatories face 40-inch flat-screen TVs with cable.

Dr. Loeser said his office, which is open from 4 to 9 p.m. on weekdays and from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on weekends, can provide quick fixes to people who have a regular dentist and provide help for those who might be too shy to trouble a typical dental office.

“A lot of patients don’t have dentists. They’re embarrassed to go into a dentist [and say], ‘Excuse me, I have a toothache.’ Here, it’ a storefront; we can take care of whatever they want,” he explained.