SEATTLE, July 24, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Enlightiks, a provider of data and predictive analytics products and services to healthcare providers, is using Tableau to help physicians understand and manage data about their patients and practices. To help its customers navigate the rapidly changing healthcare field, Enlightiks developed an analytics platform, with Tableau at its core, that lets physicians and administrators visualize massive amounts of data on patient history and patterns of care. Critically, the platform also helps physicians make accurate predictions on topics such as patient readmission.

Enlightiks Chief Medical Officer Dr. Bas Nair says that this type of information is vital to the future of the healthcare industry.

"The healthcare industry is undergoing massive change, particularly as the rollout of the Affordable Care Act requires a more technology-driven approach to health," said Dr. Nair. "But most physicians are not 'big data-ready,' nor are they IT experts or fluent in predictive analytics. Tableau is the perfect solution because it is powerful but easy to use and with it, we are able to make this transition much smoother for physicians."

To help physicians keep up with evolving regulations and standards, Enlightiks tracks 33 quality measures and visualizes the information in lightweight Tableau dashboards. These dashboards help private practices, large hospitals, and anything in between track their progress toward these goals.

For instance, Enlightiks' dashboards track readmission rates of patients, broken down by variables like gender, diagnosis, age group, condition, location, and more. In the hands of physicians, this data is a powerful tool to inform decisions about patient care and ultimately to improve patient outcomes. It's also a critical part of compliance to new standards under the Affordable Care Act.

"Tableau's dashboards are comprehensive enough to illustrate the complex data that physicians need and that regulations require, but they can be simple enough that physicians—not just data scientists—can understand them," said Dr. Nair. "When it's easy to see and understand patient and hospital data, physicians can spend more time focused on their patients and less time focused on computer screens."

About Tableau

Tableau Software (NYSE: DATA) helps people see and understand data. Tableau helps anyone quickly analyze, visualize and share information. More than 19,000 customer accounts get rapid results with Tableau in the office and on-the-go. And tens of thousands of people use Tableau Public to share data in their blogs and websites. See how Tableau can help you by downloading the free trial at www.tableausoftware.com/trial.

Tableau and Tableau Software are trademarks of Tableau Software, Inc. All other company and product names may be trademarks of the respective companies with which they are associated.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130718/SF48964LOGO

SOURCE Tableau Software