BARTOW | Polk County has a shortage of primary-care doctors, and that may pose a challenge to newly insured people seeking doctors of their own as the Affordable Care Act takes effect.

Getting insurance through the federal law's health exchange, which began enrolling people Tuesday, will eliminate one barrier for many who previously were uninsured. And it should make it easier for them to find doctors.

Just be prepared to wait for the ones you want.

Polk County has one primary-care physician for every 2,086 residents, according to the County Health Rankings of Florida's 67 counties, released in 2013. At that level, the group classifies Polk as medically underserved.

Polk ranks 35th in the state in its primary-care ratio. The statewide ratio is one primary-care doctor for each 1,439 residents. Nationwide, the ratio one physician per 1,067.

The lowest-ranked county in the state was Glades, with a ratio of one physician to 12,839 resident, and the top ranked was Alachua, with a ratio of one physician to 730.

"When you're already short of doctors, there are a lot of access issues," said internal medicine specialist Dr. Joy Jackson, medical director at Lakeland Volunteers in Medicine.

LVIM is one of several free clinics in Polk at which low-income, uninsured patients get office-type care. Some of its patients may be able to get insurance now under the new health-care law.

FIND A DOCTOR NOW

Jackson's advice to newly insured patients is: "Don't wait until you're sick to find a doctor. Go in and talk about preventative services."

Coverage starts in January for people who sign up for insurance by Dec. 15 by going through the marketplace created by the Affordable Care Act.

Prospective patients may want to call this year to set up doctor visits for 2014.

"If you try to make an appointment with a physician, you can wait two or three weeks," warned Dr. Donald Gale, Winter Haven Hospital's vice president of medical affairs.

Some local doctors aren't taking new patients, but others are. New doctors also are arriving in the county.

The shortage of primary-care doctors and some other specialists is part of a nationwide situation. Demand for care already was increasing faster than the doctor supply. Population growth and an aging population, including aging doctors, are two reasons.

Shortages vary, with disparities between rural and urban areas' in their ability to attract doctors and between the insured and uninsured in finding office-based care.

"If you're on Blue Cross, Blue Shield, there's not an access problem," Gale said, although you may have to wait to get into the doctor.

Polk County is at a disadvantage in recruiting when compared to coastal and more urban areas, he said.

Others interviewed were more optimistic about the supply of primary-care physicians.

It's been a long time since Watson Clinic had trouble hiring them, said Dr. Jorge Gonzalez, its medical director.

The clinic's size, stability, use of nurse practitioners and other practices that extend physician care, and the ability to let doctors do office-only practice are attractive, he said.

The clinic has 226 doctors and 67 mid-level employees, such as physician assistants, nurse practitioners and nurse anesthetists.

"Young doctors finishing their residencies perceive us as solid, stable, desirable," Gonzalez said.

Watson Clinic, Jay Care, Bond Clinic, and Clark and Clark & Daughtrey Medical Group are among medical clinics who employ hospitalists, hospital-based doctors, which lets others do office-only practice.

UNCERTAINTY IS A PROBLEM

Uncertainty about the Affordable Care Act, from knowing how many people will get insured to ongoing efforts to get the law repealed or to strip the program of funding, makes it hard for local physicians to predict how it could change the dynamics of Polk's doctor supply.

"They've only recently released some of the fees people will be paying for health insurance," said Dr. Arvind Soni, president-elect of the Polk County Medical Association. "The problem is the uncertainty. It's hard to expand without knowing what's going to happen."

Some uncertainty, doctors said, involves whether young, healthy patients will seek insurance or decide to pay a federal penalty for not having it.

Dr. Roxann Cook, a primary-care physician in South Lakeland, expects there will be more Polk residents looking for a doctor.

Many will have conditions they've left untreated due to lack of insurance, she said, and some will be eager to lower their medical costs.

"I have people I know who are in the process of going through enrollment," she said. "They've been on higher-cost medications they're having to pay for out of pocket."

Dr. Sergio Seoane, another primary-care doctor in Lakeland, said he doesn't think Polk will experience a significant increase in insured patients as a result of the Affordable Care Act.

"There's no incentive for anyone to get insurance," he said. "It's much cheaper to just pay the fine."

If a doctor already has a full patient load, Seoane said, adding many more patients could hurt quality.

Cook, with Mainsail at Southpoint Medical Group, also brought up the question of quality, saying affordable isn't the same thing as quality. Patients need to make sure they shop for high-caliber plans and physicians, as do those now on insurance.

Susan Sartain, director of physician relations at Bartow Regional Medical Center, said she also expects change to occur.

"We absolutely are looking for primary-care physicians," Sartain said. "We also are looking for specialists."

Southpoint Medical Group, the hospital's physicians, recently added Cook, who was practicing independently, as its first employed primary-care physician.

The others are a general surgeon, a vascular surgeon and a urologist.

If patient demand increases for a year or two, Gale said he hopes that will provide incentives for Polk communities to recruit more doctors.

Without guaranteed employment and an assured supply of insured patients, it can be hard to persuade primary-care doctors — a hot commodity — to come into a county.

MANY IN POLK LACK INSURANCE

Some Polk residents who lack health insurance see doctors on a self-pay basis or as charity patients. Others see them only sporadically, if at all.

More than 1 in 4 Polk residents ages 18 through 64 are uninsured. That's 95,103 uninsured people, 27.2 percent of the total that age.

There also are 16,070 Polk County children without health insurance, according to 2012 estimates from the U.S. Census Bureau.

Darlene Denton, 59, is one of Cook's patients.

She has insurance through her job as an elementary school paraprofessional. She didn't have it 20 years ago, when she was diagnosed with thyroid cancer, and said she still is paying for the cancer treatment she received from a specialist then.

Some people below 100 percent of the poverty level are ineligible for Medicaid under Florida guidelines. They also won't qualify for federal subsidies to help them buy insurance.

Gail Mucha, a crossing guard in Lake Wales, is in that income group.

She's been fortunate to get onto the Polk HealthCare Plan, funded by Polk's indigent-care sales tax, and sees a doctor for checkups.

When she was off the plan a few years ago, at a time when it had financial difficulties, Mucha, 57, said she couldn't afford health care.

"I just didn't go to a doctor at all," she said.

When she tried to get her teeth cleaned, a dental office asked what insurance she had, Mucha said, and she told them she would be paying herself. She hasn't forgotten their answer:

"They said ‘We don't take people like that.'"

[ Robin Williams Adams can be reached at robin.adams@theledger.com or 863-802-7558. Read her blog at robinsrx.blogs.theledger.com. Follow on Twitter @ledgerROBIN. ]