Former Federal Reserve official and Citigroup economist Nathan Sheets starts work Friday as a special counselor to the U.S. Treasury Secretary while he awaits confirmation as the department’s top economic diplomat.

If he’s approved by the Senate, what would he bring as Treasury’s undersecretary for international affairs?

Nathan Sheets Bloomberg News

He’s no stranger to crises. Mr. Sheets spent almost two decades at the Fed and ultimately served as head of its international finance division, where he helped direct emergency lending programs during the global financial crisis.

A review of recent commentary by Mr. Sheets as Citi’s global head of international economics shows a view of the world that’s largely in line with the Obama administration’s stance on several key global economic issues.

He worries that euro-zone officials aren’t moving fast enough to fix their banking problems. He’s upbeat about prospects for China to continue a healthy narrowing of its trade surplus, a major source of tension between the world’s two largest economies. He suggests emerging markets have themselves to blame for recent market turmoil, pointing to their burgeoning trade deficits as a “cautionary tale.” And he hasn’t been worried about the Bank of Japan pushing down the value of the yen too aggressively to jump-start a long-stagnant economy.

For example, he said at conference in December he’s concerned the euro zone’s banking system is heading toward another lending squeeze. That’s the last thing the region needs as it tries to claw out of a two-year recession and record unemployment threatens to fuel political tensions from Lisbon to Rome. European banks are trying to trim the amount of risky assets on bloated balance sheets. But with little quality capital available in the system, banks are cutting their balance sheets by ridding themselves of assets, including lending.

“This is creating a credit crunch that’s a powerful headwind on euro-area growth given the dependence the euro has on bank credit,” Mr. Sheets said at the conference hosted by George Washington University.

Many economists, including Mr. Sheets, say the European Central Bank and other euro-zone officials should be more proactive in their efforts to heal the currency union after years of debt crises and sluggish growth. The International Monetary Fund, for example, has urged the European Union to use its bailout cash to help inject needed capital into weak banks and has pressed the ECB to buy bonds in the market to help jump-start lending and growth in the ailing southern economies.

“The euro area would have been better served if the ECB had been more aggressive,” Mr. Sheets said at the time. Part of the problem is that the EU isn’t “an optimal currency union,” he added.

That means EU policymakers must press ahead with policies that better integrate member state’s budgets and financial systems, Mr. Sheets said in a February 2013 research note at Citigroup.

The secretary’s new counselor is particularly critical of Germany’s economic policies. Berlin, he said in a Citigroup analysis he co-authored in December, should “take more determined measures to stoke their domestic spending” to help spur growth in the weaker economies such as Greece, Spain and Portugal.

That assessment echoes Treasury’s recent swipe at Berlin in its last currency report. In October, the Treasury used unusually sharp language blaming the euro-zone powerhouse for dragging down its neighbors and the rest of the global economy.

Mr. Sheets appears to be more optimistic about the rebalancing of China’s trade surplus, one of the most contentious issues for many U.S. firms. American manufacturers say Beijing’s tight control over its currency has kept China’s production costs artificially low. Many U.S. companies also complain that China subsidizes much of its industrial-sector growth through its large state-owned businesses and prohibits foreign investment in the world’s most populous country.

“China’s surplus is expected to narrow slightly further over the next few years, as additional renminbi appreciation constrains the size of the [current-account] balance and the authorities’ emphasis on domestic demand-led growth supports imports,” Mr. Sheets said in the December Citigroup analysis. Furthermore, since China already accounts for 12% of global exports, he sees limited scope for further penetration of global market share.

That view is also similar to the Treasury Secretary’s outlook on China. In November after Beijing’s major policy summit, Secretary Jacob Lew said he expected China to continue reforms that would make the economy more market-determined.

Mr. Sheets also appears to have a sanguine view of Japan’s currency policy, another hot-button issue for U.S. firms. Many Washington-based economists worried that the new Bank of Japan governor Haruhiko Kuroda would depreciate the yen too much to help spark growth.

While the new governor would bring more ambitious rhetoric to monetary policy and buy larger amounts of securities, “ultimately, the pivot in policy is likely to fall short of the expectations of some market participants,” Mr. Sheets said in a March Citigroup report.

His prediction has, so far, proved accurate.