× Republican presidential candidate Chris Christie: You Decide 2016

Campaign ended: Feb. 10, 2016

Current position: New Jersey Governor

Career: New Jersey Governor 2010-present, U.S. Attorney for the District of New Jersey 2002-2008.

Hometown: Newark, New Jersey

Family: Married to Pat Foster with four children

Religion: Roman Catholic

On the issues:

Economy: Christie wants a simpler income tax system, which reducing deductions and giveaways. He says too many federal policies discourage people from working. He also proposes eliminating the patrol tax for those above 62 or below 25.

Education: The governor wants to expand access to charter schools, give students options in failing school districts and reform tenure for teachers so it is based on performance. Christie is in favor of giving most federal higher education assistance to lower-income students while promoting alternatives to four-year universities.

Environment: Christie vetoed measures that would limit fracking in his home state of New Jersey. He supports the Keystone XL pipeline and says we should take advantage of our energy resources domestically.

Gun control/rights: Christie’s voting history indicates he vetoed bans on high-capacity magazines, bans on state investments in gun manufacturers and bans on certain classes of rifles.

Health care: The New Jersey Governor says he would repeal the Affordable Care Act. Christie supports a ban on abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy.

Immigration: According to Christie, the U.S. should have a wall in certain locations along the border with Mexico, like in urban areas. He says this country should eliminate funding for sanctuary cities, track people overstaying their visas and hold employers that exploit illegal workers accountable.

National security: “A strong military doesn’t just help us to deal with the threats we face. It helps eliminate them before we even see them,” according to the governor. He says it is important to reinforce our commitment to our allies.

Social issues: Much of Christie’s social policy focuses on criminal justice reform, like one-stop reentry services, job training for inmates and banning the box on job applications, which asks if the person has been convicted of a crime. He says marriage should be between a man and a woman, but calls the Supreme Court decision “the law of the land.”

Social:

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/govchristie

Instagram: https://instagram.com/chrischristie/

Twitter: https://twitter.com/chrischristie

Website: https://www.chrischristie.com/