In a top-floor office on the outskirts of Seneca, an insurance co-op that served 530 small businesses statewide has gone dark.

The South Carolina Health Cooperative, which offered "stable rates" and "fully-insured plans," has been taken over by the state with millions of dollars in unpaid claims still owed.

"Health insurance is an expensive item that we all pay. This was just an attempt to go a different route to try to be less expensive," South Carolina Department of Insurance director Ray Farmer said.

When the co-op started in 2012, its monthly premiums were noticeably less expensive, according to former members. One woman told WYFF News 4 Investigates that premiums were "25-percent cheaper than other plans" she had looked into.

SCHC's young founder, Cooper Littlejohn, convinced 530 businesses to sign up.

But in Nov. 2014, state insurance officials seized control of the 2-year-old co-op. Unpaid claims totaled $11.2 million. SCHC was declared to be in "hazardous financial condition," according to court documents.

"It's obvious that their premium rates were competitive, because they were able to lure in the employers, but the premiums were deficient," special deputy receiver Mike Fitzgibbons told WYFF News 4 Investigates.

To make matters worse, SCHC's two letters of credit, which served as security for the co-op's reserves, were determined to be fraudulent.

"That was just a tough day," Farmer said, when asked about the fraudulent letters of credit. "Someone knew better than to do that, but who, when and what, the investigations will determine that."

Officials confirmed that the F.B.I. and U.S. Department of Labor are investigating the matter.

"I blame myself for a lot of what happened," former SCHC president Littlejohn told WYFF News 4 Investigates on the phone.

But Littlejohn refused to answer detailed questions about the ongoing investigations.

Officials say an "anonymous interest" donated $5 million to offset SCHC's unpaid medical claims.

But more than $6 million is still owed to medical providers. In its proposed rehabilitation plan, state insurance officials are asking providers to write off the remaining amount.