From how employees log the hours they work to how they apply for jobs, RMPersonnel has seen many changes in its 25 years in business.

Gone are the days of paper time cards and hard copy applications. Now employees record time worked using biometric time clocks and computer apps; jobseekers log on to the company website to apply for employment; and the use of web portals is prevalent.

While technology remains the biggest change over the years, Ceci Miles Mulvihill, the company’s president and CEO, says keeping up with regulations and compliance issues is a constant challenge.

Lately, the Affordable Care Act – also known as the ACA or Obamacare – has been a major focus for RMPersonnel, along with making sure temporary employees have access to health insurance.

Because the rules for Obamacare differ depending on how many employees a company has, RMPersonnel decided to create a separate holding company, RMP Temps, that would allow a different health plan for temporary employees.

Then there are the recent changes for how regulations from OSHA – the Occupational Safety and Health Administration – are applied to the temp industry. Temp companies like RMP are now considered just as responsible for on-the-job injuries as the client where workers are assigned.

“When an employee gets hurt, they look at both of us to ensure that employee has a safe working environment,” Mulvihill says. “We had to inform our clients of the change and work with them to provide a comprehensive safety program.”

One of RMPersonnel’s clients says their focus on safety has been beneficial to their clients.

“They’re strong on safety-related issues and make sure our environment is safe for all of our employees,” says Sergio Castañeda, operations manager for Halla-Visteon Climate Group.

Since its founding in 1990, RMPersonnel has grown from $10 million in revenue to $35 million, Mulvihill said, with more than 1,200 temp employees working in El Paso and Laredo on any given day. More than 150 employers contract with RMP for either temp services or PEO – professional employer organization to manage their entire HR duties – or both.

“It’s about hard work, showing up and learning from your failures,” says Mulvihill, the company’s president and CEO.

She credits RMPersonnel’s steady growth to the solid business reputation established over the years and the Miles name. Referrals and word of mouth drew clients to the business, many from the maquila industry and relationships established by her father, Rudolph Miles, through his successful customs brokerage business.

Miles launched RMPersonnel in 1990. Over the years, he transferred control to Mulvihill and her four sisters. Today, Mulvihill and one sister own interests in the business.

Initially, Mulvihill’s experience with what’s called a PEO was limited. A PEO shares responsibility for a client’s employees, becoming their employer of record for tax and insurance purposes.

She had worked in the family business at a young age and got a taste of human resources working at the Popular Department Store while in college.

But her first professional job was teaching fourth and fifth grade at Crockett Elementary. She left the classroom to have a baby and never returned, realizing the business world was her true calling.

“My passion has been finding employment solutions for clients,” she says.

When RMPersonnel opened in 1990, the company offered clients the PEO service, which includes payroll, workers comp, employment taxes, HR, benefits and all levels of staffing assistance. Later, they ventured into the temporary business as clients increasingly asked for short-term employment services.

“With PEOs, you are the back office,” she says. “We save them time on employment issues so it allows clients to grow their business and not have to worry about those issues. They normally do not have HR departments, so we become that.”

Halla-Visteon Climate Group has been using RMPersonnel’s services for more than two decades.

“When you have someone taking care of the personnel issues, you can focus on productivity,” Castañeda says. “RMPersonnel has helped us maintain costs and stay at a competitive level.”

Mulvihill says RMPersonnel’s strengths come from the longevity of its 33 employees and a company culture that relies on teamwork and professionalism.

The company has three locations: its headquarters on Montana at Raynolds, a satellite office on Doniphan Drive and another in Laredo. Mulvihill’s daughter, Amber Vargas, is operations manager.

“Our employees have great energy,” she says. “We are so fortunate to have employees who are always looking out for the best interest of the client.”

Looking ahead 25 years, Mulvihill expects RMPersonnel to grow into other Texas cities.

“I foresee that the biggest percentage of our business will come from the warehousing and distribution centers, as well as manufacturing plants,” she says. “This has been our mainstay for the first 25 years and, most likely, will continue to dominate our client base. However, I also foresee expansion into other fields that are more clerical in nature, such as providing staffing for medical offices and retail.”