The staff at Planned Parenthood prepares the clinic for patients prior to opening hours on S. 7th St. Credit: Gary Porter

By of the

Jennifer Waloway, a nurse practitioner who oversees six family planning clinics in northeastern Wisconsin, was opening the mail in August when she came upon a letter from the state.

It asked NEWCAP Community Health Services, which runs the clinics, to please submit a check payable to the State of Wisconsin. The amount: $1,169,837.10.

"I was a little in shock," Waloway said.

The letter from the Office of the Inspector General at the Department of Health Services said its audit showed that NEWCAP incorrectly had billed — and been paid — by the Medicaid and BadgerCare Plus programs for prescription drugs and for some services in 2010 and 2011. The requested repayment was just slightly less than the clinics' estimated revenue of $1.2 million for all of this year.

Family Planning Health Services, which operates 11 clinics in north-central Wisconsin, received a similar letter later that month. It was asked to send a check for $2,324,750.73.

The organization, based in Wausau, has annual revenue of about $3.4 million and operates at a slight loss.

NEWCAP and Family Planning Health Services, as well as other organizations that provide reproductive health services in the state, contend they were paid for contraceptives and other prescription drugs at a rate agreed upon and set by the Department of Health Services in 2009.

"We've been following the instructions we have been given, and we've been following them for five years," said Molly Fuller, president and chief executive of Family Planning Health Services.

All of the family planning clinics, including those run by Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin, are paid the same rate by the state.

"We are all doing it the same way," said Nicole Safar, director of policy and legal advocacy for Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin.

The Office of the Inspector General's contention, first reported by the Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism, has raised more questions than answers.

How could the clinics overbill for contraceptives and other prescription drugs when the state sets the payment rate? And if the state did pay the clinics too much for the drugs, how could it go undetected for five years?

The Department of Health Services isn't saying. The department declined to comment on the audits or explain how it pays family planning clinics for birth-control bills and other prescription drugs.

Nor has it answered questions raised by the family planning organizations in their response to the audits.

"It feels absurd" to the clinics, said Diane Welsh, a lawyer representing NEWCAP and Family Planning Health Services. "They believe they are doing exactly what they are supposed to do."

Millions at stake

The Department of Health Services would not comment on whether it plans to audit the other family planning organizations in the state.

If the Office of the Inspector General's audits are correct, and if they are expanded in scope, the state would stand to collect tens of millions of dollars. The existing audits were for only two of the past five years. And Planned Parenthood, which has 23 health centers in the state and sees almost 50,000 patients a year, is much larger than the two organizations that were audited.

But the audits are not necessarily the main worry of the family planning organizations.

"In the end, I'm very confident they will prevail," said Welsh, a former chief legal counsel at the Department of Health Services.

The organizations are worried the state will change the way it reimburses them for contraceptives and other prescriptions.

"That's when we really are in trouble," Safar said. "That's when clinics start closing."

Planned Parenthood estimates it would lose $4.5 million in revenue if the programs changed the way they pay for contraceptives and other prescriptions without an offsetting increase in the reimbursement rates for clinical services.

The family planning clinics are among the health care organizations that can buy prescription drugs at a discount under what is known as the federal 340B program.

The BadgerCare Plus and Medicaid programs agreed to pay the clinics more than the discounted drugs cost to offset the low fees the health programs pay for clinical services, Welsh and others said.

For example, the programs pay $26.02 for a month's supply of birth control pills that typically cost the family planning organizations $9 to $15.

At the same time, BadgerCare Plus and Medicaid reimburse the family-planning clinics less than the programs pay other providers and far below what private health plans pay.

The programs pay only $24.99 for a basic office visit, said Waloway of NEWCAP. For a visit by a new patient, which may take 30 to 45 minutes, the programs pay just $52.46

Could NEWCAP's clinics stay open without the markup on birth-control pills?

"We couldn't," Waloway said.

'Always felt vulnerable'

The Department of Health Services pays for reproductive health care through BadgerCare Plus and a program now known as Family Planning Only Services.

The federal government picks up 85% to 90% of the cost of the Family Planning Only Services program for the state.

It was designed for women and men, ages 15 to 44, who weren't eligible for BadgerCare Plus, and it predates the changes from the Affordable Care Act. In addition to contraceptives and family planning services, the program pays for testing for cervical cancer, sexually transmitted diseases, HIV and pregnancy. It also covers treating sexually transmitted diseases.

People with incomes of up to 300% of the federal poverty threshold — $35,010 this year — are eligible for the program. If someone is under 19, his or her parents' income is not used to determine eligibility.

BadgerCare Plus, the state's largest Medicaid program, pays for roughly half of the births in the state, and supporters of the program contend it saves the state tens of millions of dollars a year.

"We are preventing unwanted pregnancies that otherwise would be paid for by Medicaid," said Safar of Planned Parenthood. But she added, "We've always felt very vulnerable around this program."

The program is opposed by groups that contend tax dollars should not be used to fund birth control, particularly certain types of birth control that some people consider forms of abortion.

Some groups, such as Pro-Life Wisconsin, oppose any state or federal funding for Planned Parenthood, which operates three clinics in Wisconsin that perform abortions.

Those clinics do not receive state grants for family planning services, and state and federal law prohibits public funds from being used to pay for abortions except in certain circumstances, such as when it is medically necessary to save the life of the woman or when the pregnancy was the result of rape or incest.

Still, roughly 65% of Planned Parenthood's patients are covered by Medicaid programs. NEWCAPS Community Health Services said that more than 90% of its 3,400 patients are covered by Medicaid programs. And Family Planning Health Services estimates that more 80% of its 6,000 patients are covered by the programs.

Review underway

For now, NEWCAP Community Health Services and Family Planning Health Services must convince the Department of Health Services that they together don't owe the state $3.5 million.

In an email, Stephanie Smiley, a spokeswoman for the Department of Health, said the Office of the Inspector General "is conducting a thorough analysis of the additional information that has been provided on these audits."

Only after the information has been reviewed would the clinics receive a "notice of intent to recover" letter.

The two organizations could then request a hearing before an administrative law judge. That ruling could be appealed to a court.

More than three months later, though, the Department of Health Services has yet to contact the organizations.

"We have not heard a single word from them," said Robert Keller, the chief executive of NEWCAP, who wrote to Health Services Secretary Kitty Rhoades in September.

To NEWCAP and the other family planning organizations, the issue should have been resolved by now.

"They are just waiting for someone to come to their senses," said Welsh, their attorney.