A conservative organization is launching an ad campaign against Gov. Dennis Daugaard’s plan to expand Medicaid, targeting conservative voters to mobilize against the plan.

Americans for Prosperity, a heavyweight among conservative grassroots organizations, started the campaign this morning by running radio ads on KELO Newstalk radio in Sioux Falls and KOTA-AM in Rapid City. Ben Lee, the group’s state director, said the ad buy would run for at least a week, and could be expanded.

Expanding Medicaid, the ad says, would drive up the federal debt, which is a big concern to many fiscal conservatives in South Dakota. Medicaid is a state/federal health program for the poor, and the president’s Affordable Care Act allows states to expand the program to poorer adults who aren’t already covered.

The ad features two women speaking in a restaurant. One says she’s been reading about Medicaid expansion and she asks the other what it’s about.

The other woman – identified as Mary – explains that it was part of President Obama’s health care expansion, and she says that expanding Medicaid would add nearly $400 million a year to the national debt.

“And they expect us to pay for this?” says the first woman.

“Our children and grandchildren, too,” Mary answers.

The first woman then says that she thought South Dakotans were trying to stop Obamacare, not expand it. She asks what she can do about stopping it. Mary conveniently tells her to call Gov. Daugaard’s office, giving the phone number twice: “Tell him South Dakota doesn’t need Obama’s Medicaid expansion,” she says.

The ad was produced in-house by AFP’s state organization, Lee said. It’s running hourly and more frequently during drive times.

Lee described it as a “significant ad buy” to be able to run it hourly and during drive times.

Several lawmakers have expressed concerns about expanding the program because of cost overruns in other states, Lee said.

“There are quite a few of them that are concerned about it because of the costs and because of the unknowns,” he said.

Daugaard’s plan centers on the federal government picking up the tab of Native American health care that the state is currently paying. If the federal government can do that, then the state would be able to shift tens of millions of dollars into expanding Medicaid.

The state of South Dakota is leaving millions of dollars on the table by not expanding Medicaid. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Read or Share this story: http://www.argusleader.com/story/blogs/jonathanellis/2016/01/25/conservatives-target-medicaid-plan/79313174/