Buy Photo Several New Jersey Transit trains have been delayed, according to the agency’s website. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)Buy Photo

NEWARK — NJ Transit board members are set to earmark storm relief funding and provide funding for private ferry lines at their monthly board meeting on Wednesday.

The board likely won’t be faced with the stiff opposition that appeared in July, when the board unanimously voted to increase fares by 9 percent beginning Oct. 1. Much of the Wednesday agenda concerns routine housekeeping measures.

Here are three highlights from the NJ Transit board’s agenda.

1.) More money for storm resilience

The board will likely earmark an additional $11.5 million to Morris County engineering firm BEM Systems, Inc., – already approved for $6.3 million – to prepare Environmental Impact Statements and filing for National Environmental Policy Act permits.

Such permits are required for the five major projects funded with $2 billion in relief from the U.S. Department of Transportation, designed to prevent losses like those suffered during Hurricane Sandy.

A monitoring report analyzing how NJ Transit has spent its Sandy relief aid did not detail the "observations and recommendations" it found. NJ Transit denied an Open Public Records Act request by the Asbury Park Press seeking clarification on the recommendations.

Nearly $844,000 of the contract will go towards development of the Coastal Storm Surge Emergency Warning System, which will monitor extreme weather events that could damage NJ Transit facilities, especially its Hoboken terminal and maintenance complex in the Meadowlands.

The Davidson Laboratory at the Stevens Institute of Technology would provide raw data to the Coastal Storm Surge Emergency System. BEM Systems will develop a platform for NJ Transit to analyze the data.

2.) Capital funding for private ferry carriers

Though it does not operate its own ferry service, NJ Transit works closely with private ferry lines, especially those in northern New Jersey.

Train and ferry schedules are often linked to provide easy transfers. During emergencies – such as the rampant closures that plagued commuters in July — ferries often cross-honor rail passes to get commuters home.

But without public funding, ferry service is often looked at as a luxury that has priced out average commuters.

Enter NJ Transit’s Ferry Capital Improvement Program.

NJ Transit already includes ferry statistics when applying for federal funding, but its Capital Improvement Program will provide a legal mechanism for the agency to provide capital funding to those private ferry lines, used for repairs or purchasing new equipment.

Last year, NJ Transit approved a $2.5 million purchase of 10 new buses for NY Waterway, which provides free shuttle service from various commuter locations -- including NJ Transit stops -- to its major terminals in northern New Jersey. The company also operates ferry service from the Belford terminal in Middletown.

In July, NY Waterway founder Arthur Imperatore, Sr., said ferry funding could allow for lower fares, in turn providing another mass transit option for commuters.

3.) Strict advertising rules

Submitting an advertisement to be placed at NJ Transit stations is about to get a lot more rigorous.

New rules up for adoption by the board prohibit any advertisements that “express or advocate an opinion, position or viewpoint on matters of public debate about economic, political, moral, religious or social issues.” The last set of advertising restrictions simply outlawed anything deemed “controversial.”

Tobacco advertisements of any kind are already prohibited but the new restrictions specifically prohibit e-cigarette advertisements.

NJ Transit’s current advertising restrictions read like a public school dress code. Ads posted at the agency’s stations can’t promote illegal activity or include graphic violence, obscenities or weapons.

Companies can’t provide information that may be misconstrued as misleading, deceptive or “controversial,” which would promote vandalism.

Mike Davis: (732) 643-4223; mdavis@gannettnj.com

WHAT: NJ Transit board meeting

WHEN: Wed., Sept 9 at 9 a.m.

WHERE: NJ Transit headquarters, 1 Penn Plaza East, 07105

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1ERR0o0