Last night, the 7th Congressional District primary debate was hosted in Kane Hall by KCTS 9, Crosscut, and the UW.

Many attended to familiarize themselves with some of the candidates running to replace U.S. Rep. Jim McDermott, who has been representing the 7th Congressional District for 27 years.

Only six of the nine candidates were able to make it to the first televised debate of the race: state Sen. Pramila Jayapal; former Burien mayor Arun Jhaveri; current King County Council chair Joe McDermott; independent candidate Leslie Regier; political adviser Don Rivers; and state Rep. Brady Piñero Walkinshaw .

All candidates excluding Regier, who has no preference, prefer the Democratic Party.

The debate was moderated by KCTS 9 producer and anchor Enrique Cerna, KCTS 9 political analyst and editorial adviser Joni Balter, and managing editor Drew Atkins of Crosscut, a nonprofit news organization.

Throughout the debate, candidates had one minute to respond to questions on pressing domestic and international issues.

A few of the domestic issues discussed concerned addressing gun violence, undocumented immigrants, the Black Lives Matter movement, accessible public health care, the Islamic state, the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and using private corporations for campaign financing.

The Affordable Health Care Act was brought up during the discussion on health care, and the majority of the candidates agreed that, while the act was a good step in the right direction, it needs revision and improvement to meet the needs of all Americans.

“Health care is a human right,” Walkinshaw said. “Reproduction rights are a human right.”

The candidates also explicitly agreed that candidates running for political positions should not accept contributions from private sponsors in order to prevent political corruption.

“I have not taken any money from corporate PACs,” Jayapal said. “Over 30,000 people contribute to my funding and 96 percent of them have given under $100 each. Citizens United needs to be overturned and campaigns should rely on public financing.”

Regarding the Black Lives Matter movement, the candidates were asked whether black lives or all lives matter.

Rivers, Jayapal, McDermott, and Walkinshaw stressed that black lives matter, and highlighted how institutionalized racism and discrimination play a key role in the existing policies that do not support African-Americans.

“If you are an African-American child at age 2, you are already discriminated [against],” Jayapal said. “They are basing the futures of African-Americans off third grade test scores. That is wrong.”

“The Black Lives Matter movement is not only a movement about the value of lives,” McDermott said. “But also a movement to recognize the institutional racism we need to abolish in America along with the school-to-prison pipeline.”

In contrast, Jhaveri and Regier were hesitant to disagree with the statement that all lives matter.

“Trans lives matter, police lives matter,” Regier said. “If I keep going, we’re eventually going to end with all lives matter.”

While the candidates shared similar responses, their priorities for policy are evidently different. McDermott and Jayapal focus on issues regarding social and labor inequities; Jhaveri focuses on cost-effectiveness in budget utilization; and Walkinshaw focuses on addressing global climate change.

The debate will be broadcast on KCTS 9 on June 1 at 7 p.m.

Reach reporter Yemas Ly at news@dailyuw.com. Twitter: @Yemas_Ly