Cooper County Memorial Hospital CEO Allen Waldo resigned this week, just days after the struggling Boonville hospital entered into a management agreement with a company that specializes in operating small, rural health care providers.

Mike Conway, chairman of the Cooper County Memorial Hospital Board of Trustees, said Waldo submitted his resignation to the board Tuesday, and it is effective today. An interim CEO should be in place by the middle of next week. He declined to get into specifics when asked whether Waldo's departure was planned as part of the new management contract.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

"It's a personnel issue," Conway said. "Allen's submitted his resignation, and the board's accepted it."

Last week, the Boonville hospital entered into a management agreement with Kansas City-based Rural Community Hospitals of America, or RCHA. RCHA manages and operates small hospitals and provides consulting services, according to its website.

"We still believe very strongly we have a good group working with us, and" RCHA is "working on developing a business plan," Conway said.

Last summer, the hospital's trustees and staff raised the alarm that unless more people used Cooper County Memorial's services, it faced closure within a year. The hospital has struggled with years of deficits, and small rural health providers as a whole face difficulty coping with changes in the health care industry. The overhaul of the health care industry under the Affordable Care Act has many expecting consolidation among providers as they struggle to adapt to changes in the payment system.

In Cooper County's case, it faces the additional hurdle of competing with nearby Columbia.

It's unclear how the RCHA management contract affects an effort in the Missouri General Assembly to allow hospitals in Boone and Cooper counties to work together. The legislation, which passed the Missouri House last week but is still awaiting a vote in the Senate, was pushed by area legislators and written to exempt Boone and Cooper counties from current rules prohibiting county-owned hospitals from offering services in third-class counties that already have a public hospital.

The RCHA contract, on the other hand, will allow the Boonville hospital to work with either the University of Missouri Health System or the BJC HealthCare-managed Boone Hospital, Conway said.

RCHA hopes to finish a business plan on the hospital's future by the end of next week, and then the board of trustees and the community will weigh in, Conway said.

"Certainly getting community buy-in, to me, that will be an important part of it," he said.