While cleaning out my Princeton office, I became all too aware of the ephemeral nature of policy writing. A depressingly large share of the books on my shelves consisted of 30 years’ worth of books about the crucial decade ahead. Oh well. But as I added all those books to the giveaway pile, I found myself doing a bit of self-referential and maybe self-indulgent thinking, not about the decade ahead, but about the decade behind.

You see, it’s almost 10 years since I started writing about the financial crisis and the Great Recession. True, at first I didn’t know that that was what I was writing about; it began with the diagnosis of a housing bubble, whose bursting I knew would be bad but had no idea would be this bad. Still, there has been a pretty consistent arc, and I find myself thinking about what I got right and what I got wrong.

The starting point, as I said, was the housing bubble. I certainly wasn’t the first to warn on that front; Dean Baker, in particular, was both much earlier and much more forceful. Still, what I think of as my first crisis article did, I think, add value by pointing out the huge difference in price behavior between building-contrained states and others. If you looked at national averages, it was just possible to argue that prices made sense, but once you broke out the right subset of states and cities, the craziness stared you in the face. And the bifurcation was overwhelmingly confirmed in the years that followed:

Photo

That was the beginning. Since then, what have I been right about and what have I been wrong about?

Things I got right

1. The housing bubble: It’s very much worth remembering just how much bubble denial there was, and how much it was politically driven; I got a lot of “you only say there’s a bubble because you hate Bush.”

2. Inflation, or the lack thereof: I’ve written about this many times, but after the bubble burst I was an unwavering advocate of the view that the Fed’s expansionary policies posed no inflationary risk. This was again a deeply contentious issue, with the right fully convinced that inflation was coming and some on the center and left at least wobbly on the issue.

3. Interest rates: No crowding out under these conditions. I said it strongly from the start — and on this subject there was a lot of wavering among Democrats, all too many of whom bought into stories about deficit dangers even in a depressed economy.

4. Austerity hurts: A lot of people who should have known better bought into the confidence fairy, or at least accepted the notion that multipliers were fairly small; I said big multipliers under current conditions, little or no offset from confidence, and the research has caught up with and vindicated that position.

5. Inadequate stimulus: I warned, early and often, that the ARRA was hugely inadequate, and that its inadequacy would have lasting consequences — that by falling short, it would discredit the whole notion of stimulus as far as politics was concerned. Alas, I was right.

6. Internal devaluation is nasty, brutish, and long: I argued from the start that adjusting relative prices within the euro area would be extremely hard, that nobody has the kind of wage and price flexibility that would make “internal devaluation” easy — and that countries able to carry out currency devaluations, like Iceland, would have a much easier time.

7. Obamacare is workable: A quite different subject, but back in my book Conscience of a Liberal I argued (not originally) that an ACA-type system of mandates, regulation, and subsidies, while not anything you would build from scratch, would work (I wanted a public option, but that’s another story). Lots of disagreement, both from right-wingers predicting a death spiral and people on the left declaring that it was single-payer or nothing.

Things I got wrong

1. The scale of the disaster: I saw a housing bubble, knew the aftermath would be bad, but had no idea how bad. I was blissfully ignorant of the rise of shadow banking, wasn’t thinking about household debt, and wasn’t paying attention to imbalances within the euro are.

2. Deflation: I thought that Japanese-style deflation was an imminent risk in all depressed economies. Instead, low but positive inflation has been remarkably persistent. I now think that I underestimated the important of downward nominal rigidity, which combined with dispersal of shocks — some workers and firms face strong demand even in a weak economy — tends to keep prices rising even in a depressed world.

3. Euro crackup: For the most part, I think my analysis of the euro area’s economy and its problems was pretty good (but see below). But I vastly overestimated the risk of breakup, because I got the political economy wrong — I did not realize just how willing euro elites would be to impose vast suffering in the name of staying in. Relatedly, I didn’t realize how easy it would be to spin a modest upturn after years of horror as success.

4. Liquidity effects on sovereign debt: Finally, I’m sorry to say that I completely missed the important of liquidity and cash shortages in driving bond prices in the euro area. It wasn’t until Paul DeGrauwe weighed in that I realized just how much difference it would make if the ECB did its job as lender of last resort; if the euro survives, DeGrauwe — and this guy named Draghi, who put his ideas into practice — should get a lot of the credit.

I’ve probably missed some things, although I do think it’s interesting how many of my critics feel the need to attack my record by inventing predictions and claims that I never made. Still, I think that’s the main stuff, and although I have definitely been fallible, I think I did OK — mainly because I never let fashionable worries divert me from basic macroeconomics, and always tried to apply the lessons of history.