Office of Superintendent of Insurance seeks insight into surprise and balance billing practices in New Mexico.

Buy Photo Bruce Ball, of Las Cruces, looks over his medical bills near his mailbox on Tuesday, March 8, 2016. Ball recently experienced a surprise medical bill after a visit to the Emergency Room at Memorial Medical Center, which is in his insurance plan's network. He received two bills: one from the hospital and another from the physician, which he was not expecting to receive. (Photo: Robin Zielinski / Sun-News)Buy Photo

LAS CRUCES - After a visit to the emergency room at Memorial Medical Center in December, Bruce Ball, a Las Cruces resident, was surprised when he received two separate bills — both in high amounts — for the services provided.

Ball said he went to the emergency room on a Friday evening because he had an abscessed tooth, and at the time he didn’t know of any other place to go. He chose to go to MMC because the hospital is in his insurance plan’s network.

“I sat and waited almost an hour and the doctor came out and I told him what was wrong and he gave me a prescription for the swelling,” Ball said.

Ball, who has insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield, said he expected the bill to be about $250, but it was $608. BCBS paid a portion, bring the tally to $486. Thinking this bill covered all services provided during his visit to the emergency room, he paid the bill with his credit card, receiving a 30 percent discount for paying the amount in full. Now he was out $340.

About a week later, Ball received a second bill for $392 from the physician. While Ball was not aware at the time of service, the physician who treated him at the emergency room was outside of Ball’s health plan. Therefore, none of his bill was covered by his insurance.

“Had the doctor been in my network, my bill from the doctor would have been $43.86,” Ball said. “But because every doctor bills on their own, they charged me out of network, which was $392.”

What's going on?

Situations like Ball’s have been an issue for years and have become increasingly common in the past three years, with patients throughout the country receiving surprise medical bills, sometimes for exorbitant amounts. To address the issue, New Mexico’s Office of Superintendent of Insurance will host webinars and meetings for New Mexico residents to gain better insight into surprise and balance billing practices.

In Las Cruces, a forum is scheduled at 6 p.m. Wednesday, March 23, at Doña Ana Community College, 3400 S. Espina St., in the Main Building, room 96.

“We know we need to do this because we have been receiving some complaints in this office and they are becoming more prevalent, and we thought this was the time to get the (health insurance) industry and the public involved,” New Mexico Superintendent of Insurance John Franchini said.

Surprise billing is when a consumer receives an unexpected bill from a provider they were unaware was not within their health plan or when an insurance company pays less than expected on the amount of a procedure or treatment, Franchini said.

In some cases, consumers also are being charged under a different billing code for certain preventive care and screening services that should be covered by their health plan under the Affordable Care Act, he said.

While the National Association of Insurance Commissioners recently released a Model Network Adequacy Law, which addresses the surprise billing issue on a national level, OSI's meetings and webinars will take the issue a step further and provide an opportunity to review regulations and resources to ensure the best protections for New Mexico consumers, Franchini said.

“We want to hear what the people are actually experiencing, how this issue is affecting the providers and the (insurance) carriers and what we can do in our office to help enforce the protections currently in place,” he said.

Franchini said consumers getting bills from physicians outside of their health plan’s network is common in hospitals in rural areas, where the providers are contracted through staffing agencies and aren’t directly contracted with health insurance plans.

“We don’t have enough specialists and medical providers so that every community in our state can have these providers as residents in the area and contracted with the insurance companies and that’s a problem,” he said. “If we had enough providers and doctors in our state, I don’t think we would have a surprise billing problem at all. We have not had enough doctors for the last 15 years.”

Along with gaining a better understanding of surprise billing problems, the forums will help consumers connect to OSI’s free resources for addressing private health insurance questions, concerns, complaints, appeals, or grievances, according to a news release.

According to a national survey by Consumer Reports, in the past two years, 30 percent of privately insured consumers received a surprise medical bill nationwide, but only 64 percent of those took action to resolve the issue, Franchini said.

“That means we have a lot of work to do to let the public know they have options to resolve their bills and we can help begin this conversation with their providers and their health plans,” he said.

Those who have received a surprise medical bill and need assistance can attend forums, webinars or contact the Managed Health Care Bureau at osi.state.nm.us or by calling 1-855-427-5674.

“Once we find out exactly how prevalent the problems are with surprise billing, then we’ll be working with our policy holders, our insurance companies and medical providers to solve this problem,” Franchini said. “No one wants to have surprise billing out in the marketplace, so we are going to do this together to solve this.”

Forum and webinar reservation requests can be sent to OSI.RSVP@state.nm.us or via phone at 505-322-2186. Space is limited. Webinar details will be sent via email once registration is logged.

Alexia Severson may be reached at 575-541-5462, aseverson@lcsun-news.com or @AlexiaMSeverson on Twitter.

If you go

What: 2016 Surprise/Balance Medical Billing Forum

When and where:

Public webinar: noon to 2 p.m. Thursday, March 17

Public forum: 6 to 7:30 p.m. Wednesday, March 23, at Doña Ana Community College, 3400 S. Espina St., in the Main Building, room 96.

Public webinar: 6 to 8 p.m. Tuesday, March 29

Info: Send reservation requests to OSI.RSVP@state.nm.us or call 505-322-2186. Space is limited. Webinar details will be sent via email once registration is logged.

Read or Share this story: http://lcsun.co/1pnoDrd