The regulation of a bank can be quite challenging, mainly because bank regulators are still too slow at enforcing legal requirements under the Dodd-Frank financial reform law.

Living wills in the banking industry are plans, required by Dodd-Frank, which detail how a bank would dismantle their operations and financial contracts in an orderly fashion in the event of impending failure. Nearly six years after the passage of Dodd-Frank and four years after larger banks submitted the first drafts of their living wills, the Federal Reserve and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation rejected the plans of, Bank of America, Bank of New York Mellon, JPMorgan Chase, State Street, and Wells Fargo.

Under the rules, banks that have had their plans rejected have 90 days to revise their plans, unless regulators decide to shorten or lengthen that time frame. If the revised plan is rejected, regulators can seek to shrink the size, risk, and complexity of the bank by imposing stricter capital requirements and restrictions on its operations. After that, the bank has another two years to submit a credible plan. If it fails to do so, regulators can require the bank to break itself up by selling off assets and businesses.

In an act of pure indulgence, regulators have given the five banks until Oct. 1, 2016 to fix their plans.

A living will, by itself, is not sufficient to ensure financial stability. The living will does not fully explain how one bank’s failure could cause the failure of another.

The same goes for today’s higher capital requirements, which are an important regulatory tool for controlling risk. But the way capital is calculated does not fully account for the risks inherent in big banks’ holdings of derivatives.

One reason Bank of America’s living will was found deficient is because the bank did not have a sound plan for winding down its portfolio of derivatives in a crisis.

Bank of America nor the other big banks are required to hold as much capital against their derivatives’ bets as is required of big international banks.

Living wills are an important piece of the regulatory scheme. Constant attention for systematic risks and bigger capital cushions for derivative holdings are just as crucial.

Source: Banks Still Too Big to Regulate

Join the Discussion