Kathy Frankovic is one of the world’s leading experts in public opinion polling. She has been an election and polling consultant for CBS News and other research organizations

Ben Carson continues to impress Republicans, particularly when it comes to his ideological credentials

Retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson is among the most popular of Republicans. His favorable rating is 17 points higher in this week’s Economist/YouGov Poll than it was just over a week ago, before Carson made the announcement that he is running for president. But all the positive assessments of him may not make Republicans think he is electable.

About a quarter of Republicans still have no opinion of Carson, who is a popular conservative speaker especially critical of President Obama and his policies, including the Affordable Care Act. Carson’s medical background and his African-American heritage may be especially helpful in making those criticisms of the President. But that doesn’t make him popular with African-Americans. While awareness of Carson among blacks has risen 19 points in the last week, the direction was just as likely to be in a negative as in a positive direction.

Carson started out better known than businesswoman Carly Fiorina, who announced her candidacy at about the same time as Carson did. Carson is still better-known and better liked. When Republicans are asked to describe Carson in one word, the overwhelming answers are that he’s intelligent and smart. In addition, many Republicans think of him as honest and a conservative, while some worry about his inexperience.

Carson scores high among Republicans on nearly all specific measures, too. While Fiorina receives a split judgment from Republicans when it comes to whether she is qualified for the job of President, Republicans think Carson is (though more than a third of Republicans don’t answer either way). More say Carson is a strong leader than think that about Fiorina.

More than half of Republicans say he is ideologically conservative, and that his ideology is just conservative enough. Another strength is that nearly half of Republicans believe the outspoken Carson is more honest than most people in public life, an especially strong positive review.

As much as they like Carson, Republicans still have doubts that he could win. Just 28% say he is very or somewhat likely to win; nearly half say his election is not likely.

Although a majority of Republicans think their party is ready to nominate an African-American for President, nearly one in four think the party is not ready. Slightly more Republicans in the same poll, 59%, thought their party was ready to nominate a woman.

Skepticism about GOP willingness to have a black nominee is particularly high among African-Americans. Overall, more Americans say the GOP is not ready than think it is.

See the full poll results

Economist/YouGov poll archives can be found here.