Buy Photo Former U.S. Rep. John Dingell (Photo: Ryan Garza, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

Santa Claus would never let a hip fracture stop him and neither, apparently, will John Dingell.

The retiring dean of the U.S. House, and the longest-serving congressman ever, penned his annual holiday jingle this week from a hospital bed, capturing a host of topical references and making a strong — if far-fetched — hint that he may not be done with public office after all.

"'Twas just days before Dems lost control of the Senate/Handing over the reins to whoever's left in it/But amidst all the partisan clanking and clatter/Thought I'd write you a poem and highlight a few matters," began Dingell, taking his meter from Clement Clarke Moore's "Twas the Night Before Christmas."

Dingell, 88, goes on to note he's "hanging it up, after 30 elections" but not without some fanfare having "Earned the Medal of Freedom! Even passed legislation/All this in the face of Congressional stagnation."

"My one question remained," he continued, "What the heck's a Kardashian?"

The reference to the pop culture icon repeats one of Dingell's favorite lines from Twitter where his feed has become notable for a wry comic style that may seem odd coming from a congressman sworn into office in 1955, but one that perfectly suits Dingell for anyone who knows him.

Dingell, D-Dearborn, goes on to reference his own ailments — he suffered a hairline hip fracture in a recent fall and was admitted to a hospital in Washington last Friday, the day after he cast his last vote — but clearly remained committed to skewing a dysfunctional Congress and letting his readers know he hasn't fallen out of touch with this year's jingle.

Dingell is expected to remain in the hospital for two to three weeks, according to his wife, Debbie, who will replace him in Congress.

In the jingle, Dingell referenced the popular podcast Serial and the questions it raises about a 1999 murder; controversial remarks by economist Jonathan Gruber about the Affordable Care Act; Ebola, and former House Majority Leader Eric Cantor's stunning primary loss last summer.

Today, I'm happy to announce the release of my annual holiday #DingellJingle via @BuzzFeeders: http://t.co/0yvvHKVeo8pic.twitter.com/WruBnbSdUX — John Dingell (@john_dingell) December 17, 2014

"(Sen. Ted) Cruz's latest ploy backfired, ushering through nominations/Like a new Surgeon General, and a head of immigration/Made our Cabinet stronger, reaffirmed our world power/If Ash Carter doesn't work, well there's always Tim Howard," wrote Dingell, managing to link the most recent action in the Senate with the new Pentagon chief with the U.S. soccer team's goalkeeper.

But it didn't end there, as Dingell weighed into the politics of the presidential election looming two years from now, noting that both Hillary Clinton and now Jeb Bush are looking at getting in. In doing so, he suggested maybe he's not done with political life after all either.

"So the election's now upon us, and amidst all the hintin'/There'll be a line of new choices [and a Bush, and a Clinton]/As folks 'actively explore,' and throw their hats in the ring—/We must look at their records, and the experience they bring."

"As for me, I've never been one to create a big scene/So Happy Holidays to all, DINGELL 2016!"

(He then posted a logo from a bumper sticker he said supporters made up for him decades ago reading: "This Country Needs John Dingell for President.")

Dingell posted the jingle on BuzzFeed.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1DODmRy