When you’re Kim Kardashian, you can spend your days taking selfies, publishing a selfie book, and even writing a letter to your future self. The latter is what Kardashian decided to do recently as part of being Glamour’s July cover girl.

Sharing her letter to future Kim of 2025, Kim Kardashian wrote during a video for Glamour, that she hopes that the future 44-year-old Kim will be “kind” and “patient” with her tween, Nori West.

She starts the letter off by typing, and narrating, “Dear Kim, When you read this you’ll be ten years older in the year 2025. I hope this is where you are.”

From there she goes into discussing the importance of body maintenance. That must be at the forefront of her mind seeing as she’s currently expecting her second child with husband and rapper Kanye West. “When it comes to how you feel about your body, remember to be kind to yourself and enjoy how you look now, because you’re not getting any younger.”

Kardashian also noted that her daughter, Nori “North” West, will be a pre-teen, and by her own thoughts, it seems like she’s expecting those years to be a little tough.

“May you continue to feel blessed and grateful. Since North is now 12, I hope you remember that pre-teens are going through a lot. I know junior high is really tough, so remember to have a lot of patience.”

That said, Kim Kardashian, who can come off as narcissistic, doesn’t always make it about herself. In her letter, she stated that she does have wishes for her family members.

For Khloe, who has been through her own set of struggles, Kim said, “I hope Khloe finds her happily ever after and falls madly in love because she really deserves it.”

For Kourtney Kardashian, she said, “I hope Kourtney is maybe done with having babies. She has a lot on her plate and I know she doesn’t want to stop anytime soon.”

As for sister Kendall Jenner, Kim wrote, “I hope Kendall will continue modeling and do whatever she loves to do.”

Lastly, there’s sister Kylie Jenner, who Kim hopes she continues to do whatever she wants, “because she’s not usually one to take any direction.”

The only sibling she left out was her brother Robert Kardashian, who she isn’t on the best of terms with.

Kardashian didn’t end it on an obvious sour note, but instead she took the letter back around to herself again. “I trust that you will still be the queen of contouring. May science invent a mysterious and delicious green juice to keep you tan forever.”

She continued, addressing her haters, “We both know that there are always so many haters out there, and I just hope you continue to ignore them and focus on everything positive.”

Of course, Kim has real world questions for 2025 Kim.

“Are you still filming Keeping Up with The Kardashian?”

“Are selfies still a thing?”

“Are the terms bae and on fleek so 2015?”

“If not, am I still on fleek?”

Also, her one wish is to break the 100 billion mark on Instagram.

Check out the video here.

[Photo by Rick Diamond / Getty Images]