Topics: a song of ice and fire, Books, Game of Thrones, George RR Martin, HBO, TV, Entertainment News

[SPOILER WARNING: This article contains spoilers for both “Game of Thrones” and the “A Song of Ice and Fire” book series.]

The Internet has hit peak “Game of Thrones” outrage — but this time it’s not coming from TV critics (rightly) bemoaning unnecessary violence against women or fans fuming about the death of their favorite character(s). No, this time fans of “A Song of Ice and Fire” (the book series on which HBO’s “Game of Thrones” is based) are at the source of the hotter-than-wildfire reproach.

On Monday, Linda Antonsson — co-owner of Westeros.org, a popular “A Song of Ice and Fire”/”Game of Thrones” fan-site and co-author of “The World of Ice and Fire,” along with her husband, Elio Garcia, and the man himself, George R.R. Martin — fired off a series of tweets critical of the show and showrunners David Benioff and Dan Weiss. Specifically, she took issue with Benioff and Weiss revealing Stannis would burn his daughter Shireen in the series’ next book, “The Winds of Winter,” which has yet to be released. Obviously, this is a massive spoiler for book readers — seeing Stannis burn Shireen on television alone wouldn’t have meant he’d do it in the books, since there are characters who are dead in the show but still alive in “A Song of Ice and Fire” (and vice versa), and this season in particular has diverged from the book series in many significant ways.

But Benioff and Weiss felt the need to confirm the spoiler, and Antonsson, for one, was not happy, leveling scathing criticism at the two writers, whom she refers to as “Dumb and Dumber”:

Outright saying that knew from GRRM that Stannis would sacrifice Shireen is incredibly rude to GRRM and the book readers. — Linda & Elio (@hippoiathanatoi) June 8, 2015

I imagine they knew there'd be outrage, so they probably wanted to "blame" GRRM. Alternatively, they are as stupid as I have suspected. — Linda & Elio (@hippoiathanatoi) June 8, 2015

She then later wrote that her anger mostly stemmed from a feeling of betrayal:

One reason that I am so furious about this betrayal from D&D is that we have made every effort on http://t.co/LZXMx9OfIb... — Linda & Elio (@hippoiathanatoi) June 8, 2015

...to respect HBO's wishes about not posting leaks from sets, leaked episodes, etc, regardless of our views about the show. — Linda & Elio (@hippoiathanatoi) June 8, 2015

We were furious about people leaking the first four episodes and betraying HBO's trust in sending out the screeners. — Linda & Elio (@hippoiathanatoi) June 8, 2015

But apparently they couldn't care less about not throwing in totally unnecessary spoilers in their promotional material around the episode. — Linda & Elio (@hippoiathanatoi) June 8, 2015

This isn’t the first instance of a book reader voicing profound discontent with the show, just a recent and high-profile instance. A community on Tumblr is thriving around critiquing the show and favoring the books. Popular blogs like Game of Thrones Gifs and Musings and The Cultural Vacuum regularly skewer the show’s often nonsensical plots (Jaime going on a secret mission to Dorne just to find out he could’ve had Myrcella back if he had just asked nicely — oops!), poor characterizations (Stannis deciding to burn his daughter because of some snow and dead horses), unbelievably clumsy foreshadowing (with a blog devoted to this topic alone; it’s Chekhov’s gun, guys, not Chekhov’s atomic explosion), over-the-top and unnecessary sex/nudity (boner-activated Dornish poison because ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ ) and often boggling treatment of its female characters (the rape of Sansa, a badass Wildling warrior woman’s undoing stemming from her maternal instincts). The two bloggers even collaborated to pen a hilarious “Book Snob Glossary” and make a “Book Snob Bingo” card.

And let’s not forget the Westeros.org “rant and rave” threads centered around the show, with page counts reaching into the hundreds.

Perhaps the most salient criticism anti-“Game of Thrones” proponents make is that the show robs the set piece moments from the books of their proper context. The show, to a book reader, views like Weiss and Benioff running through a checklist of plot points: