The Camera has been working with an advisory board for seven years. The all-volunteer board works to advise the Camera on topics that are important to our community. We've always strived to have people with diverse political views, as well as a range of interests and experience. All care very deeply about this region and its future. We've had scientists and bankers, business owners and activists.

In addition to advising our editorial board, they write opinion pieces which run on Saturdays.

Since diversity is important for the board's make up, it's critical to us to keep the group evolving. Members often recommend their own replacements. We've also had two community-wide searches. The most recent one just concluded.

Here are brief biographies of the board members, with the year they joined:

Mara Abbott (2014) was born and raised in Boulder, graduating from Whitman College in 2008 with a degree in economics. She is currently a professional bike racer who has won both two U.S. national championship titles and two Giro Rosa stage race general classifications. In her spare time she trail runs, adventures in the Colorado mountains, is a yoga instructor and is the current chair for the City of Boulder's Environmental Advisory Board.

Advertisement

Fern O'Brien (2014) is the principal of O'Brien Law in downtown Boulder. She has lived in Boulder for 19 years and has been actively involved in the community including Downtown Boulder BID Board, Boulder Museum of Contemporary Art, Boulder Valley Women's Health Center and the Downtown Civic Use Pad Task Force IV. Fern is an enthusiastic novice painter and she loves tennis, bridge, crossword puzzles and the blues.

Stu Stuller (2014) is an attorney with Caplan and Earnest. He grew up in Milwaukee, and went to college on the Upper Mississippi. Following college, he moved west to pursue outdoor activities like climbing and whitewater boating. He spent a number of years coaching gymnastics in Eugene, Ore., before beginning a career as a freelance writer, contributing primarily to Outside magazine. He and his wife moved to Colorado in 1984. After six years of freelancing, and becoming a dad, he enrolled in the University of Colorado law school, and graduated in 1992. His mountain bike isn't even worth stealing, and his skis are pretty old school.

Chuck Wibby (2014) was born in Detroit and immigrated to Colorado in the early 1970s to ski. After graduating from CU he worked two years for Conoco R&D in Oklahoma and then returned to Boulder. He worked for 30-plus years in the environmental analytical industry and sold Wibby Environmental in 2010 and retired. He is the Chair of Boulder County FIRM (Fairness In Road Maintenance). He lives with his wife Phyllis as never-urban gentry in unincorporated Boulder County. They have two grown sons, one a public defender and one the brewmaster and co-founder of Wibby Brewing in Longmont.

Done Wrege (2013) is a Louisville, Kentucky native who spent 13 years in Los Angeles producing multimedia shows and one in San Francisco producing CD-ROMs before being brought to Boulder by US West in 1994 to produce interactive television and websites. An ASCAP writer/publisher, Wrege found time to provide KHOW Radio with parody songs for over a decade and author a book about being a celebrity impersonator. Don is Senior Producer and Director of the Boulder office of Culture Foundry, a digital media company with a client list that includes Jackson Browne, Bonnie Raitt, Crosby, Stills & Nash, Esalen Institute and The Kentucky Derby. He once had a life coach suggest that his constant writing of letters to the Daily Camera was a "cry for help."

Lou Barnes (2013) moved to Boulder from Oklahoma in '52 at age three; to New York City in '60, and back to Boulder in '73. Marketing manager of Holubar Mountaineering, president of Spruce Real Estate, managing director RCM Government Securities, and since 1988 a mortgage banker, now with Premier. Married, two kids. Dedicated xeric landscaper and football fan.

Judy Amabile (2011) is the president and co-founder of Product Architects Inc. They manufacture and distribute Polar Bottle brand sport water bottles. She moved to Boulder in 1975 to attend CU and has been here ever since. She has three sons and a dog.

Steven B. Fisher (2011) is an independent economic analyst specializing in economic research and long term forecasting. Steven provided the long-term economic and demographic forecast for the DRCOG Metrovision 2040 process. He completed a similar project for the North Front Range Metropolitan Planning Organization. Steven is a member of economics team of the Colorado Futures Center based at Colorado State University. He has a bachelor's degree from Duke University and a Ph.D. in Economics from the University of Nebraska. From 1983 to 1991 he was Director of Budget for the City of Boulder. He lives in Louisville. Steve has three daughters and a granddaughter.

Dave Ensign (2010), a resident of Boulder since 1994, was most recently employed as an Engineering Program Manager for Cisco. An early retirement offering has allowed him to take a break from work, so he has been enjoying world travel. Ensign joined the board of Boulder County AIDS Project (BCAP) in early 2012, and is in his second year as board president. He also served five years on the board of Out Boulder, Boulder`s Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender community center. He lives with his husband, Mike Mills, who is an atmospheric scientist at NCAR. Ensign is training for the Amsterdam Marathon, after which he will do his yearly switch to nordic ski racing.

Spense Havlick (2010) served on the Boulder City Council for 22 years and is Professor Emeritus at CU-Boulder in Environmental Design. He is founder and president of the Boulder-Cuba sister city organization, volunteers at EFFA, Habitat for Humanity and Community Food Share. Degrees from Michigan, CU, and Beloit. Married to Val for 56 years. Three grown kids and five grandchildren. Activities include biking, fly fishing, tennis, gardening and cruise ship lecturing.

In addition, a small, select group of advisors who have been on the board since its inception in 2007 serve as emeritus members. They fill in when active board members need a substitute, and they continue to keep in frequent contact with the editorial board and its advisors. They are: Clay Evans, Anne Butterfield, Ed Byrne, Jimmy Calano, and Marc Raizman.

Editor's note: George Will's column is online today, at dailycamera.com.

— Erika Stutzman, for the Camera editorial board. Email stutzmane@dailycamera.com. Twitter @stutzmane.