Well, will you look at that? Most leaks tend to look like they were taken with a camera built last century. A couple of extra Nintendo NX photos popped up on Reddit today, and they look a lot like the one leaked last week.

Here’s the photo from last week.

And the photos from today.

First things first, the photos do line up with a touchscreen controller patent from Nintendo. These could be the real thing, or someone is taking the patent sketches and having some fun with the internet. Seems a bit in-depth for a prank, but I wouldn’t put it past some folks.

Let’s assume for one second these are the real deal. Here’s how Reddit user perkele37 (who posted them) describes the controller.

– Only the upper ‘nubs’ of the sticks move. The bottom part is static (kind of like the circle pad, but it moves along the bottom ‘sphere.’

-The rollers on the top feel and look pretty much identical to a mouse scroll-wheel. Though I do don’t believe this will be the final design.[sic] (Note: I assume the user meant “don’t”)

– Haptic feedback is feels like Apple’s ‘taptic’ engine.[sic] Not like regular rumble.

– 3.5mm headphone jack on the bottom

The rumors surrounding Nintendo’s next hardware point to a system that blends a traditional video game console with a portable. Are we looking at the portable part? That’s the only thing that makes sense. I just don’t see how Nintendo could use this kind of controller as the main input device for a home console.

You think third-party developers shunned Nintendo before? Imagine if the main controller doesn’t have face buttons. I’m sorry, but how the hell are you going to play ‘regular’ games without them? Then again, this is Nintendo. Thinking outside the box is what they do.

I know one thing. I haven’t been this pumped for E3 in a while. I can’t wait to see what Nintendo has to offer. At the very least, it won’t be boring.

And if you feel like going deeper into the rabbit hole, check out the exploding NeoGAF thread. Internet detectives are quick and scary.

Do you think the photos are the real deal? What do you want to see from Nintendo’s next console?