Two weeks ago we asked Telegraph Money readers to write to us with their pension questions, for us to put to the Pensions Minister Steve Webb. Below are his answers.

Q. I am a 31-year-old man and have worked since I left university. The company I work for closed its final salary scheme in 2010. Every year since then seems to bring more changes to the system. I speak for many people my age when I say that uncertainty around financial security in retirement really scares me. How does the Government propose to assure us that we will be secure in our old age under the new proposals? Dr R Jones

A. Steve Webb answers: The need for greater certainty about income in later life has been a key reason for a number of our reforms. From April 2016 there will be a new state pension which will be much simpler and clearer, providing a more predictable foundation for your income in retirement.

On top of this there is “automatic enrolment”, where employers have to put you in a pension scheme to which they and you contribute, topped up by tax relief. These schemes will be highly regulated with a tough cap on charges .

And we are legislating for new forms of “risk-sharing” or “defined ambition” pensions where employers can offer benefits that are less volatile and more predictable than simply having your own individual pension pot.

Q. Expats have suffered the blatant discrimination of having their state pensions frozen for nearly 10 years.

Please do not refer to reciprocal agreements between Britain and the country concerned: you know and I know that the Department for Work & Pensions (DWP) has now admitted they are not necessary. And please do not say the country cannot afford to give these pensioners the same rights as the rest, as cost must never justify discrimination.

When is this government going to do the right thing and end this injustice? Jane Davies

A. The rules on uprating of pensions overseas have been essentially unchanged since the war, and are the same as they were when people took the decision to emigrate. In line with the law we uprate pensions in other European countries and also in countries with which we have a reciprocal agreement. To do more than this would cost around half a billion pounds a year , which is not a trivial sum, especially in the present fiscal climate.

Q. I’ve noticed your recent comments on moving to a universal 30pc tax relief on personal pension contributions. But wouldn’t this diminish the potential pension available to those who work hard and make sacrifices to save into uncertain pension schemes? Why not suggest giving higher-rate tax relief to all pension contributions rather than dragging down the rate just for higher-rate taxpayers? Andee Lopez

A. Currently we spend more than £35bn a year on tax relief on pension contributions. Yet this money is spent overwhelmingly on the highest earners.

At a time when public money is very tight, it is hard in my view to see why so much money should be concentrated on those who will generally be comfortably off in retirement. My personal view is that the benefits of tax relief should be shared more evenly, given that most pension contributors pay tax at the standard rate. The exact rate would be a matter for a future Budget, but doubling tax relief for all standard-rate taxpayers would be hugely expensive and not realistic.

Q. I was a teacher and so contracted out for my entire working life of 35 years with the exception of a year before university. I will reach state retirement age in October 2017. I recently requested a pension statement from the DWP and was shocked by how little I will receive.

However, I will be protected under the existing state pension rules and will receive a larger sum of more than £100. I will be able to buy more years from April 2016, but I already exceed the number of qualifying years by 11.

So why would it make sense for me to buy more? MH

A. When you reach state pension age in 2017 you will come under the new state pension rules. Under these rules we will look at your NI record up to 2016 and compare the state pension you have built up under the old rules with your state pension under the new rules and will assign you a “starting amount” of whichever is the higher of these two numbers.

In your case you have spent your working life outside the Serps scheme and so will have mainly built up a basic state pension currently worth just over £113 per week. In your case this is the least you can get under the new system.

If we had not reformed the system and if you had stayed contracted out, you could not have got a state pension of more than £113. But under the new rules, any years you work after April 2016 (in your case potentially one year) can build on the £113 starting rate.

In other words, because of the reform you will probably get a slightly larger state pension in 2017 than you would have done, provided you work or contribute for the year 2016-17.

Q. Do you have any plans to explain to the millions of people who belonged to contracted out pension schemes, why there is such a huge disparity in the amount by which their state pension entitlement will be cut compared to the reduced National Insurance contributions that they paid?

What formula has been used to calculate the new flat rate state pension for people who paid into contracted out pension schemes? That detail information is missing from the explanatory booklet that is sent to people when they receive their pension statement. Anon

A. Under the current system many millions of workers were in schemes that were “contracted out” of SERPs (the State Earnings-Related Pension Scheme). The deal was that they and their employer paid reduced National Insurance Contributions and in return their scheme promised to replace part of their state pension with a payment from the scheme.

Broadly speaking, the guaranteed payment from a contracted out final salary pension should be at least as great as the deduction from the state pension and in most cases will be more.

With regard to the new state pension, we cannot simply ignore the decades of reduced rate National Insurance contributions which many people will have paid during their working lives. So we will make a one-off deduction in 2016 from the pension calculated under the new rules to reflect past contracting out. The starting amount for people’s new state pension entitlement from 2016 will then be the *higher* of their entitlement under the old rules and under the new rules.

For those within five years of pension age they can request a personalised State Pension statement which will tell them exactly where they stand and we plan to roll this service out to a much bigger group in the Spring.

Q. In two years’ time my husband will retire and be eligible for the universal pension. I will not retire until three years later. Under the new universal pension rules we need 35 years of contributions to qualify for the full pension. My husband will have contributed for well over 40 years but for different reasons I will be a few years short.

Could my husband‘s extra years be transferred to me to make up my deficit? If not, then why not? Does this Government not believe in marriage and all it stands for, as in all my worldly goods I thee endow? Mrs Avril Jones

A. When the current pension system was introduced in the 1940s, it was assumed that men went out to work and women were financially dependent upon them. There were even rules which allowed married women in work to pay reduced National Insurance on the basis that they didn’t really need a pension of their own, they could just depend on their husband.

Now, more women work and more couples get divorced, so it no longer makes sense to have a system based on a model where women are financially dependent on men. So the new state pension system treats people largely as individuals, with their own pension depending on their own contributions.

However, the new rules are more generous to those who may not have been in paid work but who contributed to society in another way such as bringing up children or caring for elderly or disabled people. It may be therefore that even if you don’t have 35 years of contributions or credits you may still be getting a bigger pension than under the current rules. The best thing to do would be to get a state pension statement which will tell you exactly how you stand.

Q. Improved access to pension funds is greatly welcomed, however it appears that whichever route an individual choses to access their pension fund the Pension Fund provider will still be in a position to take substantial fees from the fund pot rather than simply release the funds into – for example – a “Pension Bank Account”. Please advise how the Government intend to ensure that full funds are released to individuals and abuse by pension funds is prevented. Anon

A. Under the new rules, pension funds will either have to enable scheme members to access the new Budget freedoms directly via their existing scheme or to transfer their money into a different product where those freedoms are available. In the vast majority of cases people who need to transfer to another product will be able to do so without charges. But in some cases there are contractual fees to move money out of a scheme and the FCA and the Government are in discussions with the industry to make sure that customers are “treated fairly” and that there are no unreasonable charges for doing so.

- katie.morley@telegraph.co.uk