The Container Store, shown here in Indianapolis, is scheduled to open in September at Mayfair in Wauwatosa. Credit: business wire

By of the

We've had Trader Joe's for eight years now. Costco has been back for nearly as long. Nordstrom is coming this fall.

As an emerging market for national chains that attract not just customers but devotees, Milwaukee of late has been doing all right.

And we'll add another retail temple to the mix in September, when The Container Store, a 70-location, Dallas-based outfit that specializes in selling Americans stuff to put their stuff into, opens at Mayfair in Wauwatosa. For many shoppers, it promises to be something of an event, calling out with the seductive promise of bringing order to harried lives.

"It's like a Zen rock garden for an urban person with a lot of stuff," Christie Tate said.

Tate knows. She grew up in Dallas, with a Container Store nearby. Now she's a busy Chicago attorney, wife and mother of two who still feels the lure of a place that offers 153 different bins and baskets (plastic, wire mesh, bamboo, sea grass...), 61 shoe-storage options and 48 kitchen drawer organizers.

"It creates its own desire, right?" said Tate, 41, who has written about the chain on her blog, "Outlaw Mama." "You go in there (and think), 'Oh my God, I should put my stuff in little containers like this.' It creates an impulse to organize."

The chain has fans among industry observers, too. It has taken a small slice of retail, "exploded it massively," and done a very good job in its niche, said retail consultant Howard Davidowitz.

"I LOVE the Container Store," retail analyst Paula Rosenblum said via email. "They are an industry darling because they treat their people really well, who in turn treat customers really well. A fun assortment and overall great customer experience."

Like Costco and Trader Joe's, the Container Store is known for paying relatively high wages for retail. Full-time salespeople average $48,000 a year, recruiting and talent director Kevin Knapp said. Part-timers average $13.58 an hour.

The pay almost certainly is one reason the Container Store averages full-time employee turnover of just 11% a year. Retail as a whole averages 50% to 70%, Knapp said.

The company devotes a lot of time to training — full-timers get about 260 hours their first year and part-timers about 160, Knapp said — and says it typically hires less than 4% of applicants.

"What we look for, certainly, are people who can communicate incredibly well, who are passionate ... people who can really interact well with our customers," Knapp said.

The Container Store also talks about its commitment to "Conscious Capitalism," which says businesses should have a higher purpose beyond making money, and should consider the interests not just of shareholders but of employees, customers and communities. The firm has been on Fortune magazine's annual "100 Best Companies to Work For" list for 16 years.

'Decluttering' trend

The opening of the store here, one of seven new locations for the company this year, comes at an interesting time — a "decluttering" trend has taken hold in the United States.

Japanese author Marie Kondo's quirky book, "The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up," has been a publishing sensation — more than 2 million copies sold worldwide, more than 400,000 in the U.S., and 23 weeks atop a New York Times bestseller list.

As of late last week, there were 154 holds on Kondo's volume at Milwaukee County libraries, far more than for any other nonfiction title.

Transplanted Australian organizing expert Peter Walsh, meanwhile, has made a mark with books ("Lose the Clutter, Lose the Weight" is the latest) and television shows such as "Clean Sweep."

Conceivably, the Container Store could benefit from a put-one's-house-in-order movement. But the chain also may be at odds with the more-rigorous versions of minimalism.

In her book, Kondo, who offers guidance on how to fold and store socks (on the edge, not flat), and how to arrange a clothes closet (heavier, longer items on the left, shorter items on the right) also has advice on buying lots of commercial storage products: Don't.

"Basically, the only storage items you need are plain old drawers and boxes — you don't need anything special or fancy," she writes.

Symbolizing a better life

Walsh isn't quite so monkish.

The extensively trained Container Store employees — they don't work on commission — are good at analyzing customers' needs and truly "helping people come to a real solution about their clutter problems," he said.

At the same time, Walsh, who volunteered that he receives in-kind support from the Container Store, said the impulse to buy bins and baskets rather than actually pare back unneeded possessions can be a trap. And, he said, the place is "a little pricey."

As with much retail, there is an emotional component to the Container Store's appeal, Walsh said. While people may buy products — a treadmill, skinny jeans, stackable food canisters — what they're really doing is investing in the promise of a better life the goods incorporate, he said.

Tate understands that. Unhappy with kitchen chaos a couple years back, she hit the Container Store in search of clear canisters to neatly house the family's pasta, cereals and such. But she wasn't just buying storage.

"You can project into the store an image of like, of "Oh, we won't have these harried dinner times anymore because we'll have this container for our spaghetti spoons," she said. "Which is absurd, but that's how marketing works, I think."

Tate has lots of friends who now are dedicating themselves to becoming more minimalist. She gets the urge, too, but while she feels like she should be shedding possessions, it's hard; the attachments are strong.

"So a good interim measure," she said, "would be if it looks nice and has this pretty glass container, then I can feel serene in my surroundings without going whole hog on the decluttering."

Sounds like an opportunity for a certain Texas retailer.

Bill Glauber of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.