A rift from a blues classic — “Born under a bad sign … if it wasn’t for bad luck, I wouldn’t have no luck at all” — seems just about right for the 2014 Rockies.

Monday, first baseman Justin Morneau and left-handed reliever Boone Logan became the latest additions to the Rockies’ disabled list. It is Logan’s third trip to the DL this season.

Morneau, fresh off his appearance in the Home Run Derby last week in Minneapolis, went on the 15-day disabled list because of a neck strain. The move is retro- active to July 14, meaning he is eligible to return next Tuesday at Wrigley Field in Chicago.

Logan was placed on the 15-day DL just before Monday’s game with a case of diverticulitis, an often-painful condition of the digestive tract.

To fill Morneau’s slot on the roster, Ben Paulsen was called up from Triple-A Colorado Springs. Paulsen made his big-league debut Monday night against the Washington Nationals at Coors Field. He was the starter at first base and batted sixth in the lineup.

Filling Logan’s spot in the bullpen was right-hander Nick Masset, activated after a stint on the DL. He had a strained left knee.

Morneau strained his neck Friday morning in Pittsburgh during an early round of batting practice. In 2011, while playing for the Minnesota Twins, Morneau had neck surgery to remove a herniated disc fragment. His history means the Rockies are proceeding with caution. Manager Walt Weiss said the current injury is not directly related to the neck surgery.

“Not exactly; it’s not the same spot,” Weiss said. “We are always cautious with ‘Morney’ when it comes to his neck, but it’s not exactly the same thing. … He’s had issues from time to time.”

Morneau, who signed a two-year contract worth $12.5 million to play for the Rockies, is hitting .312 this year with 20 doubles, two triples, 13 home runs and a club-high 60 RBIs.

Logan’s first two stints on the DL were due to a strained elbow. But his new ailment came out of nowhere. According to the Mayo Clinic’s website, diverticulosis occurs when one or more diverticula (small, bulging pouches that can form anywhere in the digestive system) become inflamed or infected. The condition can cause severe abdominal pain, fever, nausea and a marked change in bowel habits. Mild cases of diverticulitis can be treated with rest, changes in diet and antibiotics. But serious cases of diverticulitis can require surgery.

The Rockies didn’t say how long they expect Logan to be out.

The former Yankee signed a three-year, $16.6 million deal with the Rockies during the offseason. He has appeared in 25 games this year, going 2-1 with a 6.11 ERA.

Cuddy update. The Rockies are awaiting news on outfielder and first baseman Michael Cuddyer, who is out until at least mid-August because of a fractured left shoulder socket. An MRI, scheduled for Monday, was expected to reveal if the bones in his shoulder have healed. If so, Cuddyer can begin strength exercises and there is a chance he could return late this season.

Footnotes. All-star shortstop Troy Tulowitzki (left thigh) didn’t start his second consecutive game. He said he was feeling better Monday, but still sore. Tulo said there’s a chance he could play Tuesday, adding that he doesn’t think he’ll have to go on the DL. …. To clear space on the 40-man roster for Paulsen, right-handed starting pitcher Jair Jurrjens was designated for assignment.

Looking ahead

Nationals’ Jordan Zimmermann (6-5, 3.03 ERA) at Rockies’ Yohan Flande (0-2, 7.36), 6:40 p.m. Tuesday, ROOT; 850 AM

Well, at least Flande is part of baseball trivia. When the left-hander made his major-league debut June 25 against St. Louis, he became the fourth Rockies starter to make it to “The Show” this season. It’s the first time that happened in Rockies history, and the first time it happened in the majors since 2009, when Baltimore (six) and Toronto (five) both debuted four or more pitchers. Flande, by the way, has an 8.68 ERA in his two starts at Coors Field. Zimmermann (strained biceps) dodged a stint on the disabled list and has been cleared to pitch Tuesday night at Coors Field.

Wednesday: Nationals’ Stephen Strasburg (7-7, 3.55 ERA) at Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (10-6, 4.39), 1:10 p.m., no TV

Thursday: Off

Friday: Pirates’ Charlie Morton (5-9, 3.28) at Rockies’ Brett Anderson (0-3, 4.00), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post