Topics: GOP, John Boehner, living wage, Low-income, Minimum wage, Mitch McConnell, paid family leave, Poverty, Rand Paul, Republicans, surviving the holidays, Thanksgiving, wages, Politics News

It’s that time of year, everyone. Maybe you are feeling comfortably full from Thanksgiving and chatting enthusiastically with your family about the time you’ll get to spend together during the upcoming winter holidays. Or maybe you are silently fuming while waiting for your cousin to drop you off at the train already because you just spent the last 24 hours listening to your Uncle Carl talk about “Obama’s America” and the “death of family values” now that women don’t have to pay extra for basic health care.

Like it or not, if you live anywhere near your family, you’re probably going to have to gear up for round two come December. So if you’re fixing for a conversation with Uncle Carl about how best to support families in this country, here are five pro-family policies that conservatives should get behind that have nothing to do with abortion or birth control.

(But I also encourage you to talk to your Uncle Carl about reproductive freedom because we’ve all got to put in the work and Bodily Autonomy and Self-Determination Rome wasn’t built in a day, you know?)

The list is pretty universally applicable, but if you happen to be related to Rand Paul, John Boehner or Mitch McConnell, it might be especially useful. Here we go, you guys.

Paid family leave.

Do you know what is really pro-family? Being able to take care of your family without being afraid of losing your job or losing your income. And in terms of table-friendly conversation, there’s very little risk involved with bringing up paid family leave. Pretty much everyone loves it. (Except for business tycoon types who probably wear monocles or whatever. If you are dining with a monocle-wearing business tycoon type, maybe leave the table and go steal his boat or something.)

According to a 2012 poll commissioned by the National Partnership for Women and Families, 86 percent of Americans support paid leave. It’s also pretty popular across party lines — the poll found that 96 percent of Democrats and 73 percent of Republicans are for it.

In 2013, New York Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand and Connecticut Rep. Rosa DeLauro introduced the Family and Medical Leave Insurance Act, which would have taken 0.2 percent of employee wages to be paid to the Social Security Administration in order to provide workers with up to 12 months of paid time off at 66 percent of their current wages. It wasn’t perfect (66 percent of your wages isn’t 100 percent), but it was certainly a start since less than 40 percent of American workers have access to medical leave.

But the measure stalled in the House and hasn’t been heard from since, though lots of Democrats ran on the issue of paid leave during the midterms. And that’s probably because it’s a winner with most voters.

I’m from a very large, wonderful, baby-obsessed family. At any given moment, it seems I have at least one pregnant cousin. If this also describes your family, maybe try making meaningful eye contact with your expecting relative and her partner and start talking about the challenges of balancing work and family in this darned modern era.

Or maybe talk about it with your brother who is a major hypochondriac. Let him know that the proposed law would also apply to time off spent caring for sick relatives.

Or maybe bring it up with a joke. “Paid family leave? You mean someone will pay me to make my family leave?” It will be the best joke, and it will make everyone laugh and hug you.

Raising the minimum wage.

Like paid family leave, raising the minimum wage is kind of the most popular thing ever. Probably because so many people are minimum-wage workers or know minimum-wage workers and understand that a bump would dramatically improve their lives.