Liberal New England Patriots fans to drink most beer on Super Bowl Sunday

In the spirit of finding the seam between football and politics (and attracting Super Bowl watchers to an otherwise Washington-centered morning show), NBC anchor Chuck Todd informed viewers on “Meet the Press” Sunday about what liberals and conservatives prefer to drink and eat on game day.

According to data collected by Experian Consumer Services, liberals are the biggest beer drinkers, as they are 32 percent more likely to be gulping the good stuff than conservatives and 21 more likely to do so than the average American.

When taken with the fact that individuals in the Northeast consume approximately 6 percent more beer than the rest of the U.S., this figure suggests that liberal New England Patriots fans will be popping the most cans this Sunday.

Unsurprisingly, this likely includes nearly all Patriots fans (except for myself), as the data shows Patriots fans lean hard towards the liberal side, while Seattle fans lean conservative.

And what exactly will they be drinking? Liberals are 52 percent more likely to sip on craft beer than the average American, while their conservative counterparts tend toward domestic beer.

Apparently, liberals have pretty expensive taste, as craft beer is much pricier than domestic.

No matter the type of beer, football fans will undoubtedly be washing something down Sunday, and whatever that particular substance might be may change based on their redness or blueness.

Liberals, who have been known to prefer kale, consume 30 percent more pita chips than the average American. Kale pita chips, anyone? Or perhaps some pita chips and kale dip?

Bacon-loving conservatives, on the other hand, gravitate toward pretzels, as they eat 3 percent more pretzels than the average American. Perhaps bacon-wrapped pretzels would be a hit at a more conservative Super Bowl party.

Ironically enough, middle-of-the-road swing voters prefer a little bit of everything, eating 11 percent more party mix than the average American.

However, corn chips are popular across party lines.

Alas, you can politicize your Super Bowl party this afternoon, that is if you feel like braving the crowds of last-minute shoppers at your local grocery store.

Watch the “Meet the Press” segment below.