Black Friday kicks off ‘car theft month’

Posted: 2 pm ET

Ah, Thanksgiving Day! Morning coffee watching the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade with Matt and Samantha and Al, then tying to squeeze in a bit of exercise before John O'Hurley kicks off the National Dog Show. Then, the gloves really come off for a turkey dinner that it'll take a week on the elliptical to lose.

But you know who likes Thanksgiving almost as much as we do?

Car thieves.

'Tis the season

The National Insurance Crime Bureau (NICB) this week released its 2014 Annual Holiday Vehicle Theft Report, which has become a Thanksgiving tradition of sorts, at least with the nation's auto insurance companies.

Not surprisingly, Thanksgiving Day kicks off what may as well be termed "car theft month," given that 5 of the 11 busiest working holidays for car thieves fall between Thanksgiving and New Year's Day.

Last year, car thieves treated themselves to a total of 695,246 vehicles that were not their own, according to the National Crime Information Center. That works out to roughly 1,905 car thefts per day, or 1 every 45 seconds.

Of those, 19,693 occurred on 11 national holidays last year, with Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year's Eve and New Year's Day accounting for 8,228 of them.

"Last year, a car was stolen every 49 seconds on Christmas Eve," says NICB spokesman Roger Morris. "And on Christmas Day, the slowest day of the year for car thefts overall, there were still over 1,200 thefts, or 1 every 71 seconds."

Busiest holidays for car thieves

Ironically, car thieves were busiest on Labor Day last year. Go figure. Here's how the rest of the 2014 holiday heist fest played out:

The good news is, the newer your car, the harder it is for thieves to steal. The bad news is, no vehicle is immune to a smash-and-grab if the contents look sufficiently enticing.

To protect your car and holiday packages, the NICB recommends that all motorists:

Place shopping bags and other valuables in the trunk or out of plain sight.

Never leave your vehicle running while unattended.

Never leave spare keys inside your vehicle.

Avoid letting your vehicle warm up unattended on cold mornings;

Here's to a happy (and mobile) holiday season!

Follow me on Twitter.

Subscribe to Bankrate newsletters today!