The author with her father and his HP 12C calculator Manisha Thakor

MANISHA THAKOR: When I was quite young, somewhere around age 11, my dad sat me down with his HP 12C calculator. He showed me what keystrokes to use to see how my money would grow in a hypothetical situation, one where I was able to fully fund my IRA (which back then had a $2,000-a-year annual contribution limit) annually from that age forward. He then showed me how to “stress test” it. We ran the calculations for various different potential rates of return.

When I saw what a huge difference something as seemingly small as an incremental 1% or 2% increase in returns could make, I was hooked! Suppose I had started contributing $2,000 a year to my IRA at age 18 from summer jobs, and kept that up until age 65. Over those 47 years, I would have seen my nest egg rise in nominal dollars to $356,000 at a 5% return, $482,000 at a 6% return, and $658,000 at a 7% return.

My first reaction was to think: “Wow, if you can find an investment with just a consistently one- to two-percentage-point higher return, look at the enormous difference it will make.” This is the kind of thinking that often leads “active” oriented investors to pursue either growth, value or momentum strategies. I was no different.

For the first 20 years of my investing life, I was focused on the elusive search for alpha–that magical point where you are earning an incremental return above and beyond that commensurate with the level of risk you are taking.

In my 40s, I’ve done a complete, 180-degree turn and am now committed to squeezing out that extra percentage point or two by employing an investment philosophy defined by its tax-efficiency (due to low portfolio turnover), low cost (due to the use of index-like funds and ETFs) and, most importantly, its roots in a written investment policy statement (IPS). A written IPS helps keep the natural human emotions of fear and greed from causing a knee-jerk reaction to market movements that could further eat away at hard-earned returns.

My first lesson about compounding and the impact that seemingly small differences in annual returns can make over time was very powerful. Once I shifted that insight from focusing on things I couldn’t control (chasing increasingly elusive alpha) to the intersection of the things that I can and the things that matter (like keeping fees and taxes low, and my actions pre-defined in a written IPS) I moved from mere knowledge to truly useful implementation of that wisdom.

Manisha Thakor (@ManishaThakor) is director of wealth strategies for women at Buckingham and The BAM Alliance, a community of independent registered investment advisers.

Read the latest Big Issues in Personal Finance Report.