The Alabama Legislature is currently in session, faced with a massive - about $700 million - shortfall in the General Fund. Gov. Robert Bentley wants to raise taxes but maybe we should consider another alternative to make up a small portion - OK, tiny part - of that needed money.

Let's get paid for recycling our cigarette butts.

That's what some cities around the country are doing, Government Executive reported. For example, New Orleans has teamed with the New Jersey company TerraCycle to recycle its cigarette butts. There are special receptacles for the discards and, in return, the city receives $4 for every pound.

So, we'd be earning a little money and keeping unsightly litter off our roadways. Sounds like a win/win to me.

It's Saturday on what's sure to be a news-filled weekend around Alabama. President Barack Obama will be in Selma today, followed by a host of national and state leaders over the weekend, to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Voting Rights March.

So, let's get started with today's Wake Up Call.

Selma in the spotlight

The GOP is hoping to make a big showing in Selma this weekend and some have already attended commemorative events. These two caught my eye:

Honored to stand with the Congressional delegation on steps of historic 16th Street Baptist pic.twitter.com/xEpyfmQwrb -- Gary Palmer (@USRepGaryPalmer) March 6, 2015

Pilgrimage is underway & Margaret has already convinced @repjohnlewis & @WhipHoyer to take a selfie! pic.twitter.com/twjrvQ4Q0s -- Rep. Martha Roby (@RepMarthaRoby) March 6, 2015

Obamacare battle brewing

The Supreme Court is currently hearing arguments that could effectively gut portions of the Affordable Care Act. During the initial ruling on what's popularly called "Obamacare," Chief Justice John Roberts shocked many conservatives by siding with the majority.

He's likely to do the same thing again, according to columnist Brent Budowsky. Writing for The Hill, Budowsky said he's "90 percent" positive Roberts will uphold the subsidy provision of the ACA.

"Here is why: A decision to overturn the subsidy provision will violate the only rational interpretation of the legislative intent of the Congress that enacted the law, which was designed to incentivize and support consumers who signed up for insurance, regardless of the exchange those consumers employed to purchase the policies," he wrote.

NYC lifts school cell phone ban

Public school students in New York will now be allowed to take their cellphones to school. Mayor Bill de Blasio led the charge to lift a ban that had been in place since 2006.

Parents had complained of being unable to reach their children.

Tech giants support same-sex marriage

Same-sex marriages are now on hold in Alabama, awaiting a Supreme Court decision to come later this year. Some of the biggest names in the tech world are signing on to support a SCOTUS decision that would legalize such unions nationwide.

Google, Facebook, Apple and Microsoft, along with 375 other companies, have added their names to an amicus brief that says they are put at a hiring disadvantage in states where gay unions are not legal.

Charges expected against lawmaker

The U.S. Justice Department is preparing to file criminal corruption charges against New Jersey Democratic Senator Robert Menendez. The charges center on allegations that Menendez used his office to promote the business interests of a Democratic donor and friend in exchange for gifts.

Menendez's office denied the charges.

Until tomorrow. Let's all make us proud to be Alabamians this weekend.