EAGLE — When Ray Tenbrook got hit by Cupid’s arrow, it made a different sort of impact.

Exactly what his wife had in mind when she gave Tenbrook his first bow on Valentine’s Day is a matter of speculation. But the result was undeniable: He fell in love with archery.

“She bought me a bow for Valentine’s Day years ago, and I just went from there and figured it all out,” Tenbrook said. “I started tinkering with bows, and now I have a pro shop right out of the house.”

Hailing from the humble mountain town of Eagle, Tenbrook’s subsequent achievements as an archer are noteworthy. He has won more Colorado State Archery Association (CSAA) tournament championships than he can recall and is now the association’s president. In 2009, he was crowned a champion at the National Field Archery Association World Archery Festival in Las Vegas. Last weekend, he finished out of the money among more than 2,200 archers competing at the $165,000 tournament many consider to be the indoor archery world championships. He blamed the result on the bright lights of Sin City.

“We had a bachelor party on Thursday night and a wedding on Friday night, so my shooting wasn’t that great,” Tenbrook said. “But it was fun.”

Fun is the foundation of the sport that Tenbrook shares with his wife, Lisa, and 26-year-old son, Tyler. And while he’s serious enough about competition to travel as a tournament archer and pro staffer for Precision Shooting Company most weekends, it’s the good times shared among his homegrown archery club that get him through long Western Slope winters between elk hunting seasons.

Like most of the 40-some members of the Brush Creek Archery Club, Tenbrook is first and foremost a bowhunter. But bringing down a bull elk with a bow and arrow demands accuracy. And after a bit of offseason target practice, Tenbrook soon discovered that he was more accurate than most.

“I’ve hunted for a long time, and I’ve been archery hunting most of that. Then I started into the competitive side of it just to better my shooting,” he said. “With targets, you really have to be on your game. Like in Vegas, you’ve got all those people breathing down your neck and you have to shoot perfect scores to be there at the end, so it adds a lot to it, having that adrenaline rush. I think it’s harder than shooting an elk. Usually elk run right in and you don’t have time to think about it. You pull up and aim and fire.”

That’s pretty much the regimen every Wednesday night at the Eagle County Fairgrounds as well — pull up, aim and fire. There’s nothing formal about the small group that gathers to shoot at paper targets from a dirt floor designed for livestock while others toss horseshoes in the corner of the building. But for this casual group of offseason bowhunters, it’s more than they ever dreamed of.

“We started as just a couple guys shooting in the little hay barn at the fairgrounds. And then it kind of grew,” said Ron Hedrick, president of the 5-year-old club. “Most of us got into it for the hunting, so a lot of guys don’t particularly like doing (targets). But it sure helps out.”

The club recently hosted one of four state tournaments sanctioned by the CSAA in 2014, drawing more than 130 competitors as young as age 8 to compete on a Saturday in January. As a tournament archer in the “bowhunter” class himself, Hedrick agrees with his friend about the value of competition.

“A lot of our guys would rather shoot the 3D targets, but this makes you pretty good. Those tournaments, I never thought you’d get so nervous up there in front of all those people,” Hedrick said. “It gets you almost as nervous as having an elk there, with all those people around and the pressure is on you. You really have to concentrate.”

Beyond concentration, the archer’s best friend is repetition. And with some dedication, who knows where that friendship might lead?

“I like the 3D much better than targets, because it’s real hunting situations. And tournaments. But I like hunting the most,” said Tenbrook, Eagle County’s only certified bow tech. “I love it all. I spend countless hours doing archery in general. I put in way more hours on archery than I do at my job, and I’ve got a 40-hour-a-week job. The rest of it is all archery.”

Scott Willoughby: swilloughby@denverpost.com or twitter.com/willoughbydp