If you know anything about these fugitives, you can earn up to $1,000 by calling Crime Stoppers at (800) 780-TIPS. All information below courtesy of Crime Stoppers.

We’re starting off our Fourth of July list with one of the final hold outs from Operation Manor Meltdown. Gerald Banks, known on the streets as “G Money,” is wanted for dealing cocaine in Pine Manor, as well as violating his state probation on weapons charges. This career felon was targeted as part of a massive narcotics operation last month, which targeted some of the major drug dealers in the Pine Manor community. Over the years, Banks has been arrested multiple times for selling coke, as well as carrying concealed weapons. His first felony arrest was at age 16 for armed robbery, followed up a year later with a grand theft auto charge. Now 24, Banks continues to perpetuate his lifestyle of crime with no signs of slowing down – at least until he’s arrested. He is 5’11”, 180 pounds and has multiple tattoos, including a tear drop on his face, the phrase “Da Blocks Hot” on his left hand and “Hood Boy” on his right hand.

Next up is a Lee County woman with an extensive, and varied, criminal dossier. Linda Frazier is on the run once again, this time for violating her probation after three counts of dealing cocaine. This 47 year old fugitive already has 18 arrests under her belt, on multiple charges of prostitution, drugs, battery/domestic violence, repeatedly lying to police, disturbing the peace and driving with a suspended license, among others. Frazier was supposed to be on state probation until 2016, but now with her latest violation, chances are that term will now be just a little bit longer. She was last known to be living in South Cape Coral and has been known to use the aliases of Lynn Brockman and Sherry Jones. Upon her arrest, Frazier will be held without bond.

?

And on the run in Collier County is today’s birthday girl, Christine Johnson, a repeat offender wanted for burglary and grand theft. According to detectives, Johnson has a history of breaking into homes, then going into hiding. Though she was last known to be living in Immokalee, there’s a chance she could be laying low in the Hendry County area, or on the east coast of Florida. But no matter where she’s at, all we need is that one tip to bring her back to Collier County, so that she can spend her 45th birthday in the confines of the Collier County Jail.

And rounding out this week’s list is Eli Neal, wanted for the sexual battery of a Lehigh Acres woman. According to the victim, she was walking home in broad daylight near a Publix shopping center when Neal pulled over and asked if she wanted a ride home. When she got into the car, he grabbed her by the neck with both hands and told her to remove her clothes, at which point he sexually assaulted her. The victim managed to get away, but so did Neal. Arrest records show 41 year old Neal has been arrested 18 times before in Lee County, on a variety of charges including grand theft and passing bad checks. Upon his arrest, he will be held without bond in the Lee County Jail.

And, as always, if you know the whereabouts of any of today's featured fugitives, grab your phone and call Crime Stoppers at 1 – 800 – 780 – TIPS. You WILL remain anonymous and be eligible for a cash reward of up to $1,000.