"If we don't, they tend to die young on the streets," said Marc Trotz, director of the Housing for Health program in Los Angeles County, which officially began in 2012. "And they just continually recycle through expensive health care settings." Now, California wants to take the approach statewide. It is asking the federal government for permission to use Medicaid money to help put the most medically fragile homeless people in housing. Mari Cantwell, deputy director of the state health care services department, said health care and housing traditionally have been in distinct silos. "We are really trying to look at the whole person," she said. "And our belief is that this will improve health care and reduce costs."

It's hard to be healthy on the street. California health officials have recognized that, particularly now that Medicaid expansion under Obamacare has brought many new, homeless people into the program. They're now experimenting with using healthcare funding to provide housing for the chronically ill and chronically homeless.This program in Los Angeles is coming out of county public health funds, but it could be expanded statewide. Using the expansion money will require a federal waiver, but the state could use its own portion of Medicaid funding for the program. New York tried a similar program, but the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services turned them down, and the state now uses its state Medicaid funding. California's proposal, though, is broader and more comprehensive in providing healthcare services, social services, and housing together.

Of course, Congress could also adequately fund housing programs for the homeless, which of course they are refusing to do in the Transportation, Housing, and Urban Development Appropriations Bill now under discussion. In addition to slashing every housing program that exists, the Republicans propose cutting Homeless Assistance Grants by $295 million, or 12 percent of its current budget. That would mean 15,000 fewer homes for homeless families and 25,500 fewer homes of permanent housing for the chronically homeless. While health and homelessness are intricately intertwined, states should not have to be making the decisions of taking critical funding from healthcare to address homelessness. This country could afford to do both.