Record-setting athlete views current project as his 'masterpiece'

Boulder ultrarunner Scott Jurek said his main goal is to inspire others to explore the outdoors and pursue their own personal and life goals. ( Courtesy photo / Luis Escobar )

If all goes to plan, Scott Jurek, the Boulder resident many believe is the greatest ultrarunner of all time, will reach Mount Katahdin in central Maine on Sunday afternoon, completing the 2,189-mile Appalachian Trail faster than anyone in history.

Even more impressive: it won't necessarily be his greatest feat yet.

Jurek, 41, also set in 2010 the since-broken U.S. record for miles run in a single 24-hour period, with 165.7, or the equivalent of more than six marathons.

Three times he's won Greece's Spartathlon, a 153-mile race from Sparta to Athens. No other American has won once.

And as for the prestigious Western States 100-Mile Endurance Run, the world's oldest race of its kind? Jurek's won seven years in a row, from 1999 to 2005.

But the Appalachian Trail — passing through Georgia, North Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, West Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Vermont, New Hampshire and Maine — is unlike any challenge he's taken on to date.

The trail is so long that nearly half of the country's citizens live within three hours of it. Several thousand set off every year with intent to complete it, while millions hike portions.

Jurek has called the current undertaking his "masterpiece."

"Ever since looking at an old photo and map of the A.T., and picking up a pair of National Geographic A.T. books from the 70's and 80's, I have wanted to set foot on this amazing adventure," Jurek said, according to a news release, prior to embarking May 27 from Springer Mountain in Georgia.

Advertisement

He hasn't been reachable for interviews since, but he and his wife Jenny, an accomplished runner in her own right, have been updating via social media, posting photos of Jurek traversing rock, trail, water and atop some of the most famous peaks in the eastern United States.

The record Jurek hopes to break was set in 2011 by Jennifer Pharr Davis, who completed the trail in 46 days, 11 hours and 20 minutes. Jurek needs to reach Katahdin by 5:15 p.m. EDT Sunday to claim her title.

He insisted before the trip that he's concerned with more than winning.

"While a main goal is to complete the trail in record time," Jurek said, "my main goal is to inspire others to explore the outdoors and their own personal and life goals."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness