An illustration showing the invasive emerash ash borer (Photo: N.J. Department of Agriculture)

ALLENTOWN An invasive beetle that kills ash trees has spread to the borough and 13 other towns in New Jersey, according to state officials.

The emerald ash borer, a native of Asia, is now in Allentown; Monroe and South Brunswick in Middlesex County; Bridgewater, Franklin Township and Hillsborough in Somerset County; Hillsdale in Bergen County; Edgewater Park and Westampton in Burlington County; and Ewing, Hamilton Township, Hopewell, Princeton, West Windsor in Mercer County, state Department of Agriculture officials reported Thursday.

A trapping program in 82 towns over the summer and reporting by homeowners led to the finding, according to an agency statement.

Nancy Buckalew, deputy municipal clerk in Allentown, said she was unaware of the beetles' presence in borough but would make sure that the borough Shade Tree Commission and Borough Council are informed.

Municipal officials and residents of affected towns and counties should visit the New Jersey Emerald Ash Borer website www.emeraldashborer.nj.gov, where they can learn how to protect their ash trees and what to do with dead or dying trees, the agriculture department statement says.

The emerald ash borer was discovered in New Jersey in May 2014 in Somerset County. Infestations throughout the U.S. and Canada have killed tens of millions of ash trees since 2002, according to the agency.

The borer is a metallic green insect about a half-inch long and one-eighth of an inch wide, making it hard to detect in the wild. Female beetles lay eggs on the bark of ash trees. The eggs hatch and the larvae bore into the bark to the fluid-conducting vessels underneath, according to the statement.

The larvae feed and develop, cutting off the flow of nutrients and, eventually, kill the tree. The beetle attacks and kills North American species of true ash, and trees die three to five years following the initial infestation, according to the statement.

"Just as emerald ash borer has swiftly spread through other states in the nation, it has now moved to New Jersey and we must prepare for the impact of this highly destructive invasive pest, which could lead to the death of ash trees," state Agriculture Secretary Douglas H. Fisher said in the statement. "We ask that towns and counties act now to put plans in place to respond to the beetle."

In a bid to protect New Jersey's ash trees, the agricultural agency this fall released biocontrol agents called parasitoids in four locations in Bridgewater, Hillsborough, Franklin and Ewing townships, according to the statement.

Insect parasitoids - beneficial insects - are natural enemies of pests. They have an immature life stage that develops on or within an insect, killing it, according to a Cornell University website.

Nearly 9,000 larval and 1,600 egg emerald ash borer parasitoids were released in wooded ash sites with low levels of borers last month in an effort to help suppress building populations. The insects came from the U.S. Department of Agriculture's EAB Biocontrol Laboratory in Brighton, Michigan, according to the agriculture department statement.

The New Jersey Emerald Ash Borer website, developed by the New Jersey Emerald Ash Borer Task Force, which includes representatives of the state Departments of Agriculture and Environmental Protection, Rutgers University and U.S. Department of Agriculture, has many resources for municipal officials, woodland owners and residents, the statement says.

The website explains the signs of the beetle, how to identify ash trees, how to report a possible infestation and what to do with dead or removed trees, according to the statement.

The site has an Emerald Ash Borer Management Plan template and a tree removal cost calculator for towns, a risk map and treatment options for homeowners and a list of companies that will accept ash trees from woodland owners, the statement says.

New Jersey is part of a federal quarantine to prevent the spread of the beetle, which prohibits moving ash trees outside the quarantine zone.

FIGHTING THE EMERALD ASH BORER

Here are some tips on how to prevent the spread of the emerald ash borer:

Don't move firewood, which transports tree-killing forest pests, including the borer.

Use locally sourced firewood when burning it at home and traveling.

Burn firewood where you buy it.

Make sure you burn all wood purchased.

Report signs of the beetle to the state Department of Agriculture by calling 609-406-6939.

For more information, visit www.emeraldashborer.nj.gov

Source: N.J. Department of Agriculture

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Rwu0Ny