The Great Neck, New York-based North Shore-LIJ Health System and Maimonides Medical Center announced Tuesday that the two organizations are in negotiations to form a partnership.

Long interested in expanding into Brooklyn, the North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System may have found that avenue.

The Great Neck, New York-based North Shore-LIJ Health System and Maimonides Medical Center announced Tuesday that the two organizations are in negotiations to form a partnership.

No date was given for a final agreement, but once that is reached, Maimonides would continue to operate as a full-service hospital.

[Also: Tracking 2015 mergers and acquisitions]

North Shore-LIJ, one of the nation’s largest health systems, has already grown to include health insurance, offering coverage to individuals, families and businesses through the CareConnect Insurance Co. With more than 19 hospitals, 400 outpatient physician practices, and long-term care facilities, North Shore-LIJ employs about 54,000 people, making it among New York State’s largest employers.

“North Shore-LIJ has been exploring opportunities in Brooklyn for several years, as we continue to expand beyond our traditional service areas on Long Island, Queens, Staten Island and Manhattan,” North Shore-LIJ President and CEO Michael J. Dowling said in a statement.

Follow Healthcare Finance on Twitter and LinkedIn.

Maimonides would be the hub for a growing network of services, according to President and CEO Pamela S. Brier. Negotiations with North Shore-LIJ have been ongoing for at least a year, she said.

“This preliminary announcement is the result of a focused, 12-month strategic planning process by the Maimonides Board of Trustees and our executive team to identify a regional partner whose vision and commitment to excellence are aligned with ours,” Brier said in a statement.

Maimonides Medical Center has 711 beds and over 70 subspecialty programs, offering tertiary, or consultative care. The teaching hospital encompasses a Heart & Vascular Center, outpatient Cancer and Breast Centers, a fully-accredited Stroke Center and Bone & Joint Center.

It also operates Brooklyn’s accredited Children’s Hospital, a Regional Perinatal Center serving high-risk pregnant women and neonates, and a large obstetrics program, delivering more than 8,700 babies each year.

Twitter: @SusanMorseHFN