MISHAWAKA — TruPay, a company that’s been expanding at a steady clip since its founding in 2003, now has a lot more room to grow.

The company moved at the beginning of May to a new headquarters building in the Edison Lakes Corporate Park.

“My hope,” TruPay President Mark Rutledge said, “is that we will be here in Mishawaka forever and not have to consider a transition again.”

TruPay’s new location at 810 Park Place is almost three times the size of its old building at 201 S. Main St. in downtown Mishawaka. The company currently employs 43 people, but the new building could fit as many as 85. The entire property covers 5 acres, so there is space for additions as well.

The company has spent about $1.4 million to buy and renovate the Edison Lakes building.

“We did it with the intention of staying here for a long time,” Rutledge said.

TruPay’s business is in providing “human capital management” solutions. That means it handles payroll, human resources, time and labor management, and other back-office functions that many companies want to outsource. The company’s customers primarily are in the Midwest, but it processes payroll for workers in every state in the nation plus some U.S. territories.

“We’re not just a local company,” Rutledge said. “We compete against national, multibillion-dollar companies.”

Compliance is a big part of TruPay’s business, too. Companies turn to the firm to ensure they are meeting requirements related to the Affordable Care Act, tax laws, labor standards and other regulations.

“We help manage all that, but we also do payroll,” Rutledge said. “Payroll continues to be a core part of our business, but it’s really turned into a byproduct of what we really do.”

TruPay is launching a cloud-based software product called Inspire HCM that will enable clients to manage employee files — from the time a person applies for a job to the time that person retires — in one database.

“This new platform will really differentiate us from our competitors,” Rutledge said. “We anticipate significant growth over the next three to five years, and that’s one of the reasons we felt we needed to make a transition to a larger building.”

He said the Inspire HCM software also will enable TruPay to serve companies of any size, and scale up with them more easily as they grow.

TruPay has already demonstrated consistent growth over the past five years. The company was on Inc. Magazine’s list of the nation’s 5,000 fastest-growing private businesses from 2010 through 2014.

“The thing that has remained constant for us is exceptional client care,” Rutledge said. “We provide a higher level of client care, and now we’re providing a higher level of technology.”

kallen@sbtinfo.com

574-235-6244

@KevinAllenSBT