Serial entrepreneur and investor Rich Barton won’t fund startups that offer demos on a computer and Web browser. What he will invest in, and is doing so prolifically these days, are “mobile-first” consumer brands that have the potential to one day go public, he says.

Zillow Inc. Rich Barton

The founder of Expedia Inc. and co-founder of Zillow Inc., Mr. Barton has recently invested in: Trover Inc., a travel enthusiast’s photo sharing and recommendations app; Front Desk Inc., makers of a mobile business management dashboard for service providers like personal trainers, tour guides, masseurs and music schools; as well as HotelTonight Inc., the app that lets travelers book rooms at the last minute (and helps hotels make money from unused inventory).

Mr. Barton spoke with The Wall Street Journal’s Venture Capital Dispatch about the rise of mobile-first startups, and the unique challenges they face. Edited excerpts:

When did you shift your focus from Web to mobile, as an entrepreneur and investor?

Two or three years ago, we had a mobile epiphany at Zillow. The Zillow apps, as you probably know, are the most popular, and highest-rated real estate apps on iOS and Android.

Around that time, I started to say, if founders come in and show me a demo of a product on a computer–that’s an automatic reject! I won’t fund them. If they come into my office and they show me product demos on a smartphone or tablet, I will stay interested.

You usually start or fund consumer brands. Why did you back Front Desk, a business management software startup?

Like with most financing, it starts with people. Jon Zimmerman, the founder of Front Desk, is someone who I hired a long time ago at Expedia a data scientist. Since then, he had done a number of startup things in Seattle, and had become a bit of a fitness nut. He started a gym, Crossfit Seattle, and built software for it.

Small-business people, who spend as much time visiting clients as they do running the office, just don’t carry a computer around. They carry a smartphone! Jon asked: ‘Why can’t we have a full-blown business management solution on our phones?’ It was an ‘Oh yeah, that’s obvious.’ That got me fired up.

How long until we see a mobile-first company get to a healthy IPO?

The ecosystem is not that mature yet. If Instagram had held on for two more years we would have seen that, I believe. If Facebook had started later, it would have been a mobile first company. Now it’s just a predominantly mobile company.

I think we’ll see some IPOs within two years from mobile-first businesses. I don’t want to name names. With HotelTonight and Front Desk, they have to mature a bit and get some bulk, but they both could do it for sure.

How should mobile-first companies measure success?

There are many success metrics and characteristics that are particularly important for mobile first businesses.

Mobile requires better design than Web, because you have a smaller canvas to work with… teams need to demonstrate an ability to design great, usable apps before they seek venture funding.

Understanding the reality of what marketing means in a mobile-first world is really important, too. You cannot just rely on an index owned by Google, and buy keywords, search engine marketing and search engine optimization to start up, now.

It’s a good thing to get familiar with the raft of service providers out there offering mobile analytics.

Finally, entrepreneurs really need to know how the app stores work, like how do you get featured on the Apple app store, or maybe get into in an ad, that’s important.

We’ve seen this movie before. App stores are the new portals.

Write to Lora Kolodny at lora.kolodny@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @lorakolodny