The Washington Examiner 's Byron York called the speech "long, rambling and at times barely coherent ... By the time Palin finished speaking, it was hard for anyone to believe she truly is 'seriously interested' in running for president."

Sarah Palin is being smeared in headlines from the Huffington Post to the Washington Examiner for her 35-minute speech at Saturday’s Iowa Freedom Summit. In 2015, Palinophobia is as palpable as it was in 2008. After six years, the media still tears into the superstar from Wasilla like rabid dogs.

From Huffington Post: "Sarah Palin's Bizarre Iowa Speech Gets Thanks – From Democrats"

BBC.com said her speech was "all noise, signifying nothing."

John Fund of National Review Online:

... her [Palin's] meandering and often bizarre .... Sample line: “The man can only ride you when your back is bent, so strengthen it so America won’t get taken for a ride.” She will always be an entertaining speaker at conservative events, but she clearly lacks the discipline for a full-fledged campaign.

Fund failed to realize that Palin based her remark on a quote by Martin Luther King, Jr.: "A man can't ride your back unless it's bent."

MSNBC's Joe Scarborough called her speech "a tragedy."

Forward Progressives:

Clearly I can’t say for certain what she goes through personally, or what issues she might have, but watching several Palin speeches over the last year or so almost always leave me with the feeling that something just isn’t right upstairs.

The NY Daily News insisted that Palin's teleprompter malfunctioned, causing the incoherent rambling. Like other mainstream journalists, Adam Edelman didn't know about the quote from MLK, Jr.

The peculiar speech, which included jabs at Hollywood, Obamacare and Hillary Clinton, and a stranger remark about how ‘the man can only ride you when your back is bent,’ comes just a day after the former vice presidential candidate said she was ‘seriously interested’ in a 2016 presidential bid.

Daily Kos: "Poor thing, she had a teleprompter malfunction and was reduced to spewing the gibberish that fills her head." DK also referenced Palin's "when your back is bent" remark as a bizarre.

Online tweets and blog comments suggested Palin is a "cokehead," "alcoholic," "insane," "aging teabagger queen," into "kamasutra," "a liberal plant," and a "Kim Kardashian of punditry."

Palin doesn’t care; neither do her supporters. She received a standing ovation coming and going on Saturday. Palin delivered her message in fast one-liners, Americana anecdotes, and tweet-like declarations. She threw out buzzwords, covered alot of issues conservatives care about without boring them, and channeled Andrew Breitbart. "Screw the Hollywood left," she said.

"It is war," Palin said at one point. "It is war for the future of our country, for the sovereignty and solvency of the United States of America."

Read more Evans at exzoom.net.