TWIN FALLS • The politics of Idaho’s mental health funding is leaving thousands behind, argue proponents of Medicaid expansion.

More money is needed on almost every level to adequately provide mental health services to the state’s most vulnerable citizens, they say, especially after years of drastic budget cuts to mental health programs.

During the 2011 legislative session, lawmakers slashed almost $35 million from the Medicaid budget. Those cuts, along with prior budget reductions, have forced the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare to reduce services for adult mental health patients.

For fiscal year 2012-2013, Idaho appropriated $43.2 million for behavioral health. While the state receives federal funds dedicated to mental health spending, behavioral health makes up just 3.4 percent of Health and Welfare’s budget. The department receives the second-largest amount of funding in the state.

The department has 20 field offices offering mental health services across the state, said Casey Moyer with Health and Welfare.

Idaho Health Regions

A bulk of the adult and child clients they help are ordered by the court, he said.

“We seek to be the backstop,” Moyer said. “We want to make sure no one falls through the crack.”

For two years, mental health advocates pushed for Gov. C.L. “Butch” Otter and the Legislature to backfill the mental health cuts but their efforts so far have been unsuccessful.

Now with the 2014 Legislative session approaching, opportunities to find funding for mental health services are just now starting to be discussed.

Departments will submit their budgets to the governor this week, said state Rep. Maxine Bell, R-Jerome. Otter will then review the proposals and submit his budget in January.

As chairwoman of the Joint Appropriations Finance Committee, Bell said she hasn’t heard of anyone proposing backfilling mental health cuts but it’s still early.

“It has to be an issue and a pretty serious one,” she said. “How much is available for backfill on any issue is just unknown at this point.”

Health and Welfare is in competition with other frequently slashed programs for the available cash.

Of Idaho’s approximately 1.5 million resident, nearly 54,000 adults live with a serious mental illness and about 18,000 children live with serious mental health conditions, according to the National Alliance on Mental Illness.

Idaho’s public mental health system provides services to nearly 20 percent of adults with a serious mental illness, leaving the rest untreated or relying on private insurance or out of pocket expenses for treatment.

Mental Health Holds FY 2014

Idaho continually ranks as one of the top states with the highest suicide rates. In 2011, the most recent year available, 284 people committed suicide in Idaho.

Idaho could relieve its mental health funding burden by expanding its Medicaid eligibility requirements. Unlike the recent implementation of the online health insurance exchange, state-federal Medicaid expansion is the optional component under the federal Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare.

Currently, Idaho’s Medicaid program covers non-disabled adults only if they have children and make less than 20 percent of the poverty level, which is $4,584 annually for a family of four. Expanding eligibility under the federal system would allow up to 138 percent of poverty or $31,000 for a family of four. This prevents many single Idahoans who can’t afford insurance accessing preventive care and mental health counseling or medication covered under Medicaid.

Enrollment in the state’s Medicaid program has grown more than 20 percent over the last three years. In 2008, enrollment was about 185,000. By 2012, it was nearly 229,000.

Otter has already rejected expanding Medicaid once during the this year’s Legislative session while at the same time endorsing building an online health care exchange. He, along with many other lawmakers, argued that Medicaid needed to be reformed before allowing more people into the system.

With the health exchange plagued with technical difficulties, low enrollment numbers and accusations saying exchange supporters promoted Obamacare, lawmakers may not jump to push expanding Medicaid this session, Bell said.

“I’m not sure if that whole issue is going to be on the table or not,” she said. “If our exchange had gone a little more smoothly, there might have been a bigger chance.”

Expanding Medicaid would be beneficial for communities because it helps prevent individuals with mental illnesses ending up in crisis situations, said Bill Aldrich, owner of the Twin Falls-based Community Support Center. The facility relies on Medicaid funding to provide services for people with mental disabilities, including bipolar disorder, schizophrenia and severe depression.

Police are often the first responders when there’s a mental health crisis. Once on scene, they can decide if they need to take an individual to the hospital for evaluation of their mental state.

The costs then fall into a catastrophic medical fund, with county and state taxpayers picking up the tab. For example, Jerome County paid more than $114,000 for emergency care for adults with mental illnesses in 2012.

The county used to pay more, but as the bill continued to escalate, the county changed its payment process. Now they only pay when its court-ordered, said Kim Burlington, deputy clerk for the county’s social services.

Left untreated, people with mental illnesses often end up on the streets or in jail, Aldrich said.

“If you throw in Medicaid expansion, it’s going to help communities and reduce the costs overall,” he said. “There will be less emergency costs, less people going to hospital emergency rooms and less arrests.”