Volunteering at this year's Christmas lunch at St John's in Reid was an opportunity to reflect on the lives and needs of others Isobel Sambridge​, a 12-year-old Canberra school student, said.

Isobel, who was helping along with her mother, Julie, father, Malcolm, and brothers, Cameron and Callum, was one of more than 60 Canberrans who chose to spend their Christmas Day with others from less fortunate circumstances at the church hall.

Volunteers Cameron, 16, Callum, 18, Isobel,12, Malcolm and Julie Sambridge helping out at the St John's Care lunch on Christmas Day. Photo: Jay Cronan

When Mrs Sambridge, a psychologist, first suggested the family, which is not religious, do something more meaningful than just spending Christmas at home, she was surprised and pleased by the strength of the response.

"All of them thought it was a great idea," she said. "I put it to the kids first and they were all very keen to do it."

Volunteer Claire Hamilton helps to serve lunch. Photo: Jay Cronan

St John'sCare​ director, Stuart Davis-Meehan, said the volunteers made the annual event, which is open to the homeless, people struggling to make ends meet and, in some cases, those who just had nowhere else to go on Christmas Day, possible.

"I had people ringing me up as late as Christmas Eve saying they wanted to help," he said. "In the end I was just saying `come along, sit at a table and spend some time talking to people'."

Advertisement

Companionship was a much a part of the equation as physical hunger.

"Are people here because they are lonely or are they here because they want something to eat?" he said. "I'd say it's 50/50 and, in a lot of cases, it is both."

One of the two tables of presents at the St John's Care lunch. Photo: Jay Cronan

Mr Davis-Meehan said many of the guests were elderly and living alone, often in the public housing towers on the outskirts of the CBD.

St John's central location made it readily accessible and contributed to the success of the day.

The Christmas lunch is just one of a range of social supports offered by the social welfare organisation at this time of the year.

The annual present room, which lets parents in receipt of a Centrelink benefit pick a present for each of their children and collect a Christmas hamper, was open from December 8 to 18.

"We had 278 families come through [the present room] this year," he said. "More than 660 major presents were given away along with numerous books and stocking fillers. If that was not a record then it has to be very close."

The volunteers weren't only busy on Christmas Day. About 25 hams were prepared earlier in the week and 75 chickens were quartered on Christmas Eve.

At the end of the lunch guests were taken into the storeroom and asked to choose from a wide selection of fresh fruit and vegetables including mushrooms, mangoes, cherries and even Christmas bon bons to take home with them.

"Affordable accommodation in Canberra is very hard to find," Mr Davis-Meehan said.

"Many of our guests are on a benefit and, after they pay their accommodation, there just isn't enough left to survive on.

"Choices have to be made between bills and food and fresh food is often the first thing to go."