President Obama (Photo: Getty Images )

Almost always, the big question in a voter's mind as he or she takes the ballot to vote is (subliminally or not!), “am I better off than I was four years ago,” or in this case, eight years ago!

That would put us at the beginning of Barack Obama's 2008 win in a very contentious year, not because of politics, but because it was the end of George W. Bush's presidency — a presidency that was highlighted by the 9/11 terrorist attack, two wars — one absolutely unnecessary and unfortunate for all America — two tax cuts for the wealthy, leading to the massive income inequality that exists today and the really big one ... an economic meltdown like Chernobyl on Wall Street and the banking community second only to the Great Depression!

All this George W. Bush did for you in eight years, along with the failed education plan called “No Child Left Behind” that should have been called “Every Child Left Behind!” Then in comes Barack Obama to clean up a really ugly mess with an 11 trillion dollar debt from the wars and the tax cuts and the meltdown.

So if you go back to 2008 and truly remember your own personal situation and how much better things are now compared to then, what do you come up with? Because the ugly truth is that President Obama inherited a wrecked economy with seemingly endless challenges from Bush's wars. He took on all those challenges and never gave up or buckled from the pressure. In fact, he brought us back from the brink, and now we enjoy low gas prices, low interest rates and the best economy of any nation in the world.

There are still problems due to the do-nothing Republican Congress that blocked every move the president made, including dozens of attempts to kill and dismantle the Affordable Care Act that has helped many thousands to finally have viable health care insurance.

It is not the fault of the president that the evil, bloodsucking insurance companies have resumed their continuous escalation of premiums. Barack is not getting the money and the government is not getting the money because the evil, bloodsucking insurance companies are still the foxes in the chicken coop making the money and flooding D.C. and the states with their minions, the dreaded lobbyists.

So, in conclusion, again I ask you, “Are you better off than you were four years ago, and more importantly, are you better off than you were eight years ago?” If you know in your heart you are, then the only choice to beat the monstrosity called “The Donald” in November will undoubtedly be Hillary Clinton, who has vowed to continue the progressive reforms President Obama started.

It is much like when JFK was assassinated, and LBJ took over the reins of president and stayed on course to pass the civil rights acts of the '60s. Let's not give up the progress that we have made so far, because there is much yet to accomplish for a very bright future.

Bill Fuenfhausen lives in Battlefield.

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/273MmOX