Mr Byrt’s battles is the largest civil lawsuit in Australia.

FALLEN tycoon Terry Byrt has filed a $243 million civil lawsuit — the nation’s biggest ever — against the Australian Taxation Office.

The 72-year-old said his legal action was a “landmark” fight for thousands of ordinary taxpayers. He claimed it cost his business, his health, and $3 million in legal and accounting fees to fight the ATO in a four-year dispute over a “false and reckless assessment’’.

“They’ve destroyed me,’’ Mr Byrt said.

“They ­ruined my business, my reputation, and stole my dreams.”

He said a victory in the Federal Court would be a win for all Australians fighting unfair decisions by the taxman.

The ATO declined to publicly discuss the multi-million dollar claim, citing privacy ­issues. But, in its legal defence, it will argue it did not owe a duty of care and there is no proof of alleged negligence.

The ATO is under intense scrutiny over botched tax bills, handling of disputes and unfairly imposed penalties.

A Senate Committee and the Inspector-General of Taxation (IGT) head three separate inquiries into a Taxpayer Charter and protection, ATO dispute conduct, and unfair imposition of penalties.

In July, an IGT ­report found up to 35 per cent of the $4.25 billion in tax penalties over the past three years had been unfairly imposed and later had to be reduced.

“It’s a stitch-up,’’ Mr Byrt said.

“You have a go, an average Aussie battler, and the taxman cuts you down. If you try to fight it, to prove they got it wrong, they send you broke.

“I’m going to sue them and take it on, hammer and tongs.’’

The Townsville identity once presided over an empire of mining tenements, shares, property, earthmoving equipment, and fleets of fishing trawlers, ships, and aircraft. In his claim, the Ansett Resources and Industries Pty Ltd founder said his company was wrongfully wound up in 2010 by a “false and reckless assessment”.

The assessment was later overturned by the ATO in full by an objection which was fully allowed, the claim says, and lodged by the liquidator, KordaMentha Townsville.

“Subsequently, the ATO did not lodge any proof of debt in the disbursement of funds by the liquidator,” it said.

“This claim is for the recovery of personal loss by the claimant caused by the actions of the ATO.”

Mr Byrt cited loss of assets such as Macair Airlines ($84.6m), Carabella Resources shares ($82m), Kwikship ($4.4m), fishing trawlers ($3.5m), property ($2m), and aircraft ($2.8m) among the total claim.

It does not include “financial compensation for pain and suffering over the past four years as a result of the wrongful and reckless wind-up,’’ the claim said.

Mark Chapman of lobby group Taxpayers Australia said civil suits against the tax office were rare.

“I’ve never heard of anything on this scale. It is the biggest dollar hit by an individual against the ATO I’ve ever heard of,’’ Mr Chapman said.

He said most taxpayers did not have the money or stomach for a prolonged fight.

“People don’t understand how much coercive power the tax office has if they wish to use it,” he said.