Big ideas out at City Hall, nuts-and-bolts issues in





Photo: Jason Henry, Special To The Chronicle Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Patrick Bareiss, RADco program director, assists Danny Botone, 30, with his agreement for rental assistance at the Eviction Defense Collaborative in San Francisco, Calif., Friday, November 22, 2013. Patrick Bareiss, RADco program director, assists Danny Botone, 30, with his agreement for rental assistance at the Eviction Defense Collaborative in San Francisco, Calif., Friday, November 22, 2013. Photo: Jason Henry, Special To The Chronicle Image 2 of 2 James Doyle, center, a law student and volunteer at the Eviction Defense Collaborative, asks a coworker a question about one of the legal forms that Zinnia Gaines, right, has to fill out in order to receive help with rent issues in San Francisco, Calif., Friday, November 22, 2013. less James Doyle, center, a law student and volunteer at the Eviction Defense Collaborative, asks a coworker a question about one of the legal forms that Zinnia Gaines, right, has to fill out in order to receive ... more Photo: Jason Henry, Special To The Chronicle Big ideas out at City Hall, nuts-and-bolts issues in 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

For better or worse, national television pundits can no longer look to San Francisco's City Hall for the easy "You won't believe this!" story.

Not long ago, the domed building was a veritable factory of love-it-or-hate-it policies that were the first of their kind in the nation: the thousands of illegal same-sex weddings in 2004, mandatory sick leave in 2006, universal health care and a ban on plastic bags in 2007, a ban on cigarette sales in drugstores in 2008, mandatory composting in 2009, the ban on free toys in Happy Meals in 2010.

Sure, the city still gets plenty of national media attention - from the America's Cup sailing races to Twitter's initial public offering to Batkid - but it's rare these days for news to stem purely from a policy crafted in Room 200 or the offices of the Board of Supervisors.

Supervisor Scott Wiener's ban on public nudity last year may be the exception, but that drew national attention in large part because of the Castro's quirky Naked Guys, their City Hall protests in the buff and the fact that only in San Francisco would the mandate to cover genitalia be controversial.

Difference in style

What's the reason for the shift away from ground-breaking legislation and toward bread-and-butter policies? Most observers point to the dramatic difference in style between former Mayor Gavin Newsom, dubbed "the Philosopher King," and his successor, Mayor Ed Lee, known as "Steady Eddie."

Newsom - the telegenic, highly ambitious politician who loved appearing on national TV and has his sights on the governor's mansion and beyond - said upon departing Room 200 that his ideas were his legacy. From same-sex marriage to health care to environmental policy, he loved being first.

"He loved the thrill of being the first in the nation on so many issues," recalled Nathan Ballard, who worked as Newsom's spokesman. "He wanted to make news. He had a passion for it, and he wanted to change the world."

Ballard said that while Newsom and the supervisors were often at each other's throats, the combative atmosphere inspired everybody to compete to generate the next big idea.

When Newsom resigned to become California's lieutenant governor in 2011, then-City Administrator Lee took over. The longtime bureaucrat - who claims no ambitions for higher office and wasn't even sure he wanted this one - can be awkward with the media and isn't a great public speaker.

But he's adept at building consensus when tackling long-standing, serious problems including business tax reform, pension reform and creating an affordable housing trust fund.

Important? Yes. Exciting? Definitely not.

"He has a very different way of governing and solving problems," Lee's spokeswoman, Christine Falvey, said of her boss. "It doesn't get the phones ringing from Fox News or anything, but I think the public appreciates it."

Supervisor Jane Kim said Lee's style should be no surprise considering he was the city administrator and the head of the Department of Public Works before that.

"They are in some ways what people would say are the boring aspects of city work, but what really allow the city to run," she said. "That's always been his M.O."

It's spreading

Lee's low-drama style seems to be infectious. The 11 members of the Board of Supervisors are much more collegial and willing to compromise than their predecessors, but they're also not out in front on crafting groundbreaking policy that sets the agenda for the rest of the country.

Asked to name their signature pieces of legislation, the current supervisors came up with a list that'll never earn them a guest appearance on "Nightline" - or "The Daily Show."

Many of them hemmed and hawed, and then finally came up with legislation including changing the way the city funds retiree health care and reforming the California Environmental Quality Act appeals process, the way in which citizens can seek supervisors' help in blocking construction projects over environmental concerns.

"While we're not grabbing national headlines, we're focusing on real policies that matter to the residents of our city," said Supervisor Mark Farrell, who championed retiree health care reform. "It's in part a reaction to residents not wanting to be made a national story every time City Hall has a piece of legislation."

Wiener, who is proud of his CEQA efforts, said, "It's not about whether something is the first of its kind. It's about whether we're being productive making public policy."

He added that he and his colleagues may not be full of pizzazz, but they're focusing on important measures - like the 2011 voter-approved streets bond to pay for filling potholes - that previous boards neglected.

"Some of them are just things that are decades overdue that this board and this mayor have been able to get done that past boards and mayors have not been able to get done," he said.

Ruffling feathers

But to former Supervisor Chris Daly - one of several big personalities on the previous board - today's focus on courtesy and compromise comes with a cost.

"You'd like to think that decorum is not synonymous with the status quo, but unfortunately it is," he said. "In order to do something that runs counter to what the powers that be want, what conventional wisdom believes, you have to ruffle feathers."

He pointed to his own push for mandatory sick leave in 2006, which angered business groups; the creation of universal health care in 2007, which drew a lawsuit from the Golden Gate Restaurant Association; and Newsom's early championing of same-sex marriage, which drew scorn from the Democratic establishment.

Now, those policies are more widely accepted - in San Francisco and around the country.

Daly was famously bombastic - even vowing to use the f-word at every supervisors meeting one year - and acknowledged politicians don't have to go that far. But some fire in the belly is essential, he said.

"At the dinner table, my manners are as nice as the average person's, but I wasn't there to have dinner," he said. "I was there to make change, and that's what I did."

A bigger picture

Former Supervisor Angela Alioto, who was on the board from 1988 to 1997, agrees with that sentiment. She served on another cutting-edge board with another larger-than-life, attention-loving mayor, Willie Brown.

"We were so damn exciting that all of the news shows in New York were talking about us," she said. "That always angered the downtown businesses for talking about legislation that was global instead of local."

In 1993, she wrote a trendsetting antismoking ordinance, which banned lighting up in workplaces, restaurants or public arenas.

The same group approved cutting-edge policies to prohibit the city from doing business with apartheid-era South Africa and to fund needle exchange programs, both of which Alioto said were also national trend-setters.

"The supervisors had the guts to do them even though they weren't pothole, local issues," she said, saying she doesn't see that same kind of bravery now. "There's not a lot of passion going on."

Just add water

Even when the current board does take on a groundbreaking policy, it often gets watered down. Take Supervisor David Chiu's proposal to place a measure on an upcoming ballot to give employees the right to ask for a flexible work schedule to care for children or ill relatives.

After push-back from businesses, Chiu limited the number of businesses it would apply to and passed it as regular legislation rather than placing it on a ballot.

So which style is better? Political consultant and lobbyist Alex Clemens, who worked as a legislative aide to three different supervisors from 1989-2000, said they both have their benefits.

A little of both

"Being seen as a hotbed of innovation attracts attention from some, and eschewing new ideas in favor of keeping a steady hand on the tiller draws attention from others," he said. "Of course, the real trick is managing to do both at once - and then getting credit from the media and outside observers for having done so."

Or, as one longtime city official who didn't want to be named for fear of irking either mayor said, "Gavin Newsom could have used a little more Ed Lee, and Ed Lee could use a little more Gavin Newsom."