HOLLAND, MI -- The economy and employee health care expenses have furniture industry leaders worried.

Those concerns are reflected in the latest results of Michael Dunlap’s quarterly MADA/OFI Trends Survey.

Healthcare expenses, transportation costs and the rates of materials such as steel and wood have traditionally been the most commonly cited concerns from respondents, the Holland-based furniture analyst said.

The increase index reflects uncertainty about health care comes as the implementation of the Affordable Care Act continues to be a major dividing point nationwide.

On a bright note, material costs are less of a worry for industry executives. The survey's Material Cost Index is at its best since July 2012 and third highest since the survey was started nearly a decade ago.

The October 2013 Overall Survey Index is 54.35, which dipped slightly from July 2013’s Index of 55.07. The average overall index is 54.30 since the survey started in August 2004.

Dunlap characterizes the decline as minimal, adding the industry is doing better than any time since the 2008-2009 recession.

“We described it as ‘flat’ six months ago and it’s better described now as still ‘climbing'," said Dunlap.

He said the drop was heavily influenced by declines in order backlog and personal outlook.

The survey, designed to measure the current business activity of the office furniture industry and its suppliers, was completed in October.

Dunlap says he is sticking with his six-month-old forecast that the industry will continue to experience modest growth in the fourth quarter of 2013, and then accelerate during first and second quarters 2014.

“I still think that 2014 will be one of the industry’s best in a decade,” Dunlap said. “It will be a good year for the industry. I remain optimistic that 2013 will be the industry’s best year since the 2008-2009 recession and that 2014 will offer us solid growth in most markets.”

The survey results showed gross shipments declined slightly while order backlog was significantly higher. Employment fell but remained above average as hours worked rose but still remained below average. Capital expenditures remained steady, while tooling expenditures rose. Raw material costs improved as employee costs dropped.

“The improvements are reflections in the quarterly performance of some of the major manufacturers, but the major improvements are in the mid sized manufacturers,” Dunlap said.

Shandra Martinez covers business for MLive/The Grand Rapids Press. Email her or follow her on Twitter @shandramartinez