FOLKSTON, Ga. - The August 2013 closure of Charlton County Memorial Hospital not only left the community without an emergency room and in-patent care, it was among four closures of rural hospital in Georgia over the past two years.



When "financial instability" forced the Hospital Authority of Charlton County to close the 25-bed facility, it also had to lay off about 95 people.

People the hospital once served now have to travel about 30 miles to Brunswick or 50 miles to Jacksonville to get hospital services. A trip like that would seem unthinkable to someone living in a major city but is becoming a way of life for rural residents across the nation.

A total of 50 hospitals in the rural U.S. have closed since 2010, and pace has accelerated, with more closures in the past two years than in the previous 10 years combined, according to the National Rural Health Association. That could be just the beginning of what some health care analysts fear will be a crisis.



An additional 283 rural hospitals in 39 states are vulnerable to shutting down, and 35 percent of rural hospitals are operating at a loss, according to iVantage Health Analytics, a firm based in Portland, Maine, that works with hospitals.



Most of the rural hospital closures so far have occurred in the South and Midwest. Of those at risk, nearly 70 percent are in states that have declined to expand Medicaid under the federal Affordable Care Act, although some experts are hesitant to draw a cause-and-effect correlation.



In some cases, the shuttered hospitals have been replaced by clinics offering urgent care and other outpatient services. The site of the old Sac-Osage Hospital, which closed in September, could eventually become part of a walk-in health clinic. But other closures have simply left a void.



"When a hospital closes, the physicians leave. A lot of the health care infrastructure leaves. Sometimes the local businesses will leave ... the schools suffer," said George Pink, deputy director of the Rural Health Research and Policy Analysis Center at the University of North Carolina. "There's a whole multiplier effect that really can devastate some towns."



Big city hospitals have been closing at about the same rate as rural ones during the past five years, but an abundance of alternatives in most major metropolitan areas typically reduces the effect on patients. When a rural hospital closes, people might have to travel dozens of miles to reach the nearest hospital, an inconvenience that can sometimes be a matter of life or death.

When 18-month-old Edith Gonzalez choked on a grape in August 2013, her parents rushed to Shelby Regional Medical Center in their hometown of Center, Texas, unaware that the hospital had closed several weeks earlier. Their daughter was dead by the time an ambulance brought her to the next nearest hospital, more than 45 minutes later.



Kathy Hagler, whose family owns a local grocery store, helped Edith's relatives gather 1,500 petition signatures pleading with state and local officials to re-open the hospital. But nothing has come of it.



"I didn't want baby Edith to be forgotten," Hagler said, "because we had no hospital here, and that could have saved her life."



In rural North Carolina last summer, 48-year-old Portia Gibbs died from cardiac arrest after waiting 90 minutes for a medical helicopter to arrive. She could have been at a hospital in less than half that time, had not the Vidant Pungo Hospital in Belhaven closed just six days earlier.



Her death prompted Belhaven's mayor to walk 273 miles to the nation's capital in an attempt to raise awareness about the plight of rural hospitals.

Mayor Adam O'Neal plans to lead a similar march June 1 with supporters from at least 41 states. The city now is trying to acquire the old hospital through eminent domain and is seeking $6 million in federal loans to re-open it.



Since Gibbs' death, O'Neal said, several other people have died before they could make it to more distant hospitals, including a 16-year-old boy hurt in a farming accident in April.



"We have people needlessly dying," O'Neal said.



Since Belhaven lost its hospital last July, rural hospitals also have shut down in other states, including Mississippi, Ohio, Tennessee, Texas and Georgia.



Copyright 2015 by News4Jax.com. The Associated Press contributed to this report. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.