BEAVER CREEK — On the eve of her first opportunity to compete in a World Cup on her hometown mountain, Mikaela Shiffrin had a relaxing evening, playing around on a piano in her bedroom. Just for fun, she put together a “mash-up mix” of two songs: “Battle Scars” by Lupe Fiasco and Guy Sebastian and “The Scientist” by Coldplay.

“I’m so psyched with it,” Shiffrin said Sunday with typical exuberance. “It’s playing all day in my head.”

The talented teen had no problem falling asleep Saturday night but woke up at 2 a.m. and every hour after that, raring to go.

“I was like, ‘Is it time to race yet?’ ” Shiffrin said. “I was really excited, but I slept very well.”

Shiffrin raced exceptionally well Sunday. Having established herself last season as the best women’s slalom racer in the world, Shiffrin claimed her first giant slalom podium, finishing second to Jessica Lindell-Vikarby of Sweden by .09 of a second. Tina Weirather of Liechtenstien was third.

“It was a really great day, and I’m happy with it, for sure,” said Shiffrin, 18. “I came into the season hoping to improve my GS standings, so I’m in the process of doing that. I’m always hoping for a win, but focused on my skiing. I’ve never really focused on the results, because that’ll get in my head.

“I have a pretty good balance in the starting gate, knowing exactly what I need to think about in my skiing to get down the hill fast. It’s nice to be on the podium and have that gauge of where I stand with everybody else.”

Shiffrin’s teammates performed poorly in three races over the weekend, looking like they weren’t ready to race on such a technically demanding hill in front of a home crowd, but Shiffrin has already distinguished herself as a racer with a knack for performing under pressure. And as always, she raced with joy.

“I was in the starting gate and I was like, ‘Oh, my gosh, can’t you just let me go already?’ ” Shiffrin said. “Two minutes before you go, I was like, ‘OK, calm down, save it for your run.’ I finally was able to go, and I just couldn’t get going fast enough. It felt exactly as I imagined it would feel.”

Shiffrin’s father, Jeff, said her podium breakthrough in GS was one of those “moments that take your breath away.” Now his daughter will be regarded as a medal contender in slalom and GS at the Sochi Olympics, not only because of her results but her remarkable poise, too.

“I would imagine the nerves are getting better as she realizes that, in fact, she really does belong,” Jeff said. “No matter how good the results have been up to now, there’s still the sense of, ‘Wow, do I really belong here?’ She’s got the confidence of a couple of years, and really good support around her.”

After two days of watching U.S. Ski Team athletes disappoint the home crowd in downhill and super-G, chief executive Bill Marolt was thrilled to see the team’s precocious phenom come up big.

“First of all, she’s a great athlete, this doesn’t happen if you’re not a great athlete,” Marolt said. “But she has the tenacity, she has that mental edge to her that just drives her. And she works hard.

“When she gets in that gate, she knows what she’s going to do and she makes herself do it. Regardless if the light is good or bad, if she’s tired or where she’s running (in the start order). The good ones, they will it.”

John Meyer: 303-954-1616, jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer

Men’s world cup at Beaver Creek

Tuesday-Thursday: Downhill training, 11 a.m.

Friday: Super-G race, 10:45 a.m.

Saturday: Downhill race, 11 a.m.

Sunday: Giant slalom race, 9:45 a.m. and 12:45 p.m.