ST. LOUIS, Sept. 29, 2014 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Equifax Workforce Solutions (NYSE:EFX), a leader in human resource, analytics and verification services, today announced that it will share its thought leadership and expertise in two sessions at the 17th Annual HR Technology Conference & Expo - "The Modern CHRO: A Conversation with Today's HR and Business Leaders" and "Whole Foods Market Takes a Fresh Approach to Navigating their ACA Ecosystem." The Conference will be held Tuesday, October 7 – Friday, October 10, 2014.

Employers today face a number of challenges, such as complying with constantly changing legislation, minimizing risk, streamlining their hiring and onboarding processes and reducing administrative burdens. Through its industry-leading solutions designed to automate key workforce processes, including I-9 management, Affordable Care Act management, employment verifications and more, Equifax Workforce Solutions provides countless organizations with the human capital intelligence, compliance expertise and unrivaled data analytics to enhance these processes and reduce bottom line costs.

During the HR Technology Conference, experts from Equifax will participate in these two educational sessions to provide attendees with the knowledge and resources needed to understand current issues and trends, as well as how they impact HR strategies. Both sessions are scheduled to take place on Wednesday, October 8, 2014 from 1:30 p.m. - 2:30 p.m. PDT.

In "The Modern CHRO: A Conversation with Today's HR and Business Leaders," Coretha M. Rushing, chief human resource officer for Equifax, Inc. will join a panel of some of the industry's most prominent CHROs, including Ashley Goldsmith, senior vice president and CHRO for Workday, Sara Hill, CHRO for Ceridian and Laurie Zaucha, vice president of HR and Organizational Development for Paychex, to share insight on how organizations can stay ahead of changes in technology and social communication and explore how a global mindset helps promote success.

Rushing commented, "As organizations grow globally, and legislation, technology and workforce strategies evolve, the CHRO is faced with more challenges than ever before. A global leader in information solutions, Equifax develops innovative, cutting-edge solutions that equip HR professionals with the tools to keep up with the constant change and bring positive transformation to their companies. I look forward to discussing some of the biggest issues CHROs face today and sharing the insights organizations need to overcome these obstacles successfully."

During "Whole Foods Market Takes a Fresh Approach to Navigating their ACA Ecosystem," Mike Psenka, senior vice president, Workforce Analytics for Equifax Workforce Solutions, will join Keith Morrison, global executive director of Benefits and Compensation for Whole Foods Market, Inc., to detail Whole Foods' successful management of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) requirements and share how the organization is preparing for 2015. Psenka and Morrison will discuss how Whole Foods monitors its 80,000 hourly employees in 360 locations and provides managers with real-time data on which they base critical workforce decisions and strategy in order to hire and retain top performers.

"Human resources technology is a dynamic industry, continually changing, growing and adapting to workforce needs and evolving legislative requirements, and the ACA is one particular area that continues to be a challenge for many employers," said Mike Psenka, senior vice president, Workforce Analytics for Equifax Workforce Solutions. "As a result, Equifax Workforce Solutions is dedicated to providing the resources that organizations need to prepare for these ongoing changes and navigate ACA regulations effectively, while maintaining full compliance."

In addition to these sessions, attendees of the HR Technology Conference & Exposition who wish to learn more about how Equifax Workforce Solutions can provide workforce insights, support HR compliance, help optimize processes and reduce costs at their organizations, are encouraged to visit Booth No. 1735 during exhibition hours. The exhibition hall will be open Tuesday, October 7 from 5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m. PDT, Wednesday, October 8 from 10:00 a.m. – 5:30 p.m. PDT and Thursday, October 9 from 9:45 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. PDT. Equifax Workforce Solutions representatives will be available to discuss the company's key solution areas including Compliance and Onboarding, I-9 Management, ACA Management and Employment Verification Services.

About Equifax, Inc.

Equifax is a global leader in consumer, commercial and workforce information solutions that provide businesses of all sizes and consumers with insight and information they can trust. Equifax organizes and assimilates data on more than 600 million consumers and 81 million businesses worldwide. The company's significant investments in differentiated data, its expertise in advanced analytics to explore and develop new multi-source data solutions, and its leading-edge proprietary technology enable it to create and deliver unparalleled customized insights that enrich both the performance of businesses and the lives of consumers. Equifax Workforce Solutions (also known as TALX), an Equifax business unit, is a leading provider of human resource, data, analytics and verification services.

Headquartered in Atlanta, Equifax operates or has investments in 19 countries and is a member of Standard & Poor's (S&P) 500® Index. Its common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) under the symbol EFX. In 2013, Equifax was named a Bloomberg BusinessWeek Top 50 company, was #3 in Fortune's Most Admired list in its category, and was named to InfoWeek 500 as well as the FinTech 100. For more information, please visit www.equifaxworkforce.com or www.equifax.com.

Note to editors: Trademarks and registered trademarks referenced herein remain the property of their respective owners.

1550 Peachtree Street, N.W. Atlanta, Georgia 30309 Pam Stevens Equifax Workforce Solutions (314) 214-7235