An important deadline is looming for Americans all over the country – which healthcare plan will they be on when 2016 rolls in? The deadline to make a switch in time for the New Year is December 15th.

This decision could be especially important for people currently enrolled in a DAKOTACARE plan. The company made the decision this past October to leave the federal marketplace. At the time, DAKOTACARE said they could no longer afford the policies they offered under the Affordable Care Act. The decision to leave the marketplace is a perfectly legal one says Mike Fierberg, a Spokesman for Medicare and Medicaid Services, but could greatly increase the costs of plans offered. “People on the DAKOTACARE plans in the marketplace are now going to be walked over to plans outside the marketplace”, says Fierberg, “That means they cannot get tax credits to reduce premiums or take advantage of the cost-sharing reductions for out-of-pocket expenses and co-pays.” Fierberg estimates that this will make DAKOTACARE policies much more expensive then they currently are. “If people make an informed decision to stay with DAKOTACARE – and pay the extra costs, that’s fine. We are concerned that many South Dakotans will either not read the message they get from DAKOTACARE or not understand what they’re being told will happen if they don’t take action”, says Fierberg. To keep costs down, Fierberg recommends switching to a plan that is in the marketplace by December 15th, “Let’s be honest, it’s the holiday season. People have a lot more on their minds than health insurance, and they may get this notice and just set it aside. That could be a very, very expensive mistake.”

Regardless of whether you are on a DAKOTACARE plan or not – there are several things to consider when looking for a plan to cover your health care needs during 2016. Firstly, is your doctor in-network on the plan you’re looking at? Fierberg says plans with lower premiums tend to have to smaller networks in an effort to save money. Secondly, does your plan cover the medications you’re taking? If not, you could have to pay full price for them. Fierbeg says that information could be easily figured out by visiting healthcare.gov. You can contrast and compare different plans there or get local help by visiting localhelp.healthcare.gov, Fierberg says this will put you in contact with a local expert that can give you non-biased information based on your needs. You can also call 1-800-318-2596, 24 hours and day, 7 days a week to get information over the phone. A healthcare agent or broker is also a good tool to use, but Fierberg warns they may lean towards one plan or another.

Avera and Sanford Health will be the only two companies offering plans in the federal exchange in 2016. Avera announced in November that they will acquire DAKOTACARE, but the two companies will continue to operate as separate entities.

Open enrollment on plans within the federal exchange lasts until January 31st.