THORNTON — Sixth-graders in Lisa Meier’s science and engineering class on Thursday used laptop computers to look up words in an interactive glossary — an easy way to start exploring their new digital textbooks.

Some students read from the laptops and dutifully rewrote the definitions into their notebooks, while others spent time playing and replaying the accompanying video that explained the new science terms they needed to understand as they studied waves.

A $25,000 gift from the Morgridge Family Foundation paid for rights for two years to the digital textbooks, at STEM Launch.

The district paid an additional $130,000 to give the districts other middle schools access to the digital books, or Techbooks, as publisher Discovery Education calls them.

All schools in the Adams 12 district have access to the Techbooks. Middle schools are using them mostly in science classes and in some social studies classes.

Students at the district’s two STEM magnet schools, including STEM Launch, where Lisa Meier teaches, have access beginning in fifth grade.

STEM Launch principal Kellie Lauth

said the digital books are more versatile for teachers and also help save money.

“Techbooks, over the long term, are more cost-effective, especially in science, where you purchase a book and it’s almost outdated in a year,” Lauth said.

And while the school doesn’t have enough laptops to give one to every student, the Techbook is Web-based, which means students can access it from a variety of other devices, as well as from home.

“We’ve never before been able to offer each student a single resource (like a textbook to take home),” Lauth said. “With Techbooks, they each have their own log-in.”

As a way to ignite some excitement around the new digital books, students also participated in an assembly Thursday with former teacher Patti Duncan, who now works with Discovery.

Emphasizing that scientists must ask a lot of questions and make a lot of observations, Duncan set up some experiments and made students question how energy worked.

Teachers are also receiving support from Discovery and are providing feedback to the company. Based on that, the book can be updated without a new purchase — another benefit of going digital.

Techbooks, which were launched in 2011, are now used nationwide.

Locally, Littleton Public Schools and the Thompson School District are among the many other districts using Techbooks. Douglas County Schools is working with the Denver-based Morgridge Family Foundation to get the digital books into one its schools.

Yesenia Robles: 303-954-1372, yrobles@denverpost.com or twitter.com/yeseniarobles

This story has been corrected in this online archive. Originally, due to a reporter’s error, the financial contributions from the district and the Morgridge Family Foundation were incorrect.