Funds earmarked for Civic Area, Boulder Creek, University Hill and more

Adam Campbell, left, leans out of Heirloom Farm To Truck to hand Laura Cold, middle right, breakfast, while Mel Coleman, middle left, and Paul Willis, right, watch near the Boulder Theater last week. The Civic Area Master Plan calls for more events and activities to take place in the area, such as the Chef's Collaborative food truck breakfast. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

Behind the ballot The Daily Camera will examine Boulder's other two ballot issues in the coming two weeks, and our full Voter Guide 2014 will publish online and in print on Oct. 12.

Park and plaza improvements along Boulder Creek from Ninth to 13th streets, neighborhood street lighting on University Hill, a renovated Dairy Center for the Arts and a new Museum of Boulder.

Those are some of the amenities that Issue 2A would fund if Boulder voters agree to pay an additional 0.3 percent sales tax for the next three years.

The proposed short-term sales tax is a new kind of capital campaign for the city of Boulder, which typically asks voters to approve bond packages, issues debt and pays it back over multi-year period.

Instead, the money generated by Issue 2A would be spent as it comes in, a "pay as you go" capital improvement program. To win voter support for this proposal, the Boulder City Council put together projects to appeal to a variety of constituencies under the heading of "community, culture and safety."

City officials estimate the tax will bring in $27.6 million over three years, with the money going to kickstart implementation of the Civic Area Master Plan, revitalize University Hill, improve safety along the Boulder Creek Path, fund public art projects, renovate the Dairy Center for the Arts, install lighting and sidewalks at Chautauqua Park and provide matching funds for the new Museum of Boulder.

"Boulder lacks some of the cultural amenities that some of our neighbors up and down the Front Range enjoy," said Bob Yates, chairman of the Museum of Boulder and a member of the Yes on 2A committee. "This is the opportunity for Boulder to provide its community with the museum and performing arts spaces it deserves."

The tax would add an additional 3 cents to a $10 purchase.

Shoppers in Boulder currently pay sales tax of 8.36 percent, with the city's portion making up 3.56 percent. If Issue 2A is approved, the tax rate would go to 8.39 percent

Opponents of the tax say many of the projects are worthwhile, but they should be paid for through private fundraising.

"The bottom line is that we believe the proper role of government is to take care of your natural rights and ensuring that the essentials are provided — police, fire, courts, roads," said Scott Schaefer, vice chairman of the Boulder County Republicans and a Boulder resident. "These projects might be great projects, but it's not really the role of government to force everyone to pay for projects that some people want."

The tax money would fund:

Jake Burgart, of Olea Estates, gives a sample of olive oil to Wynette Argroves, of Longmont, at the Boulder Farmers' Market on 13th Street on Wednesday. Issue 2A would provide $8.7 million for improvements in the Civic Area, including a year-round, indoor farmers' market. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

Civic Area

Up to $8.7 million would be earmarked for capital improvements for the Boulder Civic Area, which is generally bounded by Canyon Boulevard, Arapahoe Avenue, Ninth Street and 13th Street.

The money, city leaders say, would be used to create a vibrant and active urban park and civic area including recreation amenities, community spaces, safety improvements, and connections and access improvements to and through the Civic Area

The Boulder City Council adopted the Civic Area Master Plan in 2013 to guide redevelopment of that area, with Boulder Creek running through the center. The master plan envisioned a mix of park and natural areas, with interactive play areas and public plazas, as well as new community institutions, such as a year-round, indoor Farmers' Market and a performing arts facility.

Some of the larger projects are still years away and will require refinement, economic feasibility studies and public-private partnerships to fund them.

But city leaders hope that Issue 2A can provide $8.7 million to "kickstart" the Civic Area Master Plan with public investment that makes the existing park space more attractive and shapes the growth that will come in the future.

The Civic Area projects are divided into three main areas:

The city has designated $4.425 million to go to the "Creek at the Core" of the Civic Area. Those projects include a new children's playground and nature play areas, education and interpretive experiences and wading areas along Boulder Creek, as well as improved bicycle and pedestrian paths with creek-side stopping points and improved lighting for safety.

Another $3.075 million will go toward "Community Spaces." Those projects include improvements to the Farmers' Market and Boulder Main Public Library plazas and the construction of a new outdoor cafe area to support community interaction and cultural programming.

The last $1.2 million will go toward "Connections and Access," projects that connect the Civic Area to downtown, surrounding neighborhoods and the University of Colorado through gateways, signage and other initiatives.

Conner M. skateboards down Pennsylvania Avenue west of 13th Street in the University Hill neighborhood on Friday. Issue 2A would provide funds for improvements on the Hill, including turing one block of Pennsylvania Avenue between 12th and 13th streets into an "event street." (David R. Jennings / Daily Camera)

University Hill

The tax also would fund up to $3.27 million for capital improvements in the University Hill Commercial District and high density residential areas, including lighting, irrigation and to improve public streets.

The Boulder City Council has declared the redevelopment of University Hill a top priority. Toward that end, the city has hired a redevelopment coordinator, put money from the general fund toward a residential services district to do additional trash pickup and snow removal, and included more than $3 million in Issue 2A for projects on the Hill.

Roughly $2 million would go toward "pedestrian-scale" lighting on main walking routes through the neighborhood.

Currently there are 30-foot-high street lights at every intersection and some mid-block lighting on longer north-south blocks, but the neighborhood's mature trees block much of that light from reaching down to the street.

Many students and residents report that it feels unsafe to walk at night and that they can't see people or objects along the way.

The proposal that would be funded by the tax calls for 14-foot-high lights spaced every 70 to 90 feet along 11th Street from Alfalfa's Market to College Avenue, along Pleasant and College avenues in either direction from 11th, along portions of 12th and 13th streets south of College, and along 18th Street from Broadway to Baseline Road.

Those areas were identified as key pedestrian routes in workshops. Other streets might get lighting in the future.

The tax also would provide $750,000 to turn one block of Pennsylvania Avenue between 12th and 13th streets into an "event street" that could easily be shut down to through traffic for performances and festivals.

The city has identified a lack of communal space as one of the issues on the Hill.

Lastly, the tax would provide $520,000 for irrigation and street trees. Previous efforts to plant street trees have failed because there was no irrigation system in place.

Joe Hackle, left, and Arn Hayden walk the Boulder Creek Path in downtown Boulder in this 2013 file photo. Boulder's Issue 2A would fund improvements to the creek path, including separating pedestrian and bike lanes on certain stretches of the pathway. (Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera)

Boulder Creek Path

Issue 2A also would provide up to $5.125 million for capital improvements to the Boulder Creek Path and its environs, generally between Third and 17th streets, including lighting and path improvements to increase safety.

The proposed Boulder Creek Path improvements would seek to address safety concerns by adding pedestrian-scale lighting and creating separate paths for pedestrians and cyclists along some portions of the creek.

A little more than $1 million would go toward putting continuous lighting — spaced every 60 to 80 feet — along the creek path from 17th to Ninth streets and non-continuous lighting — spaced every 150 to 250 feet — from Ninth Street to Eben G. Fine Park.

The city said it would look for light designs that would keep the light on the path and not leak out into nearby homes, and that could be dimmed late at night to reduce energy use and impacts on wildlife.

Another $885,000 would go toward path improvements, with the existing path painted to show it as a two-way bike path and a separate pedestrian path built next to the bike path.

The city also plans to install interpretive signs along the creek path.

The most expensive, though not the highest priority project, within the Boulder Creek Path improvements is a $2.5 million box culvert at Arapahoe Avenue and 13th Street. This project is still in the design process and might take three to five years to complete.

The multi-use path that currently runs under the bridge would be removed and a new underpass would be put in to the east of the bridge with the goal of improving sight lines and safety, and reducing closures due to high water.

The tax would also provide $700,000 for bank restoration in Eben G. Fine Park.

Katie Lazor, left, gives flowers to Stacey Keating on Sept. 26 during a public art event funded with a $1,000 grant from the city. Under the Issue 2A tax, Boulder's public art program would receive $600,000. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Public art

If approved, the tax also would generate up to $600,000 for public art and to preserve or restore the city's existing art collection

The money raised for public art would be spent both on new projects and on maintenance. The new art projects would not be just in the downtown area, but spread throughout the city.

"The goal is to maximize the effect across different neighborhoods and districts," Boulder officials wrote in a memo to City Council.

The art projects will be done in conjunction with city construction projects and other city priorities.

The city also has identified a number of existing public art projects in need of "urgent" repair, restoration and maintenance that would be paid for through the tax.

Mark Collins, left, Laura Lounge, Merideth C. Grundei, Joan Bruemmer-Holden and Jason Maxwell perform a scene during a dress rehearsal for "The Catamounts" on Thursday at Boulder's Dairy Center for the Arts. The arts facility would benefit from $3.85 million in tax money under Issue 2A. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

Dairy Center for the Arts

Issue 2A also would allocate up to $3.85 million to improve the Dairy Center for the Arts' property.

The Dairy Center, located at 2590 Walnut St., is owned by the city and leased for $1 a year by the nonprofit organization that runs the facility and its arts programming.

The tax would provide money for soundproofing and other improvements to two theaters, the addition of dressing rooms and the conversion of one theater into a black box theater, the expansion and modernization of the lobby and facade, and the creation of an outdoor deck that could serve as special event space.

The renovation also would reconfigure administrative offices for more efficiency.

Paavo Thabit, left, and Jean Adams begin a hike at Chautauqua Park on Friday after parking along Baseline Road. Issue 2A would provide tax funds to put a parking lane and sidewalk along Baseline near Chautauqua. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Chautauqua Park

The tax, if adopted by voters, would generate up to $1.5 million for improvements to Chautauqua Park and its environs for access, pedestrian, safety and lighting improvements

The largest portion of the Chautauqua project would go toward improving safety for the many people who walk to the park along Baseline Road.

Issue 2A would provide $1 million for a sidewalk, parking lane and other pedestrian safety improvements along Baseline.

The tax also would provide $250,000 for lighting from Baseline along the major walkways within the park to the various visitor facilities, and another $250,000 for interpretive signs explaining the history and character of the park.

The future home of the Museum of Boulder, at Pine Street and Broadway. The taxes raised by Issue 2A would provide $4 million toward the purchase of the museum site — provided the museum raises the other $4 million needed. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Museum of Boulder

Finally, the Issue 2A tax would provide up to $4 million for capital improvements at the Museum of Boulder, provided that the museum first raises and dedicates an equal amount — and in compliance with terms, conditions and timing approved by the City Council

The Museum of Boulder, formally known as the Boulder History Museum, bought the Masonic Lodge at Broadway and Pine Street in 2012.

For now, the museum's exhibits remain at the historic Harbeck House, 1206 Euclid Ave., while the offices and much of the museum's programming are at the Masonic Lodge.

The museum needs to raise $8 million to complete the purchase and realize its vision of a museum that not only explains Boulder's history, but provides interactive science and technology exhibits tied to Boulder's tech economy and the federal labs.

The new museum would also house a children's museum and space for traveling exhibits.

Museum backers commissioned a study of the proposal's economic viability and believe it will draw as many as 55,000 visitors a year, with half of those being from outside Boulder.

The tax would provide $4 million toward the museum purchase and renovation, with the other $4 million being raised by the museum.

The first $2.5 million in city money would be released once the museum has raised its own $2.5 million. So far, supporters have raised $1 million.

If the Museum of Boulder does not raise sufficient matching funds, the City Council could reappropriate the money for other capital improvement projects on the city's list.

In addition to creating appropriate exhibit space inside the former Masonic Lodge, the renovation will bring the building up to code, including making it ADA accessible, and add a rooftop deck and children's patio.

The museum hopes to open its new space in late 2016 or early 2017.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere.