While national polls show a stable landscape, polls in individual races continue to show some movement. That movement leads us to make a number of changes to our Rothenberg Political Report/Roll Call ratings .

Most of the House changes benefit the GOP, while the Senate and governor changes are far more mixed.

Senate Changes:

Georgia (GOP Sen. Saxby Chambliss is retiring) from Republican Favored to Leans Republican.

Louisiana Senate (Democratic Sen. Mary L. Landrieu) from Pure Tossup to Tossup/Tilts Republican.

(Read more about the Senate changes in the Oct. 17 Rothenberg Political Report ($)) House Changes:

Arkansas 2 (GOP Rep. Tim Griffin is not seeking re-election) from Leans Republican to Tossup/Tilts Republican.

California 7 (Democratic Rep. Ami Bera) from Tossup/Tilts Democratic to Pure Tossup.

Florida 26 (Democratic Rep. Joe Garcia) from Tossup/Tilts Democratic to Pure Tossup.

Iowa 1 (Democratic Rep. Bruce Braley is running for Senate) from Leans Democratic to Tossup/Tilts Democratic.

Massachusetts 9 (Democratic Rep. William Keating) from Safe Democrat to Favored Democratic.

Nevada 3 (GOP Rep. Joe Heck) from Favored republican to Safe Republican.

New York 11 (GOP Rep. Michael G. Grimm) from Tossup/Tilts Democratic to Pure Tossup.

New York 18 (Democratic Rep. Sean Patrick Maloney) from Favored Democratic to Leans Democratic.

(Read more about the House changes in the Oct. 17 Rothenberg Political Report ($)) Governor Changes:

Alaska (GOP Gov. Sean Parnell) from Leans Republican to Tossup/Tilts Republican.

Idaho (GOP Gov. C.L. "Butch" Otter) from Safe Republican to Favored Republican.

Illinois (Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn) from Tossup/Tilts Republican to Pure Tossup.

Maryland (Democratic Gov. Martin O’Malley cannot seek another subsequent term; the seat is open) from Safe Democrat to Favored Democratic.

(Read more about the gubernatorial changes in the Oct. 17 Rothenberg Political Report ($)) Be the first to know about Rothenberg Political Report/Roll Call race rating changes with our new Roll Call politics app !

Related Stories: A Senate Race Where Democrats Neutralized Obamacare Attacks NRSC Confirms Tightening Race in Georgia How 'Dr. Dan' Cured His Campaign Woes DCCC Chief Pleads for Outside Money Roll Call Election Map: Race Ratings for Every Seat Get breaking news alerts and more from Roll Call in your inbox or on your iPhone.