During the second half of the 20th century, thousands of Coloradans who worked at the federal Rocky Flats Plant near Arvada put their lives and their health on the line to ensure we did not lose the Cold War. Thanks to their hard work and dedication, the United States ultimately prevailed.

Since then, however, these patriots have been forced back into a battle to break through the burdensome red tape holding up medical care they need for radiation exposure and the other painful effects of prolonged work with nuclear weapons.

Take, for example, Paul Berry III of Lakewood, whose story is similar to thousands of other workers. Berry worked at Rocky Flats from 1970 to 1995 and again from 1998 to 2003. Today, he suffers from a rare form of cancer stemming from his service to our nation, yet onerous amounts of red tape prevented him from quickly securing the life-saving treatments he needs and earned.

Berry and other Rocky Flats workers who fought on the front lines of the Cold War should not have to fight through bureaucratic roadblocks just to receive the care and compensation they were promised.

That’s why we worked for nearly a decade to get the federal government to take notice of the injustice that these employees are being forced to endure. Thankfully, federal agencies are finally moving to reduce the burdensome processes for some Rocky Flats workers to receive care for cancers and illnesses related to their work at the nuclear weapons plant.

After years of trying to get numerous presidents and Cabinet secretaries to address the workers’ concerns, the Obama administration heeded our calls and is taking steps to ensure more Rocky Flats workers are able to secure the care they earned under the Energy Employees Occupational Illness and Compensation Program Act. A federal advisory board recommended in October that Rocky Flats workers who helped produce our nation’s nuclear weapons arsenal between 1952 and 1983 be granted a “special cohort” status, meaning they can access a fast-tracked approval process to secure health services.

The designation was finalized in December. We have been working to press the U.S. Labor Department to quickly implement this decision and process the workers’ backlogged benefit claims.

We are encouraged that the Labor Department recently held outreach and sessions in Colorado to explain to workers and their families what the new designation means for them.

While this represents important progress, we are far from done. Those who worked at Rocky Flats after 1983 still face unreasonable burdens to prove that their illnesses are related to their work with the nation’s nuclear stockpile — and many more workers exposed to toxic substances still face uncertainty as the Labor Department reviews their claims. We are working on a bipartisan proposal in Congress to eliminate this uncertainty and improve care for all of the Coloradans who became sick because of their work at Rocky Flats.

Just as Rocky Flats workers’ tenacity helped our nation win the Cold War, we will keep fighting until all of our brave nuclear workers obtain the benefits our nation owes them.

Mark Udall is a U.S. senator from Colorado. Ed Perlmutter and Jared Polis are congressmen from Colorado. All are Democrats.