'All throughout we had plenty of time on the plane to talk,' said Cummings. Cummings: 'No doubt' Cruz eyes '16

Rep. Elijah Cummings says on their trip to South Africa earlier this week, conversations with Sen. Ted Cruz convinced the Democrat that Cruz is “definitely” going to run for president in 2016.

Both members of Congress were part of a delegation that went to the memorial for South African leader Nelson Mandela, and Cummings, a Maryland Democrat, said while Cruz, a Republican from Texas, tried to “skirt the issue,” it was clear from their discussion that he wants to run.

Story Continued Below

“I have no doubt about it,” Cummings said on CNN’s “The Situation Room” on Thursday. “I asked him, was he going to New Hampshire, was he going to South Carolina, Iowa? And he said he probably would be going to all of those places and he would be doing the things that a presidential candidate would be normally doing, but he wouldn’t say yes or no. But it was quite clear to me.”

( PHOTOS: Republicans, 2016 contenders)

Cummings said he didn’t expect to see Cruz on the trip with so many members of the Congressional Black Caucus and that it offered the group an opportunity to talk on the long flights.

“I was surprised to see him on the trip. I didn’t know he was going,” Cummings said. “And when I discovered him, I said, you know, this is an opportunity for members of the Congressional Black Caucus to really let him know how we feel about the issues that we are so concerned about.”

Cruz sat next to Rep. Gwen Moore (D-Wis.), “who is not shy,” Cummings said, but all two dozen lawmakers moved around during the trip and talked with one another.

( PHOTOS: Key quotes from Ted Cruz)

“All throughout we had plenty of time on the plane to talk, we were moving up and down the aisles, we had several stops for refueling, and then of course in Johannesburg at the event, the memorial service we again had a chance to talk,” Cummings said. “I noticed that John Lewis spent time talking to him, Maxine Waters and others. And it wasn’t a concerted effort, it wasn’t orchestrated, but I think everybody had an opportunity to actually get their point of view over to him. Whether it sinks in is a whole other thing.”

Cummings said he and Cruz discussed Obamacare and their similar backgrounds as the sons of preachers.