The Tribune continues endorsements today in contested races for the Illinois House.

41st District: Rep. Darlene Senger's run for Congress has opened this west suburban seat. Republican Grant Wehrli, a Naperville city councilman, faces Democrat Ed Agustin, a retired architect. Wehrli took a bold vote against a recent firefighter contract because he thought the salary increases were too generous in this economic climate. He introduced an ordinance eliminating pensions for elected officials — and got unexpected pushback from self-proclaimed fiscal conservatives on the City Council. Agustin has some good ideas on controlling spending, such as instituting a budgeting policy that requires annual accountability. But Wehrli has shown he is disciplined about government spending. Springfield could use more of that. Wehrli is endorsed.

43rd District: Democrats appointed former Elgin City Council member Anna Moeller to this seat in March when Rep. Keith Farnham resigned. Farnham faces federal criminal charges of transporting child pornography. Moeller tells constituents that she's independent of House Speaker Michael Madigan, but he's largely bankrolling her campaign. We endorse attorney Jeffrey Meyer of Elgin. He's smart, truly independent and advocates for lower taxes, spending restraint and term limits.

44th District: Each election cycle, some tough choices keep us awake at night. This is one of them. Two years ago, we backed Democratic Rep. Fred Crespo of Hoffman Estates because he had the makings of a budget hawk. He has been tough on agency heads who appear before the appropriations committee he chairs. He has combed through state audits to get a grasp on true spending. But this year he sponsored the Democrats' phony "doomsday" budget, a bid to gin up fear over an income tax rollback. He supported the budget that passed, which postpones spending decisions until after Election Day. Republican Ramiro Juarez an elementary school teacher from Streamwood, ran against Crespo in 2012. Juarez is running again, and this time has our endorsement. He understands the public's deep frustration with the wrong direction of state government. He wouldn't push gimmicky budgets, he would push to improve the business climate and grow jobs.

45th District: Our choice in this west suburban district is Democrat Jenny Burke of Itasca. A member of the Itasca Public School District 10 board, Burke demonstrated her independence by challenging a bond proposal for new classrooms. She says the space was needed but the timing wasn't right. We'd like to see more clarity in her positions on some state issues, but she's emphatic on one thing: She would not vote to extend the 2011 income tax hike. "Illinois has not proven that it knows how to handle its finances responsibly," she says. Burke is endorsed over Republican Christine Winger, a Wood Dale trustee, who needs to brush up on state issues.

46th District: Republican Heidi Holan of Glen Ellyn gets our endorsement over a pretty impressive incumbent, Democratic Rep. Deb Conroy. This DuPage County-based district was drawn to favor a Democrat, and House Speaker Michael Madigan has been a help to Conroy. If voters want a candidate who would blow up Springfield's model of state government, reduce spending, encourage school choice and loosen the grip of public sector unions, Holan is the pick. We credit Conroy for supporting pension reform. She worked with Republicans to pass legislation allowing local governments to consolidate. She sponsored bills to freeze legislators' pay and end bonuses for committee chairs, but those bills are buried in the Madigan-controlled rules committee. Conroy has shown flashes of independence, but Holan would be more vigilant on taxes and spending.

50th District: Republican Rep. Kay Hatcher is retiring. Former Yorkville Mayor Valerie Burd, a Democrat, says she would best fit Hatcher's moderate approach to governing. She's not likely to stand up to Michael Madigan, though. Republican Keith Wheeler surely would. Wheeler, a small business owner and technology consultant from Oswego, reminds: "There are real reasons that Moody's ranks Illinois 50th in job creation." Wheeler is endorsed.

52nd District: Voters in this northwest suburban district who care about their pocketbooks should be pleased with Rep. David McSweeney of Barrington Hills. McSweeney is a spending hawk. He's not sitting on the sidelines, waiting to be told what to do. He digs into just about every issue that comes before the House: pensions, property taxes, government consolidation, you name it. As a freshman, he has brought an outsider's perspective that is much needed in Springfield's entrenched politics. McSweeney is endorsed over Democrat Bill Downs of Cary, who isn't running much of a campaign.

54th District: This one is an easy call. Republican Rep. Tom Morrison of Palatine is a common-sense fiscal conservative who is willing to work across the aisle to get things done. He split with his party several times in voting for legislation to help felons get back on their feet. He has the audacity to question the need for an Illinois Arts Council, a state agency viewed as untouchable because it's overseen by Shirley Madigan, wife of you-know-who. Democrat Laddi Singh of Rolling Meadows isn't running a serious campaign. The House could use more Tom Morrisons. He is endorsed.