On the heels of Cleveland Regional Medical Center and Doctors Diagnostic Hospital (DDH) closing their doors in Cleveland, a task force was assembled by the city to investigate the options the city could pursue to return a medical facility to the area.

The hospital task force members spent much of their time hearing presentations on the subject during the Feb. 9 meeting of the Cleveland Economic Development Corporation. A presentation was delivered by various medical entities, including DDH.

According to Vickie Newsome, CEO for DDH, the hospital still is preparing to reopen, pending a necessary board meeting in the coming days to address “general housekeeping” issues.

Newsome stated that there are approximately 35 people on the staff currently and that additional hiring will take place before the center opens for business again. DDH also will replace equipment and perform maintenance before reopening.

“Hopefully, by late April, we will be back to being a fully-functioning, four-bed acute facility in your community,” said Newsome. “The facility is ready to go and we are very excited.”

EDC President Willie Carter spoke on the purpose of the newly-developed task force, saying that it had been created to serve as the “eyes and ears” of the community.

“We want to make sure we get quality medical care for our community,” said Carter.

A presentation was also given by Ken McCormack of the Patients/Physicians Cooperatives, in which he described a different type of facility he considers to be ideal for the Cleveland community.

McCormack explained hi9s vision of a facility that would attract specialists in various medicals fields and one that would be well-equipped to handle more intensive procedures than local health care centers of the past.

He indicated that attracting specialists is necessary, should the Cleveland community expect to have a successful venture into health care.

McCormack, who has been a resident of Liberty County for the past 42 years, presented members of the EDC with statistics demonstrating what is needed for a medical entity to be a success.

“It is my desire to see that we have the highest quality medical care we can get in this community,” said McCormack. “So far, you haven’t gotten enough business from the community to sustain the two hospitals that were here and we want to change that. When the hospitals fail, it is because the money is not being spent here.”

According to McCormack, his opinion indicates that much of the failure of past health care entities within the community is directly due to a lack of community support.

Members of the EDC, as well as some audience members, cited that lack of community support was not necessarily the issue, stating opinions alluding to a poor level of service at Cleveland-area medical centers in the past and pointing out that many residents lost faith in local medical care and are instead opting to seek care elsewhere.

Mayor Niki Coats took to the podium to inform audience members of a recent meeting in which he learned that there is a possibility that St. Luke’s Medical Center could build a healthcare facility in Cleveland.

The new location, if built in Cleveland, would be under The Woodlands branch of the St. Luke’s medical care unit. The company is considering moving forward with plans for a free-standing emergency health center.

The reopening of Doctors Diagnostic is not expected to impact the decision made by St. Luke’s representatives, who are looking to schedule a group meeting with the hospital task force members.

“Willie and I both expressed our need for this meeting as soon as possible,” said Coats. “We expressed our need to move quickly.”

Once a decision is made by the organization, St. Luke’s representatives could begin looking at real estate in the Cleveland area.

“It is my understanding that they are very close to making a decision,” said Carter. “We are in desperate need of medical facilities in this community, We are working as hard as we can to get some sort of free-standing medical facility in this community.”