It appears that East Lansing-based Consumers Mutual Insurance of Michigan could wind down operations this year as it is not participating in the state health insurance exchange for 2016.

But officials of Consumers Mutual today are discussing several options that could determine its future status with the state Department of Insurance and Financial Services, said David Eich, marketing and public relations officer with Consumers Mutual.

Consumers Mutual CEO Dennis Litos said: "We are reviewing our situation (financial condition) with DIFS and should conclude on a future direction this week.”

While Eich said he could not disclose the options, he said one is “winding down” the company, which has 28,000 members, including about 6,000 on the exchange.

Eich said one of the problems Consumers Mutual is facing is a recent decision by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to only pay 12.5 cents on the dollar for health plan financial losses on the exchange in 2014. CMS has not decided yet the amount of 2015 payments.

“This affects 2014 and 2015 payments (whatever those will be). We don’t have final numbers,” Eich said.

To encourage health plan participation in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010, federal officials created a temporary "premium stabilization program" and "risk corridors" in which all health insurers were taxed based on premiums. The collected funds would be disbursed to those plans posting losses to stabilize the market for the first few years of the exchange.

Consumers Mutual posted multimillion financial losses in 2014 and has posted financial losses so far this year, sources told Crain's. Consumers Mutual declined to provide financial information until later November, when it must file with DIFS for 2014.

In May 2012, Consumers Mutual received a $72 million low-interest federal loan to form a new nonprofit cooperative mutual insurance company under the Affordable Care Act. Under the terms of the loan, it must be repaid by 2033 to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Consumers was created after 15 county health plans in Michigan decided to contribute $10,000 each to fund the loan application for the cooperative with CMS. It is not clear who would be responsible for paying back any of the loans, after all the claims are paid by Consumers.

A spokesman from DIFS declined comment on talks or the future of Consumers Mutual.

In 2013, Consumers, which was one of 24 federally funded cooperatives that received $2 billion in loans, was awarded its insurance license from the state insurance department.

At least eight of the cooperatives so far have shut down because of financial losses. They include co-ops in Kentucky, Colorado, Louisiana, New York, Nevada, Tennessee and Oregon.

In August, the HHS said 22 of the 23 cooperatives lost money in 2014 and many could have difficulty in repaying the federal loans.

At the time Consumers Mutual was chartered, Litos told Crain's that cooperatives like Consumers would serve as lower-cost alternatives to private health insurers on the various state and federally run exchanges.

Federal officials also envisioned the co-ops as providing competition to private insurers in the case where few chose to participate in various states.

In Michigan, however, more than a dozen health insurers have signed up the past three years to offer insurance policies on the exchanges.

In 2016, 15 health insurers submitted applications to participate in the Michigan Health Insurance Exchange. Insurers offering individual plans are:

Alliance Health and Life Insurance Co.

Blue Care Network of Michigan

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan

Harbor Health Plan

Health Alliance Plan

Humana Medical Plan of Michigan

McLaren Health Plan Community

Meridian Health Plan of Michigan

Molina Healthcare of Michigan

Physicians Health Plan

Priority Health

Priority Health insurance Co.

Total Health Care USA

United Healthcare Community Plan

Insurers also offering small group plans are Blue Care, McLaren, Total and United Healthcare Life Insurance Co.

Blue Cross also is offering multistate plans on the exchange.

Related Links