Rostraver police are looking for the man or men behind two armed robberies at Route 51 gas stations.

Rostraver Township robbery surveillance images Police provided these surveillance photos from robberies at BFS/Marathon and CoGo's on Route 51. More

VIDEO: Watch Ashlie Hardway's report, with surveillance footage

The first incident happened around 5 a.m. Sunday at the BFS/Marathon gas station near the Westmoreland County Airport. Police said the suspect threatened the male clerk with a silver handgun and demanded money and Newport cigarettes. After he got what he wanted, the suspect told the clerk to wait 10 minutes before calling police. The clerk wasn't hurt.



In the first robbery, the suspect was wearing dark clothing, a bandana on his face and gloves on his hands. Police were unable to get a physical description of him.



The situation was very similar in the second robbery, which happened Tuesday just after midnight at the CoGo's/Sunoco station just a few yards from the BFS/Marathon station that was robbed Sunday.

Police said the suspect, who was wearing dark clothing, a bandana and gloves, threatened two clerks with a silver handgun and demanded cash but no cigarettes. During the second robbery, the robber had to wait about three minutes for the cash register to finish its nightly update before the clerks could open the drawer.

SLIDESHOW: Surveillance images from the Rostraver robberies



"The (suspect) appeared to be very nervous," Chief Gregory Resetar said. "He was pacing around on this particular robbery because the individuals were unable to gain access to the register. They were performing a nightly process and were unable to open the register until this process was complete."



In both instances, the suspect fled on foot. Police would not say how much money was taken in the incidents.



Resetar said investigators aren't certain if the same person committed both robberies, although the clothing and gun descriptions as well as the method of the robberies are the same.



Police want to catch the thief or thieves before another armed robbery happens.



"Over time, the violence escalates," Resetar said. "He's already brandished a firearm. What's to say that he doesn't get agitated and use the firearm?"



Anyone with information on who may be involved is asked to call Rostraver Police at 724-929-8811.