Sensible changes to nominating process

Our archaic nominating process for president has to be scrapped and replaced. First, no more caucuses. Next, all primaries are held on the same day; no more little Iowa and New Hampshire having so much influence. No more cross-over voting. Some guidelines could be set so that only Republicans vote in the Republican primary and vice-versa. Independents don’t have a say in a party’s nominating process.

Now the big change: each voter will vote for their top three preferences and points will be allocated accordingly similar to the voting for the Heisman Trophy. This way, the most broadly accepted candidate can be chosen if there is significant division. There would not be an endless stream of debates rehashing the same issues. DENNIS SINGLETON, HUBER HEIGHTS

Government the problem with health care

Re “Governor’s Medicaid waiver punishes the poor,” May 6: Healthcare is a constant issue in this country due to cost, and people’s differing opinions on the solution to the cost problem. Dr. Donald Nguyen’s commentary takes the position that a government solution is preferable to a market solution and that a market solution is cruel. He points out that it requires “multi-layer bureaucracy” and an “elaborate debit card swiping and tracking system that is complicated and costly.”

A multi-layered bureaucracy and a complicated and costly system is an apt description of both the Affordable Care Act and government interventions in health care in general. Before the liberal health care interventions of the 1960s, health care was a freer market and was more affordable. Forbes in its article “The Cost of Health Care: 1958 vs. 2012” states that “while time prices for other goods and services had shrunk to less than one quarter of their 1958 levels, time prices for health care had more than quadrupled.” Restrictions on charity medical work, competition of health care plans across state lines and a slow and restrictive FDA raise costs.

The federal government needs to get out of health care so that the states can start deciding their own levels of care. DAVID LECKLIDER, KETTERING

OEA hasn’t helped teachers with pay

The article, “Pay behind struggle to retain teachers,” May 1, caused me to wonder how much my first year’s teaching salary in 1963 would be today when adjusted for inflation. I assumed the Ohio Education Association (Ohio teacher’s union), which did not exist as a union in 1963, had a tremendous influence on improving teacher compensation over the past 53 years because this has been one of its primary missions.

Lo and behold, here’s what I found. I graduated from The Ohio State University in 1963 licensed to teach high school science. My first teaching contract at Riverside High School in Logan County was for $4,400, with another $600 to coach football and basketball. Disregarding my coaching pay, $4,400 in 1963 is equivalent to $34,234 today. Today’s average Ohio starting teacher salary is about $34,000. Fairborn starts first-year teachers at $33,194 while Centerville, towards the higher end of the pay scale, is $37,900.

My 1963 pay is actually higher that the average starting pay for Ohio teachers when adjusted for inflation. The comparison tells me that the OEA has accomplished very little to help improve teacher pay over the years. Way to go, OEA. You’ve pulled the wool over the eyes of every teacher in Ohio for the inflated value that you bring. CARL WICK, CENTERVILLE