Here’s your afternoon vodka-and-watermelon-cooler pitcher of politics, from Joshua Miller of the Boston Globe at the Massachusetts State House.

TRUMP-WARREN LATEST, via Nick Gass of Politico: “Donald Trump escalated his attacks on Elizabeth Warren on Wednesday, tweeting an afternoon message with a sharply worded suggestion about why the Massachusetts Democrat decided not to run for president in 2016. ‘Goofy Elizabeth Warren didn’t have the guts to run for POTUS. Her phony Native American heritage stops that and VP cold,’ Trump wrote, hours after Warren mocked Trump’s use of the word ‘goofy’ to describe her. ...” http://politi.co/24ORg3y

Advertisement

BAKER’S COMMON CORE CAUTION, via Michael Jonas of CommonWealth magazine: “It’s not just the presidential election that Gov. Charlie Baker plans to sit out. Baker says he is also staying out of a fight much closer to home: A looming ballot question showdown over whether the state should repeal the Common Core education standards put in place six years ago. The repeal effort presents a bit of a pickle for Baker, who testified in 2010 before the state education board against adopting the new standards, but is now in charge of a statewide education system that has been integrating Common Core into teaching and instruction for nearly 1 million public school students. ...” http://bit.ly/1QZ0hd9

TARDY TO THE HILL PARTY, via Jim O’Sullivan on BostonGlobe.com: “State Democratic Party chairman Thomas McGee, a Lynn state senator, has endorsed presumptive nominee Hillary Clinton. McGee held off on backing the former secretary of state over US Senator Bernie Sanders in deference to the party’s delegate selection process, which concluded Saturday. ...” http://bit.ly/1UTbT8L

MASSACHUSETTS POLITICS BY THE NUMBERS, via Michael P. Norton of the State House News Service: “While there were no big surprises in the three special legislative elections held Tuesday, Democrats prevailed in the 2015-2016 special election derby, winning seven of nine contests and picking up one seat overall. Once the latest special election winners are sworn in, Democrats will have a 126-34 advantage in the House and a 30-6 margin in the Senate. ...” Behind paywall: http://bit.ly/1T5sULB

THE RESULTS FROM LAST NIGHT, via Lauren Dezenski of Politico: “Republican Patrick O’Connor has won a special election for the Norfolk and Plymouth Senate seat vacated by his former boss, Weymouth Mayor Bob Hedlund. O’Connor, 31, of Weymouth, bested Democrat Joan Meschino on Tuesday by just shy of 1,000 votes ...” http://politi.co/1TQHTrC

BOSTON TAX VOTE COMIN’, via Tim Logan on BostonGlobe.com: “Boston voters will be asked in November to pay a surcharge on property taxes to build more housing and parks. The Boston City Council Wednesday voted 12 to 1 to put a Community Preservation Act on the November ballot. If passed, it would add a 1 percent surcharge to property tax bills to help fund programs for housing, open space, and historic preservation. Supporters say the move could raise $16.5 million a year and draw state matching funds that would boost funding to more than $20 million. It would cost the average homeowner in Boston $28 per year, though owners of commercial properties would pay more. ...” http://bit.ly/1T909iS

Advertisement

DELECTABLE DIGITAL DOMICILE, via Ian Simpson of Reuters: “Boston is the U.S. city best placed to capitalize on the shift to a digital economy, with the tech-centered San Francisco Bay Area second as it lost ground because of worsening quality of life, a report said on Wednesday. ...” http://reut.rs/1rWS3gW

The report, from the US Chamber of Commerce Foundation and 1776, an incubator and seed fund: http://bit.ly/27dMonj

UPDATE ON THE TRAGEDY IN TAUNTON, via BostonHerald.com: “A rampage in Taunton yesterday began with the mentally-ill suspect attempting to break into numerous homes and car-jack unsuspecting motorists before violently assaulting a slew of strangers inside a packed mall, according to authorities in the wake of the crime spree that left three dead, including the assailant. ...” http://bit.ly/1NqMGAZ

HIGHER ED — PUSHBACK FROM STUDENTS ON NEW HARVARD POLICY, via C. Ramsey Fahs of the Harvard Crimson: “Continuing to mount pressure on administrators, more than 200 women rallied ... against a new Harvard policy that will bar members of unrecognized single-gender social organizations from holding leadership positions in official clubs and receiving top fellowships. ... The event marks the latest in a series of negative responses to Harvard’s newly announced sanctions ...” http://bit.ly/1Nqufwa

N.H. SENATE RACE WATCH, via Kathleen Ronayne of the Associated Press in Manchester: “Democratic Gov. Maggie Hassan [in one of Hassan’s first public speeches focused on the 2016 campaign] said Wednesday that combating climate change, supporting women’s reproductive rights and making college more affordable will be some of her top priorities if elected to the U.S. Senate. Hassan is challenging first-term Republican Sen. Kelly Ayotte in November. ...” Link via NECN: http://bit.ly/1QYYWDb

NEW ENGLAND OBAMACARE FALLOUT, via Joe Lawlor of the Portland Press Herald: “Insurance companies have requested double-digit rate increases for Mainers purchasing individual plans through the Affordable Care Act marketplace, according to rate filings released this morning by the Maine Bureau of Insurance. However, for most customers, much of the rate increases would be absorbed by subsidies ...” http://bit.ly/1OnEGeJ

YOUR MBTA-DELAY LONG READ, NUMBER I, with a super-compelling digital intro graphic that really highlights the journalism, via Zachary T. Sampson, Laura C. Morel, and Eli Murray of the Tampa Bay Times: “Police come to shoo away panhandlers, referee parking disputes and check on foul-mouthed teenagers. They are called to arrest the man who drinks a 98-cent iced tea without paying and capture the customer who joyrides on a motorized shopping cart.

The calls eat up hours of officers’ time. They all start at one place:

Walmart.

Law enforcement logged nearly 16,800 calls in one year to Walmarts in Pinellas, Hillsborough, Pasco and Hernando counties, according to a Tampa Bay Times analysis. That’s two calls an hour, every hour, every day. ... When it comes to calling the cops, Walmart is such an outlier compared with its competitors that experts criticized the corporate giant for shifting too much of its security burden onto taxpayers. ...” If you’re involved in the world of journalism, do give it a click: http://bit.ly/1qdKgdJ

YOUR MBTA-DELAY LONG READ, NUMBER II, via Jeré Longman of the New York Times in Israel by the Dead Sea: “... Yannis Pitsiladis, scientist and provocateur ... had arrived on a scouting mission for a quixotic project. He wanted to redefine the limits of human endurance by training a man to run a marathon in less than two hours without the use of performance-enhancing drugs. The Sub2 Project, as it is called, is an attempt at the extraordinary — to reduce by nearly three minutes the world record of 2 hours 2 minutes 57 seconds ...” Particularly fascinating for runners: http://nyti.ms/1ZFYP5C

YOUR MBTA-DELAY LONG READ, NUMBER III, a Q&A on GQ.com with Zach Baron providing the Qs and Robert Downey Jr. providing the As. This particular passage stood out to me: “One ridiculous indulgence that you regularly splurge on?

‘Epsom salts and baking soda. I highly recommend this to everybody. If you’re traveling, if you’re fatigued, if you’re training at a high level, if you’re stressed out, run a bath. Put four pounds of Epsom salts, which is essentially one big milk carton’s worth, and four pounds of baking soda, which is essentially four of the refrigerator size of the Arm & Hammer. Put those in a bath and sit in it for 15 minutes.’

And what happens?

‘It just pulls… Well, you know what Epsom salts is good for. Baking soda is really good with all the inherent low-level radiation and frequencies that are going on. ...’ ” Come for the interesting Q&A, stay for the photo of a $21,600 Hermès jacket: http://bit.ly/1TQruU2

How do you deal with all the low-level radiation and frequencies that are going on? Send word: joshua.miller@globe.com and @jm_bos

Me? I’ll probably just have a drink.

Back tomorrow, unless I get swallowed up by a bath of Epsom salts and baking soda.