Every child in Britain could have their DNA decoded at birth by the NHS to predict their risk of disease, the Health Secretary has predicted.

Jeremy Hunt, the Health Secretary, wants Britain to become the first country in the world to routinely sequence people’s genomes to form part of their health records.

The information can then be used through out their lives to help doctors recommend lifestyle changes and treatments to enable patients to stay healthy.

Genetic testing is already used on a disease by disease basis within the NHS to help identify specific forms of cancer, inherited conditions or congenital heart problems.

Earlier this year, however, the Government launched a project where 100,000 patients will have their entire genomes sequenced over the next five years.

Now Mr Hunt has set out his vision for how such DNA sequencing will become available to all NHS patients to help doctors predict disease.

However, sequencing and storing the genomes of all NHS patients will be controversial as many groups fear such a DNA databases could infringe privacy.

Mr Hunt said: “We could be the first country in the world where everyone’s genome is sequenced at birth and we use it to give people the most profoundly detailed diagnosis of what they need to do to stay healthy.

“We are at a moment that is potentially as significant for humanity as the founding of the internet.

“Electronic health records, where you can understand people’s medical history over a number of years, can be combined with knowledge of their genetic make up.

“We have go a chance to be the first country in the world where that becomes a reality for the benefit of the general public. It could be a complete transformation for medicine.”

Mr Hunt was speaking as he opened a new laboratory that will screen the genomes of heart patients and their families for 200 genes that cause inherited heart conditions.

These often go undetected before causing sudden cardiac death.

The footballer Fabrice Muamba suffered from one such condition and collapsed during an FA Cup match.

Mr Hunt said the new cardiac genetics unit at the Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Trust in London, was a prime example of how genetics can help patients.

It is estimated that one in 17 people develop rare diseases in their lifetime, 80 per cent of which have a known genetic cause.

Many cancers, blood disorders, and diseases such as macular degeneration and osteoporosis all have strong genetic components.

However, often it can take considerable time to diagnose these conditions and usually only once they have started displaying symptoms.

Genetic testing raises the prospect of being able to spot patients who are at risk of these diseases and even intervene before the conditions develop.

Mr Hunt said: “If someone has an inherited cardiac condition, currently we would need to monitor an average of five people who are genetically linked to that people and around half will have the same genetic make up.

“If you can identify the right half then you can save NHS resources.”

In July this year the Department of Health launched Genomics England to oversee the 100,000 Genome Project.

It has now begun taking blood samples from cancer patients and those with inherited diseases for sequencing their genomes.

The project, which will collect 100,000 genomes by 2017, aims to use this information to help assist the treatment of patients while also looking for markers in their DNA connected to their conditions.

Professor Mark Caulfield, chief scientist at Genomics England, said: "We have begun the journey to fulfilling the vision set out by the secretary of state of realising the benefits that whole genome sequencing could bring for improving NHS care for patients with serious diseases.

"We have started taking samples from patients with rare inherited diseases and will shortly begin engaging patients with common cancers and the results of our sequencing will be known during 2014.

"The potential benefits to patients of whole genome sequencing are substantial ranging from diagnosis to selection of the best therapy. "

A genome is the basic code, consisting of 3.3 billion biochemical “letters”, found in almost every cell of the body that controls every biological process.

Faults in this code, where the letters in a gene vary from normal, can lead to disease.

Since the human genome was first sequenced in 2000 after 10 years of work and £1.6 billion, the speed and cost of DNA sequencing has plummeted.

A whole genome can now be sequenced for around £500 in just 11 days and as technology improves this is expected to fall further.

However, sequencing a genome is only the first step in the process and analysing the data takes longer and is a lot harder.

Scientists have found that many genes interact with each other, while they can also be switched on and off by the environment or lifestyle.

However, an estimated 10,000 human diseases are known to be caused by faults in just a single gene, while many more have several genes that play a role.

Professor Sir John Burn, a clinical geneticist at Newcastle University and a member of the government’s Human Genetics Strategy Group, said there was a need to ensure the safely to any DNA kept on a national database.

He said: “There is an anxiety that this data could be used against you for selective insurance if we were to lose a free at point of care health service. We might need some pretty strong legal defences against that.

“There is also a problem with data handling and how we interpret this.

“Everyone has three million genetic variant and we have virtually no idea how many of them are medically significant. There is a need for an international consortium to study this variation. We are just staring out down this path.”

Medical ethicists also warn that screening entire genomes will raise questions about whether patients should be told about variants where their risk of disease is uncertain.