The Senate gave its final stamp of approval to its $1.1 billion funding package to combat the Zika virus on Thursday, just hours after the House cleared its own bill with about half that amount of money.

GOP leaders are now plotting ways to get to a conference committee on the funding – which lawmakers from both parties agree is urgently needed to prevent the spread of the virus.

ADVERTISEMENT

"Now that both houses have acted on their respective Zika packages, we will work expeditiously to reconcile them," Don Stewart, a spokesman for Senate Majority Leader(R-Ky.), wrote to The Hill on Thursday.

House Republicans argue it won't be hard to get the Senate on board with its own standalone bill, which provides $622 million in a fully offset funding pool that lasts through September.

But Democrats have been in staunch opposition of the House package, which pulls about half of its funding from other health accounts already in use by the Obama administration.

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi has also sharpened her attacks against the Senate's $1.1 billion package, with hopes of raising the total amount of money closer to Obama's full request. Pelosi delivered her strongest rebuke yet against the Senate's emergency funding package during a press briefing Thursday. (More on that here: http://bit.ly/1RbOBnJ)

The Senate's funding is wrapped up in a major appropriations package, which includes military construction, veterans affairs and the housing and urban development. Details on the Senate's bill here: http://bit.ly/23YU0pk

Sessions/Cassidy replacement bill does not fully repeal ObamaCare

It's rare that a Republican alternative does not fully repeal ObamaCare, but that's true of a new bill from Sen. Bill Cassidy (R-La.) and Rep. Pete Sessions (R-Texas).

Still, it would eliminate many central aspects of ObamaCare, including the mandates for individuals to have coverage and for employers to provide it, as well as the requirements for what an insurance plan must cover.

The core of the plan is a $2,500 tax credit that any citizen is eligible for and can use to purchase health insurance. The lawmakers say this gives flexibility to people, whether they get employer-based insurance or not, to take control of their healthcare spending, for example by using a health savings account.

Sessions and Cassidy are putting forward their plan as a task force set up by Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) is nearing the release of its own plan to fully repeal ObamaCare and replace it with an alternative. http://bit.ly/1WFHbB5

The next big abortion battle?

The Oklahoma Senate on Thursday approved a bill that would virtually ban abortion by making it illegal for doctors to perform the procedure under almost all circumstances. The bill now heads to the desk of Republican Gov. Mary Fallin, who has remained mum about whether she'll support it. If she does not act within five days, the legislation will automatically become law.

The bill has been called the first of its kind nationwide, and is certain to wind up in courts if it does become law. http://bit.ly/1XD3QgY

Cigna sets goals to curb opioid use

One of the nation's largest insurers is vowing to reduce the use of opioids among its customers by one-quarter over the next three years amid national attention on the issue. That would bring the rate of usage back to the "pre-crisis" levels of 2006, the company said in a release.

The insurer recently partnered with the American Society of Addiction Medicine in its effort, which will include tighter patient limits on opioid medication and expanding outreach and tools to physicians who prescribe the drugs.

Specialty drug spending up 26 percent

The per-patient cost of specialty drugs jumped 26 percent over the last two years, according to a report by the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association released Thursday.

Specialty drugs – which are used to treat complex or rare conditions – now represent the largest driver in the growth of healthcare spending. The uptick in spending comes both from increased use and increased costs for the treatments. Read the report here.

ON TAP TOMORROW

The Alliance for Health Reform holds a congressional briefing at 12 p.m. on the new proposed rule for Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, or MACRA.

WHAT WE'RE READING

State and local health departments are scrambling to deal with the Zika virus after seeing their budgets trimmed in recent years (NPR)

More than half of U.S. cancer rates could be prevented if more people followed long-standing health guidance like exercising, not smoking, drinking in moderation and maintaining a healthy body weight (Washington Post).

IN THE STATES

More than 60 percent of Texans favor Medicaid expansion, over the objections of its GOP legislature and governor (Houston Chronicle).

Hospitals in Oregon are pledging to provide full cost estimates of procedures within three days (Oregon Live)

Planned Parenthood is suing states to restore its funding (Bloomberg)

Kansas governor slashes $56 million from Medicaid budget (KCUR News)

ICYMI FROM THE HILL:

House votes to let VA doctors recommend medical marijuana http://bit.ly/1U2i1ZV

Analysis finds Sanders's plans – including single-payer health system – would add $19 trillion to debt http://bit.ly/1Xn38nw

Send tips and comments to Sarah Ferris, sferris@thehill.com, and Peter Sullivan, psullivan@thehill.com. Follow us on Twitter: @thehill, @sarahnferris, @PeterSullivan4