Topics: Editor's Picks, emergency managers, flint michigan, Flint water crisis, Gov. Rick Snyder, Sustainability News, News, Politics News

Seven Super Bowls ago, a political newcomer named Rick Snyder introduced himself to me and a few million other Michigan voters with a quirky, well-received ad, gently poking fun of himself as “one tough nerd.”

Touting his credentials as a job-creating entrepreneur, the ad informed us that as a kid in Battle Creek, “Snyder started reading Fortune magazine… when he was 8.”

Snyder’s tastes didn’t change much during his passage to adulthood. “From the business world, a lot of us have built great experience sets,” the former president and chairman of Gateway Computer told the Daily Beast in July of 2010. “We talk about outcomes, deliverables, and transparency… We couldn’t stay in business if we didn’t show real outcomes.”

Selling himself as a pragmatic, data-driven guy (who rarely wore a necktie), Snyder won a plurality against a divided Republican field in an August 2010 GOP primary. He polled 36 percent of the vote, beating a trio of conservative officeholders – including the state attorney general, a member of Congress and a county sheriff.

Snyder has since won two general elections. As the world now knows, turning our state government over to a business executive who never held public office before hasn’t turned out so well. The “tough nerd” is the man who presided over a colossal, avoidable and entirely man-made public health disaster. For more than a year, more than 100,000 citizens of Flint have been exposed to a toxic water supply, laced with lead and other contaminants.

Eight thousand children under the age of 5 who live in the city are most at risk; even at low levels, exposure to lead can cause irreversible damage to their brains. That translates, over time, into reduced intellectual capacity and higher incidence of multiple problems: attention deficit disorder, hypertension, aggressive and impulsive behavior – eventually, according to some researchers, higher rates of violent crime.

Lead poisoning is no picnic for adults. The substance is a neurotoxin, linked to anemia, brain damage, kidney failure and reproductive disorders for both genders.

This scandal has bodies, too. There’s been a spike in cases of Legionnaires’ disease – including 10 deaths – in and around Flint since the city’s water troubles began, nearly two years ago. The syndrome can be transmitted through mist or vapor from a contaminated water supply. High-ranking state officials knew about the outbreak in March of 2015, but Snyder didn’t say anything publicly until January 2016. “We can’t conclude the increase is related to the water switch in Flint,” said a state health department spokesperson on Feb. 3, “nor can we rule out a possible association.”

Trust me: Nobody in Flint now trusts a word state officials have to say about water quality.

The calamity began in April 2014 when the distressed and disinvested city, once home to tens of thousands of middle-class auto jobs, began using the Flint River as temporary water source. It was an attempt to save money by moving away from water provided for many years by the city of Detroit to a new, less expensive regional system that wouldn’t be ready until 2016.

Using Flint River water in the interim was supposed to save the cash-strapped municipality about $5 million over two years. Now, with a plumbing infrastructure that has been rotted by corrosive water, and families who face decades of long-term health effects, taxpayers will be on the hook for billions. That includes you, dear reader, because federal dollars will inevitably be part of the fix.

Since you’ll be footing the bill, you’re entitled to know that there were multiple signs of serious problems with Flint’s water supply, starting soon after the water supply was switched.

Residents began complaining almost immediately about foul-smelling, brown water coming out of their taps, a burning smell in their bathrooms and rashes on their skin. In August and again in September 2014, after discovering high levels of E.coli and fecal bacteria in Flint River water, city officials warned residents to boil water before drinking it.

To get rid of the nasty bugs, Flint authorities added a healthy dose of chlorine to the water supply. This makes water highly corrosive, yet somehow nobody figured to include anti-corrosion agents to Flint’s H20 recipe, even though it’s a standard, inexpensive treatment for municipal water systems.

This led to a weirder, even scarier development: In October 2014, General Motors – which still has an engine plant in the city – said that because Flint municipal water appeared to be corroding metal parts, the company would switch its water supply to Flint Township. (The township, unlike the city, still draws water from Lake Huron, via the city of Detroit.)

Read this and weep: A major company announces – in public – that city water is ruining the metal it uses to make car engines. And nobody in a position of authority says, “Hey, maybe people shouldn’t be drinking that swill?”

I’m a spin doctor, not a real doctor. But if I understand this right, the core public health issue in Flint isn’t that people were drinking corrosive water. It’s that corrosive water eroded the pipes in the city’s plumbing system. Some of those pipes and the joints connecting them contain lead. That’s how a potent neurotoxin got into the drinking supply, and into the bodies of a hundred thousand people.

Not until a full year after GM started getting its fresh water from a different source did Flint residents finally receive the same privilege. In between, city and state officials said again and again that Flint water was safe to drink. It took persistent pressure from residents, a leaked EPA memo, and independent studies by scientists from Virginia Tech and a doctor from Flint’s Hurley Hospital before harsh reality finally overcame happy rhetoric. In October of 2015, the city, the state and the Mott Foundation came up with $12 million to pay for a return to the Detroit water system.

But the lead that leached into Flint’s plumbing infrastructure hasn’t gone away now that there is cleaner water in the system. Lead levels are still too high to allow Flint residents to safely drink tap water. Which is why your Facebook page is filled with appeals to send bottled water to Michigan.

Flint residents are stuck with water that is undrinkable, homes that are unsellable (would you buy one?) and – it breaks my heart to write this – children who may be unable to fully recover from the harm grown-ups have done to their brains and bodies.

How’s that for a “deliverable,” governor?

Let’s be clear: This isn’t a failure of government. The solution to bad water from Flint has been to reconnect to good water from Detroit – which is also a government, and which despite its many problems, has delivered safe drinking water to its own residents and surrounding communities for decades.

This is a failure of a particular anti-government, authoritarian ideology, in which business elites take control of public institutions in order to dismantle as many of them as possible. The dual purpose is to spend less public money – thereby reducing the tax burden on high earners – and to redirect what spending is left into the hands of private entrepreneurs, who generally pay employees less and provide crappier service.

In 2013, Snyder’s administration laid off unionized public workers who served food in state prisons and replaced them with Aramark, a private contractor. Not long afterward, Aramark was caught serving food infested with maggots to state prison inmates. The company lost the contract, only to be replaced by a different private firm.

In case you haven’t guessed, I’m not a big fan of Rick Snyder. Other than his lack of neckties – and his willingness to buck GOP orthodoxy, embrace Obamacare and back Medicaid expansion – I’ve never found much to like about the guy. A few years back, I was hired to persuade others to dislike him, working as a media strategist for organizations that actively opposed the governor in court (the Sugar Law Center) and at the ballot box (the Michigan AFL-CIO).

But you don’t have to be a paid lefty flak to know that even after an appalling track record of bungling by his subordinates and others, the principal author of the tragedy in Flint is and always will be Rick Snyder. What you do have to know is that as this crisis unfolded, Flint was not a self-governing municipality. Instead, due to ongoing financial problems relating to a steadily declining tax base, the city has been run since 2011 by a series of “emergency managers,” who bypass the authority of the elected mayor and city council.