William Boughton currently serves as music director of the New Haven Symphony Orchestra in Connecticut. ( Courtesy photo )

If you go What: Colorado Music Festival: Week 2, feturing conductor candidate William Boughton Schedule Sunday, July 6: Chamber Orchestra with violinist Joseph Meyer, 7:30 p.m., Chautauqua Auditorium, 900 Baseline Road. Talk Under the Tent with Michael Harris (musicology Ph.D., University of Colorado-Boulder): "Reflections of Days Past," 6:30 p.m. Tuesday, July 8: CMF Chamber Players, 7:30 p.m., eTown Hall, 1535 Spruce St., Boulder Thursday, July 10, and Friday, July 11: Festival Orchestra with violinist Chad Hoopes, 7:30 p.m., Chautauqua Auditorium. Talk Under the Tent with Margaret Romero (trumpet DMA, CU): "I Might Dance All Night," 6:30 p.m. Tickets:$12-$48 Sunday, Thursday and Friday; $27 Tuesday Info: 303-440-7666 or comusic.org

After a festive, somewhat ceremonial first week, the major objective of this year's Colorado Music Festival season is set to begin in earnest: the selection of the organization's next music director.

The first of three official candidates, distinguished English conductor William Boughton, is on the podium for two programs, starting tonight with the smaller chamber orchestra, then Thursday and Friday with the full orchestra.

Boughton has had a long career as a cellist and conductor, in his native Britain, where he founded the English Symphony Orchestra, in Finland, and currently in Connecticut, where he is music director of the New Haven Symphony Orchestra.

Boughton spoke with the Camera about his concert programs, which both include English music and works for violin and orchestra by Finland's greatest composer, Jean Sibelius. Asked if he was seeking a unified theme, Boughton said the CMF administration actually selected the two programs from six he offered, but that he was excited to show contrasting sides of Sibelius.

Tonight's program begins with Benjamin Britten's Suite on English Folk Tunes.

"It's his last orchestral work, written two years before his death," Boughton said. "It reflects the concern of English musicians that the purity and innocence of folk song was being lost."

The five-movement suite is subtitled "A time there was...," a quote from a Thomas Hardy poem.

The concluding piece, Maurice Ravel's "Mother Goose Suite," is the composer's orchestration of his own piano pieces.

"It exquisitely captures the mood of the children's stories and poetry he loved," Boughton said.

The heart of the program, though, is the performance of all six Sibelius Humoresques for Violin and Orchestra, with CMF associate concertmaster Joseph Meyer as soloist. These obscure miniatures are a sort of prelude to the hugely popular Violin Concerto, which will be heard Thursday and Friday.

"These pieces are more wistful and 'Finnish' in character," Boughton said. "Knowing them inflects how one approaches the concerto. A lot of his lesser-known smaller pieces really get to the heart of the man."

The orchestration of the Humoresques is varied. Only the first is for full orchestra; the third and fourth are for strings alone, and the other three have reduced winds.

Meyer also discussed his first appearance as a soloist with the orchestra after eight years as a member.

"I learned the pieces specifically for this concert," he said. "They are not standard, and it's unusual to do all six."

Chad Hoopes, 19, will be guest violinist in Week 2 of the Colorado Music Festival. (Lisa Marie-Mazzucco / Courtesy photo)

Meyer, who also serves as associate concertmaster of the Charlotte Symphony in North Carolina, said his teacher, Camilla Wicks, was personally acquainted with Sibelius and known for her interpretation of his concerto, which he greatly admired.

The concerto anchors the Thursday and Friday programs and will be played by 19-year-old Chad Hoopes, who dazzled the CMF audience in 2011 playing the Tchaikovsky Violin Concerto. Hoopes has played with Boughton twice in New Haven. This will be his first public performance of the Sibelius concerto.

Hoopes said he and Boughton had previously discussed performing the Sibelius together. When Boughton was selected as a CMF candidate, the opportunity to return to Chautauqua was an exciting prospect for Hoopes.

"It's a special atmosphere to debut a concerto," Hoopes said. "I love returning to festivals and venues where I have played before, to see how the ensembles and I have developed. I was so fresh and young when I played there three years ago"

Hoopes described the Sibelius concerto as "at the top of the violin repertoire for technical difficulties."

He said that the intensity never really lets down.

"The emotional and physical stamina it requires are off the charts," he said, "and you have to sustain that burning passion."

As a young artist, Hoopes said he still is learning and expanding his repertoire while maintaining a full schedule as a performer.

"I like to think that I am conquering and sharing my artistry at the same time," he said.

Boughton's festival orchestra program balances the Sibelius concerto with three lighter selections of dance music, opening with the ubiquitous fifth Brahms Hungarian Dance. The other pieces were written for the theater, the Panorama and Waltz from Tchaikovsky's large ballet "Sleeping Beauty" and the ballet music from Charles Gounod's opera "Faust."

"I love pairing dance music with more serious pieces," Boughton said. "You need to balance the heavy stuff."

The concert concludes with such a "heavier" piece and brings Boughton's appearance full circle with another English masterwork, Edward Elgar's great "Enigma Variations."

Boughton has championed Elgar's music but noted that American audiences are truly familiar only with the Enigmas and the Cello Concerto.

"For some reason," Boughton said, "most of his music doesn't travel well outside the U.K."

The conductor said he looks forward to meeting the orchestra and the audience and has great interest in joining the festival:

"It really stands out among summer festivals in Colorado for its venue, which removes barriers between performers and the audience, for its community involvement, and for its attitude toward the new and the experimental."

This week also features the first CMF Tuesday chamber music concert at eTown Hall, an all-French program of Debussy (Danses Sacrée et Profane for harp and strings), Ravel (Introduction and Allegro for harp, flute, clarinet, and string quaret), and Fauré (String Quartet in E minor). The players, as always, are drawn from the CMF orchestra.