In keeping up with the Valentine's Day spirit, here is a list of nine foods that can not only increase your libido, but they're actually good for you.

While it might not have an exact history, Valentine’s Day's roots trace back to the fifth century, so contrary to popular belief, it is not a Hallmark holiday. According to History.com, it is said to be named after the Christian priest, Valentine, who was notorious for marrying young couples even when it was outlawed by the Emperor at the time, Claudius. The Emperor believed that when men were not attached to loves, they were able to be better soldiers. Valentines’ Day also has links to the Roman Pagan festival, Lupercalia, and at the end of the fifth century, in an effort to make it more of a Christian holiday, Pope Gelasius named Feb. 14 a day to celebrate this day officially. Now modern day Valentine’s Day celebrations have steered away from its Pagan roots — it’s become a day filled with chocolate, flowers, and romanance. Here is a list of some aphrodisiac foods to enhance your Valentine’s Day celebrations.

1. Oysters

Many people know of this one, but not many know of the reason why, and some have been previously skeptical about its effectiveness. However, in 2005 scientists in San Diego, Calif., decided to test out the theory of using it to boost the libido, which proved to be true. Oysters make a great aphrodisiac because they are found to have a rare amino acid, which increases the levels of sex hormones.

2. Chocolate

This delicacy has been synonymous with love and romance, but there is actually some scientific relevance behind this. According to The New York Times, two chemicals found in chocolate are linked to love and sex: tryptophan, which is a main component of serotonin — the feel good hormone — and the other is phenylethylamine, a stimulant related to amphetamine and released from the brain when people fall in love.

3. Cucumbers

Despite their phallic shape, they are said to increase the blood flow to the vagina because of their scent.

4. Chili Peppers

These spicy peppers are red, which does symbol the color of love. However, according to The New York Times, they also stimulate endorphins, speed up your heart rate, and make you sweat — thus imitating how a person feels when they are aroused.

5. Pomegranate Juice

Not only does this juice help to raise mood and memory, but it also increased sexual desire in both men and women who drank a glass daily. According to a 2012 study, testosterone levels increased between 16 percent and 30 percent among the subjects, while blood pressure plummeted,” the Daily Mail reported, “positive emotions rose and negative feelings fell.”

6. Arugula

According to Dr. Joseph Mercola, arugula contains trace minerals and antioxidants, which block the contaminants that can impact your libido negatively.

7. Cinnamon

Eating cinnamon increases your body temperature, thus increasing your libido. It also contains manganese, which is a mineral known for its aphrodisiac effects.

8. Avocado

Yes, they might look like a male body part, but they also contain high levels of folic acid — helping to metabolize protein and, in turn, giving you more energy. According to AskMen.com, “they also contain vitamin B6, which increases the male hormone production and potassium, which helps regulate a woman's thyroid gland, two elements that help increase libido in both men and women.”

9. Dates

The amino acids in dates increases a person’s stamina and sexual desire because of an overload on hormone production.

We hope you enjoyed some of these helpful tips, and as always, please make sure to check with your health care provider before trying any food that you are unsure of in regard to its effects.