PARK CITY, Utah, April 9, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Supplemental Health Care, a national leading healthcare workforce solutions company, is proud to accept the 2014 Leadership 500 Award in the Midsize Business Category from HR.com's Leadership Excellence magazine. This prestigious honor was presented to Supplemental Health Care on April 9, 2014 during the Global Leadership Excellence Forum in Vail, Co.

Leadership Excellence 500 evaluates the country's top organizations, independent consultants, trainers and coaches for their notable leadership development and human resource programs. Rankings are based on criteria designed to measure the success and long-term impact of a company's leadership programs such as its mission, curriculum content, participation levels, overall return on investment, and several others.

"Earning the Leadership 500 Award for our Recruitment Process Outsourcing (RPO) solution highlights the importance of innovative workforce strategies in today's healthcare industry. We are grateful to receive this recognition," said Tanya Tesseyman, Vice President of Supplemental Health Care's RPO Division. "Through our RPO solution, we administer the entire scope of our clients' full-time hiring needs including recruiting, interviewing, credentialing and onboarding. One of our largest clients, a Level I trauma center in Dallas, experienced immediate results from our services as we placed nearly 750 full-time employees and helped reduce their staffing vacancy rate from 15 percent to just over 6 percent within the first year of our partnership."

Supplemental Health Care's customized RPO is an efficient and cost-effective healthcare staffing solution, providing top-quality candidates and hiring full-time employees at an average of one-third the cost of traditional recruiting firm placements. The company's RPO business solution ensures that high-quality healthcare staffing needs are met for a diverse array of healthcare facilities including hospitals, clinics, urgent and acute care centers, rehabilitation facilities and many others.

"The demand for inventive RPO services is a rapidly growing trend in healthcare, particularly with recent implementation of the Affordable Care Act," said Janet Elkin, president and chief executive officer of Supplemental Health Care. "We are passionate about providing scalable staffing services that meet our clients' needs in today's demanding healthcare environment. As recognized by HR.com, our insightful RPO solution provides answers to some of the most relevant workforce management questions in our industry."

Supplemental Health Care, a premier national healthcare staffing company, provides its clients better access to physicians, physician assistants, nurses, physical and occupational therapists, speech-language pathologists, and other clinical and non-clinical positions. Through its portfolio of business solutions such as Recruitment Process Outsourcing, Managed Service Provider, and Contingent Staffing, among others, the company develops custom workforce strategies that support a variety of medical organizations including hospitals, outpatient and rehab facilities, adult day centers, government facilities, schools and home health.

The Leadership 500 Award honorees will be showcased in the May issue of HR.com's Leadership Excellence Essentials magazine, as well as the HR.com website. In its 30th year of publication, Leadership Excellence Essentials, a wholly-owned product of HR.com, is the most widely distributed leadership publication available globally, and delivered to more than 240,000 professionals each month.

About Supplemental Health Care

Since its inception in 1984, Supplemental Health Care has served as a comprehensive workforce solutions provider that delivers customized strategies to address staffing challenges faced by healthcare organizations nationwide. Leveraging a selection of business solutions such as Recruitment Process Outsourcing, Managed Services, PRN Pool Management and Contingent Staffing, Supplemental Health Care utilizes its deep staffing expertise to deliver wide ranging and creative workforce strategies that afford organizations better access to skilled clinical and non-clinical healthcare professionals.

Headquartered in Park City, Utah, Supplemental Health Care's maintains an extensive local office network of more than 58 offices in major U.S. markets and four fully-integrated national divisions: Travel Nursing, Travel Therapy, Supplemental Physicians and Advanced Practice. Visit www.SupplementalHealthCare.com to learn more.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20110728/CL43247LOGO

SOURCE Supplemental Health Care