LUZERNE COUNTY (WBRE/WYOU) Highmark, a subsidiary of Blue Cross Blue Shield, plans to reduce payments to physicians and that could impact your premiums. Eyewitness News Reporter Charlisa Gordon explains.

"People already can't afford their health insurance"

It's the sentiment of one of the many people Eyewitness News spoke with Tuesday about Highmark's announcement to pay doctors four point five percent less, while raising premiums.

But the Pennsylvania Medical Society says not so fast.





"It's concerning that a high player in the insurance market can reduce fees like this without bringing it to the table." said Dr. Chad Walker

Dr. Walker with professional orthopedics is one of the doctors with the Pennsylvania Medical Society and says something like this could have a huge impact





"That's actually going to start narrowing who's available to see you."



Highmark's announcement comes as insurers across the country report losses on the affordable care federal marketplace for last year.



"It can set a precedence across the state and across the country for these big insurers to defer their cost by lowering reimbursement rates to physicians and increase premium rates to patients." Noted Dr. Walker.



He says ultimately this could affect your health insurance premium, what doctors you can see, what services are covered, and more importantly what you may have to pay out of pocket.





The Pennsylvania Medical Society wants the Pennsylvania insurance department to review Highmark's planned cuts before they go into affect on April First.



HIGHMARK Released this statement regarding the changes to the ACA physician fee payments.

We welcome an opportunity to discuss this with the Pennsylvania Medical Society.



We have chosen to play a significant role in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) market in Pennsylvania. The dynamics of this marketplace, however, are still unstable. Patients being covered under the ACA have historically been underserved or uninsured and many are much more chronically ill than traditional commercially insured individuals.

We are committed to stabilizing our ACA line of business, and the recent fee schedule adjustment is one step toward keeping ACA plans viable. Over the last two years, we have taken multiple actions on multiple fronts, and used significant reserves, to ensure a sustainable offering to individuals in the Commonwealth.

As a health care community, we are now at a point where we collectively need to ensure that the ACA market is viable for the future. In the past, many individuals covered under the ACA would have presented at providers, and these same providers would not have received any payment. We do not believe that going back to a situation of high levels of uninsured and uncompensated care is good for Pennsylvania or physicians.

Prior to the ACA, physicians in Pennsylvania accepted reimbursement rates that were 27.5 percent lower than commercial reimbursement for Highmark’s Special Care products, which served a similar population and had a similar objective of ensuring sustainable access for an important population.