Real estate mogul Donald Trump's rise in the Republican presidential primaries can be attributed to President Barack Obama's policies, former Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal wrote in an editorial published in The Wall Street Journal Thursday. (Photo: File photos)

Real estate mogul Donald Trump's rise in the Republican presidential primaries can be attributed to President Barack Obama's policies, former Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal wrote in an editorial published in The Wall Street Journal Thursday.

"After seven years of the cool, weak and endlessly nuanced 'no drama Obama,' voters are looking for a strong leader who speaks in short, declarative sentences," Jindal wrote. He attributed Trump's appeal to voters to stagnant middle-class income and a fear of radical Islam in the Middle East, as well as Obama's "dismissive" attitude toward terrorist attacks.

"You can draw a straight line between a president who dismisses domestic terrorist attacks as incidents of workplace violence and a candidate who wants to ban Muslims from entering the country," Jindal wrote.

Jindal also blasted the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, as well as tax policies and education, all of which have over the past eight years have been large sources of contention between the president and Congress.

"Mr. Obama likes to bemoan the increasing partisan divides across the country, as if he were merely a passive observer at best and a victim at worst," Jindal wrote. "Uncharacteristically, the president is being too modest. He has created the very rancor he now rails against."

In the Republican primaries, Trump currently leads the way with 329 superdelegates, followed by U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, who has 231, and U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio, who has 110. A candidate must win 1,237 superdelegates to secure a Republican nomination.

Louisiana voters will cast their votes for both the Republican and Democratic presidential nominees Saturday.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/news/local/louisiana/2016/03/04/jindal-president-obama-created-trumps-candidacy/81315610/