In their sixth season, former prep teammates hope to play against each other

Colorado safety Jered Bell is eight months into his rehabilitation for a second knee injury and has no doubt he will be ready for the 2015 season. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Jered Bell and Kenneth Scott planned on being in the NFL by now, or at least being on their way there. It was the narrative they envisioned as teammates and friends during their senior season at Colony High School in California back in 2009.

But here they are in spring 2015, preparing each day for a senior season with their respective college teams — another senior season. Bell is a safety at Colorado. Scott is a wide receiver at Utah. Both have been granted a sixth season of eligibility by the NCAA because injuries caused them to miss two seasons earlier in their careers.

The knees have been the problem for Bell. He suffered a torn ACL in fall camp in 2011 and suffered the same injury last August to his other knee. He is eight months into his rehabilitation and has no doubt he will be ready for the 2015 season.

"I'm much more confident this time around," Bell said. "It's a lot stronger, I can already tell, than the last one. I'm not 100 percent but I know I'll be there for the season because it's stronger and it's going much smoother than the first one. ...It's just the process of going through it twice. I know what to do and what not to do."

The ankles have been the problem for Scott. He suffered a broken ankle during his first fall camp at Utah in 2010. He was in the starting lineup for the Utes in the first game of the 2013 season but suffered another season-ending ankle injury in that game. He played all of last season hoping that he would be granted another season.

Advertisement

The history of injuries and an opportunity to play during a sixth season of eligibility adds to a shared history. The programs for which they play are budding rivals, but this Buff and this Ute might as well be brothers. In some ways, they are.

"In high school we would compete every day," Bell said. "He was a receiver and I was a cornerback at the time and together we led the team."

High school years were tough ones for Scott. He didn't have much because his parents Theo Bland and Latricia Banks-Bland were struggling for a variety of reasons. His mother's battle with Lupus was the biggest obstacle. She was in and out of the hospital a lot and ultimately needed a kidney transplant that she eventually received from a donor in Utah.

Scott transferred to Colony and had a 30-minute commute to school and back each day, a complication most of his peers didn't have to worry about.

Scott and Bell first met during orientation for the freshman football team coached by Bell's father, Richard, a police captain in West Covina. It didn't take long before the pair were the best of friends and because of Scott's family's struggles and his long commute, he often ended up staying with the Bells.

"We got so close to where his mother treated me like her son," Scott said. "She told me if I ever wanted to I could stay the night at her house. Basically she took me in. I used to go to their house like every day and she fed me."

Avis Bell was a stay-at-home mother at the time and she did all she could to keep the two boys on a path toward success and a bright future. The Bells are a spiritual family, and Richard and Avis eventually became Scott's godparents when he was baptized in their church.

"I was on food stamps and Section 8 (housing)," Scott said. "So whenever I was hungry or needed something I would always go to Miss Bell. She just made sure everything was OK with me."

Scott said the Bells' generosity didn't end with a place to stay and food in his stomach. He said Jered Bell used to share his clothes and shoes with him and anything else he needed.

"He made everything of his seem like it was mine," Scott said. "I really appreciated that growing up."

Bell said he grew up with one older sister and when he became friends with Scott it was like finding a brother he never knew he had. He said his parents taught him from the beginning to be generous and kind to everyone, so sharing his things with Scott never bothered him.

"If I could provide it, I was going to do that," Bell said.

They competed each day on the football field, the basketball court. They competed for the attention of girls they both liked and they ran track together, with Scott running the second leg and Bell running the anchor leg of a 4x100 relay team.

They could have been teammates in college, but Scott chose not to go to Colorado. He was recruited to CU by Dan Hawkins' staff, which wanted him to play safety for the Buffs. Scott said he always had his heart set on playing wide receiver and chose Utah because coaches there liked him at the position.

Colorado moved from the Big 12 Conference when Bell was a freshman to the Pac-12 before his sophomore season. The two friends thought they were headed toward a series of battles with each other over the remaining years of their careers. But each new season seemed to bring a new setback for one or the other that prevented them from playing.

Only once in their careers have they both played in the annual meeting between their teams in the regular season finale. Scott led Utah in receiving in the 2012 game with four catches for 36 yards. Bell played sparingly in the game.

Neither could be blamed for going through the coming months and 2015 fall camp with fingers crossed. They're hoping to stay healthy next fall and reach the end of the season playing at a high level as important parts of their respective teams. They're excited about the idea of facing each other on the field again at the end of next season at Rice-Eccles Stadium in Salt Lake City like all those battles they had back in high school.

"It's going to be really crazy," Scott said. "I know I'm going to be talking trash to him for sure. It will be really big for both of our families. It's going to be my senior night. So it's going to be emotional and there is going to be a lot of family there."

It is not just Bell and Scott who feel like they're related. Their families have become close through the years and they often visit each other even while their sons are away at college. Both young men have already earned college degrees. Bell is now a graduate student working on his master's degree in education at CU. Scott is two classes away from earning a second degree at Utah. This one will be in economics. His first was in human development.

Maybe the best thing to come out of Bell and Scott becoming friends and the Bell family helping Scott is the effect it has had on how he sees his future. When his football days are behind him, Scott hopes to pay it forward.

"I've always had a heart for helping kids, especially kids that are in bad situations," Scott said. "I would like to be a counselor for juveniles and kids and help put them in better situations. That's perfect for me. I'm always a guy to try to help a person."

"It's crazy how God works things out," Bell said.

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @kyleringo