As tax season heads into the homestretch, the Daily News is here to help.

With a month left to file a return before the April 15 deadline, The News’ annual Tax Hotline is back to assist New Yorkers in getting through another year of making good with Uncle Sam.

Experts from the New York State Society of Certified Public Accountants will be on hand Wednesday, March 18, and Thursday, March 19, to answer your questions via telephone, email and live Web chats.

Aside from the usual reader questions regarding deductions, exemptions, expenses and credits, the hottest topic this year promises to be the Affordable Care Act, which for the first time will factor into tax returns from households and individuals who signed up for health insurance.

Or didn’t.

“The Affordable Care Act will definitely be what a lot of people will be asking about this year,” said tax professional Vincent Cervone, owner of VRC & Associates and a veteran hotline volunteer.

“If you don’t have health insurance, you’ll pay a fine this year, and anybody who did sign up will have to fill out a special form, 1095-A, to see if they’re eligible for a credit, depending on their income.”

Cervone said that many questions this year will be about the Affordable Care Act, especially what to do for those who enrolled this year, and for those who did not, and may face a penalty if they are uninsured.

The hotline, which for the past several years has helped thousands of News readers decipher complex tax issues, is more important than ever this year.

Recent budget cutbacks have whittled down the IRS’ manpower by nearly 12,000 employees, which will result in the agency being able to answer less than half of the 100 million phone calls it receives from taxpayers.

The lucky few who have gotten through to a live agent have had to suffer through extremely long waiting times.

“It’s not just regular taxpayers who are having problems,” Cervone said.

“Even tax practitioners with questions who have a special hotline are being told to call back the next day because (the IRS is) so overwhelmed.”

To call the Daily News with a tax question, dial (212) 210-2044 from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. on Wednesday and Thursday.

You can also e-mail questions starting Monday to tax@nydailynews.com, where the hotline's tax professionals, including Cervone, will provide answers on The News’ website, NYDailyNews.com, through the April 15 tax deadline.