SpaceX this week filed to amend its lawsuit against the U.S. Air Force and United Launch Services to reflect claims that the government is buying controversial rocket engines at a highly inflated cost. The deal allegedly delivers profits of 200 percent to a Russian engine maker with ties to its government.

Arizona Sen. John McCain on Friday made these claims in a letter to U.S. Undersecretary of Defense Frank Kendall outlining flaws in the accounting and acquisition strategies of the RD-180 engine.

Space Exploration Technologies Corp, known as SpaceX, filed the original lawsuit in April with the U.S. Court of Federal Claims, accusing the Air Force of illegally blocking competition by giving a monopoly to the Centennial-based United Launch Alliance, a joint venture of Boeing Co. and Lockheed Martin Corp. United Launch Services is a ULA subsidiary.

The company had a temporary victory when Judge Susan Braden issued an injunction to halt the government’s purchase of RD-180 engines, which ULA relies on to power its popular Atlas V rocket. But she lifted the ban after several federal agencies assured her that the sale of the engines would not violate the U.S. sanctions against Russia related to conflict in Ukraine.

The heart of SpaceX’s complaint is the concept of competition, but the company has gained better political traction by latching onto the Russian engine issue.

SpaceX is now taking up several of McCain’s points, namely the price ULA pays to RD Amross, a U.S. subsidiary of the engine’s Russian manufacturer NPO Energomash.

“Very little information is publicly available on the actual costs to build the Russian RD-180 engine compared to what ULA pays for them. But, I am aware of claims that the engines have been sold by NPO Energomash to RD Amross at a much lower price than RD Amross charges ULA for them,” McCain wrote.

SpaceX reiterated this concept in Wednesday’s court filing, stating, “Had the Air Force conducted a rational cost and price analysis as required by law, it would have realized that the sole source pricing charged by ULA included exorbitant profits for ULA’s Russian supplier at the expense of the American public.”

The Air Force entered into a block-buy contract with ULA in December for the purchase of 36 rocket cores over five years — a deal worth $9.5 billion. A year earlier, the Air Force said it would competitively bid out 14 additional launch contracts for missions between 2017 and 2019. But in March, it was announced that number may be cut to seven.

Military satellite launches, which have an estimated value of $70 billion through 2030, make up the fourth-largest program in the federal defense budget, but competition could save taxpayers more than $1 billion a year, according to SpaceX founder billionaire Elon Musk.

Gen. William Shelton, head of Air Force Space Command, defended the Air Force’s decision at a large industry gathering in Colorado Springs in May, saying the Air Force allocated $60 million and 100 people to work on certifying SpaceX’s Falcon 9 rocket.

“It’s very difficult to pick up the pace on that,” he said. “It just takes time, it takes money, it takes people.”

Kristen Leigh Painter: 303-954-1638, kpainter@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kristenpainter