Shaun Marsh of the Scorchers in action during the 2013-14 Big Bash League final against the Hobart Hurricanes at the WACA in February. Photo: Getty Images

ADELAIDE STRIKERS

In: Brad Hodge (Stars), Hamish Kingston*, Craig Simmons (Perth), Ben Laughlin (Hobart), Kieron Pollard, Alex Ross, Ryan ten Doeschate

Out: Callum Ferguson (Renegades), Alex Hales (Hobart), Michael Klinger (Perth), Andrew McDonald (Thunder), Ben Oakley, Nathan Reardon (Brisbane)



Availability: Pollard to miss second half due to West Indies' World Cup preparation, as Kane Richardson could if he makes the World Cup squad cut.

Strengths: With Simmons, Pollard, Hodge and Trent Lawford they have the potential to post some huge scores.

Weaknesses: Only Lawford is a legitimate all-rounder. The tragic absence of Phillip Hughes has robbed the Strikers of a reliable anchor opener.



Prediction: Sixth. Will be too expensive with the ball, and will not be as nimble in the field as most of the their peers.

One to watch: Lawford. Signed specifically for last year's tournament but, inexplicably, was never selected. Handy with the ball but it is with the bat this hefty all-rounder, nicknamed "Shrek", can do the most damage.

BRISBANE HEAT

Advertisement

In: Samuel Badree, Ryan Duffield (Perth), Andrew Flintoff, Simon Milenko, James Peirson, Nathan Reardon (Adelaide), Mark Steketee

Out: Chris Hartley (Thunder), Nathan Hauritz (Thunder), Luke Pomersbach, Chris Sabburg

Availability: The exclusion of Badree from the West Indies' expanded squad should ensure his full availability. Dan Vettori is likely to play only the first half, while Mitch Johnson and Shane Watson are unlikely to be seen at all.

Strengths: A glut of all-rounders and pacemen, both of which should be suited to their Gabba home.

Weaknesses: Few specialist batting options in reserve, in case of poor form or injury. Should have sacrificed a seamer for an extra batsman.

Prediction: Eighth. Too much reliance on all-rounders in batting order, and too much reliance on Ben Cutting as their strike bowler.

One to watch: Peirson. That the Heat discarded much-loved gloveman Chris Hartley is a reflection of their hopes for the 22-year-old, whose three one-day innings for Queensland have produced two half-centuries.

HOBART HURRICANES

In: Tim Bresnan, Alex Hales (Adelaide), Michael Hill (Renegades), Dominic Michael, Jake Reed, Darren Sammy, Beau Webster

Out: Aiden Blizzard (Thunder), Doug Bollinger (Sixers), Ben Laughlin (Adelaide), Dimitri Mascarenhas, Owais Shah

Availability: Their glut of early games should ensure Hales, Sammy and captain George Bailey play most of their matches before heading off for World Cup duty. Xavier Doherty could potentially join them.

Strengths: Impressive batting depth, to the extent that last year's semi-final hero Tim Paine could be squeezed out of a top-order spot.

Weaknesses: Not much fast-bowling experience beyond Ben Hilfenhaus, although youngster Sam Rainbird impressed in Matador Cup.

Prediction: Second. Boasts great hitting potential all the way down to No. 9, and with the ball has proven performers Hilfenhaus and Doherty.

One to watch: Evan Gulbis. Was poor with bat and ball last season but now has enough experience in domestic cricket to live up to expectations, especially with the bat.

MELBOURNE RENEGADES

In: Tom Beaton, Andrew Fekete*, Callum Ferguson (Adelaide), Andre Russell, Jesse Ryder, Matt Short, Matthew Wade (Stars), Nick Winter

Out: Jos Buttler, Matthew Gale, Jake Haberfield, Mohammad Hafeez, Daniel Harris, Michael Hill (Hobart), Muthiah Muralidaran, Will Sheridan



Availability: Both West Indians, Dwayne Bravo and Russell, will need to be replaced in the second half, as will talismatic captain Aaron Finch. Peter Siddle will feature in the second half, and perhaps the first too.

Strengths: Ample batting options, with Wade and Ferguson significantly bolstering the top six. West Indies imports should provide a fast start.

Weaknesses: Will be heavily affected by World Cup selection. Yet to prove they can thrive without Finch. Also scant pace depth.

Prediction: Fourth. Will start strongly but will be affected by World Cup duty more than any other team in the second half.

One to watch: Short. Given the good record of slow bowlers at Etihad Stadium his off-spin could be very handy, while his speciality as a top-order batsman could see him filling the Finch vacancy later in the tournament.

MELBOURNE STARS

In: Michael Beer (Perth), Luke Feldman (Thunder), Kevin Pietersen, Tom Triffitt* (Perth)

Out: Brad Hodge (Adelaide), Lasith Malinga, Matthew Wade (Renegades)

Availability: With Luke Wright still on the England periphery both internationals, he and Pietersen, should have full availability. Glenn Maxwell, James Faulkner and potentially captain Cameron White will depart in the second half for World Cup duty.

Strengths: Depth in all facets. Unlikely to be at the mercy of international selection as much as previously. Beer a key recruit.

Weaknesses: Have not coped with pressure in any of the three BBL seasons, falling in the semi-finals of each.

Prediction: First. Even with the departure of Hodge they look stronger this season than any of the past three, but need to stop tinkering with their batting order so regularly.

One to watch: Marcus Stoinis. Now free of injury, Stoinis has been impressing with both disciplines this season, particularly the bat with his lusty hitting. The Stars believe he can bowl his medium-fast at the death.

PERTH SCORCHERS

In: Michael Carberry, Marcus Harris, Michael Klinger (Adelaide), Simon Mackin, James Muirhead (Stars), Joel Paris, Andrew Tye (Thunder)

Out: Michael Beer (Stars), Pat Cummins (Thunder), Liam Davis, Simon Katich, Craig Simmons (Adelaide), Dwayne Smith (Sixers), Alfonso Thomas, Tom Triffitt* (Stars)

Availability: Mitch Marsh will make no more than a cameo, while his brother Shaun will miss the first half due to Test duty. Pacemen Paris and Nathan Coulter-Nile, especially the latter, are major injury concerns.

Strengths: An amazing home record, losing only one of their past nine at the WACA Ground. Plentiful spin options, but Perth is the worst venue to exploit that.

Weaknesses: Huge reliance on Carberry, Klinger and captain Adam Voges for runs, and on Yasir Arafat and Jason Behrendorff for wickets.

Prediction: Seventh. Losing Katich to retirement, the Marsh brothers to Test duty and, seemingly, Coulter-Nile to injury will be too significant for even the reliable Scorchers to overcome.

One to watch: Ashton Agar. Still behind Brad Hogg in the spin queue but the Scorchers' lack of batting depth, combined with Beer's departure, should see him selected regularly. Will be relied on for lower-order hitting.

SYDNEY SIXERS

In: Doug Bollinger (Hobart), Ryan Carters (Sydney), Ed Cowan, Dwayne Smith (Perth)

Out: Mark Cosgrove, Marcus North, Daniel Smith, Chris Tremlett, Ravi Bopara

Availability: Steve Smith, Brad Haddin and Josh Hazlewood are unlikely to be seen, while Mitchell Starc will miss at least the second half, as will West Indian Smith. Nathan Lyon, however, could return then.

Strengths: Nic Maddinson, Moises Henriques and Smith provide significant hitting power, and the return of Bollinger gives them another genuine strike-bowler to join Brett Lee.

Weaknesses: Three of their batsmen - Jordan Silk, Carters and Cowan - are all yet to prove they can score quickly enough in Twenty20, while Trent Copeland's ability to restrict with the ball is still unproven.

Prediction: Third. Enough depth to cover for the absences of their Australian stars. Very well-balanced squad that will be a definite title challenger.

One to watch: Sean Abbott. Limited to one match last season due to injury. Twenty20 is the format in which he still has the most to prove, particularly for bowling economy, but undoubtedly has the talent to do that.

SYDNEY THUNDER

In: Ahillen Beadle, Aiden Blizzard (Hobart), Pat Cummins (Perth), Jake Doran, Christopher Green, Chris Hartley (Brisbane), Nathan Hauritz (Brisbane), Jacques Kallis, Josh Lalor (Sixers), Andrew McDonald (Adelaide)

Out: Cameron Borgas, Ryan Carters (Sixers), Michael Clarke, Scott Coyte, Luke Doran, Luke Feldman (Stars), Jason Floros, Andrew Tye (Perth), David Warner, Chris Woakes, Tillakaratne Dilshan, Ajantha Mendis

Availability: Pat Cummins and Eoin Morgan will miss the second half due to World Cup duty. The Thunder are yet to secure a replacement for the latter, as Craig Kieswetter has had to withdraw due to injury.

Strengths: In Usman Khawaja and Hartley the Thunder have a pair who, in one-dayers, regularly set a good scoring base. Mike Hussey leads an experienced band of batsmen to follow them.

Weaknesses: With McDonald not certain to bowl Kallis is their only all-rounder, which restricts their flexibility for bowling choices if things go awry.

Prediction: Fifth. The seeds of improvement sown last season will start to sprout this season. Batting will be reliable, but will be hurt by lack of bowling depth.

One to watch: Chris Tremain. Opportunities may be stifled until Cummins departs for World Cup duty. Can leak runs, but has sufficient pace and aggression to take early wickets, for which early runs can be excused.

* = Replacing an injured player