If Americans are paying attention — and clearly they aren’t or we wouldn’t be having this conversation — they would be getting a firsthand lesson in why the Framers were correctly opposed to direct elections.

Under the Constitution, as it was written, the only federal office directly elected by the people, were the members of the House of Representatives, and they were limited to only a two-year term.

While the Framers feared tyranny, they also fear democracy, which is essentially mob rule, or tyranny of the majority. They understood the masses would never act rationally.

For instance, Gov. Edmund Randolph, of Virginia, on May 29, 1787, at the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, warned: “Our chief danger arises from the democratic parts of our [State] constitutions. It is a maxim which I hold incontrovertible, that the powers of government exercised by the people swallows up the other branches. None of the [State] constitutions have provided sufficient checks against democracy.”

Two days later Elbridge Gerry, a delegate from Massachusetts, said: “The evils we experience flow from the excess of democracy. The people do not want virtue, but are dupes of pretended patriots.”

James Madison referred to “the inconvenience of democracy,” and Alexander Hamilton to the “imprudence” of it.

Today we again we see why.

The presumptive nominee of the Republican Party for president of the United States is a man who publicly humiliated a handicapped man, said a POW from the Vietnam War wasn’t a hero because he was captured, petitioned to have disabled veteran vendors removed from the streets near Trump Tower because they were a blight, blamed the 17-year-old victim of a rape by boxer Mike Tyson; has numerous failed businesses, etc.

He is a hypocrite, a pathological liar, and a serial flip-flopper. He hires illegal immigrants while claiming he wants to deport them before he said he supported touchback amnesty. He is for and against Common Core. He is opposed to Obamacare but wants essentially a single-payer health care system. He is pro-abortion, anti-abortion, pro-abortion, anti-abortion.

I could go on. Suffice it to say, Donald Trump is the most uninformed and vulgar person to have ever sought the office.

The other side is no better.

The likely Democratic Party nominee should be indicted and jailed for using her personal email server for classified communications. She also has the blood of four heroes in Benghazi, Libya, on her hands, though her Republican opponent probably does not think they are heroes because they died.

Hillary Clinton’s challenger, Bernie Sanders, is a self-avowed socialist whose lack of understanding of basic economics is profoundly stupefying for a U.S. senator.

As famed journalist H.L. Mencken prophetically wrote in the Baltimore Evening Sun on July 26, 1920, “As democracy is perfected, the office represents, more and more closely, the inner soul of the people. We move toward a lofty ideal. On some great and glorious day the plain folks of the land will reach their heart’s desire at last, and the White House will be adorned by a downright moron.”

But there is an alternative.

On the ballot in all 50 states will likely be a two-term governor who balanced budgets, cut taxes, cut regulations and truly reduced the size of government. You know, all those conservative values for which the Republican Party used to stand. Former New Mexico Gov. Gary Johnson seems to be the only intelligent choice for president and will likely be the Libertarian Party candidate.

Google him. Be a smart, informed voter. Don’t vote for moronic clowns because they tell you there is no other choice.

If you pull the handle for the Republican or the Democrat after researching all the options because you truly believe that one of those knaves is what is best for America, good for you. You’re wrong, but good for you.

However, if you vote for one of those rogues because you think voting for someone else is a wasted vote, just stay home. You are an uninformed boob and part of the problem.

Be libertarian with me. Just once. Vote for Gary Johnson in November. You have nothing to lose and everything to gain.

http://limaohio.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/web1_LUCENTE-Thomas-Web-1-1.jpg

By Thomas Lucente [email protected]

Thomas J. Lucente Jr. is an Ohio attorney and night editor of The Lima News. Reach him by telephone at 567-242-0398, by email at [email protected], or on Twitter @ThomasLucente.

Thomas J. Lucente Jr. is an Ohio attorney and night editor of The Lima News. Reach him by telephone at 567-242-0398, by email at [email protected], or on Twitter @ThomasLucente.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus