Hunterdon-based 90 Proof will celebrate its 35th anniversary on Aug. 1 at Clinton Elks with a benefit for veterans, one of the causes for which founder Tom Lunger Sr. has raised more than $1 million.

90 Proof Band today consists of, left to right, drummer Brian “Bam” Bridge, guitarists Eliott Morris and Chris Hedges, vocalists Tom Lunger Jr. and Tom Lunger Sr., keyboarist Donald Bogut, and bassist Karl Dietel. (Photo: By Ed Zuccarelli) Story Highlights Father and son Tom Lunger Sr. and Jr. formed 90 Proof in 1980 inspired by classic rock, Southern rock, country and blues.

Lunger Jr. was only 14 years old when recruited after nailing Lynyrd Skynyrd’s “Gimme Three Steps” during a rehearsal break.

A 35th anniversary all-star jam with former members will benefit Veterans Haven North in Glen Gardner.

Since 1994, Lunger Sr. has been an officer of the Clinton Elks, where he once again is exalted ruler.

PITTSTOWN – For 35 years, Thomas Lunger, founding co-vocalist of the influential Hunterdon County-based Southern, classic and roots rock band 90 Proof, has defied his outlaw image and sound by raising more than $1 million for charity.

Much of the philanthropy for children, the elderly, veterans and the homeless has been accomplished through a partnership with the Clinton Elks, where Lunger has been an officer since 1994 and once again is exalted ruler.

In celebration of the band’s 35th anniversary, 90 Proof and the Elks are partnering on another benefit for veterans. Proceeds from an Aug. 1 all-star reunion jam with many of the band’s 20 former members will go to Veterans Haven North, a hospital for homeless vets in Glen Gardner.

“I call it ‘Unsung Heroes,’ ” said Lunger, 70, a Bloomsbury resident. “I ask them what they want, and we go get it. The money goes directly to them with no overhead. We’re going to get them new ping-pong tables.”

When asked why he has wanted to raise so much money for charity, the Waylon Jennings-like Lunger simply said, “Why not?”

He added that he joined the Clinton Elks in an effort to align the band with the organization’s many charitable efforts. These include the U.S. Marines’ Toys for Tots Foundation and Camp Moore, the State Elks Association’s Woodbridge-headquartered summer for children with special needs.

Camp Director Pia Grant sang the praises of Lunger and 90 Proof Band.

“God bless him twice,” Grant said. “It’s very unusual for a rock band to do that unless one is a member, like Tommy, who happens to be a member of a band. They absolutely have done a wonderful job over the years.”

Tom Lunger, front, and his son, Tom Lunger Jr., back, both of Hunterdon County, will celebrate the 35th anniversary of their band 90 Proof with a benefit for Veterans Haven North on Aug. 1 at the Clinton Elks. (Photo: By Bob Makin/staff photography)

Father and son

From the outset, Lunger’s biggest fan was his Southern-rock loving son, Tom Lunger Jr., who, at only 14, unexpectedly joined the band not too long after it formed. When his father took a break from a rehearsal, the teen stole the mic, nailed Lynyrd Skynyrd’s “Gimme Three Steps,” and the rest is a history that has carved a father-son bond from the root of Hank Williams.

“I think we’re the only father-and-son duo out there,” Lunger Sr. said.

Playing Rolling Thunder at the National Mall in Washington, D.C., in front of 300,000 veterans, bikers and their friends and families throughout the mid-’90s remains the most memborable gig the Lungers said they have shared.

“That was a little intimidating,” said Lunger Jr., a resident of the Asbury section of Union Township. “You felt like you were Forrest Gump when you up there.”

Music hasn’t been the only bond between father and son. They have worked together for more than 30 years as commercial and residential painters, much of it with veteran 90 Proof guitarist Chris Hedges.

The band’s family bond also goes beyond father and son. Like her brother, Lori Lunger is a member of the Elks, who organizes an annual weekend-long music festival that raises around $10,000 a year for children with special needs. The entire festival festival lineup showcases local bands, culminating with 90 Proof.

“She’s got the same heart we all do, and it gets bigger every year because she’s very good at what she does,” the Lungers said.

“Growing up with a father who is a rock ‘n’ roller has taught me a couple of things,” Lori Lunger added, “eventually all of your friends become his friends and fans. It showed me to always march to the beat of my own drum, even when some people don’t like the sound.”

Lunger Sr. also has two other daughters, who live in New York’s Rockland County with their mother. Lunger Jr. has three children of his own, but he said he doesn’t share with them the musical connection he has with his father.

While the music 90 Proof Band mainly plays comes from the South, the Lungers’ ancestors settled in New Jersey in 1741. Lunger Sr. grew up in Far Hills and Pluckemin, where he initially raised his own family before moving to Hunterdon around 1970.

“He liked the (Rolling) Stones and country,” Lunger Jr. said. “He was very Hank Williams Jr., and I was Lynyrd Skynyrd, and we used to bust each other about it because they do a lot of the same songs. And he’d be like, ‘He does it better,’ and I’d be like, ‘No, these guys do it better.’ And somewhere, we just meshed mesh, and I started liking his Stones, and he started liking my Skynyrd.”

RELATED:Pattenburg House steps up charitable efforts

90 Proof Band performs in 1994 at Rolling Thunder in Washington, D.C. Pictured from left to right are keyboardist Tom Sweeney, vocalist Tom Lunger Jr., guitarist Pat Carmona, vocalist Tom Lunger Sr., drummer Chris Pearson, bassist Wiley Moody and guitarist Tom Tarlazzi. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Tommy Lunger Jr.)

Music community

From the get go, 90 Proof Band has sought to play benefit concerts, which the Lungers eventually organized themselves. Lunger Jr. said the band only has played about 20 paid gigs throughout its 35 years, mainly as a means to upgrade equipment. In comparison, the band and its members have participated in more than 200 benefit concerts.

Black Potatoe Festival founder Matthew Angus-Williams said he appreciated Lunger Sr.’s generosity not only with local charities but also the many local musicians who have played his fundraisers.

“Very few musicians that I have been fortunate to know have worked so hard and tirelessly toward the benefit of one group of individuals,” Angus-Williams said. “Tommy has been a great example in Hunterdon County how the arts can help make a difference in the lives of others. He has always been very supportive of me and all that Black Potatoe has done, and it is much appreciated.”

When not busy running the Elks or organizing a benefit concert, Lunger Sr. can be seen sitting in just about every Thursday at the weekly jam led by his bassist, Karl Dietel, also an extremely talented vocalist-keyboardist who leads an original band and a Billy Joel tribute act.

The last Sunday of the month, Lunger joins a jam with his drummer, Brian “Bam” Bridge, and Bridge’s local all-star band, Bones Weedsley. Both jams take place at the Pattenburg House, a historic venue in Asbury that is as charitable as the Lungers and 90 Proof Band.

“It's no secret that the community of musicians in Hunterdon County has a long tradition of fundraising through their talents, and it all can be traced back to the 90 Proof Band and their park concerts and fundraising "roundups" of the late ’80s,” Bridge said. “There may have been others doing it, but none with the brazen ‘bigger-is-better’ attitude of Tom Lunger, who would think nothing of trucking in a giant flatbed and building a massive, two-tiered, intricate and completely unsafe stage on top, throwing 10 bands together and televising the whole thing on local access cable. There is whole host of local players still active in the scene who got their start with a chance to play with the 90 Proof Band, myself included.”

Pattenburg House owner Lori Stocklinski added, “90 Proof is a cornerstone of the local community, have been playing for so many years and donate their time selflessly to raise thousands of dollars every year to charities: veterans, local toy drives for children in need. There isn’t a charity around that Tommy Lunger Sr. isn’t the first to step up and want to be part of raising funds.”

90 Proof logo designed by the late John Manner, the band’s original guitarist. (Photo: Courtesy of 90 Proof Band)

At their 35th anniversary show, the Lungers said they are looking forward to merging former members with their current lineup, which also includes guitarist Eliott Morris and keyboardist Donald Bogut. They said the miss their original guitarist, the late John Manner, who designed their logo of a black wide-brimmed outlaw hat dangling from a bottle of whiskey next to a shot glass.

The logo also symbolized the hard-drinking lifestyle of Lunger Sr., a stroke survivor who still smokes cigarellos but traded in shots for iced coffee in the wake of a near fatal infection two years ago that attacked his bladder, heart and kidneys. Yet, his dedication to local charity and music never wavered.

Released from the hospital the day before Russtival, a popular annual festival that raises money to battle pancreatic cancer, the never-say-die rock ‘n’ roller refused to cancel the gig, much to the amazement of the local music scene.

“I had a (catheter) bag,” Lunger said. “I just wore bigger pants with the bag, and I made it and sang. I had to sit down on a stool because I was tired, but I said, ‘I ain’t canceling it.’

“I’m having more fun singing in the past two years,” he added. “I really am, and it’s all because of Lori from the Pattenburg. I was really down when I was sick, but she was there to encourage me and be a friend.”

Staff Writer Bob Makin: 732-565-7319; bmakin@MyCentralJersey.com

Hunterdon County-based 90 Proof Band will celebrate its 35th anniversary on Aug. 1 at Clinton Elks with a benefit for Veterans Haven North, a hospital for homeless vets in Glen Gardner. (Photo: ~Courtesy of 90 Proof)

Take action

What: “Unsung Heroes,” 90 Proof’s 35-year anniversary all-star jam and veterans benefit

When: 3-9 p.m. Aug. 1

Where: Clinton Elks, 211 Sidney Road (Route 617), Pittstown

How much: $10 (free for children younger than 12), all proceeds go to Veterans Haven North, a hospital for homeless veterans in Glen Gardner

Info: https://www.facebook.com/events/1458806851101954/, 908-735-8531

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1S3dGYx