What skills or qualities do you have that your opponents do not?

Freedom means more to me because I grew up in an era of segregation – separate water fountains, bathrooms, and neighborhoods. As an 1856 Republican, principle means more to me than party and profits. Justice is paramount.

In addition to having a BA in psychology and a Doctorate of Jurisprudence, I also have a Masters in Public Administration with an option in healthcare. This degree, along with my pre-med studies allows me to be able to work on legislation that would either repeal ObamaCare or replace it with something better. ObamaCare as it stands results in massive increases in premiums, deductibles, and co-pays, while doing little to decrease the cost of healthcare. Prevention and wellness should be emphasized and rewarded rather than maintaining the status quo that does nothing but funnel trillions of dollars into Big Pharma, obliterate religious liberty, and decrease the quality of healthcare.

As an intern in the Office of the Public Defender I was afforded the opportunity to gain insight into the effects of the War on Drugs that has resulted in the record incarceration of 2.3 million people, as well as the residual effects of having 70 million people on parole or probation, effectively barring them from gainful employment. Treating minor drug offenses as a criminal problem leads to the mass hysteria that results in shifting money needed for dilapidated schools to high-tech prisons. Drug use should be treated the same way as alcohol, as a health problem and not a criminal problem.

If elected, what will be your top priorities and why?

Jobs and Economy.

Globalization is the result of corporations that have ballooned in size and power, thanks in part to the lack of anti-monopoly laws and gaming the system, whereby international law has a greater influence on these corporations than our national laws. As such, these behemoth corporations move their operations from the U.S. to other countries, thereby taking advantage of lower labor costs, fewer regulations and less taxation.

Deindustrialization is a byproduct of globalization. We no longer have the large number of factories in this country that employ low skilled workers. Factories are built in other countries to hire workers in those countries.

Mass incarceration has an effect on employment because those with a criminal record are often barred from getting a job. More than 2.3 million people are incarcerated in the U.S. Additionally, and more problematically, more than 70 million people have a criminal arrest record, which effectively bars them from gainful employment. No doubt, the congressional district in which I am a running has more than its share of people with a criminal record.

Technology is constantly changing. Consequently, the era of working for a company upon graduation until retirement is long behind us. Google, with its yearly multiplied billions of dollars in profits each year, employs a paltry 20,000 people. This number is far less than the number of people who were employed in the auto factories and had far less profit. Technology is also responsible for making jobs obsolete.