Bruce Irwin found opportunity in an unlikely place – the waiting room of Brookwood Medical Center, where he worked as an emergency room physician.

It was often filled with "Gomers," doctor-slang for patients in emergency departments who don't need emergency services.

"It means 'Get out of my ER,'" Irwin said.

If they got out of the ER, where were they going to go? They needed a doctor's office with extended hours and easy access, Irwin said.

Irwin opened Emergency Medicine South in 1982 in Hoover, which offered healthcare to walk-in patients from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. The hours changed, and so did the name. The company later became American Family Care, which now has 150 clinics across the country and is one of the largest privately-held chains of urgent care clinics in the country.

Irwin runs the company but no longer practices medicine. He surrendered his license in 2004. Meanwhile, American Family Care now operates 124 clinics in 26 states. In Alabama, the company has clinics in Birmingham, Dothan, Tuscaloosa, Mobile, Hunstville, Montgomery, Auburn and Gadsden. Executives officially opened the new headquarters Thursday on Cahaba Beach Road.

The swanky facility sits back from the road on a forested lot. Everything from the illuminated reception desk to the carpet on the floor bears a design inspired by DNA. A collage of tiny photographs of current and former employees comes together to form the company's logo behind the main desk.

The building contains everything from purchasing and claims processing to laboratory services. Centralizing such functions allows American Family Care to streamline operations at its clinics, Irwin said. A typical doctor's office may need six employees in the front office to process claims and maintain records. A clinic run by American Family Care only needs two, Irwin said.

The opening of the new headquarters is the culmination of several years of incredible growth. American Family Care has doubled its number of employees since 2008, from 497 to 1,198. Much of that growth happened when the company purchased franchise Doctors Express in 2013, which turned it into one of the largest urgent care companies in the country.

"I did it because I've always been interested in a national brand," Irwin said. "Healthcare has never really been branded on a national level."

Irwin's growth strategy is also borrowing a page from the fast-food playbook. The company offers franchise opportunities for entrepreneurs who want to get in on the healthcare business – but don't want to go to medical school.

Franchise opportunities have been very popular. In the next six months, American Family Care expects to open five clinics and 20 franchises, Irwin said.

The deal is a good one for American Family Care and for the franchise owners. The parent company gets another location without having to do the hard work of construction or hiring, and the franchise owner gets the logistical and purchasing power provided by American Family Care.

"We buy more flu tests than anyone in the country except the U.S. government," Irwin said.

Billing controversies

American Family Care has been successful, but also controversial. Last year, the federal government settled an investigation of the company for $1.2 million for fraudulent billing practices. A former employee, Anita Salters, accused the company of billing higher-level visits for basic, five-minute examinations. She also said the company charged a surgical rate for the use of an ear-popper, which emits a puff of air to relieve pressure.

A separate lawsuit from Salters is still proceeding through the courts, accusing the company of systematic overbilling and wrongful termination after she tried to bring the problems to light.

Don McKenna, the attorney for Salters, said such problems are rife within the urgent care industry, where owners seek to maximize profits in the face of increasing cost control from private insurance and Medicare. McKenna said the same practices that led to the $1.2 million settlement could be leading to overbilling on insurance claims and uninsured customers.

"Knowing what I know, I wouldn't trust my healthcare to them," he said.

Irwin said the company agreed to settle to put an end to costly litigation. He and other executives never admitted liability, they simply agreed to settle the matter to put it behind them, Irwin said.

"It has not affected our business," Irwin said. "The amount of money that was involved was hundreds of millions of dollars, yet they settled for one-point-two million."

Protecting the brand

The federal lawsuit isn't the only litigation American Family Care has been involved in. On April 21, American Family Care filed a lawsuit against American CareSource for trademark infringement. American CareSource operates a chain of urgent care clinics in the South, and the lawsuit claims that the name and business model infringe on American Family Care's trademark.

Irwin said the company has vigorously protected its trademark in the past, which is all a part of building a successful brand. The company has filed several lawsuits against alleged trademark infringers, Irwin said.

"We trademarked our name a long time ago," he said. "People copy success, but it's not always legal."

Mickey Trimm, a professor of healthcare management at UAB, said urgent care clinics do fill an important role in the healthcare industry. And it is precisely the role Irwin envisioned when he founded the company in 1982. A trip to the urgent care clinic costs significantly less than a trip to the emergency room, and in many states, insurance companies are steering more patients in that direction when they need immediate attention.

"As a society, we're wanting access whenever we need it," Trimm said. "We're not interested in waiting until the next morning if we're sick. Having that ability to just walk in is quite attractive."

The Affordable Care Act could also create more opportunities for urgent care providers to partner with hospitals, Trimm said. American Family Care is already partnering with Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Baptist Health in Montgomery, Irwin said.

More than 30 years after Irwin opened his first clinic, patients are still looking for alternatives to expensive emergency room care, Trimm said.

"In my mind, it makes more sense than the standalone emergency departments," Trimm said. " Access is important and finding a low-cost way of providing that access is needed."