| By Peter Bodley

Contributing Writer

Anoka County employees will pay less for their health insurance coverage in 2016 than they did this year.

The Anoka County Board Aug. 11 unanimously approved a health insurance package from Blue Cross Blue Shield that has an overall reduction in premiums of 9.7 percent from 2015 effective Jan. 1, 2016.

But the proposal approved by the board for a three-year period caps rate increase for 2017 and 2018 at 8.5 percent.

The 2015 health care package for county workers was 5 percent more than 2014 costs.

Anoka County Board Chairperson Rhonda Sivarajah credited county staff for their hard work in negotiating the premium decreases for 2016.

Blue Cross Blue Shield’s initial proposal called for premium increases in the three health plans offered to county employees, Sivarajah said.

“Staff worked really hard to bring down the costs to provide the best possible plan for employees,” she said.

Under the new package, copays are up slightly, Sivarajah said.

Under the health care package, there will be doctors on demand with mental health services at no charge, employee assistance program to include a critical incident component, provision of healthy incentives, flu vaccinations for all three years and continuation of the fitness discount.

Two of the three plans, one of which is regional, offer high deductibles ($2,000 for single coverage and $4,000 for family) with health savings accounts, while the other has a $500 deductible with a $35 copay.

The new package also offers two new high deductible plans, both with $3,000 single and $6,000 family deductibles and health savings accounts.

According to Sivarajah, one of them, the less expensive, limits participants to Allina medical facilities, while the other is broader based.

Indeed, the Allina Blue Print will be the least expensive of the five plans to be offered in 2016 at $46 and $180 monthly employees premiums for single and family coverage, respectively, with the Aware $500 deductible/$35 copay plan the most expensive with monthly employee premiums of $152 and $515, respectively, for single and family coverage.

The county’s monthly share for the Allina Blue Print premium will be $502.33 for single and $1,056.67 for family and for the Aware $500 deductible/$35 copay, $573 for single and $1,155 for family.

The county board action on the Blue Cross Blue Shield proposal also puts in place a wellness program for county employees with a $100,000 budget that is designed to create a culture of health within the county.

The program will add a wellness administration position, increase Heart at Work membership to include all departments, provide biometric screenings and develop health incentives.

“We want to make sure our employees are healthy and take care of themselves,” Sivarajah said.

Following action last year on the 2015 health care package, the county board authorized an analysis of a fully-insured program, which the county currently has, compared with a self-insured program.

According to Sivarajah, the health care task force that was created recommended remaining fully insured to control premiums over the next three years, provide health care insurance for employees at an affordable rate, improve the current wellness program and position the county to be prepared for what is known as the 2018 Cadillac Tax.

Government agencies like Anoka County are not exempt from the Cadillac Tax, which is a component of the Affordable Care Act, Sivaarjah said.

“This will impact the county,” she said.

It will impose a 40 percent tax on employer-sponsored health care plans that exceed an annual limit set by the Affordable Care Act on spending for single and family health insurance premiums.

However, the health care task force did recommend that the county consider a self-insured program in the future, Sivarajah said.