Anthelio Healthcare Solutions today announced it has signed a contract to provide revenue cycle optimization services to Star Medical Center (SMC), a leading provider of advanced surgical and hospital services serving Plano, Texas, and the surrounding area. Anthelio is the largest independent provider of technology and services to hospitals, physician practice groups and other healthcare providers, serving thousands of healthcare professionals across the country with industry-leading technology solutions that provide sustainable value while supporting the delivery of quality care.

“Anthelio Healthcare Solutions has demonstrated exceptional subject matter expertise within the Revenue Cycle process at Star Medical Center,” states Mark Kennedy, CEO. “We believe they will be a valuable partner to help us streamline our business office procedures and practices. They understand the challenges and opportunities we face and with their experience, the surgeons are able to focus on quality patient care, provide the latest in surgery techniques and shorten the patient’s recovery time.”

Anthelio will provide revenue cycle management services to SMC, collaborating with their executive management team and business unit staff to implement best practices for revenue cycle optimization. Anthelio provides a comprehensive suite of revenue cycle services designed to support and drive enhanced profitability for healthcare organizations. These services combine sophisticated, cutting-edge technology solutions with a team of highly skilled professionals who have deep expertise in healthcare revenue cycle management.

Anthelio recognizes that the revenue cycle is a complex system with different components that must be seamlessly integrated to achieve optimal savings and efficiencies. Consequently, the company offers an end-to-end continuum of IT, health information management, analytics and clinical transformation products for healthcare providers, allowing organizations to meet all of their technology needs from a single source.

“We are pleased to partner with Star Medical Center to help them enhance revenue opportunities and profitability by utilizing our advanced technology solutions,” said Asif Ahmad, CEO, Anthelio Healthcare Solutions. “As a leader in providing patients access to the latest technology and surgical techniques, SMC recognizes the importance of utilizing cutting-edge technologies in healthcare. We look forward to working closely with SMC to develop solid strategies that drive efficiency and profitability while supporting the excellent care they deliver,” he concluded.

Star Medical Center provides patients in the Plano, Texas, region access to advanced technologies and techniques, offering surgical services in spine, orthopedics, foot and ankle, ear, nose and throat, gynecology, and gastroenterology. Its physicians are highly trained, skilled specialists who are dedicated to providing exceptional patient services in a first-class environment. An affiliate of Lumin Health™ in Irving, Texas, Star Medical Center is associated with SpineCARE™, a nationally acclaimed, comprehensive spine center and OrthoCARE™, specialists in orthopedics, foot and ankle care, and sports medicine.

About Anthelio Healthcare Solutions

Anthelio® is a driving force in the healthcare industry and is the largest independent provider of healthcare technology solutions to hospitals, physician practice groups and other healthcare providers. By provisioning hospitals in over 450 counties across the US with innovative solutions in the areas of IT, EHR, HIM, Patient Engagement, Enterprise Interoperability (EI) and Healthcare Analytics & Informatics (HAI) services, Anthelio impacts quality care to over six million patients. Powered by cutting-edge technologies and thousands of healthcare professionals with extensive clinical and operational experience, Anthelio drives high value for over 20,000 physicians and nurses in hundreds of healthcare organizations supporting their annual revenue of over $12 billion. Anthelio is headquartered in Dallas, Texas. Visit www.antheliohealth.com for more information.