It’s hard to imagine a more alluring new-urban setting than one where TRI Pointe Homes grand-opens two seductive model homes today – not in Highlands, Berkeley, or Stapleton, but Platt Park, the area west of University of Denver where South Pearl Street has been a dining-tavern destination dating back to the time of streetcars.

Fast forward to 2014 and its not streetcars but Light Rail trains that arrive five blocks from where TRI Pointe has 29 sites for homes – five already sold in advance of today’s opening. Closer still is the corner of Pearl at Louisiana, where TRI Pointe neighbors in Platt Park North head for coffee and famous Duffeyrolls by morning – Village Cork and Hanson’s Grill by night; on the way to walkable eateries further south: Stella’s, Sushi Den, Uno Mas, Kaos Pizza and Gaia.

That’s just the start of what’s happening now in Platt Park, says Stephanie Graham with TRI Pointe, who’ll show you those two appealing models – both with two-car garages, very private outdoor living spaces, in a choice of historic architecture: English Revival, Craftsman, Mid-Century Modern. “We’re getting prospects that start out looking at older homes in West Wash Park, that are actually further from the park and from Whole Foods and Pub-on-Pearl than we are,” she added.

Meanwhile, TRI Pointe Sales Director Tina Martelon-Braunthal, who actually grew up in the neighborhood, points west to huge changes taking place on the Gates Rubber redevelopment site along South Broadway – Maria Empanada already open, a totally new streetscape coming to Broadway and Arizona, and new apartments all along the corridor.

Renters looking at the latter need to be checking out the pricing of Platt Park North, says Graham. “Rentals range from $2,200 to $3,000 a month, and at that range they should be considering buying here,” she adds. TRI-Pointe’s prices, which Graham says end up centered between the $600s and mid-$700s, will look particularly appealing to buyers who are shopping neighborhoods around Highlands, where these kinds of prices get you only a townhome without this space and features.

You’ll see VERY creative interiors – one imagined around male tastes, the other feminine – along with slab granite counters, large areas of engineered wood floors, spacious ‘owner’s entries’ from the garages, and upstairs laundries, all at the standard price. Buyers get some semi-custom options: one for a master retreat with a ‘spa’ bath with giant shower and designer tub; another for finished basement space that’ll take these designs to over 3,000 square feet finished.

Graham also has homes that can deliver soon – one that can be ready right away at $660,000. To put today’s opening together with South Pearl’s Sunday Farmer’s Market (9-to-1), exit I-25 southbound at Washington or northbound at Downing/Emerson and turn west on Louisiana, three blocks to S. Logan (at McKinley-Thatcher Elementary School), turn north to Arizona and then west to Grant, and north.

Grand opening, Platt Park North by TRI Pointe Homes; single-family homes 2,200-3,000 sq. ft. with 2-car attached garage, finished basement option, close to dining on South Pearl, Whole Foods market. 1112 S. Grant St, Denver, corner of S. Grant & Mississippi; from I-25 exit Washington or Downing/Emerson, west Louisiana 3 blks to S. Logan (at school), north 1 blk to Arizona, west 1 blk to Grant

From low $600s

303-802-1542

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him at mark@samuelsonassoc.com.You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns at DenverPost.com/RealEstate. Follow Mark Samuelson on Twitter: @marksamuelson