On Monday, Robert Wonsch was arrested at his home in Moore, after almost a dozen women came forward, saying he made unwanted advances at them and offered a reduced fee if they would comply.

OSBI investigators knew there could be several more victims out there and encouraged them to come forward. Now News 9 has learned an additional five women have called in, bringing the total number of victims to 16.

On Monday, Robert Wonsch was arrested at his home in Moore, after almost a dozen women came forward, saying he made unwanted advances at them and offered a reduced fee if they would comply.

On Tuesday the Cleveland county DA's office filed a total of 17 felony charges against him, including sexual battery, kidnapping, and engaging in lewdness. But now that more women have come forward, more charges could be coming.

“Now what we have to do next is do a thorough interview of them, to try to get times, dates, locations and more involved about what happened between the two,” said OSBI spokesperson Jessica Brown.

News 9 checked and Wonsch used to live in California. And while there he had his private investigator license revoked for acts of Dishonesty and Fraud. Court papers out of California state he was accused of giving false information about his work history and also admitted forging a signature.

Those who encountered him here in Oklahoma say he was dishonest with them too.

1/5/2016 Related Story: Process Server Accused Of Sex Crimes Charged With 17 Felony Counts

On his LinkedIn page, Robert Wonsch talks about being honorably discharged from the United States Marine Corp. and claims he is very good at serving people with court documents. But now many are saying he acted far from honorably when he was hired to do the job.

“He talked a good talk,” said Bobby Alsobrook, a local private investigator who says he hired Wonsch to be his Director of Training.

Alsobrook says he worked for him for about a month. Alsobrook says when he discovered Wonsch had cheated him out of thousands of dollars, he began to investigate and check their computers.

“And we found pictures of women that were nude, partially nude,” said Alsobrook.

Alsobook says he did a criminal background check on Wonsch, but found nothing.

Darcy Patron-Scoon is also a process server and says she had also heard complaints about Wonsch taking advantage of people both financially and sexually. And being a fellow Marine, she is disgusted by the allegations.

“He was operating in a security capacity, a private investigator capacity, a process server capacity, so we called CLEET, and discovered he didn’t have a license,” said Patron-Scoon.

She says she spent a month investigating all of the women seeking divorces who came in contact with Wonsch.

“And the crazy thing is, it sounds like he was there forever,” said Patron-Scoon. “But he was only there for like 4 weeks, I mean it was not a significant amount of time.”

And the OSBI says there may be more victims out there.

“We believe he was the lone perpetrator in these crimes,” said Jessica Brown with the OSBI.

Court papers filed this week show Wonch is currently facing 17 felony counts after more than a dozen women have come forward.

Wonsch is currently being held without bond at the Cleveland County jail.