Herman Cain on Tuesday said that forces aligned against Donald Trump Donald TrumpWhy superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders Young Turks host offers million for Trump, Sanders debate An all-female ticket? Not in 2016 MORE are trying to spook the GOP presidential front-runner's supporters by threatening convention "chaos."

“I believe that there is a chance that Trump will go to the convention with 1,237 delegates, which is the amount you need to get the nomination on the first ballot,” he told host Maria Bartiromo on Fox Business Network’s “Mornings with Maria."

ADVERTISEMENT

“The anti-Trump movement wants people to believe that he’s going to come up short,” Cain added. "The anti-Trump movement wants people to believe that there’s going to be chaos at the convention.

“They’re doing everything they can to try and scare people from voting for Trump. All they’re doing is they’re trying to disrupt the Trump momentum. It’s not working.”

Cain said the anti-Trump coalition is composed of Democrats, establishment Republicans and "some people out there want America to stay where it is or go backwards.”

He added that some in the media are "spoon-feeding the negative perceptions of Trump."

“He’s attacked on a daily basis from multiple sources," Cain, a 2012 GOP presidential candidate, said. "If you’re going to attack me on a daily basis from multiple fronts, I’m going to counter attack. That’s what he’s doing.”

Trump leads the Republican field with 736 delegates, according to the latest RealClearPolitics count. Sen. Ted Cruz Ted CruzWhat happens when the GOP base abandons the party platform? Fiorina returns to attack Clinton's 'lust for power' Trump clinches GOP nomination MORE (R-Texas) ranks second with 463 delegates while Gov. John Kasich (R-Ohio) has 143 delegates.

Establishment Republicans opposing Trump have repeatedly teased a contested convention in Cleveland next July as a means of blocking him from the nomination. Trump has predicted “riots” if he is kept from the party’s presidential mantle despite his lead in delegates and voter support.