Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share The national weather forecast for Thursday, May 19th calls for more wet weather in the South, light showers in New England and in the Pacific Northwest. Meanwhile, the Midwest will see some pleasant, but cooler, weather.

Buy Photo Alex Gecan, new APP reporter —May 02, 2016 -Neptune, NJ.-Staff photographer/Bob Bielk/Asbury Park Press (Photo: Bob Bielk/Asbury Park Press)Buy Photo

Partly sunny forecast for Thursday

A little milder in DC, 70 degrees. Upper 60s in New York.

Alex Gecan joins APP's breaking news team

He used to be a recreational triathlete but now he mostly runs to wherever the news is breaking, or back and forth between the coffee machine and his computer.

Jersey Shore tourism; nobody's in charge

The Jersey Shore Convention & Visitors Bureau has no funding, no executive director and no website, leaving the promotion of the Shore's tourism industry to Monmouth and Ocean counties – and individual towns and businesses.

Lakewood rejects 'monster' building downtown

In the end, a developer’s plans to elevate part of the downtown shopping district never got off the ground. The proposal called for demolishing an existing row of storefronts and second-floor apartments at First Street and Clifton Avenue and replacing the building with a five-story, retail and office complex.

WATCH: Trump flags keep flying; charges dropped

Joseph Hornick will be able to fly his Trump political flags at his West Long Branch home without retribution, after the borough municipal prosecutor on Wednesday dismissed a summons alleging he violated a borough ordinance.

UnitedHealthcare dumps NJ Obamacare plan

UnitedHealthcare will stop selling its Oxford health insurance plans on New Jersey's individual Obamacare exchange, the company said Wednesday, as part of a strategy to leave markets where it is losing money. The decision will leave about 10,794 customers, or 3.7 percent of New Jersey's individual market, searching for a new insurer for 2017.

Clinton wins Ky.; Sanders, Trump take Oregon

Hillary Clinton defeated Bernie Sanders in the Kentucky presidential primary Tuesday night, the state Democratic party said. In Oregon, Sanders was declared the victor with about 60% of the vote counted.

Millions more Americans to be eligible for overtime pay

Moving to fatten low- and middle-income paychecks that have languished for years, the Obama administration on Tuesday unveiled a long-awaited rule that will make millions of Americans newly eligible for overtime pay.

Biggest winners and losers from the NBA draft lottery

As the ping pong balls were selected Tuesday night at the NBA draft lottery in New York, the fate of 14 NBA franchises rested in the balance. But as players, coaches and fans waited anxiously, the odds proved true and the previously determined lottery order saw no changes.

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Tn9eSi