He stopped short of declaring that he's running for president, but Ben Carson promised Monday he'd bring a no-holds-barred conservatism to the campaign trail. And he vowed to never – ever – soft-pedal his views to avoid giving offense.

"I hate political correctness, and I will never yield to the PC police," Carson told about 250 people at the Palm Beach Republican Club. And he delivered in a 39-minute speech, delivered without notes, and about 10 minutes of answering audience questions.

Carson wants:

•Much tougher U.S. action to combat Islamic State, known as ISIS. He said the desire by many citizens and officials to avoid extensive U.S. military involvement is "a very immature attitude." Carson said he "would even be in favor of capturing and controlling the oil wells in those areas."

"The best time to exterminate [ISIS] it is now. If we wait two or three years it's going to be much bigger, much more complex and much harder to eradicate," he said. But he thinks President Barack Obama may not even see the threat. The only way to change his mind, Carson said, might be a "brain transplant."

•Stronger American leadership, in contrast to what he sees as lacking under Obama.

"America as the pinnacle nation in the world has the responsibility of leadership. And when we don't lead, it's like having a third-grade class with no teacher. All kinds of things start erupting all over the place."

•A public that's serious about what is really important.

"We have dumbed things down. …You look at what we emphasize in our society: sports, entertainment, lifestyles of the rich and famous. Everybody knows who's on 'Dancing With the Stars' and who's playing in the game," he said. "I'm not anti-sports and entertainment by any stretch of the imagination, but we've got to learn to put our priorities in the right place."

Carson didn't offer many detailed policy prescriptions. He said the size of the federal government is "way too big" and must be trimmed. One suggestion: don't replace the thousands of federal workers who retire each year.

He wants more school choice. The "best-educated" students are those who are home schooled, Carson said. Next best are private schools, then charter schools. "Finally we get to public schools," he said.

He said Obama's proposal for free community college is "ridiculous." He said poor students can already get federal grants. For others, there is another way to finance college: "It's called work."

Carson, a retired Baltimore pediatric neurosurgeon who now lives in Palm Beach County, burst onto the political radar with a critique of Obamacare at the 2013 speech at the National Prayer Breakfast.

The Palm Beach Republican Club burst into applause and cheers when he suggested a presidential candidacy is likely, responding this way to an audience question: "My preference was a nice, peaceful retirement. …But honestly, my whole life, my professional life, has been dedicated to the welfare of children. And when I look at their future, at the rate that we're going, there is no way I can sit back and relax."

He earlier told reporters that an exploratory committee to assess the viability of a presidential candidacy could come in March. That's a legal step that allows a potential candidate to raise and spend money; people who form exploratory committees virtually never decide against running.

aman@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4550