Contact: Robin L. Rivett

President

Pacific Legal Foundation

rlr@pacificlegal.org

(916) 419-7111





PLF ranked a “Best Law Firm” by U.S. News — Best Lawyers ®



SACRAMENTO, CA; November 1, 2013: For the fourth consecutive year, Pacific Legal Foundation is ranked a “Tier 1 Best Law Firm” on the U.S. News — Best Lawyers ® list, the world’s leading survey of lawyers.

The 2014 rankings, based on surveys of more than 12,000 attorneys nationwide and nearly 7,000 clients, are posted at: http://bestlawfirms.usnews.com. PLF is listed under “Metropolitan Tier 1” rankings, in the “Sacramento” category, for “Eminent Domain and Condemnation Law.”

To be considered for ranking, a firm must have at least one lawyer listed in the 19th Edition of The Best Lawyers in America ©, which recognizes the top four percent of attorneys in the U.S. PLF Director of Litigation James S. Burling is so listed, reflecting his renown as an expert and U.S. Supreme Court litigator in the areas of property rights and eminent domain law.

The U.S. News — Best Lawyers ® “Best Law Firms” rankings are based on a rigorous evaluation process that includes the collection of client and lawyer evaluations, peer review from leading attorneys in their field, and review of additional information provided by law firms as part of the formal submission process.

“PLF is honored by this recognition of our leading role in the legal defense of Americans' property rights,” said PLF President Rob Rivett. “Our ‘Best Law Firm' designation is also a tribute to our thousands of donors. We're a public interest legal organization, and our donors make our work possible. They allow us to stand up for people who can't afford to defend themselves — and to go to courts nationwide in defense of constitutional freedoms without ever charging clients a penny.

“This recognition is a fitting way to commemorate PLF's 40th anniversary year, which is drawing to a close,” Rivett continued. “This year saw major PLF victories for property rights at all levels of the judiciary — capped by our precedent-setting victory at the U.S. Supreme Court in Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Management District. In this historic decision — PLF's seventh straight direct-representation victory at the High Court — the justices held for the first time that people's money is part of their ‘property' protected by the Takings Clause from extortionate demands by land use regulators.”

Steven Naifeh, President and Co-Founder of Best Lawyers, explained the comprehensive research behind the rankings, and the status they accord: “Because we combine hard data with peer reviews and client assessments, more and more clients inform us ours are the most thorough, accurate, and helpful rankings of law firms ever developed.”

About U.S. News & World Report

U.S. News & World Report is a multi-platform publisher of news and analysis, which includes the digital-only U.S. News Weekly magazine, www.usnews.com, and www.rankingsandreviews.com. Focusing on health, personal finance, education, travel, cars, and public service/opinion, U.S. News has earned a reputation as the leading provider of service news and information that improves the quality of life of its readers. U.S. News & World Report's signature franchise includes its News You Can Use ® brand of journalism and its annual “Best” series of consumer web guides and publications that include rankings of colleges, graduate schools, hospitals, mutual funds, health plans, and more.

About Best Lawyers

Best Lawyers is the world's oldest and most respected attorney ranking service. For more than 30 years, Best Lawyers has assisted those in need of legal services to identify the attorneys best qualified to represent them in distant jurisdictions or unfamiliar specialties. Best Lawyers lists are published in leading local, regional, and national publications across the globe. The Best Lawyers in America list recognizes the very best lawyers in each practice area and metropolitan region in the country.

About Pacific Legal Foundation

Donor-supported Pacific Legal Foundation is the leading legal watchdog organization that litigates for limited government, property rights, and a balanced approach to environmental regulations, in courts across the country. This year marks PLF's 40th anniversary.