Topics: AlterNet, Democratic Party, Harry Reid, Libertarianism, libertarians, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, Elections News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

If the Democrats control the Senate after November, Majority Leader Harry Reid might want to send thank you notes to a bunch of relatively unknown Libertarians, who, with little money and a big dependence on free YouTube videos and Facebook posts, are undercutting mainstream Republican candidates in seven states.

The Washington Post says the upstarts—Sean Haugh, Roger Roots, John Buckley, Robert Sarvis, Thom Walker, Nathan LaFrance, and Mark Fish or Dave Patterson—are attracting needed Republican votes. Who are they? A few are a bit nutty, but also appealing in perverse political ways. One is beyond creepy and should crawl back under the snake-infested rock where he came. The rest spew the party’s well-known anti-government lines. Let’s take a closer look, starting with the most intriguing.

1. North Carolina’s Sean Haugh. Is he really a pizza delivery man running a campaign based entirely on YouTube videos? He seems to be exactly that, drinking a different craft beer as he delivers his folksy bromides from a basement bar stool. The WaPo said that he has raised $4,000, a fraction of one bitcoin, and recent polls give Haugh 8-to-11 percent of the vote. That showing boosts prospects for the Democratic incumbent, Sen. Kay Hagan, against her GOP rival, North Carolina House Speaker Thom Tillis.

But enough with the horse race—what about those videos? Well, they’re charming, and Haugh sounds almost sane as he lands on right-wing stances. This one, posted on July 9, is typical. Sitting next to a drained pint glass of Peacemaker beer, Haugh shares his thoughts on gun control laws:

“I’m not your typical Second Amendment absolutist. I don’t like guns. I am committed to living a non-violent life. And that includes keeping weapons out of it as much as possible. You will not bring a gun into my home or my car. I want to end violence in every aspect of our lives. Now, not having a gun is my choice. I will be happy to tell you about my choice all day and all night long…

“But as a Libertarian, I know that trying to force others to make that choice does not work. Like what? I’m going to hold a government gun to your head because guns are bad? That makes no sense.”

If a lot of politics comes down to voting for who you want to have a beer with, Haugh certainly is that candidate. In fact, if you watch enough of his videos, he begins to look somewhatbuzzed most of the time. He’s never drinking the same beer twice.

2. Montana’s Roger Roots. Now that we’ve had some fun, it’s time to be scared. In the late 1990s, Roots sued Montana Human Rights Watch for libel because they said that he was an organizer for the Klu Klux Klan in Billings. An appeals court threw out Roots’ lawsuit, but not without citing even more alarming facts about his background in a lower court’s ruling:

“[He] authored a publication entitled Whites and Blacks 100 Facts (and One Lie), which is advertised for sale nationally. The publication lists “facts” about African-Americans, such as: blacks have low I.Q.’s due to small foreheads; they have never invented anything; and they are more likely to have syphilis than whites. [Roots] is a columnist in the Jubilee, wherein one of his columns states that the Holocaust was a hoax.”

That Court ruled Roots could not sue for libel because he was a public figure. Today, he still is a public figure. The Montana Newspaper Association and Montana PBS included Roots in a statewide debate for 2014 U.S. Senate candidates. In this YouTube clip, just posted by The Billings Gazette, it took about 20 seconds for Root to show how little he’s moderated his views. Roots attacked the Democratic incumbent, Sen. John Walsh, and the Republican challenger, Rep. Steve Daines, over federal spending.

“The main focus shouldn’t be so much on earmarks, specifically, it’s on the spending: the wreckless and irresponsible spending of these two government supremacist parties. Both of these man on stage spend like drunken sailors. Some people say that that is an insult to drunken sailors, because at least drunken sailors are spending their own money.”

Did we forget to mention that Roots also is a two-time felon, including gun convictions? MtCowGirl.com predicts he’ll draw support from the state’s Tea Party voters.

3. West Virginia’s John Buckley. Compared to the Wild West, the Libertarian running in West Virginia is almost sane. John Buckley is an ex-state legislator from Virginia and has worked for a gamut of right-wing think tanks: American Conservative Union, Cato Institute, and George Mason University’s Law and Economics Center. The WaPo noted that he once made Rolling Stone’scover, holding a Ronald Reagan bumper sticker.

In announcing his candidacy, Buckley espoused a “limited governent… live and let live” philosophy for solving big problems. He then compared West Virginia to the enslaved districts in the Hunger Games books and movies, which surely will make voters back home feel good about themselves and him. Here’s what Buckley said:

“Did you ever see “The Hunger Games”? Sometimes, it seems that Washington, D.C., is the same as the “Capitol” of Panem, administering West Virginia and our sister states just like the “districts” in the Hunger Games. The seemingly benevolent dictators in Washington, D.C., think they know what’s best for us and, in regulating us so minutely, they keep us from thriving on our own. They set us against each other, all while the lobbyists in the capital city just get wealthier and wealthier at our expense.”