JENNIFER DEAL: Like everyone else in corporate America, most executives have a lot of meetings they have to attend, either virtually or in person. But not all of these meetings are as efficient or productive as they need to be. Because of their position and level of power relative to others, executives can do a lot to help improve meetings by taking three (relatively) simple steps.

Don’t be part of the problem. Be on time. This may sound basic, but as the senior person it is very important that you show up on time for meetings because it demonstrates that you value others’ time. Also, the meeting really won’t start until you’re there anyway, even if they’ve already started talking.

If there are pre-reads for the meeting, make sure you’ve done them. Just as showing up late delays everyone, not having done your homework wastes meeting time. You may say that you didn’t have time to get to it, and you may be right. You may believe that it is OK to take time in the meeting to be caught up on the relevant information because your time is more valuable than theirs (and you may be right in that your hourly rate is higher), but not being prepared wastes the time of everyone in the meeting, and contributes to a culture where not being prepared for meetings is acceptable. And that inefficiency will affect you as well.

Stop talking. As an executive, people will often look for cues from you as to what they should be thinking. If you want to hear the ideas of the room, you should be quiet and not express a strong opinion that will undoubtedly shape the conversation.

Make sure others aren’t part of the problem. Just as you should show up on time having prepared adequately for the meeting, so should others at the meeting. If they are late or unprepared and you let it slide, others will come to the conclusion that behavior is acceptable and will behave with that in mind in the future.

Similarly, if you want everyone to participate in a meeting, make sure that “airtime” isn’t all taken by one or two people. You know who the people are who feel a need to talk a lot. If you want the meeting to include all participants, don’t let them dominate. While you might believe that everyone should feel as if they can speak up whenever they feel a need, the reality is that often people feel shut out in meetings because of a couple of people who simply won’t shut up. If you’re the person with the most power in the room, you have the authority to redirect the conversation in such a way to prevent it being inappropriately dominated by a few voices. And if you don’t it sends the message that you think it is OK for the meeting to be dominated by a couple of people.

Make sure your staff follows best practices for meeting including making sure each meeting has:

n A clear, defined purpose, whether it is decision making or information sharing or juggling. Meetings that are primarily for political posturing or catching up should be discouraged.

n An agenda organized to get to the most important items. While some believe that making meetings shorter makes them more efficient, not completing important issues just results in more meetings.

n All information and all people necessary to achieve the meeting’s goal are present. There’s no point in having a meeting if the key personnel can’t attend.

While following these recommendations won’t fix all that ails meetings (humans are humans after all), an executive following them and encouraging staff in their span of control follow them would significantly improve the efficiency of their meetings, and would hopefully have a ripple effect to improve meetings throughout the organization.

Jennifer Deal is a senior research scientist at the Center for Creative Leadership and an affiliated research scientist at the Center for Effective Organizations at the University of Southern California.

Read the latest Leadership Report.