Two Lakeland men were arrested after shots were fired into a home this morning, Lakeland police said.

Police received a report about 7:34 a.m. about shots fired into a house in the 1300 block of Golconda Road. The caller reported seeing two black men shooting into the house, then fleeing in a white vehicle occupied by two other black men.

According to police, one man fired into the home’s east side with a .38 caliber revolver, while another man fired into the west side of the building with a .380 caliber handgun.

Officers at the scene learned the home’s occupant, a 50-year-old man, had been sleeping in his bed with his girlfriend when he was struck in both feet by one of the shots. The victim was treated at the scene and taken to Lakeland Regional Medical Center with non-life-threatening injuries.

There were three adults and six children in the house at the time, according to police.

A police officer saw a vehicle matching the description of the suspect car on North Florida Avenue. The officer followed the car until backup arrived, then he executed a traffic stop. The left rear passenger of the vehicle, Mario Fernando Garrett Jr., 18, fled on foot after the vehicle was stopped, but was caught after a short chase, police said. Officers found a .380 handgun close to the capture point, police said.

The witness who reported the shooting was brought to the vehicle, and although he could not identify the vehicle’s occupants as the shooters, he did identify the vehicle, so it was impounded as evidence, police said.

Inside the vehicle, police said they found a .38 caliber handgun.

The driver of the vehicle was identified as Shawndell Artist, 34, and the front seat passenger and vehicle’s owner was identified as Joseph Kelly, 34, police said. The right rear passenger was identified as Antonio Pouncey, 21.

During interviews, police said they learned Garrett and Pouncey had asked to be taken by the victim’s home. After stopping across the street from the residence, Garrett and Pouncey exited the vehicle, and Pouncey asked Artist to “hold on” while they walked to the residence. Shortly thereafter, Artist said he heard shots being fired and saw Garrett and Pouncey running back to the vehicle holding handguns.

Both subjects got into the back seat of the vehicle and told Artist to drive out of the area. While driving, Artist said he told Garrett and Pouncey that they needed to get out of the vehicle but they refused. Shortly thereafter, the vehicle was stopped by police.

Detectives said the shooting appeared to be the result of a disagreement between the victim and Pouncey and not gang-related.

Garrett was charged with Shooting into an occupied dwelling, resisting arrest without violence, and violation of probation, F3.

Pouncey was charted with Shooting into an occupied dwelling, and aggravated battery with a deadly weapon, F2.

They were taken to the Polk County Jail.