After multiple hurricanes battered the state and caused billions of dollars in damage a decade ago, property insurers fled Florida, leaving a majority of homeowners with no coverage option but a taxpayer-backed entity created by the Legislature. Their reason: to not lose money.

This month, state insurance regulators announced that 15 health insurers have petitioned for an average rate hike of 17.7 percent on plans offered through the Affordable Care Act. That comes after the state endorsed a 9.6 percent rate increase last year. Their reason: to not lose money.

Now, four life insurance companies — United Insurance Co. of America, Reliable Life Insurance Co., Mutual Savings Life Insurance Co. and Reserve National Insurance Co. — are suing Chief Financial Officer Jeff Atwater's office over a new state law that requires them to search federal death records back to 1992, and annually going forward, to determine if any policyholders had died and if so, to locate their beneficiaries to pay the claim. Their reason: to not lose money.

In April Atwater and former state insurance commissioner Kevin McCarty appeared on “60 Minutes” to explain how companies had not paid death benefits even though they knew a policyholder had died and the policy was in good standing. Insurers cancelled policies, and kept the money, when beneficiaries did not file claims, often because they didn't know they existed.

Atwater told “60 Minutes” audits uncovered hundreds of thousands of policies dating to the 1960s, worth billions of dollars, that were not paid. McCarty called it “unconscionable, indefensible behavior.” “It's tantamount to stealing,” McCarty said.

Tallahassee lawyer Barry Richard, representing the insurers in the lawsuit, counters that the new law is unfair because the legal burden has always been on beneficiaries. To go back a quarter-century would be costly and unfair, he told WFSU.

Sorry, but people pay insurers so they can find help at the most miserable times of their lives. By and large most insurers do the right thing. Yet on this issue, these companies have knowingly profited for years off unsuspecting folks, and now they're complaining that they don't want to take the time and expense to give them their due. Regarding this lawsuit, we borrow from McCarty: unconscionable and indefensible about sums it up.