The Supreme Court upheld the Affordable Care Act almost three years ago, and health care companies began racing to get bigger, broader and better. Any chance patients will benefit, too?

Last week, Tenet Healthcare Corp. of Dallas said it would pay $2 billion including debt for a majority stake in what will be the nation’s largest group of outpatient surgery centers.

CEO Trevor Fetter called the deal “a transformative event,” which is saying something for a company that’s been transforming for a while.

Since 2011, Tenet has nearly doubled revenue to $16.6 billion as it added 30 hospitals and beefed up business from outpatient work and health management services. Tenet also owns over 550 physician practices, up from about 150, and has six insurance plans.

The expansion strategy has helped boost Tenet’s market value by more than $2 billion in three years.

The deal will double Tenet’s number of free-standing clinics to over 400 and add some sizzle to its profits. Margins at the facilities operated by United Surgical Partners International were over three times higher than Tenet margins last year.

Tenet has been buying, building and partnering so aggressively that an analyst asked whether the company has any appetite left for more.

“We’re in an unparalleled environment, at least in my 20 years of experience,” Fetter said. “And it would be a mistake to sit this period out.”

Consolidation is being driven by several trends in health reform. Since Obamacare, millions more people have access to insurance and health coverage. Employers and government are pushing hard to slow the growth in health costs without harming the quality of care.

That’s led to a push for accountable care organizations and bundling health payments rather than paying a fee for each service. In that scheme, the key is to get patients to the right provider at the right time; say, a doctor’s office instead of the emergency room or an outpatient surgery center instead of a hospital.

The health care landscape has changed significantly, Fetter said, and its evolution is still in the early stages. Tenet is committed “to invest in the faster-growing, higher-margin, less capital-intensive segments of health care,” he said.

The United Surgical Partners deal, expected to close in the third quarter, gives Tenet a platform to grow the segment even faster. Almost two-thirds of outpatient surgery centers nationwide are owned by small, independent firms and facilities. So the business is ripe for consolidation as doctors look for business partners to help with compliance and technology, and ensure they’re included in large insurance networks.

There’s “a robust pipeline of acquisitions” and new opportunities, said Bill Wilcox, CEO of United Surgical Partners.Partnership modelSurgery centers from Tenet and United Surgical Partners will be combined into a joint venture that will keep the United Surgical Partners name and its top executives. But Tenet plans to buy the remaining stake in the group by 2020 at an additional price estimated at $1.5 billion.

Tenet approached United Surgical Partners, in part because it pioneered a three-way partnership model in the late 1990s. Management, physicians and health systems participate in the venture, and Tenet execs said the collaborative approach would be more sustainable in the new world of health care.

United Surgical Partners, based in Dallas, has 202 surgery centers and 16 short-stay surgery hospitals. Most are jointly owned with not-for-profit systems, such as Baylor Scott & White in Dallas and Memorial Hermann in Houston.

About a quarter of United Surgical Partners facilities are in the Dallas and Houston areas, branded with names such as Baylor Surgicare at Plano and Baylor Medical Center at Uptown. They often do knee arthroscopy, knee replacement and spine surgeries — procedures that used to be done in hospitals.

Hospital consolidation usually doesn’t help consumers. When hospitals merge in already concentrated markets, prices generally rise, sometimes over 20 percent, according to the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.‘A big if’But outpatient surgery centers are a lower-cost option, saving up to $1,000 per case, according to a study published in Health Affairs in May 2014. Procedures take about 30 minutes less on average, and even the most vulnerable patients get high-quality care, the study said.

The Tenet deal has the potential to be good for patients and reduce costs, said Dan Mendelson, CEO of Avalere Health, a Washington consulting firm.

“But there’s a big if — if Tenet really improves the coordination of care,” he said.

That hinges on how Tenet integrates the new company and future clinics. Other health systems have made progress with outpatient facilities in primary care, imaging and surgery, he said.

Tenet is already all in. Analysts recently asked how much Tenet would spend on the outpatient business.

“I kept saying, ‘As much as possible,’” Fetter said.

Follow Mitchell Schnurman on Twitter at @mitchschnurman.