New Glucose Screening Guidelines Raise Questions

Revised federal recommendations for blood glucose screenings do not address costs and are prompting questions about how the service can practically be implemented.

The pool of candidates for blood glucose screenings has widened.



The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) last month issued new guidelines recommending that adults aged 40 to 70 years who are overweight or obese be screened for abnormal blood glucose as part of their cardiovascular risk assessment.







Michael Pignone, MD

The final recommendation by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), an independent group of experts, confirm that because of the Affordable Care Act, issuers must cover, without cost sharing, screening for abnormal blood glucose as part of cardiovascular risk assessment in adults aged 40 to 70 years who are overweight or obese. After screening, patients with abnormal glucose will also be referred to intensive behavioral counseling, which insurers will also cover without cost sharing.

According to the task force, patients should be screened even if they're asymptomatic. If patients are found to have high blood sugar, they "should be referred to intensive behavioral counseling interventions to promote a healthy diet and regular exercise."The new guidelines are an update of a 2008 USPSTF recommendation which called for screening for diabetes in asymptomatic adults with hypertension. But since then, USPSTF says that six new studies have shown "consistent benefit of lifestyle modifications to prevent or delay progression to diabetes and longer-term follow-up has increased confidence that such interventions can improve clinical outcomes."In light of these new studies, USPSTF says it has now concludes that there is "moderate net benefit to measuring blood glucose in adults who are at increased risk for diabetes."In publishing the recommendations in Annals of Internal Medicine , USPSTF says it "does not consider the costs of providing a service in this assessment" and "recognizes that clinical decisions involve more considerations than evidence alone." Even so, such recommendations raise practical questions about how screenings might be implemented in clinical practice, and of course, how it would be paid for.When asked about how such services might be covered, an HHS spokesperson told HealthLeaders Media via email that:



HealthLeaders also reached out to Michael Pignone, MD, a member of the task force and a professor at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, to discuss. The transcript below has been lightly edited.



HLM: How would mass screenings work practically? Only by clinicians' referral? Or can an overweight/obese person request testing on their own?