Dental student Rebecca Harper cleans the teeth of Kylie Allen, 5, of Moncks Corner, at the MUSC Dental Clinic. The clinic will accept adult Medicaid patients on Dec. 1 which may make it easier for patients in Charleston to make appointments than adults with Medicaid cards in other parts of the state.

Some 300,000 adults in South Carolina - many of whom likely haven't seen a dentist in years - will become eligible for routine dental work through Medicaid on Dec. 1. Annual cleanings, fillings and X-rays for adults will be covered by the state for the first time ever.

Apply for Medicaid online, apply.scdhhs.gov, or call 1-888-549-0820. To find a dentist who will accept adult Medicaid patients starting Dec. 1 in South Carolina, visit www.dentaquest.com.

Technically, there are plenty of dentists in South Carolina to meet this new demand - there are already 1,400 of them who treat children enrolled in Medicaid. But relatively few have agreed to see adults with low-income health insurance cards.

"It's not because we're greedy or money hungry," said Andrew Schweiger, who owns three dental practices in Columbia. "It's because we can't afford to do dentistry at a loss."

Medicaid will pay dentists $22 for an annual cleaning. Private insurance companies pay twice that much, Schweiger said. Medicaid pays $69 for a simple tooth extraction. Most private insurance companies reimburse $175 for the same procedure. Medicaid is also capping the amount of work it will pay for each patient each year - no more than $750 worth of preventative services per person in 12 months.

Even so, South Carolina expects to spend $35 million on the new benefits this fiscal year, the bulk of which will be covered by the federal government.

"They did the right thing by adding preventative services ... but the problem is you're not going to find people to treat them at the existing rates," Schweiger said. "I think sometimes people forget that health care providers are small business owners."

More than 2,000 dentists are currently practicing in South Carolina, according to a 2012 report by the state's Office of Healthcare Workforce Analysis and Planning. The Medicaid agency polled 700 dentists who already treat children enrolled in the program and fewer than 300 indicated that they will accept new adult Medicaid patients on Dec. 1.

The department believes they can realistically serve about 150,000 of the new patients, a spokeswoman said. The remaining 150,000 may find it difficult to make an appointment.

"We are concerned about that, but we will continue to reach out to dentists and encourage them to see our beneficiaries," said Deirdra Singleton, the agency's deputy director.

Singleton said the rates established for these new dental benefits are competitive compared with other state Medicaid programs, but that the agency will consider increasing reimbursement in the future, as needed. "We'll just continue to work with our dental association," she said.

Phil Latham, executive director of the South Carolina Dental Association, said he doesn't know how many dentists in South Carolina will participate.

"My feeling is this - and this is just my feeling - I think that as (dentists) see the program and how it works, I think more and more will continue to sign up," he said.

Medicaid patients in Charleston may find it easier to schedule their first dental visit than patients in other parts of the state because the dental school at the Medical University of South Carolina will accept Medicaid cards at its clinic.

"We're in Charleston. We're one entity. We can't cover the entire state," said Dr. Mark Barry, associate dean for clinical affairs at the MUSC College of Dental Medicine. "I believe that there are enough dentists. I think the question is will there be enough providers? Will the dentists that are practicing all over the state, are they willing to sign up to be providers? That's the key question."

This puts South Carolina in a position similar to some states that recently expanded Medicaid eligibility under the Affordable Care Act - too many new patients, too few doctors who will treat them.

A Kaiser Health News report published Tuesday highlighted how Medicaid expansion has exacerbated Nevada's physician shortage. Medicaid enrollment in Reno doubled since Jan. 1 because the state expanded eligibility, but there aren't enough doctors to see the newly insured patients.

Unlike Nevada, South Carolina leaders will not increase the income limit for Medicaid as prescribed by Obamacare, but benefits for some of the existing 1.1 million patients enrolled in the program here are becoming more robust. Not only will adults become eligible for preventative dental care on Dec. 1, but the state agency also plans to start covering nutrition counseling for obese Medicaid patients early next year.

But new benefits present supply and demand shortcomings. For example, the federal government issued a new rule this year that states need to cover comprehensive autism services for children enrolled in Medicaid. South Carolina is trying to comply with that order, the Medicaid director explained last month, even though too few licensed providers in the state offer these services.

The difference here, though, is that there are enough dentists in South Carolina to meet the new Medicaid demand. "There is tons of capacity out there. There are a lot of dentists that are not filling their chairs up right now," Schweiger said. "It all comes down to economics."

Reach Lauren Sausser at 937-5598.