BOSTON - Gov. Deval Patrick on Wednesday signed a law requiring that 17-year-olds be treated as juveniles in the Massachusetts criminal justice system, saying it's "a great day" that they will no longer be treated as adults.

Although they are not legally adults in other contexts, 17-year-olds have been considered adults in criminal courts, including for the purposes of arraignments and sentences. Years ago, high levels of juvenile offenses prompted many states to begin prosecuting teenagers in adult courts.

Now, sentiment has changed in many states including Massachusetts.

The new law passed with bipartisan support in the state Legislature and takes effect immediately. It makes Massachusetts the 39th state, along with the federal government and the District of Columbia, to classify defendants less than 18 as juveniles in the courts.

Northwestern District Attorney David E. Sullivan said it's "a recipe for disaster" to combine 17-year-olds with adults in the justice system because they are not mature enough and their brains are less developed. About 100 or so 17-year-olds are charged with crimes each year in Franklin and Hampshire counties, Sullivan said.

"It's a tremendous step forward to treat 17-year-olds in the juvenile system so they can get the right rehabilitation, the right care and not be mixed in with adults," said Sullivan, who attended the bill signing by the governor. "Moving forward, any 17-year-old in our system will now have a better chance and a more hopeful chance of getting rehabilitation and to move on with their lives without an adult conviction."

Under the new law, if 17-year-olds are convicted of certain violent crimes, a juvenile court judge can still impose an adult sentence.

The new law provides for 17-year-olds to be sent to the custody of the state Department of Youth Services instead of a prison or jail; 17-year-olds will no longer receive an adult criminal record.

Patrick filed a bill in January to raise the jurisdiction of the juvenile courts to 18. Legislators have also filed such bills, including Senate Minority Leader Bruce Tarr and state Rep. Brad Hill, an Ipswich Republican, who both attended the bill signing, along with Democratic sponsors such as state Sen. Karen Spilka and state Rep. Kay Khan.

Judge Michael F. Edgerton, chief justice of the state's juvenile courts, said that in 2012, about 3,400 17-year-olds were charged with crimes in district courts, equating to a total of 7,300 charges. Those charges will now go to juvenile courts.

Probation officers in juvenile courts are involved with the families and the schools, he said. Probation officers make sure juveniles get services, he said.

Edgerton said there is some serious juvenile crime in Hampden county.

In Hampden county last year, there were 314 arraignments of 17 year olds in

adult courts, with charges totaling 805. In Springfield District Court,

there were 193 arraignments of 17 year olds; in Holyoke District, 115 and in

Hampden Superior Court, six.