Reuters Hillary Clinton talks with ABC News anchor Diane Sawyer for her first television interview in conjunction with the release of her new book titled “Hard Choices” in this photo taken in Washington June 5.

How did Bill and Hillary Clinton go from being “dead broke” to well off? The Washington Post writes about Bill Clinton’s lucrative speaking career, reporting that he began delivering paid speeches just two weeks after exiting the Oval Office. The Post found that Bill Clinton has been paid nearly $105 million for 542 speeches around the world between January 2001 and January 2013, when Hillary Clinton stepped down as secretary of state. Records of the former first lady’s earnings aren’t publicly available but the Post cites executives familiar with her speeches saying her standard fee is $200,000 and up. The article comes in the wake of controversial comments by Hillary Clinton about her family’s financial situation.

Time to act: A growing number of House Democrats wants President Barack Obama to take immediate steps to rein in deportations from the U.S. Obama has delayed any executive action on the issue to allow House Speaker John Boehner more time to move on immigration reform this summer. But as the Hill writes, more Democrats want Obama to expedite a response in the name of keeping immigrant families together.

Olive branch: The Wall Street Journal writes Senate Finance Committee Chairman Ron Wyden has opened the door to including Republican-backed spending cuts in a plan to keep thousands of transportation projects going this summer. The Journal said the approach appeared designed to ease tensions and open up talks with the House, where lawmakers had rejected an earlier Wyden plan, saying it relied too much on tax revenue.

End run: A handful of House Democrats have written to incoming Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy for a meeting about a bipartisan path for helping the long-term unemployed. The Fiscal Times writes the move appears to be an attempt to end-run House Speaker John Boehner, who has blocked prior efforts to renew an extension of federal long-term unemployment benefits. Those benefits expired in December 2013.

So much for Obamacare not working: Paul Krugman writes in the New York Times that information about the Affordable Care Act keeps coming in, and almost all the news is good. He writes that health reform has been on a roll since March, when it became clear that enrollment would exceed expectations despite the problems with the federal website. By his count, enemies of the health-care law made at least six predictions about how it would fail, and every one turned out wrong.

Want to read the latest and most interesting stories and analysis to come out of D.C.? Subscribe to the WSJ’s email newsletter, Capital Journal Daybreak.

– Robert Schroeder

Follow @mktwrobs



Follow @capitolreport

More must-reads from MarketWatch:

Clinton’s money gaffes becoming a campaign hurdle

Hillary Clinton removes ‘dead broke’ from her repertoire

Forget stock chatter, pay attention to Treasury yields

‘Dreaded conflict’ for the Fed: slower growth and faster inflation