WASHINGTON, June 12 (UPI) -- The Federal Trade Commission announced it settled charges against a Portland, Ore., man who raised more than $100,000 for a board game that he never produced, the first move of its kind aimed at restricting scams on unregulated crowdfunding Internet sites.

The FTC said Erik Chevalier raised $122,000 through Kickstarter to produce a board game called "The Doom That Came to Atlantic City" that had been created by two prominent board-game artists. When the game never materialized more than a year later, he promised to return funds to backers, most who pledged $75 or more. The FTC said he had never hired a board-game artist and never returned the money, instead using it for rent and other personal expenses.

The FTC said Thursday Chevalier's case is part of its ongoing work to protect consumers in the new and emerging financial technology market, called FinTech.

"Many consumers enjoy the opportunity to take part in the development of a product or service through crowdfunding, and they generally know there's some uncertainty involved in helping start something new," said Jessica Rich, director of the FTC's Bureau of Consumer Protection. "But consumers should be able to trust their money will actually be spent on the project they funded."

Chevalier settled the case with the FTC by agreeing to never make misrepresentations about any crowdfunding campaign and to honor stated refund policies. The nearly $112,000 judgement against him was suspended due to inability to pay. Another game maker eventually stepped in to produce the Doom game.

On Twitter, the FTC said the case is specific to the project creator's deception, not the platform's liability.

"#Crowdfunding platforms have a responsibility to act fairly & non-deceptively," the FTC tweeted. "Crowdfunding innovative way 2 raise $, but we hope to deter bad actors from misusing these platforms."

David Gallagher, a Kickstarter spokesman told The New York Times: "Kickstarter creators have an incredible track record when it comes to following through on their promises. But creators who abuse our system and backers' trust expose themselves to legal action."