File (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Lake or toilet?

We live next to this incredible body of water; we use it as a toilet. Biologists thought there was enough water in the Great Lakes to dilute anything we dumped or pour into it, and make it harmless.

I remember as a boy my father bringing home buckets of smelt, everyone did. Smelt came upstream by the millions. My Dad and his brothers used a big square net and fished off the old 21st Street bridge. My Mom cleaned them, fried them, and we all eat them. There is nothing better than a basket of smelt and a cold beer to celebrate the return of spring.

The irony is smelt are an invasive fish that entered the Great Lakes in the 1920s. Their numbers have steadily dropped from the early 1990s. Whatever the reason, we have not done well by our Great Lakes. We still use them as a toilet.

Ed Hansen, Manitowoc

'Useful' repeal?

Congress has voted over 50 times to repeal Obamacare. Sen. Ted Cruz announced he is running for president on the Republican ticket. His main thing to do when he is president is to repeal every word of Obamacare. Cruz is now signed up for Obamacare.

On Fox News, Cruz says it's one of the good things of Obamacare. Cruz was under no obligation to take Obamacare, he could go to a private company for health insurance. I'm sure he has enough money for private health insurance. Cruz received so much backlash for taking Obamacare that his handlers have him back-tracking. By the way Ted, I want to see your Canadian birth certificate. I believe you were born in Kenya.

Jerome Bolle, Whitelaw

Referendums

On Tuesday's ballot we'll have several referendums to consider. They would like the chief justice to be elected by the majority of the justices then serving on the court. Well isn't that special! If the majority are Republican, or Democrat, or right, or left wing, so would the chief justice. Currently the justice with the most seniority gets to be the chief. It almost sounds like a union shop. A change is needed, but I don't believe the referendum's way is in our best interest.

Manitowoc's schools need more money. I don't think anyone disputes the fact that inflation affects us all. I think we need to support our schools, and vote yes on all three referendums. I also feel that in three years the same tune will be playing unless we take action now! All three referendums refer to Wisconsin Statute section 121.91. We all must contact our representatives, and tell them that 121.91 needs to be updated to coincide with the 21st century.

Les Graebel, Manitowoc

Read or Share this story: http://htrne.ws/1FtZm1U