Getty Images/iStockphoto The spread of the heroin epidemic has two groups in Sussex County forming to aid those in need. Drug syringe and cooked heroin on spoon (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto )

Three Opelousas men have been arrested in connection with the first significant heroin seizure in the city’s recent history.

“This may be the first time that officers have located and charged an individual with the possession of or distribution of heroin in the Opelousas area,” said Opelousas Police Chief Perry Gallow about what he called “operation shop closed.”

“Once officers were aware that this dangerous drug was possibly being sold on the streets of Opelousas,” he said, “we made concerted efforts to take this drug operation down. It was learned that the heroin distribution network spanned between Opelousas and New Orleans.”

Arrested so far are:

• John Q. Davis, 30, 1000 Emma St., Opelousas, charged with two counts of distribution of schedule II drugs (heroin and crack cocaine) and three counts of possession with intent to distribute schedule I and II drugs (heroin, crack cocaine and ecstasy).

• Kevin Davis, 25, 1000 Emma St., Opelousas, possession of schedule I drugs and contempt of court.

• Clarence Hamilton, 21, 1619 Brown St., Opelousas, possession of schedule I drugs and contempt of court.

Gallow said the arrest warrants against these men were executed Friday by his officers in cooperation with the Louisiana State Police, the Lafayette Drug enforcement Administration Task force, the Louisiana office of State probation and parole and the Opelousas City Marshals office.

“This was the culmination of several months of a highly intensive investigation on a major narcotics trafficking organization in the City of Opelousas, which involved the trafficking of heroin, crack cocaine, and marijuana,” Gallow said.

“The operation centered on the execution of arrest warrants for distribution of heroin and crack cocaine, as well as the execution of two search warrants on residences set up to be houses for distribution,” Gallow said.

He said those search warrants of houses at 1116 S. Railroad Ave. and 1619 Brown St. turned up 20 grams of heroin with an estimated street value of $3,000.

Also seized were 15 rocks of crack cocaine, 8 ounces of marijuana and seven ecstasy pills.

Gallow said the raid also turned up about $5,000 in cash, believed to be the proceeds of drug transactions.

Gallow said the investigation continues and police expect to make more arrests.

He said the operation resulted from the efforts of the Opelousas Police Department’s Special Operations Unit along with the Louisiana State Police Region II narcotics and the Lafayette Office of Drug Enforcement Administration Task force.

Gallow also thanked individuals who assisted by providing “valuable information” to police.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/news/crime/2014/09/20/opelousas-makes-first-significant-heroin-trafficking-arrest/15964263/