NEW YORK, Nov. 11, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- The Consortium for Southeastern Hypertension Control (COSEHC™) was recently selected to receive one of the Transforming Clinical Practice Initiative (TCPI) Practice Transformation Network (PTN) awards from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. The TCPI is one of the largest federal investments designed to support doctors and other clinicians in all 50 states through collaborative and peer-based learning networks.

Group Practice Forum, a physician-led, care delivery consultancy providing workflow optimization and practice facilitation, is one of four innovative healthcare organizations that comprise the COSEHC PTN. Other partners within the PTN include SPH Analytics and the Northwest Area Health Education Center.

The COSEHC PTN is one of 29 national and regional health care networks to be selected for the TCPI award. The TCPI is part of a collection of initiatives advanced by the Affordable Care Act to improve the quality of patient care and promote wise use of healthcare spending.

"We are pleased to be a member of the COSEHC PTN, an integral part of the Transforming Clinical Practices Initiative, which represents an innovative move toward the implementation of quality-driven care," said John Strapp, Jr., Co-Founder and Chairman of The Kinetix Group.

The COSEHC PTN provides patient-centered quality improvement strategies and tools, data analytics, practice design and care coordination techniques, and continuous medical education to help participating clinicians meet the initiative's phases of transformation and associated milestones, clinical and operational results.

About the Consortium of Southeastern Hypertension Control

COSEHC is a nonprofit (501c3) organization established to improve cardiovascular outcomes in the Southeastern United States, which has the highest prevalence of hypertension and cardiometabolic risk- factor related morbidity and mortality. COSEHC promotes scientifically based research, education, and performance improvement to reduce vascular disease and its complications. The organization encourages physician participation in its clinical database that allows for on-line consultation of members and coordinates and facilitates evidence-based best practices for participating network physicians.

About Group Practice Forum

Group Practice Forum (GPF), a division of The Kinetix Group, is an independent, physician-led, care delivery consultancy providing workflow optimization and practice facilitation. The Kinetix Group expertise includes clinical protocols, key market drivers, care delivery processes and B2B go-to-market models. For more information about The Kinetix Group, or Group Practice Forum, go to thekinetixgroup.com.

SOURCE Group Practice Forum