Every time I go to a party in London someone complains to me about their GP. I listen to their story of woe, try to offer ideas, and secretly resolve that next time I’ll pretend I’m a film director instead. For a while I’ve been thinking the NHS simply can no longer offer what is needed in the 21st century. I thought the only solution was to bring in user charges to give it a funding boost. But this all changed when I read a high-profile report, and heard of a new campaign.

A Commonwealth Fund report published in June 2014 ranked 11 western health systems for quality and cost. This report ranked the NHS as the second cheapest of all these health systems. And incredibly, this report also ranked the NHS an impressive number one out of all these countries for efficiency and overall quality of care. This report shows our health service is more cost-effective – better for cost and quality – than all other developed healthcare systems involving privatisation.

Related: Would you like to write about the highs and lows of working for the NHS?

I became a GP as I am interested in lots of different areas of medicine. But it was only when I finished my training that I fully realised that the job of doctoring in primary and secondary care is quintessentially different. In hospitals (secondary care) patients are investigated exhaustively to exclude pathology with certainty. In general practice, however (primary care), British GPs are taught to manage uncertainty, and to treat large numbers of patients more quickly based on the likelihood of serious pathology. Because of this, British GPs manage 90% of the patient contacts in the NHS. Overall quality remains high because British GPs have rigorous and holistic training. The reason the NHS is the most cost-effective health system in the developed world is because of primary care.

Shortly after the Commonwealth report, I heard of a new campaign to try to save primary care, from the Royal College of General Practitioners. Since 1998, the number of GP consultations has increased 24%. You might expect in this situation that funding would increase. But funding for primary care has dropped to a record low, at only 8.4% of the NHS budget. And our coalition government is threatening to close 100 GP practices nationally, including award-winning practices.

Related: I faced burnout working as a GP in the NHS – I had to stop

Even without extended hours, where I work in east London a full inner-city GP day is now 11 hours with no lunch break. Many primary care staff are at breaking point. Why is this? Does our government want NHS general practice to fail, so it can justify privatisation? I believe affordable healthcare for everyone has immense knock-on effects to the productivity of the entire population. But the individual profits to be made from the public’s misfortune in health are enormous.

Perhaps these are the real reasons disgruntled clubbers corner me at parties and regale me with tales of their dissatisfaction? Our government might succeed in fooling us into believing that efficiency savings are not health cuts. Perhaps it will succeed too in fooling us into not realising that the last health act now even absolves it of the legal responsibility to provide a national health service for us at all. And perhaps posterity will show getting rid of NHS primary care to be a coup-de-grace to the British economy. Or might friends at parties who complain to me be interested in supporting the campaign for a better-funded NHS?

Are you a member of our online community? Sign up to the Healthcare Professionals Network – for free – to receive weekly email updates on policy and best practice in the sector, as well as exclusive offers.