Republican congresswoman Michele Bachmann and President Obama's tough-minded chief of staff, Denis McDonough, share common ground -- literally.

Rep. Michele Bachmann, R-Minn., speaks at the Faith & Freedom Coalition conference in Washington. (Photo: Mark Wilson, Getty Images) Story Highlights Republican Michele Bachmann and White House chief of staff come from the same town

On opposite ends of the political spectrum, they were influenced by some of the same people

Those people say they share similar qualities -- passion, dedication, convictions and faith

STILLWATER, Minn. – Republican Congresswoman Michele Bachmann and President Obama's tough-minded chief of staff, Denis McDonough, share some common ground — literally.

They could not be further apart politically, yet they both sprang from this small, bucolic town on the banks of the St. Croix River. They were even influenced by some of the same people.

One football coach in Stillwater taught McDonough how to block and tackle on the field, then went on to help inspire Bachmann to block and tackle in politics. Yet another McDonough coach became a huge Bachmann supporter and starred in her campaign ads.

White House chief of staff Denis McDonough speaks on CBS' "Face the Nation" in Washington. (Photo: Chris Usher, AP)

Known around here as "The Dude," McDonough is Obama's point man negotiating with Congress, and he and his team are facing off against House Republicans over government spending and Obamacare. The GOP has embraced the Tea Party agenda of gutting the health care law, a goal Bachmann has championed as founder of the congressional Tea Party Caucus.

Bachmann wants to defund Obamacare as part of a funding bill that would continue federal government operations beyond Sept. 30. She and McDonough are also on opposite sides of the battle to raise the nation's borrowing limit, which must be increased this fall, or the country will default on its debt.

The coaches who know them personally provide perspective on how the two got where they are and on the battles ahead.

"I would say it's going to be a very formidable contest," former Stillwater High coach George Thole said. "I would say with those two battling, it'll probably go into about three overtimes. It'll go into three overtimes, and it'll be settled by a last-second field goal."

When partisan politics are swept aside, the coaches say, Bachmann and McDonough share similar qualities — uncommon passion, dedication, convictions and faith that drove them from the quaint confines of Stillwater to the heights of power in Washington.

Those common bonds are what make the coaches optimistic that political differences can be overcome.

"I really have some hope that, you know, wouldn't it be wonderful to have 'The Dude' and Michele just get someplace and say, 'God, what do you want us to do? What should we do? What's our next step?'" said Dennis Meyer, the other Stillwater coach.

Meyer was the defensive coordinator and Thole was the head coach at Stillwater High School when McDonough joined the football team in the mid-1980s. McDonough, a student in the class of 1988, was a sharp-eyed, hard-hitting defensive back.

"He didn't look like the typical football player; he was skinny and slow," Thole recalled.

He made up for that with smarts and a knack for seeing the whole field, knowing not only his position but everyone else's as well. Thole and Meyer drilled into the team discipline, teamwork, accountability and above all, the will to win. Punishment was harsh for getting out of line.

If a player showed up late to practice, the coaches would have the team do 20 push-ups and 20 sit-ups, then 19 push-ups and 19 sit-ups, and so on, all the way to one.

"And then if it was really bad, then I'd have them work their way back up," said Thole, who compared his punishments to those doled out in the Marine Corps.

Meyer said McDonough took to the regimen well. The team went 10-3 in 1987, and McDonough intercepted three passes, earned two game balls and made the all-conference team. He went on to play for St. John's University, where his team won two conference titles.

"He was very disciplined," Meyer said. "He would do exactly what you told him to do on the football field."

There are clear echoes of McDonough's high school football career in the West Wing of the White House. Aside from the framed drawing of Stillwater that hangs on his office wall, McDonough has been running the White House team much the way Thole and Meyer ran Stillwater's.

McDonough often talks of calling "plays," he cheers on staff with mantras such as "one team, one fight," and he is a ferocious defender of the president. He has instilled discipline in meetings, and after giving attendees a "parting shot" — one last chance to contribute — he assigns them "due-outs," tasks to complete before the next meeting.

McDonough rarely grants interviews about his personal life, and he declined to comment for this story.

It was during McDonough's time in high school that Meyer went through a significant life change that put him on a collision course with Bachmann. His wife left him, he quit drinking and rented a room in the house next to the McDonough family and became a born-again Christian.

A few years after McDonough graduated and left town for St. John's, Meyer says God inspired him to try to start a charter school, and during one planning meeting in his living room in 1992, Bachmann showed up.

"I don't know how she heard about it," he said. They immediately hit it off, and she joined the New Heights Charter School board.

Bachmann, he said, understood better than anyone on the board his vision for the school.

The goal was to create a school based on traditional values and rigorous academics, but there would be a pitched battle over what that meant, one that pitted Bachmann and Meyer against the rest of the board and ultimately ended with their resignations.

"Unfortunately, within months, we were confronting dissidents and protesters who accused us of trying to advance Christian values in the school," Bachmann later wrote in her memoir, Core of Conviction. "Yes, we were Christians, but we never sought to impose Christianity on our students. However, some liberal activists seemed to think that the word 'rigorous' was somehow code for 'religious.'"

Through the difficulties, Meyer and Bachmann forged a deeper bond because of their faith. They were deeply devout Christians fighting side-by-side for a better future for the area's children, and even though they lost the battle — both of them resigned in December 1993 — the experience resonated with Bachmann and helped plant the seed for her political career.

"The New Heights experience taught me a lot," she wrote in her memoir. "I learned about school governance, and also about the ins and outs of dealing with state and local authorities."

She said she became determined to keep fighting. "I might not always succeed," she wrote. "But I will always keep trying."

There was another lesson both of them took from the experience: listening to God and following his vision works — no matter how unlikely or tough it may seem.

"There's no question in my mind that no matter what it is I've done in my life, whether it's a school or anything else, I'm a woman of prayer, and I ask the Lord for guidance, and this was the same in that," she said in an interview.

Bachmann went on to run for the public school board, got elected as a state legislator and eventually to Congress, where she is still fighting.

Meyer sometimes wonders how she can keep up the battle.

"I listen to the things that are said about Michele on national TV and all this kind of stuff, and I'm just going, 'Michele, how can you do it?'" Meyer said. "I just pray for her a lot. I know she's a woman of her convictions, she's doing it because she absolutely knows in her heart that this is what the Lord has asked her to do, and that's the only reason. Otherwise why would you put yourself up for that?"

Bachmann says Meyer is absolutely right. "He understands it. He gets it that I'm signing up and suiting up to do the work," she said. "And a lot of times grief goes with it. It just goes with the territory."

Thole met Bachmann when she was running for the state Senate in 2000. He says he didn't like her at first — he supported the 18-year incumbent she ended up ousting. As he got to know her, he found that he shared a lot of her views, including on fighting for more local control of education. And he liked her conviction.

"I kind of liked her spunk, her fire," he said.

Thole, a well-known figure in the community, ended up contributing to her campaigns, lending his name to letters of support published in the local newspaper, and even starring in a few of her campaign advertisements.

Meyer and Thole may be the only two people in America who would vote for both Bachmann and McDonough to be president of the United States.

"The Dude and Michele have the same goal, and that's to help the United States," said Thole, who proudly displays a framed letter from McDonough on White House stationery.

"As one man who is stronger because of you, THANKS for all you did for Stillwater, Minnesota, and for the U.S.A.," McDonough wrote this year.

Meyer jokes that he would have one caveat before supporting a potential McDonough presidential campaign.

"I would vote for Denis if he made me chief of staff," Meyer said. "Honestly, we love them both."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1f7MeFs