Quest Diagnostics CEO Steve Rusckowski visited the Irving campus last week to talk about the $7.4 billion company’s future in a world of genetic testing and other refined specialties.

He’s pleased that the Affordable Care Act requires insurers to allow more diagnostic tests at no charge to consumers. He is watching high-deductible health plans more warily, however, as uncollected bills now equal 4 percent of revenue.

Quest Diagnostics, headquartered in New Jersey, mostly does blood, urine and drug-abuse testing. It employs 1,200 people in North Texas, most of them at the company’s Irving labs.

Diagnostic testing accounts for just 2 percent of the nation’s $3 trillion health care bill. But those lab results provide the information for nearly three-fourths of the patient care decisions made by physicians, Rusckowski said.

The Affordable Care Act lets consumers get physicals, mammograms, colonoscopies and diet counseling without co-pays, even if they haven’t met the annual deductible. The same applies for screenings to detect diabetes, depression and the AIDS virus.

Up in the air

Quest Diagnostics expects all this testing will boost business. But it hasn’t happened yet. The company says too much of the law is still up in the air, including how many states will expand Medicaid (Texas has not), and when the law’s mandates for insurance coverage will begin to bite.

Meanwhile, employers are moving workers to high-deductible health plans. They are also common in the government-run insurance exchanges for individual health insurance.

Where they’re in use, the average deductible for a single Texan now exceeds $1,500. Families are paying $2,500 or more.

“The biggest issue we have in this country right now is that more and more of the costs of care are being pushed to the patient,” Rusckowski said. “We all have bigger deductibles and co-pays. As a result, our company is spending more time getting those pieces of the overall charge.”

The 4 percent Quest preliminarily is recording as bad debt comes to $284 million. That’s not chump change for a company with net income of $598 million in 2014.

“The vast majority of that is the patient’s responsibility,” Rusckowski said.

In the meeting with Irving employees, Rusckowski talked up a reinvigorated company that’s looking to be “not just the largest lab, but a company that aims for better health through diagnostic testing.”

Genetic profiling, for example, is essential to precision medicine. This is getting a lot of attention in part because of new targeted therapies that disrupt the growth and immunity of cancer cells. The treatments can be extraordinarily expensive.

“Based on the genetic profile of the individual, we can tell whether or not a drug will work, and if none of the drugs will work, what [experimental drug] trials a patient can enroll in,” Rusckowski said. “With the cost of delivering these new therapies for cancer in the hundreds of thousands of dollars, getting that decision right is very important.”

Painless blood draw

Theranos, a lab testing firm in Silicon Valley, is shaking up the industry by promising painless blood draws, lower costs and widespread access through retail partners like Walgreens. Rusckowski said he likes that Theranos CEO Elizabeth Holmes is bringing lots of media attention to the industry, and he said he’s ready to compete.

“We actually do have finger-stick capability as well,” he said. “We no longer need to take as much blood from the patient.”

Rusckowski said he’s ready to compete on cost and accessibility as well.

Follow Jim Landers on Twitter at @landersjim.