Photo

Kansas lawmakers agreed over the weekend to send more money to the state’s poor school districts, addressing a State Supreme Court ruling last month that school financing had to be equalized around the state.

But policy changes that lawmakers added to the bill, most significantly diminishing job protections for teachers, seem all but certain to become a thorny campaign issue for Gov. Sam Brownback, a conservative Republican, as he seeks a second term.

In a state where a debate over financing for education has simmered for years, Mr. Brownback has yet to say whether he will sign the measure, approved late into the night on Sunday. But a statement from his office suggested support, reading, in part: “The bill ensures that taxpayer dollars are spent efficiently, putting money in the classrooms to help teachers teach and students learn.”

If anything, the measure — and a grueling, round-the-clock battle in recent days to reach it — was an election-year reminder to Mr. Brownback and other state leaders of the complexities of Kansas politics: While the state capital is firmly controlled by Republicans, they are by no means of a single view.

While a conservative wing pushed for a list of significant policy changes, at one point even calling for ending funding for Common Core academic standards, some moderate Republicans appeared at points to side more closely with Democrats. The Democrats wanted to send more money to poor districts to satisfy the court ruling, but favored fewer immediate policy changes, particularly on politically delicate issues like employment rules for public schoolteachers and tax breaks related to private schools.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The final result was some combination of the two: sending more than $120 million to poorer districts, granting tax breaks for corporations that donate to private school scholarship funds aimed at low-income students and — perhaps most controversially in a campaign season — ending a hearing process granted to most teachers if they are to be fired.

Conservative political forces cheered the move. In a statement, Jeff Glendening, state director of the Kansas chapter of Americans for Prosperity, said, “The removal of teacher tenure was a great win for Kansas students,” adding, “We appreciate the willingness of the Legislature to place the interests of Kansas children over the welfare of the teachers’ union.”

Photo

But an end to job protections infuriated teachers who had filled the Capitol galleries over the weekend to lobby against the measure. On Monday, the Kansas National Education Association issued a statement urging members and supporters to contact Mr. Brownback with a specific message: “We expect you, Governor Brownback, to VETO this bill as it diminishes teachers’ ability to advocate for their students without fear of retribution.”

Representative Paul Davis, a Democrat and the House minority leader, who is challenging Mr. Brownback for governor, already seemed to be raising the bill, which he voted against, as a campaign issue. Mr. Davis, who had already made it clear that he will focus his campaign, in part, on dissatisfaction with educational policy in Kansas, argued that a bill aimed at solving inequities in financing should not to be loaded with separate education policy matters. And, on Twitter, he described the changes to firing procedures as a “clear attack” on teachers.

In March, the Kansas Supreme Court ordered the Legislature to make the state’s educational system more equitable by July 1, setting off this latest chapter in the state’s debate over public school financing.

Some lawmakers had argued that the court system had no place in deciding school spending policies in the first place, while others saw the ruling as a chance to solve at least one element of the debate — the inequality between poor and rich school districts.

After days of sometimes fierce debate, including an argument over whether a middle-of-the-night meeting had been conducted with sufficient public notice, lawmakers on Sunday night reached a compromise but in relatively close votes — 22 to 16 in the State Senate, and 63 to 57 in the House.

Afterward, Mr. Brownback, in a statement, said the bill “fully complies with, and indeed exceeds, the requirements of the recent Kansas Supreme Court ruling for funding schools and providing equity.”

The issue, though, by no means ends the education funding debate in Kansas. The State Supreme Court has sent back to a lower court a still broader question of whether public schools statewide are sufficiently funded. Mr. Brownback’s supporters have said that the state’s wise use of funds for schools should be seen as more important than particular dollar benchmarks for base aid per student from the state.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

His critics say the state’s spending on schools has fallen far short, even as lawmakers have cut taxes.