Crisis is the real mother of invention. As Nepal reels in the aftershocks of the April 25 earthquake and humanitarian aid floods into the country, its citizenry and the international community face a tremendous collective opportunity. Nepal is a classic case study in the failures of international development, as has been well documented and widely experienced.

From massive state agencies to international NGOs to tiny grassroots projects, the world has tried to “help” Nepal for decades. While assistance is desperately needed at this critical time, the long-term prospects for Nepal also demand consideration at this juncture.

By and large — yes, there have been exceptions — the international development system has failed Nepal. This can and has been attributed internally to a corrupt officialdom and dysfunctional state, but critics likewise point externally to the problems of top-down foreign expertise and reliance on ineffective technological fixes. Knowing that Nepal faces billions of dollars in forthcoming aid, and a regrettable track record often characterized by mismanagement and unaccountability, what needs to be created is a different model of development altogether.

Rather than foreign guidance, this can and should be a system that better integrates local knowledge in concert with external support. This must be a relationship that balances the needs of the rural, the poor, and the marginalized with the intentions of the political and economic elite in Kathmandu. Most important, it can become a new paradigm that prioritizes and establishes wellbeing over welfare.

The devastation in Nepal is incalculable, with the death toll rising daily over the past week and anxiety pervading as many people remain missing. The destruction of Nepal’s urban architectural heritage is beyond measurement in cultural terms. And daily life has been turned upside down for more than half of the country.

And yet where this tragedy is and will remain most acute is with the rural communities that are just now making the headlines. For these Nepalis, for whom entire live savings — if not that of multiple generations — are invested and embodied in a village home or a small shop in the bazaar, the scale of loss staggers the imagination. It is a loss measured less in monetary terms than in the energy and sweat and blood that went into its creation. And it is a pain now felt by the destruction of environment compounded by an absence of insurance. While grateful to be alive, how does one even begin to rebuild when an entire life’s toil and investment is in ruins?

As Mark Duffield of the University of Bristol has aptly noted, the international development industry is largely predicated on a problematic relationship between uninsured recipients and insured providers of development. Long a powerful asymmetry, this binary is profoundly brought to bear by the current crisis in Nepal and the new but all too typical relationships forming in response. This asymmetry needs to, and indeed can, change.

In the slow but hopefully steady reconstruction of this country, an opportunity emerges to redesign development. And in so doing, it also presents a chance to redefine Nepal’s place in the world, as a study in the successes of development, rather than the failures. “Grassroots,” “sustainable,” “local” — these words circulate from the chambers of the U.N. to the cocktail parties of Silicon Valley. And yet they are not empty of meaning. Grounded opinions need to be heard and creative designs leveraged to generate real and meaningful change. Effective development must mean that the rural and the poor are integrated into the wider global system that provides insurance safety nets as well as institutional and structural support in both everyday life and in the wake of disaster. We now have an opportunity to help make Nepal a model of this change for the wider world.

We must marshal and organize the resources of Nepal’s robust youth-led, social-media-savvy community in concert with the outpouring of international aid. International aid agencies, corporate donors, foreign NGOs: Listen to the youth! Remember what worked, and also what so painfully did not, in Haiti, and please don’t make the same mistakes again.

Finally, as anxiety and confusion swirl about the act of giving, a greater good can be done by doing some homework and taking one’s time. This is a long-term process. Heartfelt efforts to help quickly are wonderful, but patience and conscientiousness are wiser. Beyond the next week’s headlines, and across the months and years, there will be something to see happening in Nepal. I pray that it can be beautiful.

Galen Murton is a Ph.D. candidate in development geography at the University of Colorado at Boulder. He has been studying and working in Nepal and the wider Himalayan region for much of the past 15 years.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.