Exclusive data shows where sharks were caught in nets this year

A TWO-metre great white was pulled from the nets at Bondi Beach - one of 70 sharks found at Sydney's most popular beaches.

Exclusive beach net data obtained by The Sunday Telegraph comes as the NSW government begins its annual aerial summer shark patrols today, with 51 beaches from Newscastle to Wollongong to be monitored.

The move comes three weeks after 19-year-old Port Macquarie man Zac Young died after he was attacked by a tiger shark at an unpatrolled beach near Coffs Harbour.

The great white at Bondi was among three found entangled in NSW beach nets last summer, with two others found at Swansea Beach and Coledale.

A fourth was believed responsible for the sole shark encounter at Dee Why (a netted beach) after it took a bite out of a surfboard being ridden by off-duty lifeguard Danny Sheather.

Beaches from Newcastle down to Illawarra are protected by shark nets, which are strung parallel to the beach at 51 of the most popular swimming areas from September 1 to April 30 each year.

The 150-metre long nets are designed not to stop the sharks from entering a beach - they do not touch the bottom - but serve as a barrier to deter sharks from establishing a "territory".

NSW Fisheries shark biologist, Dr Amy Smoothey, said the low number of shark encounters proved that the universally feared marine creatures were largely uninterested in swimmers.

"We know bull sharks cruise up and down the coastal waters of Sydney, going about their own business, mating, feeding, doing all the key things we do," she said.

"When a shark interaction happens, it's often a case of being in the wrong place at the wrong time, in murky water, in the early morning or evening.

"The ocean is the sharks' domain - there is no 100 per cent guarantee when entering the ocean - what we are trying to do with the nets and patrols is eliminate that risk, but the chances of encountering one in our lifetime are incredibly rare."

This season, 108 animals were caught in the nets, with 34 released alive, compared with 158 in the previous year, of which 56 were released.

Among the animals to become entangled in the nets included two humpback whales, which swam away with the nets, a loggerhead turtle, 34 rays and nine Grey Nurse sharks.

Four common blacktip sharks - a species which have been linked to attacks on swimmers around the world - were found in the nets at Mona Vale.

Another four were also found at Wattamolla Beach in the Royal National Park.

A 3.5-metre tiger shark and a three metre dusky whaler were found at Avalon.

Another dusky whaler measuring three metres was pulled out of the nets at Coogee while a second 3.5-metre tiger shark was found at Whale Beach.

Three dangerous sharks were found at Harbord, including 2.44 metre dusky whaler, a 1.3 metre common blacktip and a 0.89 metre silky shark.

Another common blacktip measuring 2.21 metres and one metre mako Shark were found at Palm Beach.

Over at Dee Why, the nets captured a 3.2 metre Bull Shark while a 3.2 metre Dusky Whaler was found at Manly.

And just last month, a large dusky whaler was found in the nets at Maroubra Beach.

For the first time, a scientist will take part in the aerial patrols to help identify shark species.

Contractors working for the NSW Department of Primary Industries are required to release animals which become entangled in the nets if they are alive during inspections, with those which have died taken away for research.

The Shark Meshing (Bather Protection) Program 2012-13 Annual Performance Report said the increase in the protected Grey Nurse sharks being captured in the nets "is of concern".

However, the NSW Government argues the meshing program was proving effective in helping to protect swimmers with just one fatal shark attack in 1951 at Merewether since they were put in place in 1937.

The only shark encounter at a meshed beach this year was at Dee Why when had a 30cm bite mark taken out of his surfboard by what was believed to be a Great White.

Six other shark encounters recorded in NSW waters occurred at non-meshed beaches.

A separate report by Surf Life Saving (SLS) NSW into sharks revealed 82 confirmed sightings for the 2012-13 season, including 46 at Sydney beaches, 21 in the Hunter, 12 on the Central Coast and three in the Illawarra region.