One of my proudest moments while serving on the San Jose City Council was working to get heart defibrillators installed in public places across the city. The goal was to help people if they have a heart attack and an emergency responder is unavailable. In the process, it became a critical safety tool and improved public health.

For the millions of children, seniors, and individuals with disabilities in California who get their health coverage through Medi-Cal, however, they can only hope for such an immediate response in times of need. For them to see a doctor or a specialist, they often have to wait months, resort to waiting in an emergency room for the most basic medical needs, or drive long distances.

Maribel and Juan Reyes know this routine all too well. Twice a month for the last two years, they've traveled from their home in San Jose to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles to get treatment for their 16-year-old son Juan. They make the 300-mile journey because Cedars-Sinai is the nearest hospital that accepts Medi-Cal and is able to treat Juan's hypercholesterolemia, a condition he was born with that worsens with each passing month, despite there being specialists practicing in the Bay Area. To complicate matters, the elder Juan suffered a stroke six months ago because of the stress of his son's health and providing for his family.

Advertisement

As sad as their story is, their situation is all too common. According to the California Medical Association, 56 percent of Medi-Cal patients report difficulty setting an appointment with a primary care doctor or a specialist. The problem starts with the woefully low reimbursement rates the state of California pays doctors each time they treat a Medi-Cal patient. California pays the third-lowest reimbursement rates in the country, covering barely half the cost of the actual care provided. As a result of such low rates, an increasing number of doctors have stopped accepting Medi-Cal beneficiaries.

Unfortunately, based on Gov. Jerry Brown's recent budget proposal, there's not much in the way of relief for the Reyes family or the other 12 million Californians who receive health care through Medi-Cal. Given that California has the funds to raise reimbursement rates, with revenues $7 billion higher than forecast, this inaction is unacceptable. It's short shrift for families that were counting on the state to help when California expanded Medi-Cal as part of the Affordable Care Act.

The fact is we need to do more. I have joined Assemblyman Rob Bonta, D-Alameda, along with more than 50 of my colleagues from both parties, in co-authoring AB 366, which will restore the cuts made to Medi-Cal over the past several years. While this bill is only a small step in ensuring that Medi-Cal coverage is fully funded for all recipients, it will go a long way toward ensuring California not only helps people gain coverage through Medi-Cal but also provides the funding to make it effective.

When children and adults are sick and can't see a doctor, their only options should not be resorting to emergency room visits or traveling across the state for treatment. We must recognize that a fully funded Medi-Cal not only makes sense ethically but also ensures that we will not be fooled by the allure of short-term budget savings at the expense of long-term costs resulting from not providing all Californians with the health care resources they need.

Kansen Chu, chair of the Assembly Committee on Human Services, represents the 25th Assembly District in California's Legislature. He wrote this article for this newspaper.