Buy Photo Solar farm at the former landfill on Sally Ike Road in Brick. (Photo: ASBURY PARK PRESS FILE PHOTO)Buy Photo

Six months ago, the solar farm on the former French's landfill on Sally Ike Road began producing its first electricity.

Since then, the farm's developer, Brick Standard Inc. of Hoboken, paid its first $2.1 million repayment toward the $35 million project.

The new solar farm has put the former landfill to use since garbage deliveries stopped in 1979. It has also played another role for Brick: The project has controlled some of the township's rising energy costs.

"We know what our electricity costs are going to be for the next 15 years, so it's easier to budget," said Scott Pezarras, Brick's chief financial officer.

This week, the seven-member Township Council approved the return of more than $462,000 owed to Brick Standard, a portion of cash and loans the company put in escrow while work was completed.

Brick Standard supplied $5.4 million of its own money for the project, Brick Business Administrator Joanne Bergin said in an email.

In 2012, the township borrowed $31 million and loaned that money to Brick Standard to build the solar farm, Bergin said.

Brick police chief submits plan to control costs

Some Brick residents worried that the township's taxpayers were not protected if Brick Standard were to go out of business or default on its annual debt repayments.

But Brick officials say there are six reasons why that will not happen:

1. Township officials have a letter of credit paid for by Brick Standard and issued through PNC bank that would cover the annual $2.1 million loan repayment if the company were to default. That would give municipal officials months to reach a solution with the company.

2. Ironstate Developers of Hoboken, which owns most of Brick Standard, would lose a tax credit with the federal government over the 15-year span of the loan if the company failed to make a payment, Bergin said.

"These projects are federally subsidized," Matthew D. Jessup of McManimon, Scotland and Baumann told the Township Council this week. Jessup's firm represents Brick on the solar project. "Solar's too expensive on its own to produce."

As an incentive to invest in solar, the federal government gives one-time cash payouts or years of tax breaks to companies that build the farms. Brick Standard accepted the 15-year tax break as its incentive, municipal officials said.

3. The farm will generate Solar Renewable Energy Credits for each megawatt-hour of electricity created; the credits can be traded or sold to other energy companies.

Electricity companies in New Jersey are required to have a portion of their energy produced by solar energy. If they do not have their own solar farms, they can purchase the credits from solar farms to meet their obligation.

The sale of Brick's solar energy credits will be used to repay the loan.

Environmentalists protest Six Flags' "green" solar farm

4. In the event of a default, Brick Township can seize the solar farm and its equipment, then have free electricity for the lifespan of the solar panels. Though the solar farms' loan will be repaid by 2029, Brick officials expect the panels to remain functional through 2039. However, their efficiency will drop with age, Pezarras said.

5. Brick Standard and the township have a power purchase agreement, which cycles the money the municipality pays Brick Standard for energy back into the company's loan repayments to the township.

The solar farm will control the township's rising costs over the long term, Brick officials said.

"Debt service (paid on the solar farm) stays the same, but the price of energy goes up, which ... increases the cushion (of profit for Brick Standard) and increases the debt service coverage and provides more security to the township," Jessup said.

One sour spot for Brick officials is that former Mayor Stephen Acropolis did not sign a solar agreement that they say would have made more money for Brick. Under the old agreement, the solar developer would have paid loan interest at 4.5 percent, regardless of the rate at which Brick borrowed the money. The deal would have enabled the township to hold onto any difference between the two rates.

Acropolis did not sign the deal, and by the time Mayor John G. Ducey was sworn into office and signed the deal, too much time had passed for the agreement to be considered binding.

Now, Brick Standard pays the township's actual interest rate on the bond, which will increase from 2 percent and 3.8 percent over the debt's 15-year lifespan, according to municipal documents.

Ducey said his predecessor's failure to sign the deal meant Brick did not collect $2.6 million that would have been generated.

Solar farm built in Howell

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1zmjLGZ