Howard Memorial Hospital and Ukiah Valley Medical Center, part of the Adventist Health network, announced Tuesday that its affiliated physician clinics have reached a new multi-year agreement with Anthem Blue Cross to serve individual members who purchased Anthem plans through Covered California, the state's version of the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare.

Some of the now covered physician offices include Adventist Heart Institute in Ukiah; Fort Bragg Rural Health Center; Mendocino Family Care; Redwood Medical Clinic; Ukiah Valley Medical Specialties - Gastroenterology; Ukiah Valley Medical Specialties - Orthopedics and Ukiah Valley Rural Health Center network of clinics.

"We are pleased that members of Anthem Blue Cross Covered California now have complete network access to Adventist Health hospitals and its affiliated physician clinics," said Gwen Matthews, president and CEO of UVMC, in a news release.

In May, some patients were reporting that Adventist Health clinics weren't accepting the Anthem Blue Cross Pathways PPO issued through Covered California, which was established by the state in the wake of the Affordable Care Act. However, some individual doctors said later they would still continue to see those patients. One doctor believed that Adventist Health opted out without notifying network physicians.

The doctors at the clinics above were originally on a list of covered providers Anthem Blue Cross provided during the Covered California enrollment period at the beginning of the year, said Nick Bejarano in May, regional communications manager for Adventist Health. However, Adventist claimed they found out at the beginning of April that the clinics were removed.

Bejarano said in late April that the reason the clinics couldn't accept the Blue Cross plan is that the offered reimbursement "changed abruptly" and was "slightly less" than what was originally understood.

Adventist Health also noted in this week's news release, that Anthem Blue Cross Individual Pathway PPO members enrolled with a different medical group who wish to re-enroll with a UVMC or HMH affiliated doctor, should contact Anthem Blue Cross at the toll-free number on their current ID card.