Sachin Tendulkar underlined the contribution of his mother in his career when he dedicated the Bharat Ratna award to her along with all those mothers who have made innumerable sacrifices to help their children carve out illustrious careers.History has been replete with sagas of sacrifices made by mothers for their children. It is no coincidence that many of these kids are sports persons. Travelling with their child as s/he moves across the country playing tournaments, holding hand to quell the pre event queasiness, lending a shoulder to lessen the fatigue, and providing moral support by propelling him or her to give the best are traits these moms are best known for.Anjali Bhandarkar, an advocate, says that a mother's supportive presence at all times is a must if the child has to do well. Her daughter Mallika is a table tennis national champion who also turns out regularly in international tournaments. "There was no other option but to put my career on the back burner when my daughter began travelling for tournaments," says Anjali. "For six months that the tournaments are on, I am on the table tennis court and for the remaining six months I am in the law court," she says in jest.Shying from terming her involvement with her daughter's routine as sacrifice, gynaecologist Namrata Deshmukh says that as a mother she is duty-bound to encourage her. Deshmukh's eight-year-old daughter Divya is a national under 9 chess champion and the youngest Woman Fide Master. "Being a medico, I would initially feel that I am not being fair to my medical practice. But now that I see Divya excelling in the game, I have to ensure that she gets all the opportunities and encouragement," says Deshmukh, but adds that it is still early to predict what the future holds for her child.For young singer and Nagpur Heroes 2013 candidate 9-year-old Sugandha, her mother Amruta Date is a friend, philosopher and guide. But the modest mother attributes much of the fame coming her daughter's way to god's grace. "There are many children and their mothers who work hard. But fortunately we are getting the rewards of that hard work too." Amruta, a singer herself, gave up a teaching career to groom her daughter. "I was enjoying my job as I was teaching music and was also being paid well for it," she says and adds that grooming the child for this career requires lots of adjustments. "I am constantly shuffling my time to match her schedule. I have to balance her studies and her riyaz and also do household tasks, which can be exhausting," she says."The entire time, energy and finances of a family get diverted if your child is grooming to be a sports person," says Medha Raje, mother of Rasika, a national badminton champion. "It is not just about accompanying her for tournaments. I have to take care of her diet, nutrition and build her mental strength too," she says. Medha says that there are moments when she too feels low, but then she bounces back to be her daughter's pillar of strength. "Ups and downs do take place, but what is important is that the child's moral should always be high," she says commenting upon the lack of funding for sports persons.A child who is excelling in his or her chosen sphere requires extra attention, feels Varsha Amraotkar, mother of basketball champion Mugdha who is the city's second international hoopster. "I have missed so many family functions and events just because they clashed with my daughter's tournaments or practice schedules," she says. It is only now when Mugdha is playing international tournaments that her mother is able to find time for herself. "My husband has a touring job so he was never available. I had to get tech savvy and learnt to operate mobile apps to keep in touch with my daughter who has been travelling abroad."Paediatrician Vidya Rajan says that a child who shows promise needs to be groomed with proper attention. "Once a child's capabilities have been identified, parents have to be the motivational force behind him or her." Rajan's daughter Nandita has been a meritorious student in Std 10{+t}{+h} and 12{+t}{+h} She was one among 40 children who were invited to watch the Republic Day parade at New Delhi along with the prime minister for her academic brilliance. "I cut down my medical practice by 80% to be with my children. I would take their lessons and always be around to look after their needs," she says and adds, "Mothers are the biggest support system for children. I feel their mere presence makes it easy for kids to keep their focus and pursue their goals."Nagpur University is undergoing one of the worst crises in its history. An ignominious moment came when President Pranab Mukherjee called off his visit for the 100th convocation ceremony. The vexed issue of 250 banned colleges has become the nemesis of NU and it has snowballed into a major controversy largely due to the backing of NU political heavyweight Baban Taywade. He led the fight as admissions to his college at Koradi was banned following a failure to show 50% students' enrolment which is mandatory as per Maharashtra government GR of 2009. The Dhanwate National College (DNC) principal was also accused by some quarters of allegedly blackmailing and arm-twisting for lifting the ban. The senior academician tried to clear this air of controversy surrounding him during his exclusive tete-a-tete with TOI.Excerpts from an interview ...A. We are primarily objecting to ban on 50 colleges because there is ambiguity in the 2009 GR. Moreover, it was never implemented throughout the state in all these years until the issue cropped up in NU. This GR didn't mention what the maximum capacity should be. Originally, it was meant for additional sections, but now government says it was a typing mistake and it will be applicable for all courses. Even most of these 50 colleges have secured more than 50% enrolment from 2010-11 sessions onwards. The ban on 250 colleges is OK but these 50 colleges have followed all rules.A. I am only supporting those 35 out of 250 colleges which have appointed teachers and also those 50 which are absolutely not at fault. We don't support others which failed to appoint regular teachers and already told them to start recruitment. Even during our various resolutions in the Academic and Management councils, we want NU to lift ban only from these 35 and 50 colleges.A. There is no connection with the elections. Moreover, my stand was clear from the very beginning even before I was nominated. I made it very clear from the beginning that Maharashtra Universities Act, 1994, has conferred rights on Academic Council to decide intake capacity as per Section 83(c) and the government has no right to interfere.A. It was banned on the admissions of 2009 and now, after four years, the government or NU can't go back and say that since you failed to get required number of admissions then, we are banning you. It was NU which granted affiliation to our college after verifying all credentials all these years. Even the majority of NU departments don't have teachers and there is not a single regular teacher in Government Forensic Science Institute.A. As per MU Act, there is an authority based administration in all universities. The statutory bodies are constituted for that purpose only. We are just demanding to implement decision made by the Academic and Management councils. If NU administration doesn't abide by the unanimous decisions of these bodies, I think those should be dissolved. There is no point in being elected public members when nobody listens to you.A. We completely respect all their orders. But if you carefully read the first order of May 3, nowhere it had asked NU to ban the admissions. Even DTE said no to ban admissions to two MBA colleges which are among the banned ones. Now, their students have moved to the court as NU refused to accept their exam forms. Even in subsequent decisions, court had made it aptly clear that those fulfilling conditions should approach NU and latter should consider their proposals. But NU neither accepts nor rejects them.A. We supported them initially as we wanted to streamline the functioning in the students interests. I admit that for three years we sometimes backed the VC against all odds as we didn't wanted to hamper functioning. But when, the administration started making blunders and punishing colleges, we opposed it. University's function is to help the colleges and not kill them.A. I think the administration has completely failed on all fronts in doing their duties. But we haven't asked for his papers directly. If he is still not ready to listen to unanimous decisions of statutory bodies, then I think there is no other way out.Over the years, Yavatmal has drawn more attention for farmer suicides and coal mines causing pollution than anything else. But, not many know that Tipeshwar Wildlife Sanctuary is a jewel in its crown.The 148 sq km sanctuary is located 22km from Pandharkawada on NH7 and 180km from Nagpur. The little known and scarcely visited park holds immense potential to be one of the best tourist destinations in Vidarbha and is gearing up to welcome nature lovers in the coming months.Tipeshwar, which falls in Ghatanji and Kelapur tehsils, was notified as a sanctuary on January 24, 1997 after carving out reserve forest area of 14,029.27 hectares (140.29 sq km) from territorial division and 833.58 hectares (8.33 sq km) was private forest.A visit to the sanctuary from Mathni and Sunna gates was really an 'adventurous' experience. Over 40-km of roads and accommodation facilities are being developed on priority.The sanctuary derives its name from goddesses Tipai who is revered by tribals. When Tipeshwar village was relocated in March this year, one of the conditions of its people was that they should be allowed to offer prayers at least once a year at Tipai.The Tipai still stands tall. The early morning view from here demonstrates nature at its best and the picturesque view of the landscape from the temple-top is exceptionally mystifying. The vegetation was dotted with hills hugged by fog.Moving along the narrow Shikari Road, range forest officer (RFO) UD Chavhan claimed the stretch used to be a hunting ground during the 'Raj Era' when Tipeshwar was a shooting block, and hence the name.Chavhan's claim is backed by solid proof as the road is a beautiful tiger habitat having dense forests, 60% dominated by teak followed by bamboo, ain and dhawda on both sides and several nullahs encompassing it. The TOI team also saw fresh tiger pugmarks at 7.45am near a nullah. "Shikari Road is known for tiger sightings. Last year, Pench field director MS Reddy saw two tigers on this road. This was his first tiger sighting here," says Chavhan."There are 22 nullahs flowing across Tipeshwar. Cashing in on these small streams, which dry down in summer, we have started work on developing seven underground 'bhandaras' to store water for wildlife. This will be apart from the six solar and 13 artificial water holes already in place to quench thirst of wildlife," says Reddy.Melancholic spots like the Gosaidoh, near the Pilkhan protection hut, is what makes Tipeshwar worth a visit. This is the only perennial water body in Tipeshwar. During summers, tiger sightings are assured near Gosaidoh.The roads are now a rugged terrain with huge stones making mobility difficult. Hatchbacks and other small vehicles just cannot move. The small streams in the sanctuary overflowing in rains will always wash out the roads."Culverts are on our mind. Currently, developing tourism roads is the top priority. By December end, you will see changes," said Reddy. With the Maregaon village lying deep inside the sanctuary also ready to shift out, wildlife will have a free run.There is recorded evidence of five tigers, besides presence of black bucks, chitals, sloth bears, wild dogs, nilgais, panthers, civet cats, antelopes among 160 species of birds and 26 species of reptiles. In May this year, some activists video-graphed a pair of tigers with four cubs at a waterhole.ACF Uttam Sawant admits tiger sightings are rare but will improve once prey base goes up. "We are drawing a plan to relocate sambars from Bor to Tipeshwar to improve prey," he says.Tipeshwar village has moved out and now tall grass meadows have come up on the 410 hectare farm land. At one such farm a small water body has been developed for wild animals.Tipeshwar being isolated, not many tourists visit here. Figures show that in the last seven years, not more than 1,652 tourists have visited the park. This is not even one-fourth of the tourists number you see in small sanctuaries like Bor.Reddy says he is serious about promoting Tipeshwar as a hot spot tourist destination. "We have trained 25 local youths as guides, besides new wooden gates at Mathni and Sunna are being installed. Sign boards along NH7 will be put up to guide tourists. A couple of parties are also scouting for space to develop resorts at Sunna," he said.Presently, accommodation facilities are being developed at Sunna. Work on three suites and an equal number of tents and toilets is going on. An interpretation centre is being converted into dormitories.Distance: Adilabad railway station and Yavatmal are the closest district places to the sanctuary. Pandharkawada bus station is about 22km away, while Sonegaon airport in Nagpur is at a distance of 172km.* Time: Put off immediate plans to visit to January by which time roads and facilities will be ready* Mathni Gate: It is 180km from Nagpur. Reach Pandharkawada, from where this gate is around 20km via Parwa, Kaleshwar Fata and Mathni.* Sunna Gate: This is like the Moharli gate of Tadoba. It's about 190km from Nagpur and very close to NH7. Tourism routes are at a stretch of 10km on every side.*Guides: There are 25 local guides.* Vehicles: Though no lower or upper limit for tourist vehicles has been calculated, 25 vehicles are permitted at one time.* Accommodation: Three suites and three tents besides dormitories being readied at Sunna. No accommodation at Mathni.* Gypsies: None yet.* Routes: 45-km is being developed for tourists.* Wildlife: Wide range of insects and ant species. It has 29 species of mammals and 160 species of birds, besides 26 species of reptiles out of which 6 are endangered.* Food: Canteen facility is being proposed but NH7 which passes along the sanctuary has several dhabas.