Deaconess Hospital is opening a stand-alone emergency department to serve patients in the rapidly growing north Spokane corridor.

The 15-bed facility at 8202 N. Division St. will open as soon as it receives final licensing paperwork, which could be this week, said Dr. Justin Racht, medical director for Deaconess’ emergency department.

Stand-alone emergency departments are gaining ground nationally, though this is the first for the Spokane area, Racht said. Since the passage of the Affordable Care Act, the demand for health care has grown, including emergency care.

“Contrary to popular opinion, the majority of people who visit an emergency department do need to be there,” Racht said.

However, most are treated and released without being admitted to a hospital. At Deaconess’ downtown emergency department, only about 20 percent of patient visits result in a hospital admission. The low admission rate gave officials the idea for the stand-alone department to serve north Spokane and nearby communities.

“The North Side is growing like crazy, and so is the demand for 24-hour emergency care,” said Ruthy Allen, one of the registered nurses who will work at the facility.

Deaconess North Emergency Center is about 2 miles north of Providence Holy Family Hospital, which also has an emergency department.

The center is a full-service emergency department, with diagnostic testing and lab work, Allen said. It will provide care for serious or life-threatening injuries, such as breathing problems, abdominal pain, allergic reactions, food poisoning, fractures and minor burns.

Patients who need to be admitted to a hospital will be transported downtown to Deaconess or another hospital of their choice.

Patients who need MRIs will also be sent to Deaconess’ downtown emergency department. Other tests, such as ultrasounds, X-rays and CT scans, can be performed at the center.

The center has a psych room for individuals in crisis, and one patient room equipped for obstetrics.

The 12,720-square-foot facility is located on 5 1/2 acres.