New Jersey Food Truck Association shares tips on how to open a food truck.

The Monroe-based Ahh! la Cart food truck is among 40 that will be at the Food Truck and Rock Carnival from Sept. 18 to 20 at Oak Ridge Park in Clark. The average cost of purchasing, designing, fabricating, painting, insuring and permitting a food truck is about $100,000. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Ahh! la Cart) Story Highlights Establishing a demographic and brand is the first step a prospective food truck owner must take.

Simple and focused is the best approach to a food truck menu because of the small kitchen.

An average food trucks costs about $100,000, which includes equipment, fabrication, design and insurance.

About $700 to $2,000 in certifications and permits also are needed, depending on the municipality.

If you have had a lifelong dream to open a restaurant, but never had had the financing to do so, a food truck may be a more affordable and lucrative option.

An average cost of about $100,000 includes equipment, fabrication, graphic design, painting, insurance, permits and certification, said Joe Hepner, president of the Hoboken-based New Jersey Food Truck Association and co-owner of the Aroy-D Thai Elephant food truck since 2011. That's a much more affordable investment than the $1 million it can cost to open a brick-and-mortar establishment, according Forbes magazine.

But before you spend a penny, there are several steps a food truck owner must take in order to solidify success, Hepner said. Here are his suggestions:

Start with a demographic, concept and brand -- “If you’re dealing in regional foods, a high school student is not going to be your target market. If you’re offering flavors of a different area, it’s not going to go over that big at a big drink fest, where people are getting hammered. Knowing your demographic will determine whether you will succeed or bomb. I was invited to Six Flags Great Adventure. They said, ‘We would love to have your truck,’ but I knew it wouldn’t do great because a bunch of young people going on rides don’t want Thai food. My demographic is white collar, American corporate offices. At corporate parks, I slam it with long lines. But barbecue goes over well with blue collar. You have to know which demographic is right for you.

-- “If you’re dealing in regional foods, a high school student is not going to be your target market. If you’re offering flavors of a different area, it’s not going to go over that big at a big drink fest, where people are getting hammered. Knowing your demographic will determine whether you will succeed or bomb. I was invited to Six Flags Great Adventure. They said, ‘We would love to have your truck,’ but I knew it wouldn’t do great because a bunch of young people going on rides don’t want Thai food. My demographic is white collar, American corporate offices. At corporate parks, I slam it with long lines. But barbecue goes over well with blue collar. You have to know which demographic is right for you. Know your competition — “When you’re putting your business plan, don’t be fooled by your great food. To understand your demographic, you also need to know your market. That’s not just your audience. Back in 2009 and 2010, I did exhaustive research on food trucks, and there were not many of us in New Jersey back then, so I knew I could start up in the state. If there were 10 Thai trucks, I might have rethought my decision. Look up where the trucks go, what venues, where the opportunities are.”

— “When you’re putting your business plan, don’t be fooled by your great food. To understand your demographic, you also need to know your market. That’s not just your audience. Back in 2009 and 2010, I did exhaustive research on food trucks, and there were not many of us in New Jersey back then, so I knew I could start up in the state. If there were 10 Thai trucks, I might have rethought my decision. Look up where the trucks go, what venues, where the opportunities are.” Keep the menu simple and focused — “You can’t be everything to everyone because the kitchen is too small. Keep it simple and focus on what you do best.”

— “You can’t be everything to everyone because the kitchen is too small. Keep it simple and focus on what you do best.” Get your LLC and Servsafe certification — “While you’re building your brand, establish yourself as a limited liability company and take the test for your Servsafe certification. You can get those things done way in advance.”

— “While you’re building your brand, establish yourself as a limited liability company and take the test for your Servsafe certification. You can get those things done way in advance.” Read David Weber’s “Food Truck Handbook” — “If I was going to write a book, this is what I would write. It’s a great book for someone trying to get into the business.”

Once you’ve purchased a truck, which will cost on average about $80,000, Hepner said, have it fabricated. Hepner recommends Shore Kitchen Supply because of the vast experience the Brick Township-based fabricator has been designing industrial kitchens.

He also suggested hiring a graphic designer to create a custom vinyl wrap that will help to brand and market the truck.

Once you’re ready to open in a demographic-friendly location, you’ll have to obtain municipal health and fire permits, as well as an additional peddler’s license, parking permit and other permits in some towns, Hepner said. They cost between $500 to $2,000, depending on the municipality.

For more information, visit www.njfta.org/.

Staff Writer Bob Makin: 732-565-7319; bmakin@MyCentralJersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1F6adTk