Topics: Editor's Picks, Fox News, Ronald Reagan, Ted Cruz, Tom Cotton

Forty or 50 years ago, the very thought of Dwight Eisenhower or Richard Nixon being too liberal for the Republican Party would have been hard to fathom. But what was considered conservative in the GOP of the 1950s, ’60s or ’70s would be considered centrist or moderate today. The power that extreme wingnuts exert on the modern GOP has been obvious during recent events in Congress, especially the ongoing debates surrounding the Affordable Care Act of 2010. Catering to the Tea Party and the GOP’s extremist base, Republicans shut down the government for the first time since 1995-1996.

The fact that killing Obamacare is such an obsession for House and Senate Republicans is ironic in light of the fact that in the past, many Republicans (including Nixon, Sen. Bob Dole and Mitt Romney) were proponents of universal healthcare via the private sector and proposed ideas similar to Obamacare. In fact, a criticism many liberals and progressives have had of Obamacare is that it is too close to Republican ideas of the past. So House Republicans have, in effect, been railing against what used to be a Republican idea.

House Republicans also pandered to the Tea Party when, on September 19, they pushed through a bill that calls for slashing billions of dollars from the food stamp program during the worst economic conditions since the Great Depression. The bill, which passed the house 217-210, was passed largely along party lines: only 15 Republicans voted against it, and not one House Democrat voted for it. In the past, that bill would have encountered a lot more Republican opposition; it’s hard to imagine Nelson Rockefeller, Thomas E. Dewey or Dwight D. Eisenhower favoring so deep an assault on the social safety net. But there is little room for either moderation or compassion in the GOP of 2013.

American politics have evolved in such a way that in 2013, the United States has two main political parties: a very centrist, even center-right party (the Democrats) and a hard-right authoritarian party (the Republicans). GOP strategists may say they are the party of Abraham Lincoln, Dwight D. Eisenhower and Teddy Roosevelt, but none of those presidents would get very far in today’s GOP—certainly not at the national level. The GOP has become the party of Ted Cruz, Iowa Rep. Steve King, Rick Santorum and Virginia gubernatorial candidate Ken Cuccinelli. Here are 10 Republicans who would actually be hated if they were trying to make it in today’s GOP.

1. Richard Nixon

The word “liberal” was seldom used in connection with Richard Nixon in the late 1960s or early ’70s. Nixon was a paranoid Cold War anti-communist and uptight moralist who helped push the U.S. Supreme Court to the right, railed against pornography and defeated Democrat Hubert Humphrey in the presidential election of 1968 by helping to usher in the GOP’s “Southern strategy” (which was designed to win over racist Southern whites who had left the Democratic Party because of the civil rights movement and LBJ’s Great Society). Nevertheless, there are many things about Nixon that would make him persona non grata in the GOP of 2013.

Nixon strengthened social security benefits, supported elements of Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal, and was instrumental in the creation of both the Environmental Protection Agency and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration in 1970. But perhaps Nixon’s greatest sin, in the minds of modern Republicans and the Tea Party, would be his support of universal healthcare. In 1974, Nixon and Democratic Sen. Ted Kennedy of Massachusetts worked out a healthcare reform deal. Kennedy, at first, proposed a single-payer healthcare system along the lines of Canada and the U.K., but when it became obvious he didn’t have the votes for that, the plan Kennedy and Nixon agreed upon would have been similar to the Affordable Care Act of 2010 but with more generous provisions. (“Nixoncare” was derailed by the Watergate scandal and Nixon’s resignation in 1974.) So when it came to healthcare reform, Nixon was to the left of President Barack Obama and way to the left of Paul Ryan or the Tea Party.

2. Earl Warren

To the Christian Right, the Warren Court of 1953-1969 went out of its way to erode family values in the United States. But Chief Justice Earl Warren was not a Democrat. He was a Republican ex-governor of California who was nominated to the U.S. Supreme Court by a Republican president: Dwight D. Eisenhower. The Warren Court handed down a lot of decisions that social conservatives detest, including the 1965 ruling in Griswold v. Connecticut (a right-to-privacy decision that struck down a Connecticut law forbidding the use of contraceptives by married couples), 1969’s Stanley v. Georgia decision (which said that mere possession of explicit porn is not a crime even if it is obscene) and the landmark 1957 ruling in Roth v. the United States. Roth established a whole new definition of obscenity that made it much more difficult to get an obscenity conviction for sexually explicit material. Christian Right activist Phyllis Schlafly, a major critic of the Roth decision, has complained that “the flood of pornography started with the Warren Court.”

These days, there is no way a Republican president would nominate someone as socially liberal as Earl Warren for the Supreme Court—and if a Republican who held Warren’s views ran for president, the Christian Right would see to it that he didn’t make it through the primary.

3. Dwight D. Eisenhower

Liz Cheney and many other neocons love to paint President Obama as a pacifist who is soft on national defense. This is ludicrous in light of the fact that Obama gave the order to kill Osama bin Laden in 2011 and ordered 17,000 more troops deployed in Afghanistan in 2009. But to neocons, the military-industrial complex can never be large enough or aggressive enough.

On January 17, 1961, it was none other than outgoing President Dwight D. Eisenhower who brought the term military-industrial complex into the public consciousness during his farewell speech. Eisenhower was hardly anti-military: he was a five-star general during World War II. But his words served as a warning against jingoism and a belligerent foreign policy. These days, no Republican would get very far in a presidential primary if he or she said what Eisenhower said 52 years ago: “We must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex. The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists, and will persist.”

4. Barry Goldwater

When Barry Goldwater ran for president against Democrat Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964, he suffered a landslide defeat: Johnson won 486 electoral votes, Goldwater a mere 52. A key factor in Goldwater’s defeat was the Johnson campaign’s ability to paint Goldwater as a warmonger who would get the U.S. into a nuclear war (which is ironic in light of how greatly LBJ escalated the country’s involvement in the Vietnam War). But even though Goldwater was considered an arch-conservative in the 1950s and ’60s, he became quite critical of the GOP’s direction in the 1980s and ’90s—and a key factor was his disdain for the Christian Right.