GOLDEN — As he surveyed his farm, nestled in a backyard between North and South Table Mountain, Jason Plotkin had weather on his mind.

Specifically, the possible frost — or even snow — that loomed last week, well before his 22 varieties of organic tomatoes had a chance to finish their late-summer fruition.

“The climate in Colorado, you have to have some kind of indoor growing space,” said Plotkin, 27, himself part of the growing crop of small-scale vegetable farmers in the Denver area. “It can snow in May. It can snow in September.”

Early freeze or no, Plotkin’s 1-acre Golden Acre Farm could soon be able to extend its growing season year-round, thanks to the farm-to-table relationship Plotkin has cultivated with the executive chef at Regis University.

Bon Appetit Management Company, the food-service provider at Regis, is giving away $50,000 in grants to small farmers nationwide, and Golden Acre’s request for a greenhouse is one of five finalists for two $5,000 grants in the Southwest region.

The grants are part of Bon Appetit’s 15th anniversary celebration for its Farm-to-Fork program, which requires its kitchens to source at least 20 percent of ingredients from small, owner-operated farms within a 150-mile radius. Chefs and diners at Bon Appetit properties across the U.S. will vote to determine the winners Sept. 23.

“I would love to be able to extend my season and know I have a permanent structure to grow my starts,” Plotkin said. “Not only do I need a greenhouse so I can get my plants to market sooner, I want to be able to supply Regis and other restaurants with hardy winter crops.”

For the past year, Plotkin has worked with Glenn Babcock, executive chef for Bon Appetit at Regis, to serve up Golden Acre produce in the university’s cafes.

Each week, after closing his stand at the Highland Farmers Market, Plotkin brings whatever didn’t sell — heirloom tomatoes, swiss chard, watermelon, beets, turnips, cucumbers, kale galore — to Regis.

Babcock then buys what he wants direct from Plotkin at a wholesale price. The produce’s destination: the 1,800 meals served to Regis students every day.

“I clean him out every single week,” Babcock said.

It’s been a mutually beneficial relationship, Babcock said. He gets fresh, high-quality local produce “at a fair price,” and Plotkin knows that he won’t go home with unsold produce.

“It becomes my challenge to say, ‘We have this great, wonderful product in-house — how do we use that? How do we save it?’ ” Babcock said.

Most produce ends up on the salad bar where it “really shines,” Babcock said. But the chef also gets creative, serving up watermelon agua fresca, oven-roasted turnips and “kale 5,000 ways.” He even started up a little pickling operation to handle an overabundance of cucumbers.

“It’s been fantastic,” Plotkin said. “Glenn understands the need for community support for small farms.”

If he wins the grant from Bon Appetit, Plotkin plans to build a passive solar greenhouse and aquaponics system, incorporating used and recycled materials as much as possible.

The goal, he said, is to transform the 3-year-old farm into a year-round operation, supplying organic produce and sustainably raised tilapia.

“I’ve been growing food since I was 12 years old,” Plotkin said. “It’s my trade. I love being outside. I have a passion for growing plants. You learn something new every season.”

Babcock is also looking forward to the possibility of more fresh, local produce, particularly in the months outside the traditional growing season when Regis serves most of its meals.

“To have that expanded capacity, he has the opportunity to supply some hardy winter greens and hardy vegetables — cauliflower, broccoli, kale,” Babcock said. “It’s a win for us. It’s a win for him.”

Emilie Rusch: 303-954-2457, erusch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/emilierusch