Topics: Ayed Fadel, Israel-Palestine, New York Times, News, Politics News

“I think that this interview was my last interview ever, I am done with media!” exclaimed Ayed Fadel.

Fadel is the Palestinian owner of Kabareet, a bar in Haifa, Israel. He was featured in a Jan. 3 piece in The New York Times titled “In Israeli City of Haifa, a Liberal Arab Culture Blossoms.” The article, written by Times reporter Diaa Hadid, characterizes the Israeli city as a hub of “a self-consciously Arab milieu that is secular, feminist and gay-friendly,” juxtaposing it as “a striking secular counterpoint to the conservatism of many of Israel’s Arab communities.”

The Times claims Haifa “has embraced its diversity” and is “a comfortable place for liberal Palestinians who want not only to escape the constraints of conservative Arab communities but also to be among their own people.” In order to do so, it quotes young progressive Palestinians like Fadel.

There is a problem, however. Fadel says the Times took his quotes completely out of context.

Three other people interviewed for the article also felt they were misrepresented.

According to Fadel, the U.S. newspaper of record removed all of his criticisms of Israel and its illegal occupation of the Palestinian territories.

“There are so many points missing, crucial ones, that the lack of them make this article shallow, offensive and degrading,” Fadel explained.

On social media, the young Palestinian man described the Times interview as a “trap,” in order to contribute to an article making Israel look good. He said he “found this piece disturbing.”

“It refers to certain aspects and neglects so many others that I personally mentioned during the interview,” Fadel explained. “It portrays the modern Palestinian in a ‘Western’ image that comforts white readers and make them say, ‘Oh, they’re just like us!'”

“I do agree our community has developed and evolved, and I love going to the places mentioned in this article. They feel like home, and because they feel like home, it’s disturbing the way they were illustrated,” Fadel added.

Salon reached out to The New York Times for comment. The author, Diaa Hadid, relayed her response for Salon to Margaret Sullivan, who edits the Times’ Public Editor’s Journal. Sullivan included Hadid’s comments in a post published on Jan. 8, a sequel to a previous post published earlier in the morning that summarized criticisms the piece has received from all across the political spectrum.

Hadid stood by her work, which she said she thought “was ultimately fair.”

“I thought I had conveyed what they meant – which is my duty as a writer: to not take things out of context, and to be fair to what people mean,” she said.

“I wrote this story really because I wanted to pay tribute to Haifa’s unique culture, and particularly how Palestinian citizens of Israel had carved their own dynamic, liberal scene in the city,” Hadid explained.

“For that reason, I was mortified to find out that at least four people I had interviewed felt that I had misrepresented them in the story, and that it had garnered more criticism than any other story I have written in nearly a decade of coverage the Middle East,” she added.

In his previous statements on social media, Fadel strongly disagreed that the representation was fair and accurate.

Fadel says that for “90 percent of the interview we were talking about how the culture of the cultural resistance is growing and taking place in so many levels, such as music, art spaces, etc., and how the Palestinian underground scene is getting bigger and bigger and full of creativity and how literally it is being a place full of intelligence and rebel agenda.”