'Mighty Goat' puts Kayla Becker in the winner's circle

If You Go What: Boulder County Fair When: Ends Sunday Where: 9595 Nelson Road, Longmont Among Sunday's events: Noon 4-H/FFA rabbit awards in the Exhibit Building; 1 p.m. 4-H/FFA beef awards in Barn C, 12:30 p.m.-2 p.m. 4-H/FFA dairy goat costume contest in Barn A; 2 p.m. 4-H/FFA breeding/fiber/utility goat awards in Barn B; 2:30-4 p.m. Rocky Mountain Carriage Club demonstration in the Indoor Arena. Further Info: Bouldercountyfair.org

An 11-year-old Greeley girl had what her mother said Saturday an "awesome" showing at this year's Boulder County Fair.

Kayla Becker, 11, hugs her grand champion goat after she won grand champion round robin for showmanship in 4H at the Boulder County Fair on Saturday. (David R. Jennings / Broomfield Enterprise)

Kayla Becker, a member of the Liberty Livestock 4-H Club, wound up showing this year's grand champion market goat, a Boer she's named "Mighty Goat."

The youngster also showed a sheep, a Suffolk-Hampshire cross named "Trooper," which was the 2014 Boulder County Fair's reserve grand champion market lamb.

To add to her accomplishments, Kayla also ended up winning a giant belt bucket and blue ribbon on Saturday for her skills in showing a variety of animals — horses, steers, dairy goats, market goats, lambs and hogs — in a Junior Round Robin competition.

"She's had a great, great fair, said her mother, Janet Becker.

Advertisement

"It's actually really, really good for being in 4-H only three years," said Kayla, who will soon be starting sixth grade at Greeley's Chappelow Elementary School.

She spends her summers with her grandparents, Richard and Jane Miller, who live outside Longmont on East County Line Road, and her aunt, Ronda Weber, who raises show lambs on a farm between Longmont and Berthoud.

Kayla's Boulder County Fair accomplishments are carrying on something of a family tradition, her proud mother said.

Janet Becker said she'd showed the grand champion lamb and grand champion hog at the 1993 Boulder County Fair, when she was a member of the Pleasant View Sheep Keepers 4-H Club, as well as the Grand Champion lamb at the 1994 Colorado State Fair.

Kayla appeared to have mixed feelings, however, about the possibility of parting with her own grand champion goat and reserve grand champion market lamb at Saturday's 59th annual Boulder County Fair Junior Livestock Auction.

"I love them so much," she said of Mighty Goat and Trooper.

Nor were beef and dairy cattle, rabbits, goats, sheep, chickens, turkeys, barrows and gilts the only animals and poultry up for auction on Saturday, the next-to-last day of this year's fair.

On Saturday morning, another set of bidders put up hundreds of dollars to buy award-winning 4-H products featured at the fair.

Isobel Tuck, an 11-year-old member of the Niwot Nifties 4-H Club who attends Boulder Country Day School, said she was happy with the $100 she got for a basket of banana chocolate-chip and gluten-free — money her mother, Lucy Tuck, said Isobel would be donating to the club.

Kendra Harris, an 18-year-old recent Mead High School graduate and a member of the Kicks-and-Bucks 4-H Club who'll be attending Colorado State University to study animal science this fall, scored $500 for the basket of Angora fleece she'd trimmed from her rabbit.

Harris said that rabbit itself won a championship in this year's fair in a category of English Angora and breeding rabbits.

Alexandra Tanaka-Cuerden, a member of the Fairview Crops and Livestock 4-H Club who attends Erie High School, got $200 in the auction for a yellow cake she'd decorated with buttercream icing.

She said she won a "people's choice" award for her cake decoration at the fair, although "I've only been doing it for a couple of months . . .I'm happy to receive anything."

Jessie Slepicka, another member of the Niwot Nifties 4-H Club who's a recent Niwot High School graduate and will be attending the University of Colorado to study criminal justice this fall, got $300 in Saturday's 4-H Product Sale for his cranberry-and-apple turnovers.

"I thought it went really well," Slepicka, a 13-year 4-H veteran, said of this year's fair and auction.

As for Saturday afternoon's livestock sale, the winning bid for Kayla Becker's grand champion market goat was $2,000, but she won't have to part with Mighty Goat. The bidder, identified by fair officials as Agra Holdings, is donating the goat back to Kayla.

A buyer identified by the auctioneer as Gas Mat bid $3,000 for "Trooper," Kayla's reserve grand champion lamb, but the girl's aunt said the family will probably buy the animal back rather than have it wind up in a feedlot.

Kayla said she and her family would be going to a Red Lobster for dinner Saturday night to celebrate her Boulder County Fair experience.

Contact Times-Call staff writer John Fryar at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com