09/17/2015 1:23 AM EDT CNN President Says Wall-To-Wall Debate Coverage Fits 'All-In' Strategy HuffPost's Michael Calderone reports: SIMI VALLEY, Calif. -- CNN went wall-to-wall with Republican debate coverage in the days leading up to Wednesday night's big event, complete with an on-screen countdown clock and seemingly endless reporting and analysis. CNN Worldwide President Jeff Zucker said shortly after his workers wrapped up the marathon five hours of debate that they approached it similar to other major news events. “We go all-in when there’s a big story," Zucker said in an interview from the press filing center at the Reagan Library. Read more here.

09/17/2015 1:10 AM EDT Carly Fiorina Delivers As Trump Takes Some Hits In GOP Debate HuffPost's Scott Conroy reports: SIMI VALLEY, Calif. -- He smirked. He shouted. He wagged his finger. He taunted his opponents. In the opening stages of Wednesday night’s marathon Republican presidential debate, Donald Trump was very much the outsized version of himself that has enthralled the nation all summer. When it was all said and done, however, Trump did not steal the show to the extent that he has at every turn leading up to this point in the campaign, perhaps signaling--at long last -- a new stage in the race for the GOP nomination, in which the overriding narrative might no longer be The Donald vs. Everybody Else. Read more here.

09/16/2015 11:39 PM EDT Non-Politicians Dominate Republican Debate Three of the four Republican candidates who had the most speaking time at Wednesday's main debate have never held elected office. Donald Trump, Carly Fiorina, and Ben Carson held the floor for more than 45 minutes combined. Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush was the only experienced politician to break into the top tier of airtime. The spotlight cast on a small coterie of outsider candidates reflects a wider dynamic of the race: Carson, Trump and Fiorina together currently take more than half of the vote in horserace polls. While Republican voters like the majority of 2016 contenders, many are fed up with their party's current leadership. Nearly three-quarters of GOP voters say they'd prefer a Washington outsider to someone with Washington experience -- a view shared by just 18 percent of Democrats. "I'll tell you why people are supporting outsiders. It's because you know what happens if someone's been in the system their whole life, they don't know how broken the system is," Fiorina said early in the debate. "A fish swims in water, it doesn't know it's water. It's not that politicians are bad people, it's that they've been in that system forever." With eight other candidates scrambling for the remaining fraction of airtime, even those with a tenuous claim to outsider appeal tried to reframe their job history. "As far as being an outsider is concerned, let me tell you this, Jake, I'm a Republican in New Jersey," New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie quipped to host Jake Tapper. Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) defended a record of missing Senate votes by arguing that both parties are "completely out of touch with the lives of our people." -- Ariel Edwards-Levy

09/16/2015 11:26 PM EDT Missing From The Debate: Obamacare What a difference four years -- and millions of people with health insurance -- can make in the Republican presidential campaign. In 2011, the last time GOP candidates for president gathered for a debate at the Ronald Reagan Library, the topic of the Affordable Care Act came up early and often. Right near the beginning, Mitt Romney got a tough question about the Massachusetts health care law he signed -- a program that became the prototype for the Affordable Care Act. Rick Perry, then among the most vocal opponents of “Obamacare,” was pressed on how he would address the problem of the uninsured if the Affordable Care Act came off the books. Jon Huntsman described his own preferred alternative to Obama’s health care law; Rand Paul expounded on the dangers of government meddling with health care markets. And when Michele Bachmann got a question about the economy, and what she’d do to create jobs, she used it as an excuse to talk about the (alleged) damage the health care law was doing to the business climate. On Wednesday night, for this year’s debate at the Reagan Library, the health care law got almost no attention at all. Donald Trump made a quick reference to it during his introductory remarks, and Ted Cruz made his usual promise to repeal the law. But the only sustained discussion came in response to a question about the summer Supreme Court decision rejecting an anti-Obamacare lawsuit. And that was a conversation about Chief Justice John Roberts, his supposed act of heresy, and what kind of justices the Republicans would appoint to serve on the Court. Health care policy didn’t come up. So why didn’t the CNN hosts ask about it? Why didn’t any of the Republican candidates strain to bring it up, the way Bachmann did in 2011? Here’s one theory: The issue is losing its resonance, even among Republicans. No, the law is not popular. When pollsters ask respondents whether they like the law or approve of it, usually pluralities and sometimes even majorities say no. But recent surveys suggest that opposition may finally be softening, the issue is not dominating the headlines anymore and another issue, immigration, is become the GOP's chief preoccupation. This is happening at a time when millions of people are getting health insurance through Medicaid and regulated private insurance -- and, as a result, the proportion of Americans without health insurance is reaching historic lows. The components of the law are also pretty popular. Whatever people feel about the law in theory, they like the protections it provides in practice -- the guarantee of comprehensive insurance for people with pre-existing conditions, for example, and the generous tax credits for purchasing private coverage. Support for those features actually isn’t new. Polls have picked it up for a long time. In 2011, that support simply didn’t matter, perhaps because the benefits were purely hypothetical. Now they are real -- and making a difference in the lives of millions of people. Maybe that’s why Republicans are a little more skittish now. -- Jonathan Cohn

09/16/2015 11:16 PM EDT Marco Rubio Says He's Not A Climate Skeptic Moderator Jake Tapper asked the candidates to respond to a question on climate change that came in via Twitter. Tapper referenced George Schulz, who served as secretary of state under former President Ronald Reagan and is now active on climate change. The question compared it to the concern over the hole in the ozone layer in the 1980s, an environmental challenge the Reagan administration was skeptical of but eventually took on. Florida Sen. Marco Rubio insisted that he's "not skeptical" of climate change -- he's just skeptical of the Obama administration's proposed policy solutions. "We're not going to destroy our economy the way the left-wing government wants to," he said. Those policies, he said, "make it harder to do biz in America" but "will do nothing to change our climate, to change our weather." U.S. measures to reduce climate change would do little, he argued, because "America is not a planet." He did not acknowledge the effort currently underway to reach a global agreement to address climate change. Christie took a similar tack. "We don’t need this massive government intervention to deal with the problem," he said. "Everybody makes a mistake every once in a while, even George Schultz, with all due respect." He also agued that there exists "some wild left-wing idea that somehow, us by ourselves is going to fix this problem." Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker argued that the rules from the Obama administration Environmental Protection Agency to address climate change would hurt manufacturing in his state, but "will have a marginal impact on climate change." -- Kate Sheppard

09/16/2015 11:15 PM EDT Some Candidates Had Cringe-Worthy Answers To 'Which Woman Belongs On The $ 10 Bill?" The GOP candidates were asked about which woman they'd chose to be on the $ 10 bill, since the Treasury has announced that a woman will replace Alexander Hamilton in 2020. Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) gave Susan B. Anthony as his answer. Sens. Marco Rubio (Fla.) and Ted Cruz (Texas) both chose Rosa Parks, though Cruz said he'd keep Hamilton on the $ 10 bill and replace Andrew Jackson on the $2 0 bill instead. Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush said he'd choose former U.K. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, while Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker picked Clara Barton, the founder of the Red Cross. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie chose Abigail Adams, the wife of former President John Adams, and Ohio Gov. John Kasich selected Mother Theresa. Some candidates named members of their family. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee said he'd pick his wife, because "who else could possibly be on that money?" Businessman Donald Trump said he'd put his daughter, Ivanka, on the bill -- or Rosa Parks -- and neurosurgeon Dr. Ben Carson said he'd choose his mother. But former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina, the only woman on the stage, declined to name anyone altogether. "Honestly, it's a gesture," she said. "It doesn't help to change our history. We've got to recognize that women aren't a special interest group ... This nation will be better off when every woman can live the life she chooses." -- Samantha Lachman

09/16/2015 11:12 PM EDT GOP Candidates Pick Their Preferred Secret Service Code Names Every president and presidential nominee receives a code name once they receive Secret Service protection. Here's what GOP candidates would like to be called, as they declared onstage at the second presidential debate in Simi Valley, California, on Wednesday night. Chris Christie: Trueheart Carly Fiorina: Secretariat Scott Walker: Harley Donald Trump: Humble Ben Carson: One Nation Marco Rubio: Gator Mike Huckabee: Duckhunter Rand Paul: Justice Never Sleeps John Kasich: Unit 1 Jeb Bush: Eveready Ted Cruz: Cohiba -- Igor Bobic

09/16/2015 11:02 PM EDT Jeb Bush Defends His Brother’s Choice Of Chief Justice Roberts For The Supreme Court When Sen. Ted Cruz disapproved of former President George W. Bush’s nomination of Chief Justice John Roberts to the Supreme Court, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush (R) defended his brother’s record. “I’m surprised Senator Cruz would say that since he was a strong supporter of John Roberts at the time,” Bush said when co-host Dana Bash brought up Cruz's criticism. Bush added that the court needs “justices with a proven, experienced record of respect for upholding the Constitution.” And on that point, Bush conceded Roberts may be lacking. “John Roberts has made some really good decisions, for sure, but he did not have a proven, extensive record that would have made clarity the important thing,” Bush said. “And that’s what we need to do. And I’m willing to fight for those nominees to make sure that they get passed. You can’t do it the politically expedient way anymore.” “This is perhaps the most important thing that the next president will do,” Bush added. That’s when Cruz noted that Roberts -- whom he called “an amazingly talented lawyer” -- was otherwise the wrong choice to lead the Supreme Court. “He’s a good enough lawyer that he knows in these Obamacare cases ... he changed the law, he changed the statute in order to force that failed law on millions of Americans for a political outcome,” Cruz said. And from there, Cruz went on to repeat word-for-word what he said in a speech at a conservative forum last week, where he pointed out more “rock-ribbed conservatives” were needed at the Supreme Court, and imagined an alternative universe without Roberts at the high court. But Bush wasn’t having Cruz’s about-face on Roberts. “As I said, he supported John Roberts. He supported him publicly,” Bush said. “You could rewrite history, I guess, Ted. But the simple fact is that you supported him because he had all the criteria that you would’ve thought would’ve made a great justice. And I think he is doing a good job.” In 2005, while Roberts awaited Senate confirmation to the Supreme Court, Cruz penned a glowing recommendation of the nominee for National Review. “The Senate should confirm him swiftly,” Cruz wrote at the time. -- Cristian Farias

09/16/2015 10:55 PM EDT Jeb Bush Sheepishly Talks About Smoking Weed 40 Years Ago Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) on Wednesday managed to nudge former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush (R) into discussing his past marijuana use. Paul began by explaining his belief that marijuana legalization should be left up to the states, and then suggested that someone else on the stage may have used weed in their youth. "Forty years ago I smoked marijuana and I admitted it," said Bush. "I'm sure other people did it and didn't want to admit it in front of 40 million people." Bush has previously admitted that he smoked pot as a teen in high school at Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts. Minutes after his comments Wednesday night, he tweeted an apology to his mother, former first lady Barbara Bush. Sorry Mom — Jeb Bush (@JebBush) September 17, 2015 The exchange came during a broader debate about states rights and marijuana laws. While Bush has campaigned against medical marijuana, he agreed with Paul that states like Colorado should be allowed to decide for themselves whether to legalize marijuana, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie (R) suggested that the president should force states to abide by federal drug laws, which consider marijuana to be among the most dangerous substances. -- Nick Wing