Horses and the city go together

Bayside: To Voicer Dorothy Arenella: If the New York City carriage horses were “old, tired and bedraggled” as you asserted, I would agree there would be nothing good to say about the institution. Fortunately, our horses are fit, content and well cared for, and range in age from 5 to 18 years, the prime of an equine’s life, as they routinely live 25 years or more. Our carriages are modern, lightweight, ball-bearing-wheeled and even at full capacity of five adults, do not approach “a heavy load”; they are more akin to you pulling or pushing a shopping cart full of groceries. High quality food, stabling, grooming, dental, shoeing, mandatory four times a year vet checks and five-week vacations at pasture by law; moderate, steady exercise, guaranteed retirement at our venue, Blue Star Equiculture in Massachusetts; plus the love, interaction and attention they get from drivers, passengers, passerbys and stablemen — for a horse it is a gig hard to beat. I know people in this city who have much, much less. Eva Hughes, Horse & Carriage Association of N.Y.C.

Infallible?

Staten Island: Il Papa said we are talking too much about abortion. As a Catholic-educated person, I think his Holiness is wrong. He is supposed to be infallible when teaching on faith and morals. Isn’t abortion a moral question? The church teaches life begins at conception. Taking a life after conception is murder. He said the church “sometimes has locked itself up in small things, in small minded rules.” Killing a child in the womb is a small thing? Joe Cuccurullo

The church and the people

Valley Stream, L.I.: It seems we finally have a Pope who may actually bring the Catholic Church into the 21st century. Pope Francis hit the nail on the head when he said “it is not necessary to talk about these issues all the time.” The issues being gay marriage, abortion and contraception. It is time to make all people feel welcome in God’s house. We can only hope God allows Francis to live a long life so that he may make the changes necessary to ensure the Catholic Church will continue to do the work Jesus started over 2,000 years ago. Maria DeMaio

The fight for school reform

New Haven: Joel Klein writes that we must graduate children ready for success in college and careers, and meeting this goal will take courage and leadership (“Wanted: An education reformer,” Op-Ed, Sept. 9). In Connecticut, we agree. In New Haven, there’s an historic mayoral election under way, and education reform has rightly been at the center of the debate. Waterbury is home to the state’s first new charter school in five years. In Hartford and Bridgeport, charter schools have partnered with their districts to turn around Connecticut’s lowest-performing schools. Candidates seeking to run our cities are starting to talk about how they will turn around schools and increase access to high-quality public school options. We hope they will be even clearer about their plans as the campaigns enter the final stretch. As Klein suggests, we need leaders who will move education reform forward, because better schools will lead to a better future. Jennifer Alexander, Connecticut Coalition for Achievement Now

Bad medicine

San Francisco: The Congress has set itself above the people. Every American deserves the same health care coverage that every congressperson receives; nothing less! Paul H. Taylor

Ditto

Hope, R.I.: In an effort to kill Obamacare, the GOP is preparing to spend next year convincing people not to get health insurance. Is it just me, or is the Republican Party beginning to give off a foul odor? Art Hayek

Tritto

Bronx: In a Sept. 19 editorial, “Up the down escalator,” you lament how the President and Republicans have failed to come together and address poverty, infrastructure spending and immigration reform, and go on to say how “poll after poll shows the American people broadly united” in addressing these critical issues. The American people are also united on the repeal of Obamacare. Bob Pascarella

Not a shore thing

Staten Island: So the Jersey Shore boardwalk was rebuilt, and in that process wires weren’t changed? That’s like putting the same damaged sheet rock that was taken off back on the walls. I’m sorry, but I don’t see that being possible, and I don’t think these businesses should benefit once again from tragedy without an investigation. I was there this summer, and although the advertisements suggest the shore is open, they were far from being ready and I feel they took a serious loss this summer. They might be stronger than the storm, but they’re not stronger than a spark! Donna Mockingjay Spoto

Cuomo’s fixed game

Woodbourne, N.Y.: Congratulations on your quick and thoughtful response to the “enhanced” wording and placement of the casino ballot initiative voters will be deciding on Nov. 5. Both in the initiative’s positioning, and its disingenuous language, Gov. Cuomo is clearly emulating the gambling institutions he wants to attract. The business strategy of casinos — “The house always wins” — has been well learned by Cuomo. He wants to win. To do so, he’ll tilt the odds in his favor any way he can rather than give voters objective information on casinos. Joan Thursh

Mailbox junk

Brookyn: To Voicer Heidi Lystad: Alan Maisel was a school teacher, then assistant principal, then office manager to an assemblyman, then an assemblyman himself. Now he is seeking the term-limited Council seat of Lew Fidler. We received a ton of literature from Maisel, most of it on glossy card stock. He claims he paid for it. Bunk! His opponent Mercedes Narcisse sent out one piece. Ugo M. Rosiello

Why wait

Manhattan: It makes no sense that state law prevents the Board of Elections from counting paper ballots for a week to give them time to arrive by mail. They should be able to start counting the ballots the day after the election. This would speed up the count and provide for a smoother and more logical process for candidates and voters. Steve Simon

Still counting

Brooklyn: Is there nobody out there who will take the Board of Elections to task? Why does it take so long to count votes? And really, in this century, why the heck are there paper ballots that need counting? Please, somebody get rid of these paper-pushing bureaucrats and put people in who will ensure that my vote counts. Diane Rayboy

Thanks, Howard!

Brooklyn: I thank Howard Stern for giving me the honor of attending all 18 “America’s Got Talent” shows with 10 ultimate fans each week. Thanks to AGT and Radio City for welcoming me each night. Fans’ dreams do come true! Mariann Tepedin

Ticket scam

Endicott, N.Y.: On Friday morning, I wanted to purchase two tickets to the John Mayer concert at Barclays Center in December. I went to the Live Nation website exactly at 9 a.m., and the only tickets available were in the elevated back corner of the arena. I grudgingly purchased them, as they were a gift for one of my children. I then checked StubHub. There were hundreds if not thousands of tickets for sale. At 9:05 a.m.? Tickets that had a face value of $99.95 were selling for up to $3,000! Why do people even bother to go to concerts anymore? Once again, regular people — true fans — get the shaft. Susette Wise

Curtis is wrong on hip-hop

Manhattan: In the Sept. 19 paper, Curtis Sliwa shows he is ignorant by saying, “Hip-hop music and other forces make young men and women hostile toward police.” As a small child, I first witnessed police brutality back in the early 1970s in Harlem; two cops ran up to a neighborhood kid, threw him against a wall, kicked him and beat him with a stick. After screams from onlookers, they took off and left the boy. Hip-hop did not exist then. Tinika Cook

NRA vs. America

Goshen, N.Y.: NRA types love to babble on about “freedom.” Let me explain something to you: People who live in constant, mortal terror, wondering when and where the next massacre of innocents will take place, may indeed be many things — no argument there. “Free” they are not. Let’s stop kidding ourselves here and now, okay? Tom Degan

No on Sharpton

Brooklyn: I am in full agreement with Voicer Diane Hunt. Joe Lhota, if you are serious about being mayor, you must lose your pal, Al Sharpton. Your affiliation with him will be your downfall, just wait and see. You won’t be getting my vote. Georgie Lennon