By Matt Dixon

TALLAHASSEE — As lawmakers continue to debate the possible loss of $2 billion in federal health care money and how it could impact the state, the latest financial reports show some hospitals would maintain healthy profits even without the federal help.

But some hospitals, mostly in rural areas, that already are experiencing trouble meeting profit margins would be hurt more, according to the financial data collected by the state.

“If you [a hospital] don’t have a lot of cash-on-hand, their creditors will want money right away,” said Bruce Rueben, president of the Florida Hospital Association. “It almost becomes a death spiral.”

Even hospitals reporting better financial results will be forced to find ways to cover the lost federal money, some in the industry argue.

The legislative fight continuing into the session’s final week is over a fund known as the low-income pool, or $2 billion in federal money used to reimburse hospitals for care they provide to those who can’t pay. This year, federal officials have said they will not provide the money unless Florida expands Medicaid under Obamacare.

The Obama administration is using similar tactics in Texas, Tennessee and Kansas, threatening to withhold the indigent care money unless those states get on board with expanding Medicaid, part of the president’s plan to provide health care coverage to more people.

The Florida Senate supports the idea, but House Republicans and Gov. Rick Scott oppose it. Scott has said he will sue Obama for using the hospital money as a sort of blackmail to force Medicaid expansion opposed by Republicans who fear the state cannot afford the additional costs.

The rift between the House and Senate has created a budget stalemate that will send the Legislature into a special or extended session.

The prospect of losing the federal hospital money has led some to argue that hospitals will be devastated and the state’s economy upended. But financial data collected by the state from hospitals show it’s not that simple.

Of the 230 hospitals receiving the low-income pool money, 65 — or 28 percent — had negative total margins or survived on a margin at less than 1 percent, according to the most recent financial data compiled by the state. Total margin is a measure of a hospital’s profitability that does not include long-term debt. The financial data comes from the most recent fiscal year reported by the hospitals, some ending their financial year in December 2013 and others ending in mid-2014.

Those struggling hospitals collectively received $519 million in low-income pool, or LIP, funding in the current state budget, according to state figures. If LIP goes away, their budgets would be further reduced.

Some of the most profitable hospitals in the state currently receiving LIP money would also remain profitable if they lost the cash, financial reports show.

Lee Memorial Hospital, a 355-bed facility in Fort Myers, had a 25 percent margin in 2013, one of the best in the state. The facility’s profits topped expenses by $169 million in 2013-14. The current state budget doles out $35 million in LIP funding for the hospital, a loss that would hurt but still leave the company with a sizable margin.

Jim Nathan, president of Lee Memorial Health System, which operates the Fort Myers hospital, said his facilities collectively face a $48 million loss if LIP goes away, which would jeopardize the ability to expand and “could lead to even longer waits and fewer services in the future.” He said the system has capital needs far in excess of $1 billion over the next decade due to aging baby boomers.

The hospitals with the top 20 margins in the state brought in $1.7 billion above expenses in 2013-14.

Reuben said that even large hospitals must react to million-dollar cuts, which can result in cutting programs or shifting costs to insured patients.

“When a hospital has a big funding cut, especially a significant one over a short period of time … one approach they use is cost shifting,” he said.

House Republicans last week proposed using $600 million in state money to provide hospitals some relief. That money would be used to draw down federal matching dollars, but it’s so far unclear how much.

Hospitals say that’s not nearly enough.

But House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, says they need to reexamine their budgets.

“Listen, they built their budgets around what I’d call a lottery,” Crisafulli said of LIP, a program created in 2005 that was meant to be temporary.

The Senate has balked at the House plan, and says it wants to hear from the feds before moving into final budget negotiations. It’s unlikely the feds will shut down all supplemental hospital funding, but most believe it will be below current levels.

At the request of federal officials, a Senate-crafted hospital funding plan would give some money to 82 hospitals that currently get no funding. Some of those new LIP recipients have comfortable bottom lines.

North Florida Regional Medical Center in Gainesville had a $65 million margin in fiscal 2014 and would get $1.7 million under the Senate plan. South Miami Hospital had a margin of $54 million and would get $4.4 million under the Senate proposal; and Aventura Hospital and Medical Center in Miami-Dade County had a margin of nearly $50 million and would gain $1.5 million from the Senate plan.

Contact Daily News reporter Matt.Dixon@naplesnews.com and 352-233-0777