VOTE NOW:

Should Parents Have the Freedom Not to Vaccinate Their Children?

URGENT:

Should the Government Be Allowed to Mandate Vaccinations?

VOTE NOW:

Should Vaccinations for Children Be the Parents' Decision?

Obamacare services for children include immunizations, vaccines, screenings and tests. Affordable health coverage provides many parents with medical care for their families, as well as information about taking better care of their children.Here are five ways Obamacare promotes vaccines and childhood immunizations:The Obamacare website points out the advantages of vaccines for children. It notes that measles accounted for an estimated 2.6 million deaths each year before widespread vaccination took place in 1980. An estimated 15.6 million deaths have been prevented from 2000 to 2013, thanks to the measles vaccine.Vaccine and immunization plans are an important part of the preventive services offered through Obamacare. Many insurance companies did not offer preventive care, especially for families that could not afford it. Under Obamacare, most health plans are required to cover preventive care services at no out-of-pocket expenses. Parents also don't have to meet deductibles or have copays and coinsurance.. Children have 26 preventive services through Obamacare. Immunization vaccines are available from birth to age 18 and scheduled accordingly. They include vaccines for diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, measles, mumps, rubella, hepatitis A and B, influenza, rotavirus and many others.Services under Obamacare include regular screenings and other preventive measures during a child's visit to the doctor. Autism has become a concern for some parents who think vaccines might be involved, although major studies have shown no connection. Children receive autism screenings at nearly every visit. Health coverage includes regular wellness checkups for a child along with scheduled vaccines, blood tests and measurements to help track the child's health and growth, according to WebMD. Children are even helped before birth with Obamacare. Pregnant women receive immunizations and screening for possible diseases to protect their unborn. For example, pregnant women are screened for hepatitis B during their first prenatal visit. The aim of preventive care for children and adults is to avoid unnecessary illnesses and disorders before they happen for the health of patients and to keep medical costs down.This article is for information only and is not intended as medical advice. Talk with your doctor about your specific health and medical needs.