Taxes are what we pay for civilized society. - Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., 1928 We campaign in poetry, but govern in prose. - Mario Cuomo, 1984

King Solomon occupies a strange, equivocal place in Jewish history. Builder of the Temple, King when Israel reached its greatest height, author of Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, and judge of awesome wisdom, he is admired and lauded.

Yet he seems to pale in comparison with his father. In the last few years, several biographies of David have appeared, but none of his successor. David’s Psalms dominate the liturgy; Solomon’s Proverbs remain hidden. Ecclesiastes only pops up briefly for Shabbat Hol Mamoed Sukkot and is then put back in cold storage.

This week’s Haftarah suggests why:

The Lord gave Solomon wisdom, as He had promised him; and there was peace between Hiram [Phoenician King of Tyre] and Solomon, and the two of them made a treaty. King Solomon imposed forced labor on all Israel; the levy came to 30,000 men. He sent them to Lebanon in shifts of 10,000 a month; they would spend one month in Lebanon and two months at home.

An entente with an idolater is bad enough; but then Solomon imposes labor on Israelite men in a grim evocation of Egyptian slavery. The great Anglican theologian and philologist Frederic Farrar (1831-1903) suggested

It was perhaps from his Egyptian father-in-law that Solomon, to his own cost, learnt the secret of forced labour. In their Egyptian bondage the forefathers of Israel had been fatally familiar with the ugly word mas, the labour wrung from them by hard task-masters.

Little wonder that after Solomon’s death, the people begged for relief from his policies and eventually broke up the kingdom because of them.

The contemporary Protestant theologian Walter Brueggemann goes farther. Brueggemann argues in The Prophetic Imagination that Solomon created a “Royal Consciousness” of oppression, imperialism, affluence and hidebound, static religion. (Like most, he also gives David a pass). When the prophets protest against injustice, Brueggemann argues, they are protesting Solomon.

Yet is all this fair? The Tanach lists Solomon’s actions after telling us of his wisdom for a reason. “Wisdom”, after all, does not mean intelligence so much as it means practical reason – determining the best plan of action in the face of imperfect information and unpleasant alternatives.

How, precisely, was the Temple supposed to be built? J.H. Hertz suggests that the Israelites could simply have volunteered objects, as they did with the Mishkan in the desert. One can wonder about Hertz’ realism. The Temple was supposed to be bigger and grander than the Mishkan – indeed, that was the whole point. And were the contributions in the desert as “voluntary” as is commonly thought? Everyone was traveling together in a vulnerable position: in the desert, it certainly would have been difficult to reject “suggestions” of contributing to the Mishkan. In the far flung Kingdom of Israel, there were more places to hide.

Nor should we be misled by the phrase “forced labor.” Solomon’s path diverged sharply from slavery, which as the social theorist Orlando Patterson has argued, constitutes a form of “social death”: the slave submits to total domination from the master, and is deprived of identity, the ability to reproduce, or an independent culture. Instead, Solomon’s policy looks more like conscription, in the case of building the Temple, the underlying purpose is just as compelling as national defense (perhaps even more so).

Taxation also serves as a useful analogy. Modern states would simply tax citizens for public works projects. Solomon did not do that here probably because he couldn’t: ancient Israel lacked a modern case economy. Was a temporary one-third levy exorbitant? Ask tax-cutter George W. Bush, who in his 2000 Presidential nomination speech declared 33% a reasonable rate to pay.

One could argue, of course, that if building the Temple required forced labor, then Solomon shouldn’t have done it. But apart from the fact that it derived from divine command, would Israel really have accepted it? Israel wanted the Temple, and the glory that came with it. It didn’t want to pay for it. Solomon had to figure out how to square those things. No wonder the Tanach calls him wise.

Purists would also condemn Solomon’s treaty with Hiram. Israel’s king could have attacked the pagan ruler, who still held sections of the Land of Israel and tried to entice the Israelites with Baal-worship. Eventually, Hiram’s descendant Jezebel would marry Israel’s King Ahab and persecute Israelites. But Solomon cut a deal and got the lumber and skilled craftsmen he needed, as well as preserving the lives of Israelites who would have died in a religious war of conquest.

Solomon’s policy looks terrible. It feels terrible. But under the circumstances, it might have been the best that could be achieved. He got the Temple built. He kept the nation secure and at peace, and unified. Few would call the man perfect, but in comparison to his father, even his sins look good. Religious conscription is disquieting: sleeping with another man’s wife and then using royal authority to murder him is diabolical. Obviously, we cannot overlook Solomon’s great sin, when in his “old age,” his foreign wives “turned his heart after other gods.” (1 Kings 11:4). But we might easily ascribe this to senility, and in any event, it hardly undermines the rest of the prodigious good the man did.

Why, then, do popular culture and Jewish tradition seem to put Solomon in the shade? Perhaps it is because Solomon committed sins worse to us than chasing after other gods, namely, boredom and compromise. His triumphs are soporific compared to David’s. David wrote poetry; Solomon gave advice. David conquered Jerusalem; Solomon built the drainage. David killed Goliath; Solomon negotiated treaties. It is easier to overlook, or forgive, the messiness of life when the triumphs are so beautiful. David understood this and milked it. Solomon couldn’t: he had too much work to do.

We love warriors, singers, movie stars. We detest legislators and bureaucrats. Popular songs commemorate the heroes and the lovers. If there is a song about passing the Affordable Care Act, or fixing the healthcare.gov website, I haven’t seen it. But nearly 20 million people are now covered because of health care reform. When my daughter gets sick, a song is good, but medicine is better.

Solomon’s (literally) prosaic virtues do not imply that the prophets, or even Brueggemann, are totally wrong. Instead, two traditions battle: Wisdom and Prophecy. As an ideal type, Prophecy criticizes, holds power to account, demands the fulfillment of ideals. Wisdom grapples with the world as it is, not as we want it to be; it understands the limits of power and recognizes the need for ambiguity; it rejects redemption. Prophecy calls down the sure and certain word of the Lord; for Wisdom, “it is the glory of God to conceal a matter, and the glory of kings to explore a matter.” (Proverbs 25:2).

Although Haftarah’s whole section of Tanach is called Nevi’im, in fact it contains both of these traditions, and Haftarah’s brilliance lies in its capacity to include both. It’s mostly Isaiah and Jeremiah, but lots of Kings and Judges, too. Haftarah must return to prominence precisely because it comprises both Wisdom and Prophecy. We will read and chant Isaiah, and Jeremiah, and Amos, and be inspired. But Solomon should inspire us as well.

COMMENTS

View our privacy policy and terms of service.