FAIRHOPE, Alabama – Gov. Robert Bentley's steadfast opposition to expanding Medicaid will soften, and leaders will begin "talking like grown-ups," an advocate for the poor said Tuesday.

Speaking at a Baldwin County forum sponsored by the League of Women Voters, policy analyst Jim Carnes predicted that Bentley – if re-elected – will find a way support expanding the health insurance program for the poor and disabled.

"I personally think the election is going to be a turning point. ... We're going to start talking like grown-ups," said Carnes, policy analyst for the Arise Citizens' Policy Project.

The Affordable Care Act provided federal funds to help states expand the program to people earning up to 133 percent of the poverty line. Beginning this year, the federal government will pay 100 percent of the expansion costs for the first three years, with the federal match gradually declining to 90 percent.

But the U.S. Supreme Court ruled states could opt out of the expansion, and Alabama was among those that decided to do just that. Carnes estimated that 185,000 working Alabamians – folks employed in industries like construction and food service – are affected by the decision.

Expansion advocates at Tuesday's forum collected signatures for a pair of petitions, one destined for Bentley and another for state Sen. Trip Pittman, R-Montrose. Reached by phone, Pittman indicated that petitions are unlikely to change his mind.

"I'm steadfast," he said. "We can't afford the Medicaid we have. The federal government can't afford it."

Pittman also cast doubt on the prospect of Bentley changing his mind. "He's given his word. He's been known as a man of word."

State Sen. Vivian Davis Figures, who attended the forum, said she prays that Bentley changes his mind. She said race and partisanship have influenced the politics of Medicaid expansion. Figures, D-Mobile, predicted that an expanded Medicaid already would be a reality if either President Bush had led the drive.

Pittman dismissed that notion.

"This is about philosophy," he said. "I opposed President (George W.) Bush on his prescription drug program."

Signs of change

But Carnes at the forum pointed to signs of a changing political climate. State Rep. Steve Clouse, an Ozark Republican who chairs the House budget committee, recently has made statements supportive of expanding Medicaid – provided the state can withdraw if the federal government ever reneges on its promise to pay 90 percent of the costs.

Carnes noted that a number of Republican governors across the country have reversed their opposition, as well.

If Alabama also reverses course, Carnes predicted, it likely would by way of a waiver from the federal government that would allow a hybrid model. Some states, for instance, have used federal Medicaid funds to purchase private insurance for low-income residents.

That is not as good a deal as a straight-up Medicaid expansion, Carnes said, but it would cover more people. He said his organization already has begun to have internal discussions about how to respond to various stipulations that might be included in a waiver request.

"What will we live with? What could we support?" he said. "Where would we draw the line?"

Carnes said Alabama is costing itself enormous sums of money by failing to expand. He pointed a 2012 study by the University of Alabama at Birmingham indicating that expansion would cost Alabama $771 million over the first six years, while bringing in $11.7 billion. The total economic impact, including spinoff activity, would be about $20 billion, according to the study.

"You can start to picture what a massive infusion of money into the state might do for the economy," he said, pointing to a different study commissioned by the Alabama Hospital Association projecting that Alabama would create more than 30,000 new jobs as a result.

A study by Troy University's Manuel H. Johnson Center for Political Economy challenged the conclusions of both of those studies.

Carnes directed people to a website, Alabamasbest.org, which displays a running clock measuring how much money the state is giving up. As of Tuesday evening, it was more than $1.25 billion.

"We are giving up $55 a second. ... The stakes are very high," he said.

Impact on hospitals cited

Dr. R. Allen Perkins, chairman of the of the University of South Alabama Division of Family Medicine and president of the Alabama Rural Medical Association, said the state's hospitals are at risk because they are not receiving the additional Medicaid money at the same time they are losing federal funding to compensate them for the cost of treating uninsured patients that they must care for by law. Those payments to hospitals will begin to phase out in fiscal year 2017.

Congress voted to phase out those funds under the Affordable Care Act on the theory that the expanded Medicaid would eliminate the need for such payments.

"What we're doing is turning away money that used to come to us in different ways," he said.

Perkins said the Affordable Care Act already has had great success in achieving its goals. The uninsured rate has plummeted, hospital readmission rate have declined and the cost growth of Medicare has slowed, he said.

Using slides, Perkins pointed to statistics that the United States spends far more than most countries on health care – an average of $8,000 per person each year. The most expensive 1 percent of patients account for 20 percent of that total, while half of Americans spend less than $300 a year, he said.

Perkins said that by 2035, without any change, the average cost was projected to exceed the average income.

Plus, only about 5 percent of health spending comes via charity care, he said.

"Charity is not an option," he said.

Dr. Suzanne Tormoen, a Fairhope physician who was on the panel, said she supports expanding the program. But she said she has not decided whether she would accept Medicaid patients.

"You don't get paid very much to take care of Medicaid patients," she said. "That needs to change."

Tormoen said she hopes the Affordable Care Act will lead to better preventive care, which would reduce costs in the long run. She said doctors are used to "the patient who waits until they are 65" and eligible for Medicare before they seek treatment.

By then, Tormoen said, patients usually have diabetes or other chronic conditions.

"That's way too late to start the preventative process," she said.

Updated at 2 p.m. on Wednesday to correct Rep. Steve Clouse's hometown and make clear that the cuts to hospital reimbursements have not yet begun.