When he ran for president in 2008, Mr. Obama was the candidate of the young and the demographically ascendant. He eventually attracted strong majorities among African-Americans, Hispanics, Asian-Americans and voters under 30.

Mr. Obama’s message was inspirational and nationally cathartic, to be sure. But it was far from revolutionary, though his candidacy, given his race, certainly was. He called on the country to put aside differences of region, color and class and to join together toward a common and prosperous future. Hardly the stuff of Eugene V. Debs.

He promised to put an end to the Bush economic disaster and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and to pass universal health care, completing a Democratic dream dating back at least to F.D.R. The most populist idea Mr. Obama offered was his vow to repeal the Bush-era tax cuts for the rich, while keeping them in place for the middle class.

After Mrs. Clinton won the New Hampshire primary in 2008, Mr. Obama responded with an intonation crafted in defeat, which was designed to stir not revolutionary fervor, but patriotic hope; proclaiming that it was “written into the founding documents” of a flawed but earnest nation yearning to perfect its union: “Yes, we can.”

Mr. Obama was arguing for his own electability as a black man in a country that had never elected anything but a white man as president.

Candidate Obama didn’t favor overturning the country’s private health care system or even instituting the individual mandate to purchase health insurance that Senator Clinton insisted was necessary to extend coverage, though he later adopted it as president. And Mr. Obama vehemently fought the notion that he was a socialist, or even out of the ideological mainstream. He ran as a centrist and a national healer, clearly not knowing that he would face an opposition once in office that was equal parts trenchant and ideologically radical.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Once elected, Mr. Obama faced immediate and continual fire from vocal contingents on the right, but also from influential left-wing bloggers and liberal and libertarian radio hosts whom the White House press secretary Robert Gibbs derided in 2010 as “the professional left.”

Some of these figures have dined out on the theme that Mr. Obama promised them a revolution and sold out instead to the establishment and the big banks. The liberal TV and radio veteran and longtime columnist Bill Press has even written a book on the theme, “Buyer’s Remorse: How Obama Let Progressives Down,” for which Mr. Sanders provided a blurb.

But many African-Americans chafed at the fact that these mostly white liberals had hardly given the new, and first black, president — with all the unique historic challenges the latter fact entailed — time to tackle the sinking economy and get health care through before demanding that he issue executive orders defying the “don’t ask, don’t tell” law and somehow unilaterally close the Guantánamo Bay prison without the consent of Congress. Mr. Obama and his attorney general, Eric H. Holder Jr., were excoriated for failing to jail Wall Street bankers whose rapaciousness triggered the Great Recession.

Of all the liberal resentments during the Obama years, one of the sharpest has been the failure to secure a public insurance option as part of the Affordable Care Act. And while Mr. Sanders frequently points out that he was a member of a committee that helped draft Obamacare, he still wants to scrap it in favor of a European-style single-payer model, which would certainly face an even harder time getting through Congress than Obamacare did.

Some prominent liberals called for voters to punish Mr. Obama during the 2010 midterms. They got their way, as Democratic voters stayed home in droves, something that often happens in midterm elections but was especially devastating in a census year. African-Americans have paid the heaviest price, as the 2010 election stripped them, particularly in the South, of significant political power as a result of redistricting.

In 2011, as a guest on Thom Hartmann’s radio show, Mr. Sanders added his voice to those calling for Mr. Obama to face a primary challenge, based on outrage over the administration’s willingness to put changes to the Social Security formula on the table in the quest for a “grand bargain” budget deal. He was joined in the call to challenge Mr. Obama by his current surrogate, Cornel West, the African-American scholar whose acid critiques over the last eight years have included referring to the president as a “black mascot of Wall Street” who “has a certain fear of free black men.”

Today, Mr. Sanders is struggling to add Obama Democrats, particularly voters of color, to his coalition.

Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, The Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world.

The campaign offers many reasons: a continuing unfamiliarity with the candidate in black communities; or the Clinton family’s long ties to black voters, despite the continuing critique of the aspects of the Bill Clinton era that were the worst for African-Americans, such as the infamous 1994 crime bill (which Mr. Sanders voted for as a congressman) and welfare reform.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Black voters also cite Mrs. Clinton’s greater experience, pragmatism and knowledge on a variety of issues. But it seems clear that among Mrs. Clinton’s strongest advantages with black voters — and it’s an advantage that could prove decisive for her in the primary campaign — is her embrace of Mr. Obama’s legacy.

It’s an embrace that has been made all the more powerful when the notion that President Obama has achieved little that he promised, and therefore must be followed by a “revolution,” remains a constant undercurrent of her opponent’s campaign.