Getty Images The cost of groceries for preparing meals at home fell in 2015, reflecting a low rate of consumer inflation.

Americans got a big break on gasoline prices in 2015 as well as furnishings for their homes, but they got less relief on some of their largest expenses such as medical care and shelter.

Consumer prices rose just 0.7% last year to mark the second slowest rise in inflation in 54 years, the government said Wednesday. (The consumer price index rose just 0.1% in 2008 during the worst of the Great Recession.)

The biggest relief, of course, came at the gas station.

Plunging oil prices drove the average cost of regular gas to $2.14 a gallon by year end from $2.50 at the start of 2015, according to the Energy Information Administration. As measured by the CPI, the cost of fueling up sank 20% in 2015.

Lower fuel costs also led to a 3% decline in the price of airfare.

Cheap gas helped fuel a car-buying binge in 2015 as Americans bought new vehicles at a record rate. Low interest rates and dealer incentives added a helping hand: prices of new autos were basically flat last year.

The same could not be said for insuring vehicles. Forget all those funny TV ads about cut-rate plans: auto insurance jumped 5.7% last year.

Another large household expense, medical care, also accelerated. The cost of going to the doctor’s office or the hospital rose 2.9% in 2015 to mark the fastest increase in three years, the CPI report showed.

Higher health-care costs and the fate of Obamacare are major talking points in the 2016 election season.

Also on the up and up in 2015 was the cost of renting or buying a home. Rents climbed 3.7%, the biggest increase in eight years.

Moving to your new home was also expensive. Freight costs leaped 13%.

New home buyers did get small breaks in other ways. Furniture prices slid 2.3% in 2015 and the cost of clocks, lamps, cookware and tableware posted even steeper declines.

Oh, and that new big-screen HDTV? Prices of televisions tumbled 15%.

The cost of putting food on the table also eased after a big runup in the previous year. Food prices rose just 0.8% in 2015 — the smallest gain since 2009 — with most of the increase coming early on. Prices had jumped 3.4% in 2014.

Even better, the cost of buying groceries to prepare meals at home actually fell for the first time in six years and only the second time since 1976.

Beef prices finally began to subside last year after soaring almost 20% in 2014 to record highs. Buying a beef roast cost 7% less than the year before.

Americans were also able to pig out more cheaply, as size of the U.S. pig herd hit the highest level since the government began keeping track in the late 1980s. The cost of pork fell 7%, mainly because of the cheapest ham prices in several years. Shoppers can buy fresh hams for $2 a pound or less in stores now.

Just don’t expect such great deals on bacon, whose cost soared in 2014 after disease wiped out millions of piglets. Americans much prefer bacon to any other cut of pork, so prices only fell slightly last year even though the pig herd increased.

Some staples did post big increases in 2015. Eggs surged 15% because of chicken disease and lettuce prices rose almost 9% owing to funky weather.

It also cost more to eat out. Prices rose four times faster than the cost of dining at home.

If you dressed up for the restaurant, however, take heart. The cost of buying a men’s suit dropped 4% and women’s dresses fell almost 10%.

More from MarketWatch