Nurse practitioner Martha Brinsko helps a lot of patients manage their diabetes at the Charlotte Community Health Clinic in North Carolina.

“Most mornings when you check your sugar, what would you say kind of the average is?” Brinsko asked patient Diana Coble.

Coble hesitated before explaining she ran out of the supplies she needs to check her blood sugar levels, and she didn’t have the gas money to get back to the clinic sooner. Brinsko helped Coble stock up again.

“If you need to get more than one box, get more than one box,” Brinsko said. “But you need to check them every morning so that we can adjust things.”

Coble, who is unemployed, lives with her sister and can’t afford insurance even now that the health law is in place, relies on the clinic for health care.

“They do a great job with everything,” Coble said. “I couldn’t do without them.”

Nancy Hudson was the clinic’s director as Obamacare rolled out and now consults for the clinic. She expected the insurance exchange, or marketplace, established under the Affordable Care Act would reduce the number of uninsured patients the clinic sees. The opposite happened, she says.

“What we found within our patient population and within the community is that a lot of the advertisement and information about the marketplace brought people [in who] didn’t know anything about free clinics and did not qualify for any of the programs within the ACA marketplace,” Hudson says.

And now they get free or low-cost care at the clinic, which is designated by the government at an FQHC, or federally qualified health center.

The health law was designed to cover the poorest people by expanding Medicaid, the federal-state program for low-income people. But the Supreme Court made that optional. The result in states that didn’t expand Medicaid is a gap, where some people make too much money to qualify for Medicaid but not enough to qualify for insurance subsidies. In North Carolina, about 319,000 people, like Coble, fall into the Medicaid gap.