Sioux City, IA

Most drivers hate them: Those traffic cameras that look for speeders on the interstate in Sioux City.

But you better get used to it.

"I still believe the Sioux City Ordinance is an unreasonable excercise of the government's power," plaintiff Michael Jacobsma said.



KMEG News reports that on August 6, 2012, Michael Jacobsma was detected by Sioux City Traffic cameras on I-29 Northbound. Since then, it's been a battle in the courts, going all the way to the Iowa Supreme Court.

In a unanimous decision, the High Court affirmed the lower court's ruling that Jacobsma was responsible for the citation issued to him, and that the cameras are in fact constitutional.



"Well, I'm disappointed and I disagree with the court's opinion. I respect the court's opinion, though, and that's what we'll have to abide by," Jacobsma said.



Nicole Jensen was one of the city attorneys representing Sioux City, and she says the city is pleased by the court's decision.



"There were several claims made in regards to due process and Constitutional Rights. The city felt the ordinance was in fact proper and hoped the court would find it exactly as it did," Jensen said.



Jacobsma says that the bigger picture behind the court's ruling is that other towns and cities in Iowa could implement similar ordinances; and he says that's a slippery slope.

"Unfortunately, I think the court's decision gives legal authority now to other cities all over Iowa to basically take a motorist or a person's money without having to prove they committed the violation," Jacobsma said.



Jacobsma's next course of action would be to petition the US Supreme Court to grant him Writ of Certiorari and hear the case.

He has 90 days to file a petition.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.