John Bel Edwards won the gubernatorial election, and just like that, gay and lesbian residents across the state are feeling a little more secure and a lot less like a step stool for an outgoing governor with unreasonable expectations of winning the White House. Edwards is not even in office yet. His term doesn't begin until Jan. 11, 2016.

But even as governor-elect, Edwards is already signaling the change that's to come to Louisiana. On Tuesday Edwards let it be known that he plans to issue an order protecting gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender state employees from job discrimination and harassment. The incoming governor's rule will also apply to state contractors.

It might sound like Edwards, with his promised executive order, is dragging Louisiana into the future. But that's only because our current governor, Bobby Jindal, kept dragging the state in the opposite direction. Louisiana's last two Democratic governors, Kathleen Blanco and Edwin Edwards, both took steps to protect gay and lesbian state workers from job discrimination and/or harassment.

But the previous two Republican governors, Jindal and Mike Foster, both walked back those reforms. As Jindal campaigned for governor in 2007, he promised not to renew Blanco's order. Perhaps he was taking orders from Gene Mills, the director of the Family Forum, who had said Blanco's could force the state to protect the employment of pedophiles.

Opponents to basic rights for gay people can't seem to make their arguments without comparing gay people to criminals or, even worse, to animals. If those opponents aren't suggesting, as Mills did, that rights for gay people necessitate rights for perverts who snatch and rape children, then they're suggesting that allowing same-sex marriage puts society on the path of allowing interspecies sex.

We can hope, that with John Bel Edwards' election, we'll have a governor who won't seek counsel from anybody making such arguments. And we can hope that his anticipated executive order will enjoy more permanence than those issued by the last two Democrats to run the state.

Sarah Jane Brady of the Form for Equality said, "We are certainly looking forward to having a governor that makes human rights a priority."

Jindal said that Blanco's order was unnecessary. If the unnecessariness of an executive order stayed Jindal's hand, he wouldn't have issued an executive order telling state employees that they could legally defy the U.S. Supreme Court ruling allowing same-sex marriage. It's telling that no parish clerk in Louisiana stepped out on Jindal's word. Surely, they knew that all he had written for them were instructions on how to go to jail.

If the unnecessariness of an executive order stopped Jindal from issuing it, he wouldn't have declared Louisiana off limits to refugees fleeing a civil war in Syria. If a person is in the United States legally, then that person can't be barred from certain parts of the United States. So not only is that executive order unnecessary, but it is also unenforceable.

Edwards said during his campaign that he agreed with Jindal's attempt to block Syrian refugees. So on that point, Edwards isn't the departure from the past that he ought to be. But he is doing the right thing on protecting gay state employees, and he was super clear from the start of his gubernatorial campaign that he was going to accept Medicaid expansion for Louisiana.

Though the Medicaid expansion allowed by the Affordable Care Act is similar in every way to a proposal Jindal himself had made, because it was associated with President Barack Obama, Jindal felt compelled to reject it. Jindal could have helped poor Louisianians. Instead, he chose to vilify them, arguing that if we expanded access to health care, "Soon there will be more people riding in the cart than people pulling the cart."

I've expressed my reservations about Edwards. I've written that his 100 percent pro-life record and his near-100 percent record with the NRA and his support from Louisiana sheriffs make him a lot more conservative than the D beside his name suggests.

But he is showing a concern for the poor that is more characteristic of Democrats. He announced Thursday a plan to increase the state's minimum wage and to put even more money in the pockets of the state's low earners by doubling the earned income tax credit.

So gay Louisianians aren't the only group who can anticipate a new day, one where they're not being used to score cheap political points.

Jarvis DeBerry can be reached at jdeberry@nola.com. Follow him at twitter.com/jarvisdeberry.