ANALYSIS/OPINION

The canon of Christmas films has expanded over the decades such that there are as many choices as there are tastes in holiday fare. However, despite other cinematic efforts to tap the earlier November holiday, Thanksgiving still belongs solely to the John Hughes’ 1987 comedy masterpiece “Planes, Trains & Automobiles.” While other movies (“Home for the Holidays,” “Addams Family Values”) have used the Turkey Day as a plot device, only “Planes” can truly be said to be a “Thanksgiving movie” in the truest sense of perfectly capturing not only the spirit of the day but also of forever tearing it away from any other film efforts. It is the only film I know of that everyone watches this time of year.

Christmas gives filmmakers an excuse year after year to churn out (typically vapid) new attempts at separating moviegoers from their cash, but arguably the only film truly enshrined in the pantheon in the last 30 years was “National Lampoon’s Christmas Vacation” in 1989 — coincidentally, also written by Hughes. Several lists came out this week in various online forums of the “best” Thanksgiving films. Unsurprisingly, “Planes” topped them all; surprisingly, there were more films on those lists than I would have expected.

So why does “Planes, Trains & Automobiles” still hold sway as both a classic comedy and retain its status as the ultimate Thanksgiving film nearly 30 years after its release? It enjoyed relatively modest box office for its day but found a cult following on VHS and became a Thanksgiving Eve tradition in many homes (mine included).

“Planes” is one of those comedies that is essentially perfect and, despite the passage of decades, seemingly does not age. The story of mismatched, uptight Neal Page (Steve Martin) and the crass-but-lovable Del Griffith (John Candy) trying to get back to Chicago for Thanksgiving is about as far from complicated as a script pitch could possibly be. Hughes (1950-2009) excelled at a certain brand of ‘80s comedies of efficiency. He directed only nine films in his career but wrote many, many more, including the “Vacation” movies, “Home Alone” and “Mr. Mom.” Typically his directorial efforts took place in a single day or two, had sharply defined characters, were always less than two hours and, in the best tradition of comedy, found ways to squeeze laughter not just out of humiliation — though that was certainly a part of it — but by forcing his characters into situations and company that all but guaranteed an explosion of hilarious proportions. The comedy came not from the story but from the characters’ reactions to the plots, something writers of contemporary “funny” films would do well to observe.

Think of Mr. Martin’s F-word-laced tirade about three-quarters of the way through “Planes.” After suffering humiliation after humiliation, walking back from the car rental lot to St. Louis’ Lambert Airport across a frozen highway and runway, Neal is met by a giggling, too-happy clerk (Edie McClurg, one of Hughes’ regulars), whose face sours upon beholding the steaming Neal.

“Welcome to Marathon. May I help you?”

What follows is the film’s most famous two minutes, in which Neal — heretofore so buttoned-up, desperately trying to smirk his way through adversity while clinging to his upper-middle-class notions of propriety — finally loses his mind and unleashes an angry, mean-spirited soliloquy at the clerk peppered by 18 (I counted) F-bombs.

That much profanity probably failed to shock even audiences of the day (or now), but it is the exact right script choice for the moment: Neal has come completely unglued, and circumstances have unleashed the primordial rage within that he works ever so hard to keep in check day by day as a suit-and-tie type.

Hughes understood that a well-placed curse word had the ability to both surprise and elicit laughter. Neal using the F-word even once would have been funny enough, but his dropping it as every other word for a full minute is nothing short of comedic transcendence. Though the film continues on for another 40 minutes, and more misery yet awaits Neal, the rental car scene is the ultimate apex of his fall from polite boardroom drone to scalding, ranting maniac, forced at last to fight at street level with the blue-collar folks he has treated previously as so far beneath him (and using “their” vernacular, no less). The moment is a humor masterpiece in and of itself, and Miss McClurg’s brief-yet-firm response takes the wind out of his tempest with but two words — one of them, again, “that” word.

Yes, the rant earned the R-rating in a film that otherwise would be fine for the whole family, but it is crucial to the film’s success and to Neal’s unraveling. To ever see “Planes, Trains & Automobiles” on television, with either bleeps or substituted words, is nothing short of a crime against cinema. In a half-century career of brilliance, it is perhaps Mr. Martin’s finest moment ever committed to film. (To put this into some personal perspective, it is the one scene my father, a virtual hate machine for anything Hollywood, insisted on being alerted to before it happened every Thanksgiving Eve.)

This is but one example of how perfect Hughes fashioned his film as both writer and director. Every scene works, every joke lands, not a moment of screen time is wasted. While there are pratfalls and pitfalls for certain, the laughter, the pathos, comes from the odd-couple relationship between Neal and Del. While much of the humor comes from their verbal sparring, Hughes accomplishes this as much with visual gags. Consider when Neal first recognizes Del at the airport as the thief who swiped his cab on Park Ave. during rush hour. Neal peers up from his issue of Fortune to spy Del reading a trashy stag book called “The Canadian Mounted.” In that one throwaway moment Hughes has established not only a clash of personalities but one of class.

These two will be anything but friends. It is therefore required they spend the next 90 minutes together.

Hughes understood intrinsically that comedy is about victims, not perpetrators. We like and identify with Neal because he is continually victimized by Del’s increasingly poor, if heartfelt, choices, and we like Del not just because he is the everyman so many of us are but because he has no one to blame for the morasses he creates but himself — a man as flawed as any of us.

Hughes applied this same axiom in “Ferris Bueller’s Day Off.” While yes, Ferris is unquestionably the hero of the piece, the film is really about Cameron (Alan Ruck) and his transformation from neurotic antisocial wreck to finding confidence by the story’s end (that poor Ferrari!). Some of us are Ferrises, but most of us are Camerons. And while the school bureaucrat Edward Rooney (Jeffrey Jones) is indeed Ferris’ nemesis, we like Rooney because, at the end of the day, he’s right: Ferris is ditching, he knows it, we know it; Ferris must be held to account, but Rooney continually falls into Ferris’ prefabricated traps. He’s the superego to Ferris’ id, seeking desperately to get the jack back in the box. Both Cameron and Rooney continually fall victim to Ferris’ machinations, which produces the humor.

Story Continues →