Singapore’s demands complicate TPP — U.S.-India statement wide-ranging — EU nods to TTIP secrecy concerns

With help from Adam Behsudi and Doug Palmer

SINGAPORE’S SOE A TRICKY ISSUE IN ASIA-PACIFIC TALKS: The 12 countries negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership have largely coalesced around basic rules to ensure state-owned enterprises compete fairly with private-sector companies, and discussions have now shifted largely to what countries want exempted from those rules: For Singapore, that would be its massive state-run investment company, Temasek Holdings, industry sources said.

Story Continued Below

Determining how Temasek would be treated under the rules has been a tricky process. The government has repeatedly stressed that companies in which Temasek has a major stake, which range from Singapore Airlines to massive telecommunications firm SingTel, operate just as any other private company and are subject to the same market forces.

“You have the issue that these are not, in Singapore’s view, SOEs like any other — certainly not like the loss-making, corrupt firms found elsewhere in this region,” said Deborah Elms, executive director of the Singapore-based Asian Trade Centre.

Singapore’s demands in the TPP run counter to what it got in its bilateral free trade agreement with the U.S. in 2003, in which it was able to exempt Temasek from the agreement’s SOE rules but had to apply the rules to any subsidiaries in which Temasek had at least a 20 percent stake. Read the full story by Pro Trade’s Adam Behsudi here: http://politico.pro/1uUM8aX.

HAPPY EARLY THANKSGIVING! Welcome to Morning Trade, where we will soon be exporting turkey from the oven and importing it into our stomachs. Please note that Morning Trade will be on hiatus for the next two days to better focus on eating and digestion of yummy foods. But you can still send me trade tips at vguida@politico.com or @vtg2.

A PIECE OF EXPORT PIE: The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative has plated up some Thanksgiving stats in a blog post. “Much of the bread, stuffing, and cakes that accompany traditional Thanksgiving dinners are made from wheat. Last year, the United States exported $10.5 billion in wheat and wheat products, with Washington State leading all U.S. states with nearly $2.5 billion in wheat exports,” it said: http://1.usa.gov/1pkZs7x.

U.S., INDIA RELEASE WIDE-RANGING STATEMENT: The U.S.-India Trade Policy Forum had no immediate outcomes but did produce commitments to work together in contentious areas. Both countries agreed on work plans for cooperating on agriculture, services, intellectual property and investment in manufacturing, the two sides said in a joint statement Tuesday on the high-level dialogue, the first in four years.

The statement recognized the importance of providing a transparent and predictable policy environment, trade secrets protection, and “the paramount goal” of ensuring the poorest populations in India and the United States have access to quality health care. U.S. and Indian officials committed to exchanging information in these areas and identifying ways in which trade and innovation policies can improve access to health care and affordable medicines. They also agreed to meet again next year in Washington.

Rick Rossow, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, pointed to President Barack Obama’s upcoming trip to India near the end of January as a potentially galvanizing event, putting pressure on the two sides to come up with some “deliverables” for the meeting. A realistic goal could include an agreement by India’s Parliament to loosen restrictions on foreign investment in the insurance sector, he said.

U.S. BUSINESSES HEARTENED BY INDIA FORUM: Patrick Kilbride, executive director at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce’s Global Intellectual Property Center, called the forum “a good start.” “Our expectation going in was that this would be an agenda-setting opportunity,” he said, adding that this is the first time that many of these issues — particularly surrounding pharmaceutical patents — have been discussed at this level.

“The fact that this has taken place, the fact that there is broad agreement on an agenda, the fact that they didn’t seem to close off any avenues of discussion … we’re very pleased with direction of the engagement,” Kilbride told POLITICO.

Chris Moore, senior director for international business policy at the National Association of Manufacturers, praised the work by USTR, but he noted the “vagueness” in the statement, such as on investment, and said his group would have liked to see more concrete progress “as an indication of India’s willingness to engage and to really work with us toward solutions to longstanding issues” as well as new ones.

But Jamie Love, director of the nonprofit group Knowledge Ecology International, which advocates for the poor, had a different take on the meeting. “If Michael Froman succeeds in cutting off India as a supplier of inexpensive generic medicines, he will kill more people than Obamacare will save, and that's not much of a legacy,” he said.

CONGRESS WARNS EU ON DIGITAL MARKET: The chairmen and ranking members of the Senate and House committees with jurisdiction over trade criticized digital rules under consideration by the European Parliament, which they argue would create a “walled-off ‘EU cloud.’” “Provisions calling for particular outcomes in the enforcement of EU competition law and localization of cloud computing services … are especially troubling,” the lawmakers say, adding that such moves could hurt the ability of the U.S. and EU to negotiate their proposed bilateral trade deal. See the letter here: http://politico.pro/1FoOJgr.

EU NODS TO TTIP SECRECY CONCERNS: The European Union will make public certain negotiating proposals covering the “rules” portion of the U.S.-EU trade talks, new European Union Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmström said Tuesday, apparently referring to areas such as intellectual property rights, food safety, labor and the environment.

The European Commission on Tuesday, responding to public concern about TTIP, agreed to pare back some of the secrecy surrounding the negotiations by giving members of the European Parliament and other interested parties more information about proposals being discussed.

“Many of the fears are not well-founded,” Malmström said. “We can only discuss this if we have all of the documents, or most of the documents available, so we can have a fact-based discussion.”

Bernd Lange, chairman of the parliament’s Committee on International Trade, praised the move. “The transparency will be stronger and I appreciate it very much,” Lange told reporters at a news conference with Malmström. He also made a pitch for the European Commission to publicly disclose its services trade offer, one of the areas of greatest public concern. See the full story by Pro Trade’s Doug Palmer and Adam Behsudi here: http://politico.pro/1rdpivz.

IN OTHER TTIP NEWS: The European Commission hopes to publish a report before the end of the year summarizing the results of its public consultations on whether to include an investor-state dispute settlement mechanism in the pact with the United States, Malmström said Tuesday. “This is something we’ll be taking forward the beginning of next year,” she told reporters, noting the commission had received nearly 153,000 comments on the issue.

CHOCOLATE CEO TO JOIN ADVISORY COMMITTEE: Obama announced his intent to nominated John Bilbrey, CEO of The Hershey Company, to serve on the Advisory Committee on Trade Policy and Negotiations. See the White House release here: http://politico.pro/1zskotr.

MIDEAST TRADE MISSION COMING UP: Ken Hyatt, deputy undersecretary of Commerce for international trade, will lead 11 U.S. companies on a trade mission to Morocco, Egypt, and Jordan from Dec. 3-11 to explore possible infrastructure projects. Click here for the list of companies taking the trip: http://1.usa.gov/1uUy0hZ

LAST-DITCH GSP PUSH IN LAME DUCK: Supporters of the Generalized System of Preferences are still hoping Congress will move legislation renewing the program, which has been expired for 15 months, before the end of the year. Twenty-five ambassadors from countries such as Brazil, Ukraine, Kyrgyzstan and Thailand called on congressional leaders to do so in a Nov. 20 letter. See the ambassadors’ letter here: http://politico.pro/11SY3uY.

INTERNATIONAL OVERNIGHT:

— Kazakhstan is close to being able to join the WTO, according to the organization’s director-general, Roberto Azevedo, Reuters reports: http://reut.rs/1thgQGL.

— Asia will continue to grow faster than other regions, an economist with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development told German news agency Deutsche Welle: http://bit.ly/1ts4DOs.

— India’s textile industry could grow five-fold in the next 10 years, The Ahmedabad Mirror reports: http://bit.ly/1recHrW.

THAT'S ALL FOR MORNING TRADE! See you again soon! In the meantime, drop your host and the rest of the team a line: abehsudi@politico.com and @ABehsudi; vguida@politico.com and @vtg2; dpalmer@politico.com and @tradereporter; mkorade@politico.com and @mjkorade; and jhuffman@politico.com and @JsonHuffman. You can also follow @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Trade on Twitter.

** A message from The National Pork Producers Council: The Trans-Pacific Partnership, whose 12 countries account for nearly 40 percent of global GDP, is a high-standard, 21st century free trade agreement that eliminates barriers to trade. TPP will promote economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region, expanding demand for U.S. food and agricultural products among nearly half a billion consumers. The TPP also will strengthen trade rules and provide specific new market access commitments for U.S. exports.

Without the TPP Agreement, U.S. exports to Pacific Rim countries will be at a serious competitive disadvantage, and competitor countries – including other TPP nations and those such as the European Union that are negotiating free trade agreements with countries in the region – will leap at the opportunity to fill the void if the United States rejects the deal.

The United States needs to implement the TPP Agreement, which will significantly boost U.S. exports and create hundreds of thousands of U.S. jobs. http://bit.ly/1U51u4F **