Gov. Rick Perry turned a tribute to his 14 years as governor into a rabble-rousing speech about the future of American leadership, laying the groundwork for a potential second presidential run after leaving the Texas stage.

In a passionate speech before almost 10,000 GOP delegates at their state convention in Fort Worth, Perry spoke of Washington failures, Texas successes and putting the nation’s future in the hands of better leaders.

It is his last address to the Republican activists before stepping down as the state’s longest serving governor in January. But he left little doubt that he was not through with political life.

He reserved special venom for the Affordable Care Act and for the Department of Veterans Affairs’ failures in meeting the medical needs of servicemen and women.

“Some states took the bait of Obamacare, and expanded their Medicaid. We did not,” Perry said triumphantly.

“Federal money is not free. It’s the fruit of taxpayers’ labor, and the problem is not states that refuse it but a federal government that so freely spends it,” he said.

“If you need any greater proof that government-run health care doesn’t work, ask a military veteran,” Perry said to loud cheers.

Texas has the highest rate of uninsured children and adults. Critics have pointed out that his decision to reject Medicaid expansion has left more than 1 million Texans without health care.

Perry touted conservative principles that have guided Texas – a list of core talking points he has emphasized for the past four years. They include keeping taxes low, limiting environmental and business regulations and making it more difficult to file lawsuits.

He said Washington needs to heed Texas’ example.

And he dismissed efforts by Democrats to win their first statewide election in two decades.

“The national Democrats think Texas is the next battleground. Well let’s be really clear: Texas will be their political burial ground,” he said.

While praising the Texas economy and baiting Democrats, Perry’s speech frequently employed lyrical words to speak about the nation’s needs to achieve a brighter future.

Throughout his speech he set the tone of a candidate aiming for the White House again.

“We need to set the stage for 2016 when we will win the White House and we will rebuild the American dream,” Perry said.

“We’re too good a country to wander through the wilderness of economic darkness. We must seize our promise at home. We must establish our moral authority overseas. We must live up to our promise,” he said.

He concluded by telling the Republican delegates to “roll up their sleeves” to help rebuild the nation.

“This America we love faces some hard decisions. And it requires better leaders. Leaders willing to do what is difficult rather than what is expedient,” Perry said, exhorting the crowd to “Let’s get to work.”

If there was any doubt to his intentions, his wife, Anita, underscored it in her introduction of the governor. While talking of Perry’s 24 years in public office and their journey together, the state’s First Lady said they look forward to the future.

“I’m happy to say we both have some tread left on our tires,” she said.

Texas Democrats responded to the Perry speech, saying he is leaving the state with a bleak future, including crumbling infrastructure and schools struggling with insufficient funding.

“Texas is great, not because of Republican politicians, but because of its people and our state’s vast natural resources,” said Democratic Party spokesman Emmanuel Garcia.

“For all of Perry’s rhetoric and grandstanding we saw today, he left Texans with a neglected state water plan, transportation infrastructure and an unconstitutional school finance system. It will weigh on his conscience no matter where politics takes him,” Garcia said.