A late-Friday browse through Heritage Auctions’ virtual stack of catalogs turned up a surprising offering: the Super Bowl ring that once belonged to Dallas Cowboy Harvey Martin. And, of course, it’s not just any Super Bowl ring, as though there is such a thing, but one presented to the man who shared Most Valuable Player honors with another immortal member of the Doomsday Defense, Randy White.

“The fact that it comes from the co-MVP of the game makes it really special,” says Heritage’s Chris Ivy of the jewelry earned after Dallas toppled Denver at the Louisiana Superdome by a score of 27-10 on January 15, 1978. That, and the fact it belonged to Harvey Martin — South Oak Cliff’s own, the Too Mean man who was beloved, troubled and redeemed over the course of a celebrated, turbulent life.

It’s unclear where the ring comes from: Says Ivy via email, “The ring is originally sourced from the family, but they are not the consignors.” Our Tom Fox photographed it on January 13, 2010, at Valley Ranch. I never saw Martin wear the ring during the final three years of his life, when we became friendly following a stint in rehab that saved his life and kept him out of prison. For all I know he sold it long ago; in 1998 he told me he still had his Super Bowl MVP trophy, but never mentioned the ring.

But, of course, it doesn’t really matter. Martin, who remains absent from the Ring of Honor, died Christmas Eve 2001 at Baylor Medical Center in Grapevine. He was felled by pancreatic cancer at the age of 51.

Here is how Heritage describes the ring in its catalog.

Twin stars on the ring face represent two trips to the NFL mountain top, each sporting a genuine diamond nucleus and blue sapphire spokes and set against a field of smaller diamonds. “Dallas Cowboys World Champions” stands in raised lettering at the perimeter of the face. Left shank reports Martin’s surname and jersey number on either side of a Cowboys helmet, while right shank features a Lombardi Trophy in miniature with text reading, “Super Bowl XII, 1977, 27-10.”

This will not be the first ring from Super Bowl XII to go up for auction. Thirty-one years ago Thomas “Hollywood” Henderson had to part with his. He had no choice. The Internal Revenue Service made him do it. And it was an absolute steal at $11,000.

Martin’s ring goes on the block at the end of February, during one of Heritage’s Platinum events in New York City. Also being offered: a 1947 New York Yankees World Series ring, a Willie Mays-swung bat, Ali’s fight-won gloves, a Jordan jersey that still smells of Chicago Bull sweat. Says Ivy, director of sports auctions at the Oak Lawn-based Heritage, Harvey’s ring is guesstimated at $40,000. It will open at $10,000 and be sold without reserve.