Topics: 2008 election, Amy Poehler, Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, Lorne Michaels, oral histories, Racial profiling, Sarah Palin, SNL, Tina Fey, Video, Entertainment News

The Hollywood Reporter has published a captivating excerpt from the updated edition of “Live From New York,” the 2002 “SNL” oral history by Pulitzer Prize-winning Washington Post television critic Tom Shales and television producer James Andrew Miller. The book, out Sept. 9, picks up the show’s history where it left off, follow-up with the inner workings of the show during the 2000s.

The excerpt reveals that cast members felt tense, but reenergized by the politics of the 2008 election cycle, and suggests that while the nation’s political landscape changed “SNL,” the reverse might also be true. Read some of the highlights below, but head over to THR to read the whole thing.

2007 was the era of peak Hillary Clinton “entitlement,” according to executive producer Lorne Michaels, but her absence made room for Barack Obama:

Lorne Michaels, executive producer: We were contacted by, I think, Howard Wolfson from Hillary [Clinton’s] campaign, and they wanted to do the first show of the season. [Barack] Obama was heating up, but they called first, so I said OK. You have to play by those rules. And then, the week of, they bailed. I went, “Really? You called us, and we gave it to you.” I think every now and then I get carried away and think we actually do have influence. And then, after that, we put Obama on the date when Hillary was supposed to be on. The sense of entitlement which was following her everywhere at that point peaked for me at the bailing.

It was also a revolutionary time for Amy Poehler:

Amy Poehler, castmember: Playing Hillary and Sarah Palin was an indication of women taking center stage in politics in a way that I hadn’t been able to experience in my time there. My first show was two weeks after 9/11 happened, and for the first three or four years of my time there, we could barely do anything political. Everyone and everything was so tender, and we had lost Will Ferrell as our [George W.] Bush. Everything was so bad; the news was so bad. There was a lot of pop-culture stuff, and getting to finally do really deep political parody at the end of my career there felt really satisfying.

“SNL’s” political comedy during that period likely influenced how America saw its notable politicians:

Horatio Sanz, castmember: I always kind of felt bad when Will Ferrell did his Bush impression because he was such a good old boy that you really didn’t think, “Oh, this evil little rich prick whose dad and his friends got him in office.” You thought, “Oh, he’s just a good old guy I’d like to drink beer with.” As funny as Will’s impression was, the audience as a whole, the whole country, would probably see that as, “Oh, I like Bush. Because he’s Will.” You know, if Will hadn’t done that impression, or at least made him likable, it may have tipped it the other way. I honestly think so. We made up for it. I think Tina’s impression basically killed Sarah Palin.