UPMC operating income increases for first 3 quarters of fiscal 2016

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

UPMC reported continued growth for the first nine months of fiscal 2016, emphasizing in a Tuesday news conference the revenue from mergers with other hospitals in recent years.

The hospital system reported $272 million in operating income for the three quarters that ended March 31, up from $226 million for the same period a year earlier. Contributing to the growth were increases of 13 percent in UPMC Health Plan membership, 3 percent in physician revenue and 1 percent in outpatient revenue, while hospital stays dropped by 1 percent, according to financial statements.

The system reported $5.1 billion in cash and investments, and total operating revenues for the period of $9.5 billion.

The results followed the recent announcement that UPMC has entered merger talks with Susquehanna Health, a four-hospital health system with a $562 million operating budget in north central Pennsylvania.

Hospital officials reported revenue increases from mergers ranging from 4 percent at UPMC Altoona — with which UPMC merged in 2013 — to 47 percent at UPMC Mercy since a 2008 merger.

Patient volumes have increased following the mergers, said Leslie Davis, the system's chief operating officer.

“Consumers recognize our brand, and when we're willing to move it to the community, we're either creating demand that didn't exist before or people are probably coming from other places,” Davis said.

Branding plays a role, she said. The system attached the Magee-Womens brand to a new women's hospital at UPMC Hamot in Erie and increased services, driving up revenues, she said.

Adding hospitals to the system also helps increase UPMC Health Plan membership, said Robert DeMichiei, UPMC's chief financial officer.

The health plan has attracted members through the federal Affordable Care Act's marketplace and in Medicaid managed care plans, DeMichiei said.

UPMC has not reported specific financial results for its ACA plans, a line of business that is losing money for many insurers — including Highmark Inc. — but not all.

UPMC plans to continue to sell health insurance in the areas where it merges with new hospitals, he said.

Wes Venteicher is a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at 412-380-5676 or wventeicher@tribweb.com.