MADISON (WKOW) -- Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vermont) brought stars and everyday supporters out to the Kohl Center Sunday night for a final Dane County rally before Tuesday's Democratic presidential primary election in Wisconsin.



Sanders holds a two-point lead over national frontrunner Hillary Clinton in an average of the most recent polls conducted in the state.



UW-Madison Police expected a crowd of 17,000 Sunday night, but only about 4,400 people showed up for Sanders' third rally in the city in the last eight days.



There was a lot of star power on hand to help push voter turnout, including speeches from Hollywood actresses Rosario Dawson and Shailene Woodley, as well as a few bands popular with college students, such as Best Coast and Leisure Cruise.



"For me, really wanting to do this was to come here and, you know, get people encouraged to like get out and vote on Tuesday, because it's a very important election," said Bethany Cosentino, lead singer of Best Coast.



"I just feel like being for Bernie and being here, it just feels like you're part of something that matters, a good change, a revolution like he says," said Kewaskum resident Jessica Brazzell.



"We have a once in a lifetime opportunity to elect someone who is for the people," Woodley, star of the hit "Divergent" movie series, told the crowd.

As for Sanders, his message was more focused on Wisconsin than past speeches. He specifically took aim at Gov. Scott Walker (R-Wisconsin.

"So, Gov. Walker wants to cut funding for education and give tax breaks to large corporations. Well, my view is exactly the opposite," said Sen. Sanders.

Sanders also hit the Governor over his refusal to take the Medicaid expansion offered under Obamacare. Medicaid is the federal government's insurance program for people who live at or below 133% of the federal poverty level.



Gov. Walker expanded Medicaid to all adults who live at 100 percent of the poverty level or below, but those earning between 100 and 133 percent in Wisconsin have to buy insurance through the federal marketplace.

"As a result of that decision there is no question people will die, people will become much sicker than they otherwise would have become," said Sen. Sanders.

It seemed clear Sanders was trying to rile up his liberal base in an effort to get as many voters to the polls as he can Tuesday. He even followed Hillary Clinton's lead from Saturday night by weighing in on the biggest state-level race.

"I hope that a large voter turnout on Tuesday will help elect JoAnne Kloppenburg to the Supreme Court," Sen. Sanders told the crowd, all but endorsing the more liberal Supreme Court candidate in her race against Justice Rebecca Bradley.



Sanders has said he'll need a big turnout and margin of victory in Dane County in order to carry the state on Tuesday.



********



MADISON (WKOW) -- Bernie Sanders is expected to pack the Kohl Center during a rally Sunday night, with UW-Madison expecting a capacity crowd of 17,000.

Doors open at 2:30 and anyone who's going to the rally should get there early to allow extra time to get through security. The event is scheduled to begin at 7 p.m.

Here are a few other things to know, according to UW-Madison:

Entry: Attendees will enter through the east doors of LaBahn Arena, adjacent to the Nicholas-Johnson Pavilion. Kohl Center gates will not be open. The event is free and no tickets are required. Seating is first come, first served – attendees are urged to arrive early and be prepared for long lines. Restrooms and concessions will be available inside the arena.

What to bring: For security reasons, and to speed up the screening process, please limit what you bring to small, personal items like keys and cell phones. Weapons, sharp objects, chairs, and signs or banners on sticks will not be allowed through security. Laptop computers, backpacks, large bags/purses, and outside food/drinks are also prohibited. Small bags/purses smaller than 8.5”x11” will be permitted, but subject to search.

In particular, water bottles (both full or empty) are not permitted.

Parking: Normal Kohl Center event parking will be in effect for $5 per vehicle. The 100 block of Frances Street will be closed all day Sunday.

Both Democratic and Republican candidates are crisscrossing the state in advance of the April 5 Wisconsin primary. Campus policy permits each candidate to hold one event on campus each election, subject to any applicable charges for facilities and other services.