Despite Bill Maher’s praise of all things liberal, the HBO host criticized President Barack Obama’s support for military intervention in Syria during his show “Real Time with Bill Maher” on Friday, saying America looks more like George Zimmerman than the world’s policeman.

Maher has been a vocal opponent of an invasion in Syria, condemning the use of chemical weapons but concluding bombing countries isn’t the “answer for everything.” The HBO host discussed America’s continued arguments over intervention in “yet another Muslim country” during his “New Rules” segment, criticizing America’s always-changing attitude.

“Forget the Syria debate, we need to debate on why we’re always debating whether to bomb someone,” Maher said. “Because we’re starting to look not so much like the world’s policeman, but more like George Zimmerman — itching to use force and then pretending it’s because we had no choice.”

He began the segment saying America needs to stop wondering why other countries hate us and acting hypocritical in telling countries the U.S. doesn’t want to be involved while preparing to intervene.

“Twelve years after 9/11 and yet another debate on whether to bomb yet another Muslim country, America must stop asking the question, ‘why do they hate us?’” Maher said. “…And we’re the only nation — as we’ve have seen in this Syrian fiasco — who threatens to drop bombs on you while telling you we don’t want to get involved. ‘We’re just bombing, please, don’t get up. Just bombing, no boots on the ground. No, a little light bombing, we’ll be out of your hair in a week.’”

Secretary of State John Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov did come to an agreement — bolstered by Russian President Vladimir Putin — early Saturday morning to secure Syria’s chemical weapons. The deal, President Obama said during a news conference Tuesday, would provide a diplomatic option as opposed to a military intervention.

Check out Bill Maher’s “New Rules” segment — courtesy of Mediaite — below. Caution, NSFW