Police monitoring campus buildings for looting amid flood

Troy Sennet (Boulder County Sheriff's Office)

The University of Colorado Police Department on Sunday arrested a convicted burglar they say they think is a serial thief who has stolen at least eight laptops from campus buildings during the past two weeks.

Police arrested Troy Wayne Sennet on suspicion of second-degree burglary, theft between $2,000 and $20,000 and false reporting to authorities.

Police said they believe Sennet is the serial thief who has stolen laptops from the Engineering Center and Cristol Chemistry buildings during the past two weeks. Following those thefts, CU police on Wednesday released a YouTube video of a man who stole laptops from the Engineering Center.

Police said Sennet matches the suspect description and was arrested wearing the same pants and shoes as that of the suspect in the surveillance video.

A Facilities Management employee, who recognized the suspect from the video, contacted police at 2:30 p.m. after seeing the suspect walking near the Gates Woodruff Women's Studies Cottage along the Norlin Quad, according to police.

Advertisement

Officers found Sennet east of the Norlin Library. Sennet, a 43-year-old transient, has an extensive criminal history for theft, burglary and trespassing.

In a separate incident, police Saturday arrested Matthew Jason Stringer on suspicion of trespassing, unlawful conduct and on a fugitive warrant after he was found by a police officer trespassing in the Ramaley Biology building during the campus closure.

Stringer was found with a laptop, cell phone and iPod in his backpack, according to police. Stringer, a 44-year-old transient, has been arrested by CU police for burglary on multiple occasions.

“Throughout this flood, our officers have patrolled campus buildings looking for potential looters and unauthorized individuals," said CU police Cmdr. Robert Axmacher in a statement. "These efforts will continue while the campus recovers."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Brittany Anas at 303-473-1132 or anasb@dailycamera.com.