The Obama administration is touting the apparent success of the Affordable Care Act in Alabama on its fifth anniversary.

It was on this date in 2010 when the President signed The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act into law. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services says one hundred and seventy one thousand Alabamians were enrolled during the most recent sign-up period.

HHS Regional Director Pamela Roshell** says there’s wellness care available through the act along with insurance coverage…

“Staying healthy and getting screened for possible problem is at no cost for these consumers, so this will definitely put many people on the right track as it relates to managing their health better, and seeing if there’s a problem.”

The U.S. Supreme Court is hearing a challenge on the legality of tax subsidies help purchase coverage through the affordable care act. The White House has said there’s no “plan B” if the payments are struck down.

Documents indicate UAB might have considered announcing the shutdown of football and two other sports two months earlier.

The documents released by Alabama state Rep. Jack William on Monday include a "task list" compiled by a public relations firm working with the university, that referenced a Sept. 30 announcement date. UAB President Ray Watts announced the decision to end football, bowling and rifle shortly after the season, citing the financial costs of maintaining competitive programs.

Watts cited a report from CarrSports Consulting dated Nov. 18 in making his decision, saying fielding a competitive football program would cost some $49 million over five years.

The papers released Monday included Bill Carr's findings, dated Sept. 3.

UAB said in a statement no definite decision had been made before November.

March is Colo-rectal Cancer Awareness Month. New studies show that the risk of developing the disease increases with advancing age. The number of cases in Alabama is about on par with the national average.

Doctor Dennis Ahnen is with the American College of Gastroenterology. He says there are a number of causes of colon cancer but only one real way to prevent it...

"Obesity is a risk factor, lack of physical activity is a risk factor diets that are high in red meat and processed meat and low in fiber containing foods like fruits and vegetables. Those are all risk factor, but each are only modest risk factors, in fact the biggest risk factor for getting colon cancer is not getting screened."

Ahnen says getting screened is the best way to prevent colon cancer. This allows doctors to find and identify the polyps and remove them. Screenings should start at age fifty if you have no family history and continue every ten years.