The milk of mother’s kindness

Bronx: Re “Breast of times” (Aug. 6): Yes, breast-feeding can be challenging for some mothers, but being a new parent is challenging for all mothers. It is up to us as a society — the health-care system, government and everyday people — to reduce barriers and support breastfeeding. We need to ensure that our hospitals and other birthing facilities provide optimal maternity infant care practices, such as immediate skin-to-skin contact, rooming-in and qualified lactation professionals to assist if there are issues. Insurance companies should abide by the Affordable Care Act and provide reimbursement for lactation services and breast pumps, when indicated. Our worksites should provide the legally required break time for mothers who need to express milk for their babies. Society should applaud mothers who are nursing their babies, any place, any time. Theresa Landau, chairperson, NYC Breastfeeding Leadership Council

Breast is best

Manhattan: According to your article on breast-feeding, women who give birth are caught “in the crossfire of conflicting information.” Nothing could be further from the truth. Every public health organization in the world concurs that breast milk is the ideal food for infants . If women choose not to breast-feed, or cannot breast-feed, commercial formulas are available — but they are not equivalent to breast milk. Kathleen Carpenter

Suffer the children

Albany: I was extremely disturbed to read U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara’s recent report on Rikers Island (“Big house of horrors,” Aug. 5). The details are a shocking indictment of a system that fails our children. Sixteen- and 17-year olds are not adults, should not be incarcerated with adults and require appropriate supervision and services. The majority of incarcerated youth have not committed violent offenses . It is our responsibility to assure their safety and development while they serve time. Additionally, it is in our best interest to return them back to society with the tools to be productive citizens. Gov. Cuomo’s plan to raise the age of criminal responsibility and reform our state’s juvenile justice system will better serve all New Yorkers. Paige Pierce, executive director, Families Together in N.Y.S.

NYPD blues

Tappan, N.Y.: I have become increasingly disgusted by your unbearably biased articles slandering and smearing the NYPD and law enforcement. The death of Eric Garner was a tragedy, yes. However, the constant perpetuation of hostility and animosity toward men and women in blue is abhorrent. And the fact that you give a race-baiting pimp like Al Sharpton even a modicum of space in your newspaper is mind-boggling. P.S.: I am not a cop, nor is anyone in my immediate family. I do, however, possess the utmost respect for the men and women who put their lives on the line every day to keep us safe. Phil Giuliano

Give cops a chance

Staten Island: This incident with the chokehold has again put the Police Department in a very bad light. The people who bash the NYPD on a daily basis are happy to have more ammunition — and just waiting for another mistake to happen. The idea of having cameras on police officers is insane. The commissioner is taking the right steps to correct the problem with training. Jeffrey Van Pelt

Out of line

Ridgewood: Al Sharpton made a a racist comment about the mayor’s son, and nothing was said. If I were Mayor de Blasio, I would have slapped his face. Nicholas Musto

There when he needs them

Staten Island: Isn’t it ironic? Al Sharpton declares war on the Police Department, yet he asks it for protection for his march over the Verrazano Bridge. This brings stupidity to a new level. But then we’re talking about Al Sharpton. Michael Colavito

Have a heart

Brooklyn: I’m very disappointed in the comments published by the Daily News about the death of a human being, Eric Garner. The majority believe the police union deserves kudos for standing up to Al Sharpton — and that Garner was resisting arrest. My God, were is the empathy for his family? The videos showed cops and EMTs literally watching a man die in the street, and all you can come away with is how the police are being treated? Eddie Watson

Get some therapy

Manhattan: It would be a good idea if all members of the NYPD were required to take an extensive course in anger management. It seems to me a lot of their aggressive hostility is anger-motivated. Muriel A. Diamond

The good guys

Springfield Gardens: To Voicer Kenny Bowden Jr.: I know many young men, and in my family I have young, black, law-abiding, working men who are raising their families to the best of their ability. People may like to believe all or most black men have abandoned their families and are criminals. Not so. Glad you spoke up. There are good men in every race and neighborhood. Lynne Savage

Curb your dog

Brooklyn: The police are currently focusing on quality-of-life issues. In Prospect Park, many dog owners allow their dogs to go unleashed. I have contacted park officials via 311 for the past three years, but there is no change in the situation. Are white, economically stable dog owners allowed to infringe on park users’ quality of life with absolutely no curtailment by the city? Jessica Balter

I was robbed

Floral Park: To whoever stole my shopping cart — with shoes and deodorant I had just bought, along with a grocery list and coupons — at the Stop and Shop on Hillside Ave. in New Hyde Park: Keep the deodorant. You need it. You stink. I bet you took the shoes back and got my money. I bet your mother is proud of you. Did you have a good laugh over this? How many times have you done this? I’m putting an Irish hex on you. For shame. P. Maggiulli

The true beasts

Brooklyn: Re “Sick fisherman force fish to smoke a cigarette” (NYDailyNews.com, Aug. 5): I find it difficult to process the level of depravity of some members of our species. What waste of human protoplasm would torture a defenseless animal? What these cretins did is reprehensible. I only hope they are caught and prosecuted to the maximum extent of the law — and that they each end up with a cellmate twice their size who just happens to love animals. Rina Deych

Armed and dangerous

Flushing: Just when I thought the NRA couldn’t get any crazier, these gun-lobby lunatics proved me wrong (“Vision Zero on guns,” Aug. 6). Who else but an NRA blogger and firearms fanatic would conceive of the bright idea of issuing gun permits to blind people? Why not give them driver licenses as well? Dick Reif

The real immigrant tradition

Flushing: There can be no reasonable debate with people who think that eliminating borders, and permitting millions of unknown, undocumented and possibly dangerous persons to enter our country and demand support, is an American tradition. The latest arrivals claim to be victims of oppression and expect to be wards of the government. Many 20th century immigrants also escaped persecution and poverty. Their understanding of the American tradition, however, was that they would be afforded “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.” Our wealth and standard of living are testament to the creativity and productivity of those immigrants. Ed Konecnik

Remembrance of things past

Brooklyn: I, too, must lend my voice to those writing in about the custard treat that was sold in the A&S basement. My mother always bought me one whenever we shopped in the store. I remember it was in a tall clear glass and there was a long spoon in it. I have never tasted another custard like it in all the years since. Domenica Militello

Memories in store

Brooklyn: With all the letters about A&S, it brought to mind another great department store icon, E.J. Korvette. I worked there for three years while in high school and college. I met my wife there. It was a great place to shop and an even better place to work. It had the most extensive record department you could find in NYC. Everyone who worked there became an instant friend. Do any other Korvette alumni remember? Glenn Brown