This week, Everyday Health is publishing a series of articles about the calorie counts that will soon be required on chain restaurant menus across the country. This final installment looks at how consumers can use calorie counts to their advantage.

Calorie counts are soon to appear on chain restaurant menus across the country, but many experts are worried that consumers won’t know how to make use of them. The only information mandated by the Affordable Care Act that must be published directly next to the menu item is the calorie count for the dish itself. Because the mandate doesn’t require any other information, such as daily nutritional requirements or information beyond calories, many experts are worried that people won’t get much use out of the labels.

“In part, if you don’t put the context there, then why did you mandate it in the first place, because the purpose was to help people manage their calorie count,” asked nutritionist Gayle Timmerman, PHD, RN, of the University of Texas at Austin.

A Step in the Right Direction

Other researchers agreed that context and other aids to help people understand what they’re reading will be necessary, but all acknowledged that just getting the calorie counts on menus is a big step.

“My initial perception is that there’s always going to be a better mousetrap that we can build, but I’m not yet as much of a skeptic of menu labeling as many people are,” said Jason Block, MD, professor of population medicine at Harvard University.

Because certain cities, including New York City, have already implemented calorie count mandates, there have been some studies to test their effectiveness. Christina Roberto, PhD, a psychologist and epidemiologist at Harvard’s School of Public Health, said she found the results of those studies to be largely inconclusive.

“The media coverage traditionally paints a picture that it doesn’t work, and that’s really frustrating, because it’s much more mixed,” she said, noting that there are studies that show menu labeling does do work and studies that suggest it doesn’t.

Dr. Block recently conducted a study to see how people estimated the calories they were consuming at fast food restaurants, including McDonald’s, Burger King and Subway. The study, published in the British Medical Journal in May 2013, will serve as a basis for Block to compare consumers’ calorie estimations before and after the implementation of the ACA-mandated menu calorie counts, he said. His initial research found that people tend to underestimate the calorie count of what they’re consuming by 175 to 259 calories, and consumers’ estimations were even farther off when they ate at chains that marketed themselves as healthier, such as Subway.

One thing that Block noted was that right now, calorie information is in fact available at almost every chain restaurant, even if it isn’t posted on the menu — it's on posters, napkins or food wrappers. But almost no one actually takes the time to look at it.

This didn’t surprise Roberto, who once conducted a study counting how many people walking into chain restaurants actually sought out calorie information. She and her team observed 4,000 people for the study, but only six actually looked for the information — 0.1 percent.

“It has to be staring you in the face — people are not going to make the effort,” she said.

Unfortunately, according to Timmerman, people are “horrible” at understanding calorie counts. Block added that, research-wise, “no one has really looked in depth at the effect of people’s understanding of calorie counts.” Roberto said there may be more intuitive ways to present the information, since people often make decisions about what to order very quickly.

Margo Wootan, director of nutrition policy at the Center for Science in the Public Interest, said that numeric information can still be helpful. “The main way people use nutrition labels on packaged foods is to make comparisons,” she said, citing choices like whether to buy Triscuits or Wheat Thins, or Breyers or Haagen-Dazs ice cream. “I think that will be easy for people to just see,” she said, making up a hypothetical choice between a 580-calorie chicken ranch sub or a 480-calorie Italian sub. “That will be eye-opening for some people.”

Context Counts, Too

Other research has suggested that calorie counts are particularly effective when the number is put in context. Roberto, for example, conducted a study in which individuals were presented with options that included calorie counts and information on how many calories a person should eat in a day. Other participants were given only the calorie counts. Having calorie counts available led people to make healthier choices, but the biggest surprise came later. The researchers were also monitoring what people consumed later, after the study, and they found that those who had been told how many calories a person should eat during the entire day picked healthier options later, on their own. “Maybe that reminder keeps them in check,” Roberto suggested.

Another study, conducted by researchers at the University of North Carolina and published in Appetite, looked at how people reacted to labels that just gave calorie counts versus labels that also explained how far a person would have to walk to burn off those calories. Adding any sort of nutritional information reduced the number of calories ordered by about 100, but people with access to the information on how far they’d have to walk cut their orders down by another 100 calories. Among the participants, 82 percent said they preferred the physical activity-based labels.

Additional information such as how many calories a person should eat in a day, or how calories translate to exercise, is “good for education, but to put it on a menu would be impossible,” given space restraints, Wootan said. Adding it as supplemental information that could be found online or in on-site brochures would probably mean it would get the same attention as calorie counts before the mandate — almost none.

Roberto suggested that a simple system, such as traffic light labels (green for healthy food, yellow for moderately healthy food, and red for unhealthy food), would add a lot of value to the labels. With the implementation of calorie count posting already delayed, researchers noted that it may take some time to figure out how to post the information to best help consumers.

How You Can Use Menu Calorie Counts

In the meantime, here are some tips to help you navigate the calorie counts that are coming: