Poll finds casino support dropping in Massachusetts.

BOSTON - With the Massachusetts Democratic Party preparing for its state convention in Worcester this Saturday, a new poll from the Suffolk University Political Research Center and the Boston Herald finds that most Massachusetts residents think state conventions are "a waste of time and money."

A large percentage of residents also disagree with a rule, held by both state Democrats and Republicans, requiring a candidate to get support from 15 percent of convention delegates in order to appear on the ballot.

David Paleologos, director of the Suffolk University Political Research Center, said conventions can be good for candidates – for example, a strong convention showing boosted then-political newcomer Deval Patrick, a Democrat, during his successful 2006 gubernatorial campaign. But they can also hurt new candidates by forcing them to spend close to half a year campaigning at caucuses and organizing convention delegates.

"They can consume a lot of hours and dollars and focus, to the detriment of likely general election voters or even primary voters," Paleologos said.

The poll asked residents whether they believe state party conventions serve an important role in the political process by setting benchmarks for candidates and key issues or whether they are a waste of time and money, especially for candidates who must focus on getting support from delegates.

Just over half (51 percent) responded that conventions are a waste of time and money, while only one quarter said they serve an important role.

Asked about the 15 percent rule, 42 percent of respondents said it was not fair, compared to 33 percent who said it was fair. Proponents of the rule say it sets a baseline level of support that any serious candidate should be able to meet, and lets activists make sure a candidate values the state party platform. Opponents say as long as a candidate gets enough signatures from voters, party activists should not be allowed to exclude him from the ballot.

The rule has been controversial. At the Republican convention in March, the party said Tea Party-affiliated gubernatorial candidate Mark Fisher fell just shy of the 15 percent needed to challenge Charlie Baker, whom the party endorsed. Fisher, claiming voting irregularities, challenged the ruling. The party ultimately let him on the ballot to settle a lawsuit. In 2012, overwhelming support for Democrat Elizabeth Warren kept Marisa DeFranco off the Democratic ballot.

Matt Fenlon, executive director of the Massachusetts Democratic Party, defended the role of the state convention. "I think as Democrats we've shown over the years that the conventions are a proven way to keep our grassroots energy alive and growing," Fenlon told The Republican/MassLive.com. Fenlon said the conventions generate energy and excitement among grassroots activists and showcase the party's messages on issues.

With over 600 caucuses, events that elect delegates to the state convention, Fenlon said 7,000 Democrats participated in the process. "I think it's pretty clear that a majority of our grassroots are excited by our conventions," Fenlon said.

Similar to previous polls, the Suffolk poll has Democrat Martha Coakley, the state attorney general, in the strongest position among the gubernatorial candidates. If the primary were held today, Coakley would beat Democrat Steve Grossman, the state treasurer, 44 percent to 12 percent, with 32 percent undecided. None of the other Democrats – Don Berwick, Juliette Kayyem or Joe Avellone – would get more than 4 percent.

Coakley would also lead Baker in the general election, 36 percent to 28 percent. Baker leads Grossman by 2 percentage points, and the other Democrats by far larger margins.

Baker holds a 33-point lead over Fisher in the Republican primary.

The poll finds that a majority of voters are undecided in the races for lieutenant governor, attorney general and treasurer, and none of the candidates have statistically significant leads in those races.

The poll finds that Patrick continues to enjoy a high approval rating – 57 percent.

President Barack Obama, a Democrat, has seen his approval rating drop slightly. His approval rating is 45 percent – down from 47 percent in June 2013 – and 44 percent disapprove of the job he is doing. Obama's reputation has suffered nationally due to factors ranging from the slow economic recovery to problems with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. Despite a new Massachusetts health insurance exchange that has been a technological disaster, the poll found 49 percent of voters think the national health care overhaul is "generally good" for Massachusetts, while 40 percent think it is generally bad.

The poll of 800 voters, released Monday, was conducted June 4-7 and has a margin of error of 3.5 percent.