Gov. John Hickenlooper last week waded into the long-running controversy over red-light cameras and photo radar with some useful suggestions for limiting their use.

Given the fact that photo radar is clearly deployed by some communities in Colorado to create speed traps that generate revenue, his proposals are welcome indeed.

For several years we’ve been tempted — but hesitant — to support legislation to ban photo radar and red-light cameras outright given the evidence of abusive practices. Why hesitant? Because cities really should be able to control their destiny on an issue as local as traffic management. But the state has an interest in rational traffic policy, too, and the sorts of measures the governor proposes make sense.

We’d go further than he does, though, limiting photo radar to school zones, construction and work zones and areas with high rates of accidents, injuries and fatalities. His final suggestion, “areas with high volumes of traffic violations coupled with resident or business requests for automated traffic enforcement,” is too susceptible to manipulation.

Also, as the the governor says, the fines should be spent on “traffic safety improvements and related purposes,” not flow into the city’s general fund.

The governor’s proposal was meant to head off House Bill 1098, which originally banned photo radar and red-light cameras. As it passed the House on Friday, however, HB 1098 was amended to a more palatable policy: It would allow the devices if local voters approved their use.

A similar bill, Senate Bill 276, which passed the Senate on Friday, would require elections only for red-light cameras.

The Senate bill says if local officials defy the mandate for a popular vote (on the theory that home rule cities can’t be restricted in such fashion), then the state would withhold a portion of highway funds.

Although some claim otherwise, mandating local elections should not be seen as a devious attempt to ban such cameras. As SB 276 sponsor Sen. David Balmer, R-Centennial, told us, some towns would probably vote to use red-light cameras and some would reject them. We tend to agree.

In fact, the vote would probably turn on how responsibly officials had deployed the automated systems in the first place.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.