Here we go again? Could we really be talking about a government shutdown already? The GOP hasn’t even taken control of the Senate yet and already the s-word is being bandied about in the more truculent quarters of the right. At the moment, it remains there – party leadership wants another shutdown like it wants a third Obama term – but, yeah, we’ve seen this show before.

At issue is the political dirty bomb President Barack Obama dropped into the middle of the GOP last month when he announced that he was acting unilaterally to overhaul the nation’s immigration policies. As I wrote in this space last month, I disagree with the move as the next step in the broader elimination of political norms which have helped the government function (filibusters used rarely and debt ceiling extortion not used as a tool for major policy overhauls, for example).

Republicans, predictably, denounced the plan in somewhat more pointed terms – as an unconstitutional dictatorial power-grab. “The House will, in fact, act,” Speaker John Boehner promised reporters before Thanksgiving, and incoming Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell made similar comments.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Republican Party]

The problem Republican leaders face is that given the separation of powers and the burgeoning reach of executive authority over the last half-century, there is little Congress can do. They essentially have a fly swatter and a nuke: They can inveigh impotently, or they can shut down the government (“use the power of the purse” is the term of art for those wishing to avoid the s-word). As Boehner conceded this week, “Frankly, we have limited options and limited abilities to deal with it directly.”

Not surprisingly, given their desire to prove to voters that they can govern responsibly – a concept which does not include shutdowns – congressional GOP leaders are trying to thread the needle, striking a sufficiently belligerent pose to appease their base while stopping short of exercising their nuclear option. First, they voted Thursday on a House bill that would ban Obama from changing immigration laws through executive order (a piece of legislation proposed by Florida GOP Rep. Ted Yoho, whose legislative credentials include, as the Washington Post put it this week, having “talked up impeachment more than almost any other House Republican”). This is spleen-venting: The legislation won’t see the light of day in the for-now Democratic Senate. House Republicans plan to next pass a spending bill which will keep most of the government running through the remainder of the fiscal year but will cut off funding for the Department of Homeland Security (which enforces immigration policies) in February, setting up a confrontation with the president on one side and the unified Republican Congress on the other.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on President Obama]

If this plan – give the GOP base symbolic express-your-outrage votes in order to avoid an immediate and politically toxic showdown – sounds familiar, that’s because it is. You might recall how it worked out a year ago when it was called the “Cantor plan,” and was devised to forestall a government shutdown over Obamacare. The idea, then, was that the House would pass a spending bill which defunded Obamacare but with a provision allowing the Senate to keep the funding and send a clean bill to Obama. That plan crashed under a conservative rebellion. Instead we got last year’s shutdown.

Here we go again? There are reasons to argue for and against the likelihood of a shutdown, in the spring if not now. On the one hand, starting in January, Boehner will have a bigger and more ideologically diverse House Republican Conference. This isn’t to say that he will be overseeing a moderate party but it will have more moderates. This could give him more maneuvering room to bypass his hardliners. “Next year, GOP leadership sources promise, they’ll ignore the far right and make progress with an easier group of lawmakers,” Politico’s Jake Sherman and John Bresnahan reported this week.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Government Shutdown]

And there are broader political concerns, starting with the fact that the party’s approval-disapproval ratings plummeted (which is pretty incredible given how low they started) during the shutdown last year. Then there’s the fraught politics of potentially engineering a government shutdown in order to more aggressively deport millions of people living in the U.S. illegally. A recent Latino Decisions poll, for example, found that 89 percent of Latinos support Obama’s executive action and will support a 2016 candidate who promises to continue it.

On the other hand, not everyone draws the same lessons from the 2013 experience. “We had a shutdown a year ago, and we just got the biggest majority we’ve ever had in the House since 1928, and one of the largest majorities we’ve ever had in the Senate,” Idaho GOP Rep. Raúl Labrador, a tea party leader, told reporters this week. “So I don’t understand their reasoning for taking anything off the table,” including a shutdown.

And consider the sort of apocalyptic rhetoric being deployed in response to Obama’s move: “This is not a matter to be discussed at some point,” Alabama right wing Sen. Jeff Sessions told Politico. “It’s an unacceptable aggrandizement of power that Congress has an institutional duty to reject.” Also it’s “a serious breach of our Constitution” and “a serious threat to our system of government.” Oh wait, that last wasn’t a member of the “Hell No” caucus but rather was Boehner himself, who nevertheless proposes to address this existential crisis with stern words but – heavens no! – not with the other weapon available to him.