Click photo to enlarge «

1

»

The Colorado Enterprise Fund (CEF) was founded in 1976 as a non-profit lending source specializing in loans for small and emerging businesses unable to secure traditional bank financing. Its first employee was Ceyl Prinster, who since then has climbed the ranks and today is CEO and president of the CEF.

Its mission is to accelerate community prosperity by financing and supporting entrepreneurs and small businesses. The agency has closed more than $40 million in loans to over 1600 businesses during its existence, and in the process helped created thousands of jobs.

The CEF is based in Denver.

1. You have been running the Colorado Enterprise Fund for over 20 years. That's a long run. To what do you attribute your staying power?

I come from a family of entrepreneurs who knew that serving the community is an important key to business success. I take an entrepreneurial approach to the work that I do. To me that means always being on the lookout for new opportunities, understanding the markets we serve and how we fit in, and adapting our operations to most effectively meet the needs of the customers we serve. Being entrepreneurial means taking risks and making mistakes sometimes, but it's how you grow, both personally and as a company. I get involved in the local community and our national industry association to learn about how others are doing similar work and to make connections for resources and collaboration.

Advertisement

I am a lifelong learner - I read books and articles about leadership, change management, corporate culture and innovation for ideas and inspiration. I participate in training, leadership exchanges (nationally and locally) and various workshops (both online and in-person.) I am fortunate that I am in an industry - community development finance -- that is inspiring, innovating and expanding, which presents ever-new challenges and opportunities to keep me excited and engaged.

2. Can you give us a brief snapshot of its history, and how has it changed during your time with the organization?

Colorado Enterprise Fund is a mission-driven nonprofit lending institution that began nearly 40 years ago in 1976. I was not a founder, but was the first employee. Originally, we were a pass-through entity for a government loan program to revitalize areas of Denver that were deteriorated and could not access capital from banks. When I started, we had received a small amount of capital to make direct loans to small businesses in these inner-city areas to help both the low-income business owners and the neighborhoods. I think of those first years like a small kindling flame that we have since built up over the last 25 years into a robust fire - a versatile pool of capital helping a myriad of businesses across the state to create jobs, community services, innovative products and a livelihood for many, many families. From our humble beginnings as a small neighborhood loan pool funded with $200,000 of borrowed capital, we now have $20 million in assets, 25 employees and nearly 500 loans in our current portfolio. We serve the entire state with funding from money center banks to community banks; Federal, state and local government entities; and nonprofit and other impact investors. We have closed $43 million in loans to over 1600 businesses, and have impacted an estimated 13,000 jobs. It's a track record we are proud of.

3. Do you only focus on Colorado, or do you efforts reach beyond state lines?

We only make loans in Colorado. We are based here and all our efforts are focused on helping small businesses in Colorado to start and grow. We are Colorado proud! That said, we are actively connected with other organizations across the country to leverage our knowledge and resources, bringing a national perspective and funding resources to Colorado. CEF is nationally known for performance excellence and innovation in our field. For example, we were selected to and have been an active participant for over four years in the Goldman Sachs Small Business Collaborative comprised of 24 high-performing community development finance organizations across the country. We also are actively involved in the Citi Leadership Program for Opportunity Finance, which brings together over 50 leaders from similar organizations to learn from and share challenges and successes with each other. CEF is nationally rated by Aeris, an independent rating agency for community development finance institutions. We want to do everything we can to bring national resources to Colorado, and also to elevate Colorado as a national player in our industry.

4. Who is supporting you - the CEF?

We have many supporters and partners. Our funders include banks at all levels, government entities (federal, state, county, municipal), and private (mostly nonprofit) investors, all of whom support our mission of accelerating community prosperity by financing and supporting entrepreneurs and small businesses. We also have many partners that support us in other ways - like the Boulder Small Business Development Center (SBDC), City of Boulder Office of Economic Vitality and the Boulder Economic Council who help connect us with businesses that need our loans. We also partner actively with the City of Longmont Office of Community Development and the Longmont Area Economic Council in a similar way. In fact the Boulder/Longmont area is one of our strongest service areas because of our active collaborative engagement with these community partners.

5. How big is your staff, and are they all in the Metro Denver area?

We have 21 people on our staff with 4 open positions. Our headquarters are in Denver, with a satellite office in Ft. Collins. By no means does our staff just sit in the office, however. We have many team members who are out every day visiting our borrowers, taking applications for loans, meeting with our partners and talking to bankers and others in the communities we serve. I grew up in Western Colorado and understand how people outside of Metro Denver expect Denverites to be visibly present to be credible in their communities. We have limited resources so we have to be efficient and can't have offices in all our communities. However, we have a model that is mobile and connected with the communities we serve.

I feel very blessed and privileged to have been a part of CEF for so many years and hope that I have made a difference in the world somehow. Working in a mission-driven organization is inspiring, challenging and rewarding. I have many great partners, staff, board members and resources that have helped along the way. It motivates me to work hard, be creative, be humble and help others, too. We still have a lot to accomplish, but I am proud of the work we have done so far.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel