Buy Photo Dr. Karen Worthington of the Ingham County Animal Control Shelter performs surgery to sterilize a cat on Friday. Observing the procedure is MSU pre-vet student Sarah Lindo. (Photo: Matthew Dae Smith/For the Lansing State Journal)Buy Photo

LANSING – A 10-year tax increase proposal to fund a new $6.8 million animal control shelter — with expanded services — could go before Ingham County voters in the Aug. 2 primary.

A proposed 0.35-mill tax increase was approved Thursday by the Board of Commissioners’ Law & Courts Committee. The measure will go on the ballot if two other committees and the full board give it the green light.

The site of the new shelter is undetermined. In any case the current facility, which dates to 1971, would be torn down. It is located off Cedar Street in Mason, near the Ingham County Jail.

“It’s 45 years old and it is in need of some serious maintenance,” Animal Control Director John Dinon said Friday. “But more importantly it was designed at a time when animal control functions were very different that they are today.”

He said the current Ingham County shelter is inadequate for the adoption program in use now. There is only one entrance and there is little space for people to meet and bond with animals, Dinon said.

A worker at the Ingham County Animal Control Shelter in Mason, works in one of the holding areas Friday. (Photo: Matthew Dae Smith/For the Lansing State Jurnal)

And animal adoption is a "significant" activity at the shelter, Dinon said. Of the 529 animals that came in during the first three months of this year, 233 were adopted.

Along with the new 21,000-square-foot shelter — the current one is about 11,800 square feet — Dinon said the new tax also would provide:

Six days of service instead of five. The shelter would be open Sundays in addition to Tuesdays-Saturdays.

Eleven more staff members, bringing the total to 30. This would include two new animal control officers, raising that total to eight. There would be patrols seven days a week instead of six.

Two public entrances instead of one — an entrance for picking up animals and another for dropping them off.

Restoration of after-hours on-call service of the animal control officers for law enforcement. The 24/7 service was cut out of the department’s budget in 2006.

Speaking to the committee on Thursday, Dinon said if the public was paying for a new shelter, they should expect improved services. He called the current level of service “inadequate.”

“When you come to the shelter there 20 people in the lobby and two clerks serving them,” he said.

Dinon was hired in October to replace Andy Seltz, who had resigned to run Livingston County’s animal control department. Most recently Dinon, a Michigan State University graduate, served as outreach and engagement director for the U.S. Humane Society in Toledo, Ohio,

Freeing up general fund money

The controller’s office provided the committee three suggested proposals: A 0.14-mill increase for a new shelter only' a 0.31 mill proposal addressing a new shelter and raise money for staff, which current comes in large part from the county's general fund; and a 0.46-mill request covering the second option and increased services. The third option would replace the general fund money with millage money.

The department's annual budget is about $1.7 million, with $1 million coming from the county’s general fund. Another $700,000 is generated by fees.

What commissioners agreed on is a 0.35-mill proposal that builds a new facility, reduces the reliance on county general funds and increases some services. County officials say the millage would generate about $2.4 million in its first year and cost the owner of a home with a taxable value of $75,000 about $26 more in taxes annually.

Chief Deputy Controller John Neilsen said Friday the millage proposal would offset most of the county's contribution from the general fund — $600,000 to $700,000 — although the exact number still was being calculated.

Buy Photo The Ingham County Animal Control Shelter is shown Friday. County officials are looking at a tax increase to replace it. (Photo: Matthew Dae Smith/For the Lansing State Journal)

Commissioner Penelope Tsernoglou, D-East Lansing, called it “exciting” to have a plan to work from. The board has taken heat because no strategy was in place when it pursued a parks and trails millage in 2014 that voters approved. It just recently was able to put a grant process in place that allows communities to begin spending money, and it spent $70,000 for a consulting firm to come up with a plan to allocate the money.

“We’re not going to get criticized for not having a plan,” Tsernoglou said. “We know exactly what the money is going to be used for if we choose to do it.”

Two Republican commissioners, Randy Maiville of Onondaga and Randy Schafer of Williamston, both cited the high amount of taxes that county residents pay already. Schafer casting the lone vote against the proposal.

Schafer called the county’s total levy of some 9.8 mills “astronomically high” and said the county already has several special millages

Maiville said the board could look into cutting other millage levies, particularly the health services millage, which was cut in October from 0.52 mills to 0.35 mills after many of the county’s low income residents began qualifying for coverage under the Affordable Care Act and expanded Medicaid.

That reduction in the millage saved taxpayers about $1.1 million a year.

Contact Curt Smith at (517) 377-1226 or csmith@lsj.com. Follow him on Twitter @CurtSmithLSJ.

Buy Photo Ashleigh Anderson of the Ingham County Animal Control Shelter in Mason cleans cages Friday, (Photo: Matthew Dae Smith/For the Lansing State Journal)

What's next

A proposed animal shelter millage goes before the County Services Committee on Tuesday and the Finance Committee on Wednesday. Both meetings start 6 p.m. at the county Human Services Building, 5303 S. Cedar St., Lansing.

It is scheduled to go before the full Board of Commissioners on April 26. If approved there, the millage will go on the Aug. 2 ballot.

Ingham County levies

Along with its $44 million general fund budget, Ingham County levies nine special millages. Here are the levies and the amounts they’re generating in 2015-16:

Indigent veterans support – 0.033 mills; $229,121 (2016 only)

911 system – 0.8431 mills; $5,755,913

Transportation (CATA) – 0.48 mills; $3,277,000

Transportation #3 (CATA) – 0.12 mills; $819,250

Juvenile justice – 0.6 mills; $4,096,250

Potter Park Zoo and Potter Park – 0.41 mills, $2,799,104

Farmland/open space preservation – 0.14 mills; $955,792

Health care service -- 0.35 mills; $2,389,479

Trails and parks -- 0.5 mills, $3,413,541

Read or Share this story: http://on.lsj.com/1NeE3ce