HUNTINGTON, Ind. (21Alive) -- Five after the shock, economic development officials are scrambling to salvage the best outcome from the announced departure of hundreds of United Technologies jobs in Huntington.

The natural reaction is to throw up your hands in frustration, but there's no time for that.

We've got to get moving as a region to figure out how to get the displaced workers directed into new career opportunities.

UTEC, the heating and air conditioning industry parts supplier out of Huntington is moving out of the country because a big UTEC customer, Carrier, told 1400 workers in Indianapolis last week we are hitting the road.

Warning: there is foul language in the Facebook video taken during the Indianapolis Carrier announcement.

Carrier indianapolis plant is closing 2017 Posted by LaKeisha Austin on Wednesday, February 10, 2016

Not a happy crowd there and folks are not happy in Huntington either, with 700 jobs being phased out by mid to late 2017.

The jobs agency Northeast Indiana Works says it really hurts when you're trying to replace decent paying manufacturing jobs.

"The truth of the matter is, is that wages across the board in northeast Indiana right now are lagging the state and they're lagging the nation, so we have quite a bit of work to do in the area of raising wages," Rick Farrant of Northeast Indiana Works said.

The good news, according to Farrant, is that there are a lot of manufacturing positions that are unfilled right now.

He says a meeting will be organized in the next 3 to 4 weeks with key stakeholders to assess the skill sets of UTEC workers and find ways to plug them into openings either in Huntington County or surrounding counties.

Gov. Mike Pence released a statement Monday saying that neither Carrier nor United Technologies provided any advance notification to the State of Indiana that they were moving operations.

“As governor, I was profoundly disappointed to learn that Carrier Corporation and United Technologies would relocate jobs and operations to Mexico, costing hardworking Hoosiers more than 2,100 jobs. My heart goes out to all the families and communities that are affected by this news," Pence said in a statement.

Pence said that the Indiana Economic Development Corporation provided training grants to both Carrier and United Technologies.

If the companies are found to be non-compliant with those terms, the IEDC will seek to recapture those grants to the maximum extent permitted by the agreement in order to protect Hoosier taxpayers.

The IEDC entered a contract with Carrier Corporation in 2013 to provide up to $200,000 in training grants based on the company’s job creation plans.

A majority ($197,815.76) of that contract has been awarded. If the company closes its Indianapolis facility, or if the layoffs affect their job commitments noted in the contract, the IEDC will seek to recapture those grants.

The IEDC also has two recent contracts with United Technologies, and in 2010, the IEDC offered the company up to $182,500 in training grants.

In 2015, the IEDC entered into another contract offering up to $300,000 in training grants based on the company’s plans to create new jobs.

In light of this week’s news, the IEDC has de-obligated United Technologies from that $300,000 contract.

You can click here to find your nearest WorkOne location.