Website helps residents find best health plan for them

Florence— Amber Kolami, certified health coverage guide with Valley-Wide Health Systems, Inc., gave a presentation Tuesday evening at the John C. Fremont Library on how Connect for Health Colorado can help those who would like assistance seeking health insurance for the Affordable Care Act.

According to their website, "Connect for Health Colorado is a new health insurance marketplace, that opened for business in October 2013, for individuals, families and small employers across Colorado." The website states that the "online marketplace...include(s) a customer support network of customer service center representatives, health coverage guides and licensed brokers to help Coloradans find the best health plan for their needs."

"You want to keep your options open," Kolami said, and encouraged people to thoroughly shop before deciding on a health coverage plan to purchase.

According to the website, "Connect for Health Colorado will also be the only place where Coloradans can find out if they are eligible for new federal financial assistance, based on income, and use the benefits right away."

Some individuals may qualify to be exempt from purchasing health insurance, and may apply with a form from the federal government for exemption, according to the website. It also stated that many individuals do not qualify for exemption and that "If you do not have insurance...the federal government may impose a fee on your taxes." It states that the fee in 2014, "will be one percent of annual income or $95, whichever is greater" and the fee would be paid when "you file your taxes at the end of the year."

Advertisement

At the meeting, Kolami advised that open enrollment is through March, and if purchased on or before the 15th of the month, coverage will take effect on the first day of the following month. She stated that certain life events, such births or death and divorce or marriage, do provide individuals opportunities to enroll outside of the open enrollment period.

Kolami said insurance companies are sending out letters of cancellation if coverage is not "aligned with the laws of the Affordable Care Act."

Kolami provided contact information for Connect for Health Colorado. People may visit the website, http://connectforhealthco.com/" title="connectforhealthco.com">http://connectforhealthco.com/, or call 855-PLANS-4-YOU (855-752-6749) for assistance from Connect for Health Colorado representatives in Colorado Springs. Hours are 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. Monday through Friday and 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturdays.

For application assistance, people may call Kolami's office in Cañon City at (719) 275-2301, ext. 1853. She said she can help people over the phone or schedule an appointment. She said the office does not accept walk-in visits.