Sam Richards of Crystal River, Florida says he's crafted a term -- Trumpapparllia -- to stand for all things Donald Trump, including apparel, thoughts, actions and food. Richards says it's what was heard as screams filled a jam-packed room as Trump was declared the winner in the first-in-the-south primary.

It's the word thrown out by a small business owner that's followed the campaign for 39 events.



For Richards, it's the word that best describes the atmosphere of diverse American voters believing the best chance for positive change in America is a man that isn't a career politician.

Buttons, shirts, scarves and hats, Sam Richards said his Trumpapparllia carries a story of support for a man with business sense and a story of survival.

Richards himself is a business owner. In addition to selling Trumpapparllia, he owns a trucking company. The small business owner describes his journey as a rough but good one. He says the motivation is the belief Trump has the best chance of fixing the budget and helping business owners.

"He's got great ideas, and he's gonna take everybody's opinion and work with it - make it great," Richards said.

In the first 100 days in office, if Trump is elected, Richards says he hopes to see illegal aliens work legally. He believes there is enough opportunity for everyone -- he just wants to see it all done fairly.

It was standing room only at the Spartanburg Marriott long before Donald Trump was projected to win South Carolina. In the sea of supporters is a pink scooter clad with a Donald Trump Halloween mask. That gem of Trumpapparllia is what gets a breast cancer survivor from place-to-place.

She believes her survival of six near-death experiences to be divine intervention, allowing her to witness Donald Trump "make America great again."

Her name is Regina Hayes. She's from Spartanburg. She believes Donald Trump has the best chance of fixing her hot-button issue. Hayes says Obamacare is not affordable. She trusts the business sense of Donald Trump and believes he can come up with a better plan.

"I actually read the bill. I know what was in it," Hayes said of Obamacare.

As results from the polls in South Carolina came in, she hoped to see Trump show the crowd in Spartanburg that he is not and will not be the career politician. She hoped he would show the crowd he is "not a puppet."

That's exactly what she got. Trump said if he is elected, Obamacare will be gone.

"He doesn't have any special interest that the rest of them do. He's his own man. He is able to make deals with other countries, and he can wheel and deal and make America great again," she said.

Josh Wheeler of Spartanburg is a 2014 graduate of Wofford College. More importantly, he likes to believe he has something to do with Trump's quest to make America great.

Wheeler says he has followed Trump's life and career since the ninth grade.

"Every election, I always said, 'How cool would it be if Trump ran for president.' I've read his books and watched how he deals with people and handles negotiations. This guy would be great as president -- but never thought it would happen. I even taunted him on his Facebook."

Why Trump? Wheeler says Trump will fight for Americans.

"He can afford to do the right thing -- not just financially, but because he doesn't have the restraints of a career politician," Wheeler said.

Wheeler hoped for a landslide victory as results started to come in. A big win and a big celebration are what Wheeler experienced.