Topics: AlterNet, Hillary Clinton, news, Politics, Progressivism, Elections News, Social News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

During Tuesday’s Democratic debate, Hillary Clinton tried to display a new and more progressive version of the Hillary who Americans have seen for years: as First Lady, U.S. Senator, 2008 presidential candidate and Secretary of State.

Clinton certainly triumphed on the style side. She was composed, confident, articulate and deftly criticized Bernie Sanders on a range of issues, but without sounding too strident or caustic. But what about substance? Is Clinton newly progressive on some issues or mostly defending centrist status quos as before?

The verdict, according to a range of progressive analysts is Clinton is talking a more progressive game than her policy prescriptions would deliver. This is true for some of the bigger issues: expanding Social Security, regulating Wall Street, reforming criminal justice, the latest Pacific rim trade agreement, and stating that being a woman makes her the “outsider” candidate.

Let’s take a look at six issues that highlight the style verses substance gap.

1. Expanding Social Security. As Isaiah J. Poole wrote at The Campaign for America’s Future, “Unless you listened carefully, you might have missed the expanse of daylight between Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders when asked about their plans for Social Security at the CNN Democratic debate Tuesday. It’s a gap that is alarming people who are fighting to protect and strengthen Social Security.” Clinton was asked is she would support Sander’s plan to increase Social Security benefits how much the wealthy pay toward the program from their income taxes. Only the first $118,000 is taxed for it.

Clinton said she strongly supported Social Security and opposed privatization efforts, but when asked if she’s raise benefits, replied, “I want to enhance the benefits for the poorest recipients of Social Security… particularly widowed and single women.” As Poole wrote, “What alarmed Social Security activists is that underneath Clinton’s positive language–‘fully support,’ ‘enhance’ – appears to lie support for policies, including from leading conservatives like Pete Peterson–that would actually undermine Social Security.”

Republican Paul Ryan, the House Ways and Means Committee chair, uses the same language to protest the poorest people, but “would reduce benefits for the top 70 percent of wage earners while maintaining benefits for the bottom 30 percent,” Poole said. “The last thing we need right now is to fear a Trojan horse from a presidential candidate who says she ‘fully supports’ Social Security.”

2. Wall Street reformer? Beyond the competing rhetoric by Clinton and Sanders that each would take a tougher line with Wall St. practices that undermined the economy and upended millions of lives—such as pushing mortgage-backed securities—the verdict on Democracy Now by 2016 Green Party presidential candidate, Dr. Jill Stein, was clear: Clinton might toughen some oversight but she would not reinstate a law repealed by her husband, President Bill Clinton, which created a new world of risky markets.

“She’s sort of talking out of both sides of her mouth: She wants to go against Wall Street, but she won’t support [reviving] Glass-Steagall,” Stein said. “Glass-Steagall being the law that separated speculative banking from everyday consumer banking and… prevents banks from taking risks at consumers’ burden… it prevents bailouts from going forward. So, you know, Glass-Steagall was repealed under the Clinton administration and needs to be brought back. But Senator Clinton does not support it.”

3. Criminal Justice and Prison Reformer? During one of the few exchanges on criminal justice—when legalizing marijuana came up—Clinton said, “We have got to stop imprisoning people… We need more states, cities, and the federal government to begin to address this so that we don’t have this terrible result that Senator Sanders was talking about where we have a huge population in our prisons for nonviolent, low-level offenses that are primarily due to marijuana.”

According to The Marshall Project, an investigative journalism website tracking criminal justice, only a very small percentage of prison overcrowding is due to non-violent drug offenses. In 2014, only 3.6 percent of people in state prison were there for drug offenses, and 0.3 percent were in federal prison for pot. “As TPM’s Dana Goldstein pointed out, any attempt to cut incarceration by as much as 50 percent—the target of some reformers—will require shorter sentences not just for marijuana, not just for drugs, and not just for crimes considered non-violent,” the Marshall Project wrote. “But that’s not an easy sell during a highly competitive campaign season.”