Fresh off a decisive win in the Nevada caucuses, Hillary Clinton returned to Los Angeles on Monday to raise money for her presidential campaign.

Among her stops: The set of “Scandal,” where she posed for a selfie with Tony Goldwyn and Scott Foley, who was directing an episode. He posted on his Instagram account.

At an event at the Hancock Park home of producer Ellen Goldsmith-Vein and her husband, Marketshare CEO Jon Vein, Clinton was introduced by Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti to a crowd of about 350 people, where she talked about the negativity coming out of the Republican party and of Donald Trump, according to attendees who were there.

Clinton cited comments about Muslims, and how it has posed a danger for the U.S. because it has made it difficult for U.S. officials to put together a coalition of Arab nations.

According to attendees, among those at the $2,700-per-person event were Jim Parsons, Courtney Love, George Takei, media mogul Haim Saban, Rep. Brad Sherman (D-Calif.), Rep. Tony Vardenas (D-Calif.), former White House social secretary Jeremy Bernard and music mogul Clarence Avant and his wife, Jackie. The event sold out by Sunday night, sources said.

The host committee included producer Lawrence Bender, Will Ferrell and wife Viveca, investor Sim Farar and his wife Debbie, producer Emmy Ellison and director Peter Sattler, fundraising consultant John Gile, attorney Carol Hamilton and fundraising consultant David Wolf.

Clinton also talked about how she wanted to improve on Obamacare, rather than try to establish a single-payer system, as is proposed by her chief rival for the Democratic nomination, Bernie Sanders.

Earlier, Clinton attended an event in Studio City at the home of Elizabeth Hirsh Naftali, who co-hosted along with Anita Hirsh.

See More:Hillary Clinton Campaign Says Katy Perry Donated Concert Time at No Cost

Clinton was making her seventh fundraising visit to the region since announcing her candidacy, Sanders draws on a bonanza of small-dollar online contributions.

At the Hancock Park event, those who raised $10,000 got a photo with Clinton, while those who raised $27,000 got a photo and membership on the Hillary for America finance committee.