A recent VTDigger article highlighted the case of a high-income person who spent much of 2014 on Medicaid, a government health insurance program meant for the needy and disabled.

Under the current Medicaid eligibility rules, that individual, who asked not to be identified, was legitimately enrolled in the program, despite earning more than $100,000 in 2014.

That’s because under the Affordable Care Act Medicaid eligibility is calculated based on monthly income. If a new applicant’s income for the current month is below the threshold — roughly $1,300 for an individual or $2,700 for a family of four — they qualify for Medicaid until their income changes, according to Vermont Health Connect spokesman Sean Sheehan.

The person profiled in the VTDigger report lost his job and employer-sponsored health insurance mid-year. By that point he had received close to $100,000 in compensation. Sheehan said that using monthly income is a federal rule, and he did not know the policy justification.

When the individual in question applied for health insurance through Vermont Health Connect, he automatically qualified for Medicaid. As an individual without employer-sponsored insurance, he had no choice but to apply for coverage through the health care exchange. Vermont is the only state that does not allow individuals to purchase insurance outside the exchange.

However, VHC provides applicants the option of purchasing a plan without checking their eligibility for premium subsidies or Medicaid, officials said.

In November, the person went to renew coverage for the coming year and, still without income, remained on Medicaid.

Around that time, he went into business for himself, and had additional earnings in December. That income likely makes him ineligible for Medicaid, and he will have to purchase health insurance before the end of VHC’s open enrollment period Feb. 15.

People who apply for health insurance through Vermont Health Connect are also asked to submit their projected annual income. That allows people with variable income, such as seasonal laborers, to set the expectation that they will be eligible for the full year. The purpose is to reduce the churn of people on and off the program, Sheehan said.

Regardless of one’s projected income, any change in actual earnings must be reported to VHC within 10 days, he said.

However, reporting an income change, or any change to coverage or personal information, is not quick or easy through the exchange, which has carried a backlog of such requests for the entire year.

VHC and its contractors were unable to complete an automated change function for the Web portal, so changes must be reported to call center workers and manually keyed in by VHC workers.

This week, VHC placed a change request form on its website that can be submitted online, Sheehan said, but those changes must still be entered manually. A fully automated option for changes is expected to be completed in April or May, according to VHC officials.

The self-reported income and personal information on coverage applications must be checked against a federal database. At the end of January, VHC had close to 12,000 individuals whose Medicaid eligible income had not been verified.

That number continues to grow, likely due to new applicants entering the system. A Feb. 9 internal memo shows the number of people with unverified Medicaid income was 13,502.

Vermont suspended regular Medicaid eligibility redeterminations in August 2013. The federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has approved the state’s plan to wait until April to resume them. State officials have said they expect beneficiaries to come off the program when the process begins again, but would not hazard a guess as to how many.

Trinka Kerr, the state’s lead Health Care Advocate for Vermont Legal Aid, said she’s more concerned about people who are eligible for Medicaid who aren’t receiving benefits because of problems with the exchange.