A health and information fair on Saturday will kick off the 33rd annual Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Birthday Celebration, which is held in conjunction with the national Martin Luther King Jr. Day and commemorates the civil rights icon’s Jan. 15, 1929, birthday.

King would have turned 86 this year. He was assassinated April 4, 1968.

The fair will begin at 10 a.m. Saturday and be held at the Martin Luther King Jr. Recreation Center, 2901 Pennsylvania Ave. It will feature free mammograms and other health screenings, including some for children. Specialists will be on hand to help anyone wanting to enroll in Affordable Care Act plans. Raffle prizes will include a 51-inch flat-screen television. Radio station “K104” KKDA-FM (104.5) will broadcast live from the event.

The annual Dallas celebration will include several other public events in advance of the Jan. 19 national holiday. Speakers, singers and an Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity tribute are planned as part of an evening of activities starting at 7 p.m. Jan. 16 at the King rec center. Michael Bowie Jr., senior pastor at St. Luke Community United Methodist Church, will speak, and the South Dallas Children’s Choir will sing. In response to current national events, attorney Frederick Barrow will discuss how to handle interactions with police. The evening will end with the candle-lighting and wreath-laying ceremony at the King statue in front of the center.

The annual King march will begin at 10 a.m. Jan. 17 at Dallas City Hall, 1500 Marilla St. Marchers will move south on Ervay Street, east on Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard and past the King center, finishing at the Fair Park entrance at Robert B. Cullum Boulevard.

Also Jan. 17, a silent auction and private reception at 6 p.m. and banquet at 7:30 p.m. are planned at the downtown Hyatt Regency Hotel, 300 Reunion Blvd. The speaker will be Rahiel Tesfamariam, a writer, youth anti-violence activist, minister and graduate of Stanford and Yale universities. Tesfamariam founded the online lifestyle magazine UrbanCusp.com and was named by Essence magazine one of six female “New Civil Rights Leaders.” Banquet tickets are $85 and available at the King center and at mlkcelebra tiondallas.org. To purchase tickets, click on the “Links” tab.

Other King holiday activities include the 29th annual DFW Elite News King Parade and Festival from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Jan. 19. The parade will begin at Lamar Street and Forest Avenue, move east on King Boulevard and end at Fair Park, where the festival will be held in the Grand Place building.

ABOUT TOWN: Writer Joyce King will lead a public dialogue about her latest book, Exonerated: A Brief and Dangerous Freedom, at 10 a.m. Saturday at the Roundtable Writer’s Breakfast sponsored by The Black Academy of Arts and Letters at the academy’s headquarters at Canton and Akard streets downtown. Tickets are $15 and available at 214-743-2400 and at tbaal.org. Click the January 2015 calendar to learn more.