U.S. President Barack Obama ( Facebook )

"A politician thinks of the next election. A statesman, of the next generation." —Pastor James Clarke (1810-1888)

Tens of millions of upstanding Americans are disgusted, yet not surprised by the recent revelation of our President's lying regarding his stand on same-sex marriage. He deliberately misled hundreds of millions of Americans for years and on multiple occasions by telling us a falsehood regarding what even he described as a "sacred union."

Without being disrespectful or unpatriotic, we must realize Barack Obama is no different than leaders in Jesus' day who "loved praise from men rather than praise from God" (Jn.12:43). And if there was anything Jesus loathed and exposed it was dishonesty! As Dr. Michael Brown quoted legendary Bible teacher Charles Spurgeon in his outstanding article "I Will Not Sell My Soul for Success," "Character is always lost when high ideals are sacrificed on the altar of conformity and popularity."

David Axelrod, loyal friend and former senior adviser to the president, has revealed Obama's unconscionable lie in his new book, Believer: My 40 Years in Politics (currently excerpted in Time magazine). Let it sink in. The leader of the free world crisscrossed this country and told countless millions of children, young people and adults that he stood for marriage between one man and one woman and opposed homosexual marriage. He deliberately deceived us about his position on the most hallowed institution in human history.

In light of the above, it would do us good to reflect on these words from two of America's greatest spiritual leaders:

• "In a society which too often places a great premium on cleverness, materialism and greed, our greatest need is moral integrity." —Dr. Billy Graham

• "The single most critical issue we must address in life is absolute integrity of heart before God." —Dr. Jack Hayford, The Gravity of Lying

Before outlining some disturbing realities, may readers not think that I'm a mean-spirited, critical right-winger out to nail Barack Obama. I pray daily for him and have served for almost 40 years as a board member for a national prayer ministry promoting prayer and fasting for our nation. I monthly participate in national prayer calls to intercede for our president and governing authorities.

Yet being prayerful and respectful does not preclude being discerning as one observes a civil servant's conduct. When the president of the United States has been dishonest regularly over the years, it is cause for alarm. This is not a time for a wink and a nod approach that minimizes a leader's behavior by saying, "They're all a bunch of liars and crooks just doing whatever they have to do to get elected!"

Neither is it a time to ignore the gravity of what's happening because of the influence of the Oval Office. As we'll discover, because of our president's example of repeatedly and brazenly lying over seven years, a culture of lying has emerged in America on his watch and he, as our commander in chief and head of the nation's First Family, will give an account to God for it.

We must address this reality, not excuse it.

Lying is lying! No more compromising by allowing the litany of lame excuses: "It's OK unless you get caught" ... "I misspoke" ... "I misremembered" ... "I don't think I said that."

President Obama, you need a sense of accountability to a Sovereign and Holy God! We love you but call you to repent and pray for the fear of God in your life.

Jesus called Satan "a liar and the father of lies" (John 8:44). Is this whom you want to emulate and model for our citizenry? He also said, "Everyone who has been given much, much will be required" (Luke 12:48)

You like I will one day "stand before the judgment seat of Christ" (2 Cor. 5:10). "Men will have to give account on the day of judgment for every careless word they have spoken" (Matt. 12:36). Think back to your appearance before Planned Parenthood, America's No. 1 abortion provider, and how you reassured them of your unflagging support and told them "God bless you!"

Although it may make you uncomfortable, Scripture minces no words regarding lying. "[A]ll liars shall have their portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone. This is the second death" (Rev. 21:8).

Mr. President, read it for yourself in Proverbs 6:16-19 where we are given the "six things the Lord hates, seven that are detestable to Him." Only one is repeated, "a lying tongue ... a false witness who pours out lies."

A Presidential Pattern, Not an Isolated Incident

I believe our president's lack of integrity has had a corrosive effect on our nation over the long term and damage has been done to our culture in his quest to "transform America." The influence of Saul Alinsky and his "Rules for Radicals" (a manual dedicated to Lucifer!) has adversely affected Barack Obama and instilled in him certain ungodly principles to accomplish goals no matter what the cost. Rule 12 teaches, "Pick the target ... personalize it and polarize it." Go after people—they hurt faster than institutions. (This is cruel but very effective.)

Consider just a few areas where our president and his team have misled us:

• Emphatically stating that ISIS is not Islam

• Repeating over 20 times when promoting Obamacare: "If you want to keep your policy/your doctor—you can!"

• Reporting over and over that the Benghazi disaster came from a spontaneous demonstration started by a video

Prev

Next >>

Draw closer to God. Experience the presence of the Holy Spirit every month as you read Charisma magazine. Sign up now to get Charisma for as low as $1 per issue.

Has God called you to be a leader? Ministry Today magazine is the source that Christian leaders who want to serve with passion and purpose turn to. Subscribe now and receive a free leadership book.

Did you enjoy this blog? Click here to receive it by email.

-

See an error in this article? This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.