Buy Photo Some Old Hickory residents have railed against controversial plans for a new limestone rock quarry near Old Hickory Dam. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights Bipartisan legislation filed by Rep. Beck and Sen. Dickerson would protect Old Hickory Dam.

A company has bought land near for a rock quarry, but that could harm the dam and property values.

There is a very serious issue facing our state. A private company has purchased land right next to Old Hickory Dam with the stated plan of operating a rock quarry.

I am not against rock quarries and I’m reluctant to try and tell someone what they can do with their land. However, private land use must not endanger the public. The continuous blasting of a rock quarry right next to an aging dam is a very bad idea and I, along with Sen. Steve Dickerson, am trying to stop it. We have filed HB 2292/SB 2357 that would prohibit the operation of a rock quarry within one mile of a dam.

The Old Hickory Dam and others just like it across the state are over 50 years old. Some like Wolf Creek and Center Hill are in serious need of repair and are costing taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars in repairs.

In addition to the concrete structure of the Old Hickory Dam, there is a major earthen dam component. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has stated it has serious concerns about the continuous blasting necessary for the operation of a rock quarry next to the earthen dam. There is a chance the continuous vibrations from blasting will weaken the earthen dam, causing costly damage and even catastrophic failure.

Even without the continuous blasting, this dam will not last forever. Why would we do anything that would speed up that process and possibly cause an actual dam failure?

A failure of this dam would be devastating for not only Nashville but for everyone down river for hundreds of miles. A breach of the dam will make the flood of 2010 look like a mud puddle. In 2010, we lost homes, businesses, and lives and it took over $2 billion to rebuild our city. Why would we take the risk of allowing a rock quarry to be built next to a dam?

Rep. Bill Beck (Photo: Submitted)

But even if the dam isn’t breached — and no one can guarantee that it won’t be — our Old Hickory neighborhood is going to be seriously degraded. Our home values will drop, and the peace and tranquility we now enjoy will be over.

The Corps predicts vibrations at the earthen dam to be 25 percent higher than the Corps’ protocol, as well as deafening, sonic boom-like airblasts and the potential for flyrock posing hazards to the neighborhood and recreational areas.

This isn’t a partisan or political issue. This is an issue about common sense.

Common sense dictates that a rock quarry with continuous blasting should not occur next to an aged, earthen dam.

Sen. Dickerson and I are working in a bi-partisan manner to stop this dam and we both have it scheduled for a committee hearing this week. The land owners have hired big-money lobbyists to try and stop our bill so we are fighting an uphill battle.

If the legislature lets a bipartisan bill die — a bill aimed at protecting our dam, our city, our neighborhood, our recreational opportunities, and our way of life — then it will be to blame if disaster strikes.

Rep. Bill Beck, D-Nashville, represents District 51 in the Tennessee House of Representatives.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1p01T08