ENLARGE Bea Keith Bedford for The Wall Street Journal

In a stretch of Midtown where the watering holes are mainly dark pubs for tourists, Bea feels like a den of hipster cool.

On a recent evening, a dapper gent in a fedora greeted patrons, ushering them into the cozy space. The focal point is the square bar in the center of the room with wraparound seating, which co-owner Sotir Zonea likened to "a big communal table."

"I'd rather stare at a person than a wall with liquor bottles," he said. The brick walls, painted white, serve as a backdrop for projections of classic movies.

Bea (pronounced BE-uh) is named after Mr. Zonea's Romanian grandmother. Mr. Zonea said he originally planned a downtown location but fell in love with this area after spending time there. "The neighborhood deserves Bea," he said, a middle-ground option that is not too quiet or loud, where people can have a conversation without yelling.

ENLARGE The Over the Moon Cocktail Keith Bedford for The Wall Street Journal

The cocktail menu by mixologist Jason Walsh, formerly of Monkey Bar, strives to strike a balance between snazzy drinks and fast service. "I know Midtown and people will not wait for a cocktail that takes five minutes to make," Mr. Zonea said.

The Lavender Monk ($13), the top seller, is a refreshingly tart blend of lavender-infused vodka, yellow chartreuse liqueur, lemon juice and ginger beer, served with a delicious candied-lemon garnish. The Over the Moon ($13)—rosemary-infused gin, Italian aperitif aperol, lime juice and orange San Pellegrino—is like lemonade on a hot summer day. A nice twist on a margarita, the Divine Derecho ($14) features silver tequila, silver mescal, lemon juice instead of the typical lime and a splash of sherry. The most exotic drink on the menu is the Smoky Sidecar ($14), made with Lapsang-infused brandy. Every sip is like a hit of the smoky Chinese tea, tempered by Cointreau and lemon juice.

ENLARGE The restaurant's roasted beet salad Keith Bedford for The Wall Street Journal

Good choices for nibbles include the spicy lamb meatballs ($12), served with tomato sauce, cucumber raita and garlic toast, and the beet salad ($9), a solid version of the classic made with arugula, blue cheese and pecans. Main courses are offered, too, with the English muffin burger ($12) and green pasta with shrimp ($16) among customer favorites.

—Jana Zabkova

Bea, 403 W. 43rd St. at Ninth Avenue, open daily from 5 p.m. to 2 a.m., 212-602-1910.