The 2015 tax filing season for US citizens may be one of the most complex ever and expats are being urged to plan ahead.

The American Citizens Abroad group has launched a Tax Return Preparer Directory specifically aimed at helping Americans living overseas navigate the complicated system and ensure tax compliance.

For them, filing a tax return has been made more complicated by increased IRS and Department of Justice enforcement activities and the implementation of FATCA by foreign financial institutions around the world.

ACA says that the need for Americans abroad, currently estimated by the US Department of State at 6.8 million, to find qualified tax professionals is needed now more than ever.

Americans abroad need a comprehensive, reliable source for finding return preparers and similar professional advisors. Identifying and getting information about advisors is difficult.

“There is no one place Americans overseas can look. There is word of mouth, some of the American Embassies maintain lists and that’s about it. The ACA Tax Preparer Directory fills this void and gives Americans the resources they need to stay tax compliant,’ said Marylouise Serrato, ACA executive director.

The ACA Directory explains to taxpayers who can be a tax return preparer and the rules that apply. It lists 1,700 preparers and is free.

Figures show that the number of Americans living abroad increased from 70,000 in 1966 to between three million and four million in 1996 and more than seven million today, according to several estimates.

There are many reasons Americans have moved, including the globalization of the economy and increased cross-border migration generally, yet the US is the only developed country in the world that requires citizens who live abroad to file tax returns.

The FBAR (Foreign Bank Account Report) requires holders of foreign financial accounts to report detailed information about all such accounts each year. It can take many days to obtain and compile the information and then prepare the form.

The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act of 2010 has made it even more complex. FATCA compliance costs for foreign banks are so high that many banks have closed the accounts of Americans living abroad.

It is estimated that around 3,000 US expats have given up their citizenship due to the tax system. Prior to the changes, it was only a few hundred a year.