Community colleges lifted via Obama

Six years before he proposed making community college free for students, President Barack Obama called for 5 million additional college graduates by 2020, invoking President Franklin Roosevelt and the G.I. Bill and asking for $12 billion over the next decade to reform and strengthen two-year colleges.

He called it “a historic step on behalf of community colleges in America.”

Story Continued Below

But the colleges never got the money.

Though the American Graduation Initiative never got off the ground, a combination of Obama administration cheerleading and economic shifts over the past six years has lifted community colleges to new levels of status, significance and public consciousness in the U.S.

In the 2011 economic stimulus bill, the president allocated $5 billion to improving community colleges. Through reconciliation legislation that amended the Affordable Care Act in 2010 — the same bill from which the American Graduation Initiative funding was cut — Obama secured $2 billion to authorize and fund the Trade Adjustment Assistance Community College and Career Training Grant Program. There’s also Obama’s oft-touted investment in Pell grants: Since 2008, the maximum award has risen nearly $1,000, hitting $5,730 this academic year. And of course, in January, the president proposed making two years of community college tuition free.

Both White House and community college officials recognize that the free-tuition proposal — which requires approval from a Republican-led Congress — is dead on arrival. Yet Obama hasn’t let up, and there’s no indication he will. To the contrary, on Friday, he’ll tout the plan in a graduation speech at Lake Area Technical Institute.

Observers say “America’s College Promise,” the $60-billion-a-decade tuition plan, represents the peak of a long climb.

“Like most political gestures that offer something for nothing, this one is not all it’s cracked up to be,” House education committee leaders said April 13, after Vice President Joe Biden, filling in for Obama, discussed the plan at length in the president’s weekly address. “There are better ways to help individuals pursue the dream of a college degree and learn new skills to succeed in today’s workforce.”

But America’s College Promise secures the standing of community colleges as a legacy issue for Obama.

“It is, without a question, a common thread through the administration so far, and I think the president thinks that community colleges are really essential institutions to the goal of building a stronger middle class,” a White House official said. “Our hope is to not only get some much-needed resources to help strengthen these institutions, but also to make sure they get the recognition they deserve for opening up opportunities.”

At one of several local events following the unveiling of America’s College Promise, Biden told students and staff at a campus in Iowa that the administration has been working to raise awareness of the two-year colleges to the perhaps-unprecedented level it’s at now.

“What we had to change was the perception of the quality of community colleges,” he said.

His wife Jill, a long-time English professor at Northern Virginia Community College, put it this way at a recent summit of the two biggest community college associations: “Community colleges have entered a new day in America.”

Early bipartisanship didn’t last

Sector officials are quick to note Obama’s successes.

“If you’d asked me 20 years ago did I believe that we’d have a Pell grant program of $36, $37 billion per year I’d have said you were crazy,” said J. Noah Brown, president and chief executive officer of the Association of Community College Trustees.

The plan for free community college came as an equally shocking — if more abrupt — surprise. Community college leaders say they weren’t consulted. The White House declines to elaborate on who or what went into the plan’s development — other than to say it was based on similar, smaller-scale efforts in Tennessee (by Republican Gov. Bill Haslam) and Chicago (by Democratic Mayor — and former White House chief of staff to Obama — Rahm Emanuel).

In Obama’s many speeches promoting America’s College Promise this year, he’s repeatedly pointed to the idea’s bipartisan beginnings, while jabbing at congressional Republicans who won’t fund it. Although the Volunteer State’s GOP Sens. Bob Corker and Lamar Alexander, who chairs the Senate education committee, flanked Obama when he announced the plan at Pellissippi State Community College in January, they also stated their opposition to such a federal initiative.

Brown worries bipartisan progress on workforce and education issues — consider reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, or the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act — could be threatened by political jockeying over a lofty and arguably unrealistic idea.

“I don’t want that to be lost because right now Republicans and Democrats don’t want to talk to each other and are looking to score points at each other’s expense,” Brown said.

While Obama and Biden play up the idea to the campus crowds, administration officials have been providing a dose of reality at home. At the same summit where Jill Biden recently spoke, Domestic Policy Council Deputy Director James Kvaal said officials would work on the proposal “over a period of time.” He recalled the rocky road to funding the TAACCCT program, noting that “this is the way the legislative process works.”

At that meeting, one sector official said she was frustrated the administration didn’t come to colleges first, and she was skeptical the plan would ever materialize. Another said later that a more feasible approach would be to request a significantly smaller chunk of federal funding to launch pilot programs in just a few states.

More recently, the White House convened an exclusive meeting of a few dozen organizations to drum up public support for the initiative. Jill Biden has said officials are forming a coalition of experts in business, law, philanthropy and higher education “to support our efforts to strengthen community colleges.”

It may have worked: ACCT and American Association of Community Colleges are in the “early stages” of building a coalition of partners in higher education, business, philanthropy and other sectors to maintain the conversation on college affordability and educational attainment issues, Brown said.

A question of priorities

But the idea still “hasn’t gotten much traction” on Capitol Hill, said Terry Hartle, senior vice president of government and public affairs at the American Council on Education — and not just because Republicans want local governments handling this sort of thing and Obama would fund it by raising taxes on banks and the wealthy.

It’s also expensive.

Even if the funding did suddenly turn up, Alexander and others would probably rather spend it on Pell grants, which are facing impending cuts, Hartle said at a recent meeting of lieutenant governors.

“The reality is that federal assistance has become more important to our colleges,” said David Baime, senior vice president for government relations and research at the AACC. Like all public colleges, two-years have been hit hard be state disinvestment triggered by the recession, making it harder to educate more students, better, like Obama wants.

Stephen G. Katsinas, director of the University of Alabama Educational Policy Center, believes that by partnering with influential foundations like Gates and Lumina, the Obama administration has, to a degree, taken on private goals that may irk certain lawmakers.

“There appears to be a strong urban tilt in the Gates Foundation agenda and to some extent Lumina’s agenda, and that in turn gets reflected in the federal initiatives,” Katsinas said. “I think that is part of the problem why the administration has trouble building broad-based support across the political aisle.”

Jackson Sasser is the president of Santa Fe College in Florida, which last month won the $800,000 Aspen Prize for Community College Excellence. The award is high-profile — Jill Biden plugged America’s College Promise at this year’s ceremony — and is based on a college’s success in improving learning and workforce outcomes for all students, regardless of race or income. Sasser likes Obama’s idea but believes there should be an income limit to the proposal, so the money goes to the neediest students.

But it won’t matter, he said, because lawmakers still don’t recognize the huge role community colleges play in the workforce, nor do they fund higher education accordingly.

“If you took them out, the economy would collapse,” Sasser said. “There’s a disconnect there, and that’s partly our fault. The community colleges have just been doing the work, and haven’t really organized on what to say.”

‘A well-tread path to the White House’

Community colleges do have a presence on Capitol Hill, though. In addition to the AACC and the ACCT, there’s Rebuilding America’s Middle Class, a three-year old coalition of about three dozen community colleges from seven states. ACT, the College Board and Pearson are also members.

“Every Congressman has a community college in their district,” said Tom Snyder, president of the 32-campus Ivy Tech Community College, which is a RAMC member. The coalition spent $70,000 on lobbying in 2014. Snyder said the group has influenced lawmakers to take up issues like year-round Pell grants, which appear poised to return during reauthorization of the Higher Education Act. He called Haslam’s Tennessee Promise “a big, big deal.”

Regardless of whether lawmakers have gotten the message, the administration has certainly been advertising community colleges as an economic accelerator that will boost everything from America’s degree attainment to its global competitiveness.

People like White House Domestic Policy Council Director Cecilia Muñoz, Education Secretary Arne Duncan, Labor Secretary Tom Perez, and of course the Bidens, are at the end of “a well-tread path to the White House” that community colleges enjoy, a White House official said.

“I do think that our prominence has been elevated,” Baime said, “and I think that the administration is responsible in part for that.”

But timing had something to do with it, too. When the economy goes bad, two-year colleges tend to see enrollment influxes. That was the case in Obama’s first term — during a three-year period at the height of the recession, community college enrollments rose nearly 22 percent. (Now they’re back on the decline, falling 3.5 percent in fall 2014.)

Regardless of where the moment came from, Brown wants to seize it.

“The opportunity that we have to get some things done by virtue of the administration putting us out there is huge,” he said. “And if we don’t take advantage of this and work across the aisle on a number of things we care about, then shame on us.”

If Democrats maintain their hold on the White House in 2016, the spotlight may not dim for a while.

“I fully support President Barack Obama’s plan to make community college free,” Hillary Clinton said last month during her first official White House campaign stop — at a two-year college in Iowa. “I’ve spent years telling people around the world, ‘look at our community colleges.’ But a lot of them haven’t caught on.”

Authors: