Two weeks ago the New York Times ran a story about the need to host classes in Norway and Denmark for Muslim men new to the country. The topic? Rape is wrong and unacceptable.

A course manual sets out a simple rule that all asylum seekers need to learn and follow: “To force someone into sex is not permitted in Norway, even when you are married to that person.”



In Denmark, lawmakers are pushing to have such sex education included in mandatory language classes for refugees. The German region of Bavaria, the main entry point to Germany for asylum seekers, is already experimenting with such classes at a shelter for teenage migrants in the town of Passau.



Many refugees “come from cultures that are not gender equal and where women are the property of men,”

Mr. Isdal said. “We have to help them adapt to their new culture.”



Henry Ove Berg, who was Stavanger’s police chief during the spike in rape cases, said he supported providing migrants sex education because “people from some parts of the world have never seen a girl in a miniskirt, only in a burqa.” When they get to Norway, he added, “something happens in their heads.”



Now, Germany is facing the same type of rape epidemic as progressive politicians continue to allow thousands of refugees, many of whom are military aged males, into the country.

During New Years Eve celebrations in the western city of Cologne, dozens of Muslim men allegedly participated in rape mobs. They surrounded young women, touched them, raped them and stole their wallets and cell phones. Tensions surrounding how the situation is being handled are rising by the day. From ABC News:

A string of sex assaults and robberies during New Year's celebrations in Germany has fuelled debate about the country's ability to integrate large numbers of migrants, after police said that men who targeted dozens of women in the western city of Cologne appeared to be of "Arab or North African origin."



Political leaders including Chancellor Angela Merkel condemned the attacks, though many also warned against hasty conclusions about the perpetrators. But to some Germans already uneasy about the one million asylum-seekers their country took in last year the incident seemed to confirm simmering fears.



"It's unacceptable that women are sexually molested and robbed by young migrants on the streets and public squares of German cities at night," said Andreas Scheuer, general secretary of the Christian Social Union, the Bavarian wing of Merkel's party.



"Whoever won't accept our rules for living together, including respect for women, can have no place in our society here in Germany," said Scheuer.

If you have to educate an entire influx of Muslim men about how rape is wrong, you probably shouldn't be letting them into your country.

And again, lets not forget the massive cover up of the rapes of thousands of children, boys and girls, in Britain for the sake of not being called Islamophobic.