Photo

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• The wild ride continues.

China’s economic uncertainty is keeping the markets volatile today, with trading marked by wide swings but not resulting in big losses or big gains so far.

U.S. stocks are up more than 1 percent, but European shares ended down, after a 1.3 percent fall in the Shanghai index.

The volatility will most likely give the world’s central bankers pause at their annual conference in Jackson Hole, Wyo., starting on Thursday. Before the market turmoil, Federal Reserve officials had signaled that U.S. growth was strong enough that interest rates could rise next month.

• Two reporters killed on live TV.

Two journalists were shot and killed this morning while broadcasting live from a strip mall in Moneta, Va., near Roanoke.

Video from the shooting appeared to show a crew from WDB-7 News in Roanoke being attacked. The station confirmed that the shooting involved members of its crew.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• Trump shuns Latino journalist.



The Republican presidential candidate Donald J. Trump snubbed and ejected Jorge Ramos, a prominent news anchor at Univision and Fusion, when he tried to ask a question without being called on.

The confrontation extended the adversarial relationship between Mr. Trump and the Spanish-language news media. Mr. Ramos returned 15 minutes after being removed by a security guard to continue his verbal tussle.

• Echoes of 2008.

Senator Bernie Sanders appears to be drawing even more support from small donors than Senator Barack Obama did in 2008, a study shows, with an average contribution of $31.30.

A new poll shows Hillary Rodham Clinton with a strong lead over Mr. Sanders in Iowa, however. And Martin O’Malley attends 30 house parties across Iowa today.

• Making peace.

The president of South Sudan signed an agreement today to end an 18-month civil war. The U.N. Security Council had threatened unspecified “immediate action” if he didn’t follow through.

And Kosovo and Serbia on Tuesday signed a deal brokered by the European Union that puts them on track to normalize ties. Kosovo declared independence from Serbia in 2008.

• Inaccurate ISIS analysis?

The Pentagon’s inspector general is investigating whether military officials portrayed too optimistically the intelligence assessments of the U.S.-led campaign in Iraq against the Islamic State, according to unnamed officials.

Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox. Monday – Friday.

• Sorry, Washington.

Commuters in the U.S. capital suffer from the worst gridlock in the country, wasting 82 hours a year stuck in traffic, a report released today says. That’s nearly twice the national average.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

MARKETS

• Oshkosh Defense in Wisconsin won a Pentagon contract, potentially worth $30 billion, to make the ground vehicle that will replace the Humvee.

• Disney is teaming up with YouTube, ABC and retail chains around the world to begin selling merchandise next week for the newest “Star Wars” movie, due out in December.

• Burger King is proposing a one-day truce with McDonald’s to sell a blend of their burgers called the McWhopper.

A pop-up store staffed by workers from both chains would donate proceeds to raise awareness of the International Day of Peace on Sept. 21.

NOTEWORTHY

• Remember to bring safety goggles.

About 22,000 people in Buñol, Spain, take part today in La Tomatina, the world’s largest food fight, featuring about 150 tons of overripe tomatoes.

It started at the end of World War II, when a street brawl broke out near a vegetable store. So much fun was had that it became an annual event.

• Wanted: exit strategy.

In the thriller “No Escape,” opening today, an American family in a Southeast Asian nation has to find a way out of the country after a violent coup. The film stars Owen Wilson, Lake Bell and Pierce Brosnan.

• What’s on TV.

“Katrina 10 Years Later” features New Orleans residents who endured the 2005 hurricane, including one who spent the night on the roof of his house as his 4-year-old granddaughter and his elderly mother died (8 p.m. Eastern, BET).

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And “The Carmichael Show” is a new sitcom inspired by the actor Jerrod Carmichael’s relationship with his outspoken family (9 p.m. Eastern, NBC).

• Passing the torch.

Organizers in Los Angeles, the city likely to replace Boston as the U.S. bidder for the 2024 Olympics, released financial projections that put the cost of hosting the Games at $4.1 billion.

• A step toward equality.

Ninety-five years ago today, American women got the right to vote when the 19th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution was declared in effect. Today, it is celebrated as Women’s Equality Day.

• In memoriam.

Augusta Chiwy, a black Belgian nurse who saved countless Americans wounded in the Battle of the Bulge in World War II, even though black nurses were barred from treating white soldiers, died near Brussels. She was 94.

BACK STORY

Competitors take the stage in Oulu, Finland, today as the 20th Air Guitar World Championships begin.

The hallmark of air guitar, of course, is that you don’t need an actual guitar.

You also don’t need to know how to read music or take pricey lessons. You can practice anywhere and won’t disturb anyone (at least not with noise).

What’s most needed is an air-guitar-friendly song, so that you can impress the judges in the categories of charisma, technical skill and the vague notion of “airness.” There’s also a separate award for audience favorite.

Photo

We don’t have a clue who the first person to play air guitar was, but one of the earliest known public renditions was by Joe Cocker at the Woodstock music festival in 1969, as a prelude to his performance of “With a Little Help From My Friends.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

National winners from Germany, India, Japan, Russia, the U.S. and other countries are in this week’s showdown. The final is at 12:30 p.m. Eastern on Friday and will be streamed live.

At the end of the competition, the contestants return to the stage to air-jam together to the Neil Young anthem “Rockin’ in the Free World.”

Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.