By of the

Controversy over whether Milwaukee County continues to use its longtime transit operator or switches to a new company based in Dallas has shed light on the unusual structure — and inherent risk to taxpayers — of the current system, particularly its pension funding.

Under a contract put in place in 1975, Milwaukee County pays a lump sum for the private, nonprofit Milwaukee Transportation Services to manage and operate the bus system and contribute to the pension. However, MTS decides how to allocate the funds, which come from the state and federal governments, transit fares and county property taxes.

If the contractor makes a costly mistake and can't make up for it in the budget, the bill ultimately comes back to the county.

In 2012, MTS managers failed to secure a new paratransit contract before the previous contract expired. The Journal Sentinel reported that this forced MTS to sign two emergency contracts, which cost the transit system $8 million more over three years than the cheapest bidder would have charged. MTS found the money in the budget, but the extra expense came at a time when the county already had to make up for funding gaps with property taxes and a short-term federal transit grant.

Further, under the contract the county is ultimately liable for the pension, even though it doesn't have a single seat on the transit system board.

MTS holds three of six seats on the Milwaukee County Transit System pension board, which determines pension contributions and investments. Union representatives hold the remaining three seats. The county comptroller receives an annual actuarial report about the pension's performance that's incorporated into other audits, but the county has no representatives on the pension board to keep track of the fund on an ongoing basis or to help make decisions on how to manage the fund.

Keith Brainard, director of research with the National Association of State Retirement Administrators, said most boards of public or quasi-public pension funds consist of both stakeholders, such as employees and employers, as well as representatives of taxpayers and independent outsiders with financial expertise. MCTS is different.

"Taxpayers have the risk, but they're not in a position to really manage that risk. When you've got an arrangement in which one party bears the risk and another party benefits from that risk ... that's potentially a problem," Brainard said. "The party that's on the hook for the cost, or potential cost, ought to have some potential say in how that is managed and administered."

Former Milwaukee County administration and human services director Rob Henken, now a director of the Public Policy Forum think tank, said MCTS' spending and investment decisions impact the county budget as well as taxpayers and transit users because the county has to pay expenses not covered by other sources.

"This issue of pension funding is connected to both the local property tax and to the service level that the bus system is going to be able to provide," he said. "So from a taxpayer's perspective, to the extent that there is a potentially sizable liability for Milwaukee County with regard to the status of a pension fund, clearly, there should be an interest in having some public oversight of the decisions that are made that affect the long-term viability of the pension fund."

Unfunded liability

The current operating budget for the transit system is $164 million, with $19 million coming from county taxes.

The pension fund is currently worth somewhere between $370.6 million and $409 million, depending on the numbers used. Although it was fully funded in 2001, it had an unfunded accrued liability of $101.5 million as of Jan. 1.

Jackie Janz, a spokeswoman for MCTS, said the 2008 stock market collapse adversely affected the plan, but the board's conservative investment approach helped make necessary changes to funding levels in the past few years and set it on the right track.

"To this end, in cooperation with our unions, we have increased our level of funding in recent years," she said. "In 2009, the contribution to the pension trust was 21.5% of payroll (split between employer and employee based on the current union contract). In 2013, that percentage is up to 28% of payroll with 30% of that coming from the employee."

Janz said the current market value of the pension fund is a more accurate measure than the actuarial value of $370.6 million. Market value was $408.9 million as of Oct. 3, she said.

"The pension is well funded at 92% and we expect it to be fully funded soon," she said in an email.

The funding level doesn't immediately concern Rick Bassler, acting president of the bus drivers' union, Local 998. However, the possibility of a for-profit company taking over for MTS does.

Bassler said MTS employees have a personal stake in making sure the MCTS pension is well funded because their own pension comes from it. That would not be the case for employees of MV Transportation, the new vendor the county selected to take over from MTS, he said.

The switch to MV Transportation is not yet assured. County Executive Chris Abele, who favors a three-year contract for MV Transportation, on Friday granted a one-year contract extension for MTS until legal questions surrounding the MV deal are resolved.

MV Transportation has promised to honor the current pension, but county officials told vendors in writing during the bidding process the county intends to remain liable for any unfunded pension liabilities.

W.C. Pihl, executive vice president of business development for MV, said the company would "work with the county to find a way to fund the pension faster" in an effort to bring it up to full funding. Neither MV nor the county could say specifically how the county would be involved.

Pihl also said the pension board should have contributed more to the fund to prevent the value from sliding.

"It went from $0 (underfunded) to $100 million. Once you get into a situation like that, what you should do is make more than the minimum required payment to get things back on track," Pihl said. "They chose to let it ride and hope for better investment return each year and the hole kept getting bigger and bigger."

Brendan Conway, a spokesman for Abele, would not say whether officials have any intent of changing the makeup of the pension board to include representatives of the public, saying the county is still negotiating with MV while it waits for two legal challenges to get sorted out.

Abele said with MTS, the county had little recourse for bad pension performance because MTS is a nonprofit. He said he'd like the pension fund to be part of MV's performance evaluation under a potential contract. This would give the company a vested interest in funding the pension, he said.

"With MV, one of the things we make clear is, you'll be evaluated on the performance of the pension," he said. "I don't know how much leeway the county felt it had before. Clearly not enough to change that trajectory. ... Either the previous administration weren't watching while it went from 100% to 78%, or they were and they didn't want to do anything. There's nothing I can do about that. What I can do is, I let people know I'm going to hold you accountable."

Visit the Public Investigator blog at www.jsonline.com/piblog.

Facebook: fb.me/GitteLaasbyPage

Twitter: @GitteLaasbyMJS

Milwaukee County Transit System won't release individual pension payments

The Public Investigator requested individual pension payments to MCTS' top managers, in particular managing directors and deputy directors. Milwaukee Transport Services refused to release those, saying they are not public records.

"We have determined that specific pension disbursements must remain confidential to protect the public interest in hiring and retaining qualified personnel for positions with Milwaukee Transport Services, Inc," MTS wrote in its response. "We find that the needs of MTS to hire and retain qualified personnel outweighs the public interest in disclosure. This is especially true given that annual audit reports showing the entire pension system are being disclosed in response to your request."

In a letter to MCTS' chief administrative officer, Milwaukee County counsel Colleen A. Foley outlined the county's official stance, saying the county disagrees with the denial and to release the information.

"Given both the Internal Revenue Service and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation's determinations that this involves a public pension, the pension disbursement data is subject to a public records," Foley wrote. "Accordingly, Milwaukee County requests that you provide that information and fully comply with the request."

The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel resubmitted its request for the individual pension payments and is still waiting for a response from MTS.

Got a tip?

Do you know of government waste or a story idea for Public Investigator? Contact us:

Email:PI@journalsentinel.com

Phone: (414) 223-5385

Twitter:@GitteLaasbyMJS

Address: Public Investigator, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, 333 W. State St., Milwaukee WI 53203