Update: The ballot proposal language, released in September, would give workers 1 sick day for every 30 hours worked.

LANSING, MI -- Michiganders soon may be asked to sign for sick days as a new group pushes for all workers to have access to that benefit.

The Time to Care Coalition will lead a legislative ballot initiative and plans to collect more than 300,000 signatures. The group's proposal would allow workers to earn one hour of paid sick time for every 40 hours worked. A full time, 40-hour per week worker would get 6.5 paid sick days a year (assuming an eight hour workday.)

That would have helped people such as Staci Lowry, a Detroit resident who worked in customer service before her 4-year-old daughter had a stroke. She exhausted her options under the Family and Medical Leave Act before she was able to tap into Medicaid. She is with her daughter full time now, juggling five doctors.

"It meant starting over, but I'm hopeful," Lowry said.

Danielle Atkison, director of Mothering Justice, said Michigan is overdue for this reform. Asked what she would say to people who say this would make the state less attractive to business, she said the measure would make the state more attractive to parents.

According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 65 percent of U.S. workers have access to paid sick leave. Only 25 percent of part-time workers get paid sick days. Nationally, three states and many cities require mandatory paid sick leave.

In Michigan a city-by-city approach would be impossible, since the Legislature recently passed a bill preempting these types of local ordinances.

In the Michigan Legislature, Democrats have introduced legislation that would let workers earn 8.7 days of paid sick leave per year.

There also is another statewide coalition that has formed specially to focus on paid sick leave.

The Michigan Chamber of Commerce still is evaluating the details of the proposal, said Director of Health Policy & Human Resources Wendy Block.

"We do oppose a one-size-fits-all paid leave mandate," Block said.

Such mandates can be costly and could make Michigan less competitive, she said.

Justin Winslow, vice president of public affairs for the Michigan Restaurant Association, said more restaurants are offering fringe benefits. But a mandate would be tough, especially for smaller restaurants already dealing with a minimum wage increase and Affordable Care Act changes.

"I think you need to put it into the context of everything that they're dealing with right now," Winslow said.

The Time To Care Coalition plans to officially submit language to the Board of State Canvassers this week. The group will begin collecting signatures after the canvassers approve the format of the petition.

An initiative petition goes to the people for signature collection. If it gets enough signatures, it goes to the Legislature for approval or rejection. If the Legislature approves it, it becomes law. The Legislature also could choose to reject it and put another proposal on the ballot, where voters could choose between the two. If the Legislature fails to act within 40 days, it goes to the ballot.

Update: This story has been updated with comments from the Michigan Chamber of Commerce and Michigan Restaurant Association.

Emily Lawler is a Capitol/Business reporter for MLive. You can reach her at elawler@mlive.com , subscribe to her on Facebook or follow her on Twitter: @emilyjanelawler