Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

PARIS (AP) — Fashion royalty Salma Hayek — the Academy Award-nominated wife of the luxury heir François-Henri Pinault — led the front row pack at Saint Laurent, the highlight of the Paris menswear shows on Sunday.

Joining her were actor Will Peltz and, nearby, Vogue magazine editor Anna Wintour, who nursed her jetlag in shades, having just arrived in the French capital.

The Saint Laurent collection — the final show on the final day of menswear — posed a serious question: Has controversial designer Hedi Slimane, who everyone loves to hate and hates to love, finally been vindicated?

Here are the highlights of Sunday’s fall-winter menswear 2015 shows, including show reports from Paul Smith, Lanvin and Saint Laurent.

SLIMANE FINALLY VINDICATED?

The fashion press is a tough bunch. Saint Laurent’s Hedi Slimane has been criticized, chewed up and thrown out a hundred times.

The Franco-Tunisian designer courted controversy first in 2012 amid accusations he threw out the precious YSL heritage in his debut collection for the revered Parisian house by going punk and dropping “Yves” from the house name.

Yet the styles that fashion critics, including this one, lambasted him for — glam rock, grungy, punk, teddy boy, and uber-skinny styles — are now ubiquitous on the catwalk. As they are on the street. The house is apparently financially buoyant.

This fall-winter season, it’s common to hear the phrase: “That’s quite Hedi Slimane.”

To quote Liberace, the once-wronged 46-year-old is now probably laughing all the way to the bank.

SAINT LAURENT’S BACK TO BLACK WITH A FRENCH TWIST

If the mantra “thin is in” applied to previous Saint Laurent shows, this new collection might be called “thinner is inner.”

Extra-uber-skinny retro pants stood out in a collection that featured starved-looking women as well as men.

Slimane carried on his ’70s musing in suits with peaked lapels, winklepicker shoes, glam-rock fur “fun” coats and punk rock leopard-print sweaters with skinny black jeans that might have been worn by Sex Pistols star John Lydon.