A brief tour of Hillary's lackluster public career reveals an untrustworthy, inept candidate.

This March 23, 2015 file photo shows former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton as she takes part in a discussion on "our nation's urban centers," and "challenges from housing and transportation to education and workforce accessibility" at the Center for American Progress (CAP) in Washington, DC. Hillary Clinton will officially launch her 2016 presidential bid -- her second White House run -- at the weekend, several media outlets reported April 10, 2015. (Photo: NICHOLAS KAMM, AFP/Getty Images)

It is the least surprising news of the decade. Hillary Clinton is running for president. More accurately, Hillary Clinton is still running for president. She has been for at least a decade.

Yet for more than a decade, she has been running from scandal. Can you remember a time when the Clintons were not surrounded by controversy, particularly controversies of their own making?

OUR VIEW: Hillary Clinton's challenge

Some reports say that Hillary Clinton moved up her announcement date precisely because of her email scandal and her foreign donations scandal. Nothing says, "I'm the best candidate for president," like using the very announcement of your candidacy to distract from unflattering headlines.

The secrecy, hypocrisy and deception that are Clinton's trademarks should alone disqualify her for the presidency — especially in a country where the public rightfully demands more accountability and transparency from our government.

Yet even if you set that aside for a moment, Hillary Clinton's record offers her little to run on. Consider her record as a Secretary of State. She famously "reset" relations with Russia, who in return has regularly antagonized the United States and steamrolled into Ukraine. Now our allies in Eastern Europe are uncertain about Russia's territorial ambitions.

Here is the question no Clinton supporter can answer: What was her biggest accomplishment as Secretary of State? It certainly was not Middle East policy; the region is more tumultuous than it has been in a long time. Under the Obama-Clinton foreign policy, ISIS has emerged as a new and barbaric global threat.

Her department's failings are many — from the tragedy in Benghazi to refusing to label the murderous Boko Haram a terrorist organization.

Lacking a meaningful accomplishment, Clinton has pointed to the many miles she traveled as secretary. But there is no evidence that she earned much good will for our country in all that travel. (We did, however, learn recently that she seems to have earned significant donations to the Clinton Foundation.)

What about her time in the Senate? We know a couple things about her tenure. First, she was one of the top "earmarkers" of taxpayer dollars, and these earmarks often benefitted people or interests that had donated to her campaign. From 2002 to 2006 she secured $2.2 billion in earmarks, a number that was deemed "unusually large."

Second, we know that, despite her rhetoric about equal pay for women, Hillary paid women less than men — about 72 cents for every dollar a man made.

As first lady, Hillary Clinton is remembered for HillaryCare, her failed attempt to force an ObamaCare-style healthcare policy on the country, a policy that more Americans oppose than support.

With no record to run on, Hillary Clinton's only hope it to convince Americans she shares their concerns and understands their challenges. That will be difficult for the consummate D.C. insider, whose main concern in recent years has been using her connections to rake in $300,000 a speech.

When she does try to "connect," she fails — like complaining about being "dead broke" at a time when she owned at least two houses and had an $8 million book deal in the works.

Hillary Clinton knows she is vulnerable. That's why she and her allies have tried to clear the field and ensure she is the "inevitable" nominee. The last time she had to compete for the nomination, it did not work out so well. This time she wants a coronation, not a contest.

In other words, Hillary Clinton doesn't want the Democratic Party to have a democratic nominating process.

Unlike the Democrats, Republicans will have a real competition to choose our nominee. Voters will actually have a say in the process, and candidates will have to make their cases. There will be no coronation. There will be a real exchange of ideas.

Polls show Americans are ready for a president who will take us in a new direction, who will offer an agenda different from President Obama's. But we will not get an agenda different from Obama's with a member of the Obama administration.

Hillary Clinton wants to be president. There is no doubt about that. But why? Why should Americans trust her? Her record is disappointing. Her rhetoric is hypocritical. And she thinks the rules do not apply to her. The last time she held a press conference she lied repeatedly to the American public. Is that really what America wants from our next president? Four years of lies? Four years of scandal? Four years of failed policies?

We can do better. We deserve better.

Reince Priebus is the chairman of the Republican National Committee.



In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the Opinion front page.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1FN8aQw