WASHINGTON — It might be time for Ted Cruz to get a dog.

Because as the saying goes, if you want a friend in Washington, that’s what you do. And by the time Cruz’s crusade to defund Obamacare finally crashed to a halt Wednesday, the Texas senator had precious few friends left.

The government shutdown alienated colleagues in both parties. It generated fresh animosity toward the tea party and a flurry of recriminations toward Cruz. Voter support for the Republican Party plunged.

And the health care law survived unscathed.

“This is a terrible deal,” Cruz said moments before the deal to reopen the government sailed through the Senate with bipartisan support. He blamed the defeat on colleagues who lacked the political courage to stand with him.

“The outcome could have been different,” he said. “Imagine a world in which Senate Republicans united to support House Republicans.”

Cruz willed himself to the center of the fight. For months, he predicted that Democrats would cave if Republicans stood together to strip funding from the health care law. He dramatized the cause with a 21-hour overnight Senate speech, soaring to unusual prominence for a freshman senator. He refrained from using the risk of a catastrophic default on U.S. debt as leverage. Still, the defeat was so resounding that it left his political future in doubt.

The vast majority of his colleagues repudiated his tactics. Some accused him of promoting himself more than any attainable goals or the health of his party.

Sen. John McCain of Arizona, the 2008 GOP presidential nominee, called the last few weeks an “agonizing odyssey.”

“This has been one of the most shameful chapters I’ve seen here,” he said, lamenting damage to the GOP for little gain. “We’re in a hole. We have to dig out. We weren’t going to defund Obamacare, and we weren’t going to keep the government shut down.”

About the only praise flowing toward Cruz on Wednesday pertained to his decision not to stand in the way of the deal Senate leaders hatched.

“At some point, when you’ve reached the end of the road, to then make life miserable for no reason, with absolutely no outcome in sight — then the pendulum swings,” said Sen. Bob Corker, R-Tenn.

Cruz maintained that he never had any intention of allowing default, though he hadn’t made that clear until he stepped in front of TV cameras, right at the same moment Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell had taken to the Senate floor to unveil the eleventh-hour deal he’s struck with Majority Leader Harry Reid.

“There’s nothing to be gained from delaying this vote one day or two days. The outcome will be the same,” Cruz said, adding that “once again, it appears the Washington establishment is refusing to listen to the American people.”

Cruz and his aides insisted the fight actually paid off. The flaws of Obamacare are now a topic of daily conversation in Washington and across the country, they argued.

Polls have consistently shown, though, that while Americans are unhappy with the health care law, they oppose defunding it, especially in connection with shutting down the government.

GOP strategist John Feehery called it smart for Cruz to steer clear of triggering a default. Taking blame for the shutdown is one thing; a calamity of that magnitude would have been quite another.

“He will not want to have the weight of the world on his shoulders. … He just declares victory by voting no,” said Feehery, a former top aide to former House Speaker Dennis Hastert.

But, he said, Cruz’s extremism has not just harmed the party. It will, in his view, make it impossible to win the GOP nomination for president in 2016, though Cruz could enjoy the notoriety of a Michele Bachmann or Sarah Palin, or win a third-party nomination if the tea party splits off.

“This isn’t about legislating. It’s about being in the center of things,” Feehery said. “He’s become a tea party hero.”

Cruz’s popularity among party activists will get its next test Oct. 25, when he headlines a major Iowa GOP dinner.

Democrats were eager to blame Cruz for the shutdown and potential damage to the economy. Texas Democratic Party Chairman Gilberto Hinojosa called it “a reckless, tea party-fueled temper tantrum.”

And fellow Republicans in Washington weren’t coming to Cruz’s defense, either, on the question of whether the shutdown was worth it.

“It certainly wasn’t anybody’s intention to have this shutdown. Hopefully we’ve all learned some important lessons,” said Texas’ senior senator, John Cornyn, the deputy GOP leader.

Some Republicans complained that the shutdown overshadowed the huge glitches when the Obamacare insurance marketplaces went online Oct. 1, shielding Democrats from embarrassment.

“Obamacare is going to be the gift that keeps on giving,” said Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., one of the critics of Cruz’s tactics. He called it hostage-taking and political “overreach.”

That fellow conservatives would air such concerns reflected the chasm of mistrust and misapprehension Cruz has created after just 10 months in Washington.

“We’ve been asking from the beginning, what’s the endgame?” said Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., who has fumed for weeks at Cruz for prodding fellow Republicans into the showdown. She noted that Obamacare exchanges opened on schedule despite the shutdown.

GOP leaders had leaned hard on Cruz.

Sen. John Thune of South Dakota, the No. 3 GOP leader, credited the Texan for highlighting concerns about Obamacare. “But at the end of the day, if it’s clear that’s not going to succeed, you might want to fight another day and find areas that unite us,” he said. “You learn from it and move on.”

Many tea party activists hailed Cruz, along with Utah Sen. Mike Lee, as one of the few conservative leaders willing to fight. But other Cruz allies seemed to be struggling to find a silver lining.

Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., asserted that Cruz’s efforts “clarified” where each party stands on Obamacare — as if that hadn’t already been clear after President Barack Obama insisted he won’t allow repeal or defunding of his signature health care law.

“It’s been an unfortunate series of events in some ways,” Sessions said.

At the Texas Association of Business, a leading advocacy group in Austin, president Bill Hammond said Cruz erred in fighting to defund Obamacare, rather than push to cut spending and overhaul entitlement programs as most Republican lawmakers urged.

“It was unrealistic,” he said. “I hope that he will turn his guns on making certain that my grandchildren have Social Security and Medicare, by reforming them without raising taxes.”

Follow Todd J. Gillman on Twitter at @toddgillman.