Pensacola, Florida (CNN) Jeb Bush, continuing to hit back against Donald Trump, took some not-so-subtle digs Wednesday at the GOP front-runner's spat with a Univision anchor.

The former Florida governor, holding a town hall in Pensacola, Florida, argued that Trump "should be held to account" on his immigration proposals to build a wall on the U.S.-Mexico border and deport millions of undocumented immigrants.

"He should be asked, as he was yesterday, how are you going to pay for it? Why don't you -- prove to me it's not practical?" Bush said during his town hall, blasting Trump for "appealing to people's angst and their anger" without offering "conservative" solutions.

In Iowa on Tuesday, Univision anchor Jorge Ramos was escorted out of a Trump press conference when he tried to grill Trump on specific questions about his immigration plan. Ramos was later allowed back into the event and the two had a testy exchange.

Bush, who takes questions from reporters on a near daily basis, was asked by journalists after his town hall to more specifically address Trump's encounter with Ramos.

"I think people in the press ought to be treated with a little more respect and dignity," Bush said. "How about that?"

He added that he was surprised that he didn't see many reporters pushing back against Trump at the time of the battle between the real estate titan and Ramos.

"I didn't see a whole lot of like people in the press saying, 'Woah, woah time out, wait a second,'" he continued. "I thought you guys would, you know, unite."

Bush held the town hall in Pensacola to commemorate the anniversary of the deadly back-to-back hurricane seasons that wrecked havoc in Florida in 2004 and 2005, when Bush was governor. It was another example of Bush drawing a contrast with his rivals on his executive experience as a two-term governor of a large state.

"Look, there's some people running that are really talented about filling the space, about saying big things. They think that volume in their language is a kind of a version of leadership," he said in the town hall, drawing some laughs from the audience. "Talking is not leadership. Doing is leadership. And that's what we need."

Bush has stepped up his attacks on Trump in the past week as the front-runner has continued to zero in on the former governor, taking aim especially at Bush's demeanor and calling him "low-energy," a favorite attack line of Trump's.

21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush waves as he takes the stage as he formally announces he is joining the race for president with a speech June 15, 2015, at Miami Dade College in Miami. Hide Caption 1 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Former Florida governor Jeb Bush shakes hands with attendees after speaking at the 42nd annual Conservative Political Action Conference on February 27 in National Harbor, Maryland. Hide Caption 2 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Bush takes a selfie with a guest at a luncheon hosted by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs on February 18 in Chicago. Bush delivered his first major foreign policy speech at the event. Hide Caption 3 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Bush hands out items for Holiday Food Baskets to those in need outside the Little Havana offices of CAMACOL, the Latin American Chamber of Commerce on December 17 in Miami. Hide Caption 4 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Bush waves to the audience at the Tampa Bay Times Forum in Tampa, Florida, on August 30, 2012, on the final day of the Republican National Convention. Hide Caption 5 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Bush (left) and wife Columba Bush attend the 2012 Lincoln Center Institute Gala at Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center on March 7, 2012, in New York City. Hide Caption 6 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life President Barack Obama (left) speaks about Bush (center) while visiting Miami Central Senior High School on March 4, 2011 in Miami, Florida. The visit focused on education. Hide Caption 7 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Bush (left) speaks with Brazilian President in charge Jose Alancar during a meeting at Planalto Palace in Brasilia, April 17, 2007. Bush was in Brazil to speak about sugar and ethanol business. Hide Caption 8 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Then-Texas Governor Rick Perry (center) testifies as Bush (right) and then-Arizona Governor Janet Napolitano (left) listen during a hearing before the House Committee on Homeland Security on Capitol Hill October 19, 2005. Hide Caption 9 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Bush gives a thumbs up signal from his car as he leaves a local polling station after casting his vote in Coral Gables, Florida, November 5, 2002. Hide Caption 10 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Bush walks out of the West Wing after meeting with his brother, then-President George W. Bush, at the White House January 9, 2002. Governor Bush participated in the signing ceremony of the Everglades Protection Agreement. Hide Caption 11 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Then-Mexican President Vincente Fox (left) and Bush hold a press conference September 7, 2001, in Miami. Fox visited Florida to attend the Americas Conference and deliver a speech to speak about issues such as immigration. Hide Caption 12 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Then-President George W. Bush (right) is greeted by Jeb Bush on March 21, 2001, at Orlando International Airport in Orlando, Florida. President Bush was in Orlando to attend the American College of Cardiology Annual Convention. Hide Caption 13 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Bush speaks during a press conference at the Carandolet Government Palace in Quito, January 18, 2006. Bush and a businessmen delegation were in a two-day visit to talk about a free trade agreement. Hide Caption 14 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Bush speaks to reporters after meeting with the Florida State Cabinet at the Florida State Capitol Building November 16, 2000, in Tallahassee, Florida. Hide Caption 15 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Then-President George W. Bush (left) and Jeb Bush (right), raise their arms onstage following a rally at the Florida State Fairgrounds, October 25, 2000, in Brandon, Florida. Hide Caption 16 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Jeb Bush (left) and then-President George W. Bush stand with their arms around each other's shoulders at a rally in Miami, Florida, September 22, 2000. Hide Caption 17 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Then-President George W. Bush (right) and Jeb Bush go through the line for strawberries during a stop at the Stawberry Festival March 12, 2000 in Plant City, Florida. Hide Caption 18 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life The Bush family, (left to right) former U.S. President George W., former Florida Governor Jeb, former President George H.W. and his wife Barbara, watch play during the Foursomes matches September 25, 1999 at The Country Club in Brookline, Massachusetts the site of the 33rd Ryder Cup Matches. Hide Caption 19 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Former President George H.W. Bush (second left), his wife Barbara Bush (left), their son Jeb Bush (center), then-first lady Hillary Clinton (second right), and former then-President Bill Clinton (right) look up to see the U.S. Army Golden Knights parachute team November 6, 1997 at the conclusion of the dedication ceremony of the George Bush Library in College Station, Texas. Hide Caption 20 of 21 21 photos: Jeb Bush's life Portrait of the Bush family in front of their Kennebunkport, Maine house August 24, 1986. Pictured, back row: Margaret holding daughter Marshall, Marvin Bush, Bill LeBlond. Pictured, front row: Neil Bush holding son Pierce, Sharon, George W. Bush holding daughter Barbara, Laura Bush holding daughter Jenna, Barbara Bush, George Bush, Sam LeBlond, Doro Bush Lebond, George P. (Jeb's son), Jeb Bush holding son Jebby, Columba Bush and Noelle Bush. Hide Caption 21 of 21

But Bush on Wednesday argued that he's "got tire marks" on his forehead from the leadership he learned "through trial and error."

"You don't talk about things on the sidelines. We need leadership in Washington, D.C.," he said, before adding: "high-energy leadership."

While he may not like talking about Trump, he hinted in one of his answers that he's following his rival closely. At one point, a man in the audience made a reference to a tweet that Trump re-tweeted Monday night, in which someone on Twitter wrote: "Jeb Bush is crazy, who cares that he speaks Mexican, this is America, English!!"

"@YoungYoung54: @JeriHyatt @megynkelly @JebBush So true. Jeb Bush is crazy, who cares that he speaks Mexican, this is America, English !!" — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 25, 2015

At the town hall, the man joked to Bush that he was "going to talk to you in the Mexican language but ..."

Not missing a beat, Bush quickly caught onto the reference.

"Mexican? I don't even know what language that is," he said to laughs. "I heard that someone brought it up. What's up with this? I mean, Mexican?"

The man continued to ask his question, referencing Trump's visit to the border last month

"Do we have to talk about that guy?" Bush interjected playfully.

The voter argued that he doesn't think crime from immigrants is as bad as Trump makes it sound.

Bush, who visited the border himself this week, started ripping into Trump's proposal to build a wall when an audience member shouted out that China built a giant wall.

"Oh yeah. 600 years ago," Bush said. "I'm telling you what they say on the border. Not in Pensacola, because we don't have a border problem here. I'm talking about the people that are on the ground, what they say. It's not feasible and it would tear apart their community, would hurt their economic activity, and it's not needed because there are better ways to deal with this."