MISHAWAKA — The city of Mishawaka plans to open a clinic for its employees early next year, hoping to further scale back health insurance costs that had escalated each year.

The clinic would be similar to — even conducted by the same company — that the South Bend Community School Corp. opened at the start of its fall 2013 semester, which so far has proven both popular among South Bend employees and a major cost saver.

The clinic would open in the now-mothballed fire station at 333 Mishawaka Ave. that went inactive after the city opened a new station on Harrison Road in 2013. The clinic operator, Activate Healthcare, would possibly lease part of the space, said Mayor Dave Wood.

Wood said the city is talking with other employers about possibly joining the clinic as fellow members. With more members, he said, the per-person cost decreases until it reaches a point where the clinic staff would have to expand. And it might help with economic development, he said.

"We are open to discussions with any organization about participating in our clinic so long as it makes sense for the city," he said, noting that the clinic will open with or without partners.

The city proposes to spend $1 million from its 2015 budget to start up the clinic, said city Controller Rebecca Miller. But she said the city has been told that it could end up saving about $1 million each year in insurance costs.

The South Bend school corporation reports that its medical and prescription claims dropped by $981,000 in the first year and its overall health plan costs were $1.6 million less than anticipated.

Mishawaka’s clinic is part of its switch this past January to a self-funded health insurance program for the 614 city employees who receive health insurance and their spouses and dependents, or about 1,600 people altogether. Doing so, the city departed from health insurance through a statewide trust where the city’s costs had risen 30 percent in recent years.

The city had been paying about $1 million a month with the trust. So far, the self-funded insurance has been saving the city about $30,000 each month, since the city is paying for claims but not for premiums anymore, Miller said. She expects the monthly savings to rise in the coming year.

“We think it would be a great thing for the staff,” Wood said, noting that an on-site physician’s assistant would be like a health coach. “We want to promote wellness out of it.”

Prescriptions and tests will cost less through the clinic. And because employees won’t owe a co-payment for clinic visits, as they do now, Miller said, “We hope it’ll have employees wanting to go (to the clinic) rather than waiting.” That, she said, would nip illnesses before they progress into bigger issues, hospital visits and extra time off from work.

Clients would be free to visit other Activate clinics in the area, too.

Wood knows that a key to the clinic’s effectiveness is that clients trust the clinic’s doctors and know that their information will remain confidential as they would at any other clinic.

Miller said the clinic could open by March or April.

574-235-6158

jdits@sbtinfo.com