In his newsletters, Panhandle U.S. Rep. Jeff Miller habitually attacks the Affordable Care Act. Although many have no basis in actual fact, I am not as troubled by his criticisms as I am by his hypocrisy.

Miller gets his health insurance through the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program. The FEHBP covers members of Congress and more than 8 million other federal employees, retirees and their families. President Obama cited it as a model for the Affordable Care Act. Conservatives also publicly praised it before they declared nuclear war to the ACA.

According to Congressional Research Service, the FEHBP offers about 300 different private health care plans, including five government-wide, fee-for-service plans and many regional health maintenance organization (HMO) plans, plus high-deductible, tax-advantaged plans. This is pretty much what the ACA does. Also like the ACA, the FEHBP negotiates contracts annually with insurance companies who wish to participate. There’s plenty of competition. FEHBP is the largest employer-sponsored health plan in the U.S.

But unlike the ACA (and here’s where Rep. Miller’s hypocrisy reaches its zenith), the health coverage that he gets is heavily subsidized by taxpayers, head and shoulders above ACA subsidies. According to FactCheck, the government pays on average 72 percent of the premiums for members of Congress. For example, the popular Blue Cross and Blue Shield standard fee-for-service family plan carries a total premium of $1,327.80 per month, of which beneficiaries like congressmen pay only $430.04.

But there’s more. House and Senate members also are eligible to receive free care at military hospitals. For outpatient care, there is no charge at the high-quality Washington, D.C., area hospitals (Walter Reed Army Medical Center and National Naval Medical Center). Inpatient care is billed at subsidized rates set by the Department of Defense.

You also do not hear Rep. Miller complaining about the requirement in the ACA that members of Congress are subject to its mandates, including one that plans available to them must meet the same minimum benefit standards that other insurance plans will have to meet. That’s because the FEHBP is such a sweetheart deal for Rep. Miller and his colleagues that they are not about to complain about their taxpayer subsidy.

Ask Rep. Miller about his insurance the next time you see him. But that may be difficult. His website does not include any town-hall-type meetings or schedule of events in his district. When you search his website for “town hall meeting, “the only hit you get is an event back in 2009. Maybe that’s because he, like most members of Congress, spend nearly half of their day (four hours) in political fundraising.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1J7pzqL