A member of the U.S. Park Police keeps watch in front of the White House on Thursday in Washington, D.C. The U.S. Secret Service is reviewing new security measures inside and outside the White House fence after a man made it all the way inside the presidential mansion on Friday before being tackled. (Photo: AFP/Getty Images )

The Green Bay Press-Gazette occasionally offers Another View, providing an opportunity to read about state, national and international issues covered by writers across the country. The following editorial appeared Tuesday in the USA TODAY.

Last week’s Secret Service fiasco that allowed an intruder to jump the White House fence, cross the lawn, open an unlocked (yes, unlocked) door and step inside an entrance not far from the First Family’s quarters has sparked talk about pushing people farther away from what’s often called “The People’s House.”

To which the people ought to say, “Enough already.”

For almost two decades, ever-widening perimeters, ugly barricades and annoying metal detectors have become the go-to response for every new security threat. And with each pile of concrete and screening checkpoint, the symbols of America’s free and open society have morphed into symbols of fear.

After the horrific Oklahoma City bombings in 1995, car traffic was banned on Pennsylvania Avenue in front of the White House. Before long, the closures became permanent. Other major streets adjacent to the White House grounds have been permanently closed to car traffic, too.

After 9/11, public tours of the White House were stopped and the lighting of the national Christmas tree was closed to the public. Although both moves have since been reversed, much of official Washington remains walled off.

Some of these barricades are a necessary response to an age of terror. But now the Secret Service and other security agencies are talking once again about widening the buffer zone for pedestrians outside the White House fence or putting up screening checkpoints farther away from the gates. At the rate authorities are going, tourists will have to peer through binoculars from outside the Capital Beltway.

If there’s any lesson from the latest White House breach, it’s that security requires constant vigilance and common sense, not more buffer zones.

When any unauthorized person crosses the White House fence line, a loud alarm goes off and is transmitted to every on-duty officer’s radio with a code identifying the location of the breach. Under protocols, security dogs can be used to chase and subdue intruders. Yet the night of Sept. 19, an Iraq War veteran whom relatives say is suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder was able to jump the fence, run all the way to the North Portico entrance and walk inside before he was stopped by a guard.

This was bad enough, and it could have been far worse. Minutes earlier, President Obama was still on the grounds. When authorities searched the intruder’s car, they allegedly found 800 rounds of ammunition, a machete and two hatchets. He was caught with a knife.

This was the latest black eye for a Secret Service already troubled by earlier scandals. In 2012, agents doing advance work for the president were ordered home from Cartagena, Colombia, after they were caught partying with prostitutes. In March, three agents preparing for the president’s visit to the Netherlands were ordered home, too, this time for excessive drinking. One had passed out in a hotel hallway.

No organization is perfect, of course, but when you literally hold the president’s life in your hands, you had better be close to it.

This time, investigators will have some basic questions: Why was the White House door still unlocked after the alert? Why was there no guard outside the door. Why wasn’t a security dog unleashed?

The public deserves those answers before more taxpayers are pushed farther away from a house they own and pay to secure.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/YBja24