Glenn Beck made a stunning prediction on his radio show Tuesday, saying that he believes there will be "massive terror around the world within the next eighteen months," as well as in the United States, as America continues to decline.

Using President Obama's poll numbers as a gauge, Beck noted that as America continues to weaken, bad elements will continue to be emboldened.

Beck made the shocking claim based on several factors, including inflation, the national debt, jobs, the deteriorating situation in the Middle East, the growing police state, political correctness, the impact of Obamacare (including the privacy concerns), the lack of control at the borders, and domestic surveillance.

First, Beck noted that printing money will lead to inflation, and eventually, hyperinflation.

Beck's warning is reminiscent of the current, horrific, situation in Venezuela, as reported yesterday by the Examiner. Over the weekend, Socialist President Nicolás Maduro,

"stationed armed national guardsmen 'around outlets of an electronics chain [Daka] that Maduro has ordered to lower prices or face prosecution.'"

Some store managers are currently in detention for resisting the action. The citizens, even while knowing how reckless the policy is, stormed Daka. Some even smashed windows and looted the chain store.

Beck observed,

"We are now printing $80 billion dollars a month that we don't have, printing it - digitizing it with the Fed." He said, "inflation will come," and eventually, "hyperinflation."

Citing a recent report by the New York Times that laughingly reports,

"Some economists say more inflation is just what the American economy needs to escape from a half-decade of sluggish growth and high unemployment."

Beck begged to differ, saying,

"They are trying now to start to lay the groundwork, saying that 'experts are saying that inflation is good.' It will not be good for you, and inflation is coming, and in a matter of time, hyperinflation..."

Next, Beck mentioned the national debt. He said,

"We're at 17 trillion dollars. In 24 months, we could be at 22 trillion dollars. And will anybody care? Does anybody think that is a good idea? A good direction?"

Back in 2006 (when the national debt was at $8.5 trillion), President Obama, Harry Reid and Joe Biden among others all voted against a debt ceiling increase, as reported at Liberty Unyielding.

During his speech, then-Senator Obama said in part,

"The fact that we are here today to debate raising America’s debt limit is a sign of leadership failure. It is a sign that the U.S. Government can't pay its own bills. It is a sign that we now depend on ongoing financial assistance from foreign countries to finance our government’s reckless fiscal policies."

Obama's great flip-flop has been all but ignored by the mainstream media. An exception was on April 15, 2011, in an interview with George Stephanopoulos of ABC News, where President Obama said that voting against the debt ceiling was a "political vote."

Not surprisingly, Obama's offensive response was not challenged.

Beck then cited an article by Noah Rothman posted Wednesday on Mediaite, titled, "Obama, Not Bush, Lost the Middle East."

In the must-read article, Rothman writes in part,

"It was America’s unparalleled dominance that held the frayed stitching which kept this region at relative peace over the past 40 years together...Today, however, that dynamic is rapidly changing for the worse as Washington seeks to retrench and extricate itself from the burdens of maintaining the peace. If this trajectory continues, it will have been Obama, not George W. Bush, who lost the Middle East."

Referring to external enemies of the United States, Beck said,

"We are in bed with the Muslim Brotherhood, we are not watching our borders...we are being politically correct, we are not watching anything...we could be hit by terrorism tomorrow and I think that within the next eighteen months, we will."

Beck also said that he is concerned about the growing "police state," and questioned why police forces in America need "armored Humvees," such as the one pictured.

As reported by the Anniston Star in October for example, the Calhoun County Sheriff’s Office now owns one of seven of such vehicles maintained by law enforcement in Alabama.

Beck cited jobs. He said,

"More and more people are going to lose their jobs. They are going to have their hours cut and they are going to lose their health care...all in direct response to Obamacare. As people see the hassle, as they lose their doctors, as they can't get an answer from anybody..."

Beck finally cited domestic surveillance and privacy concerns associated with Obamacare, saying that with the continuing unrest, President Obama's poll numbers will continue to drop.

Beck said that he hopes he is wrong and appealed to all Americans to pray.

Follow Renee Nal on Twitter @ReneeNal and Facebook.

Check out her news and political commentary on Liberty Unyielding, Gather and TavernKeepers.com for news you won't find in the mainstream media. Renee is also a guest blogger for the Shire Blog.