Nuggets coach Michael Malone said Sunday he expects veteran forward Danilo Gallinari to miss “an extended period of time” because of a severely sprained right ankle. Malone isn’t counting on the team’s leading scorer to play during a seven-game homestand that starts Monday and wraps up March 12.

“I feel bad for him. He was having a career year,” Malone said. “It’s always tough when you lose a player like Gallo for us because we’re so young and he gives us so many things. But just for him, as a young man, because that’s a lot to handle and for him to hurt it and be out for a long period of time, it’s not good for any of us. But we’ll support him in every way we can and hopefully he can come back even better.”

Nuggets Mailbag: Pose a question for Christopher Dempsey

Malone said Gallinari, who suffered the injury in a game Friday at Dallas, had an MRI on Saturday.

That result confirmed a sprained ankle, but it didn’t hold much “good” news beyond that.

Gallinari will be out until at least mid-March and possibly longer than that. The Nuggets’ season ends April 13 at Portland.

“He got to meet with the doctors and kind of confer on what’s the best course of action,” Malone said. “And then just do as much rehab as possible”

Gallinari is averaging 34.7 minutes and a career-high 19.5 points per game. For the 11 games he played in February, he averaged 19.7 points, 4.1 rebounds and 2.5 assists.

“For me, preparing, moving forward to this seven-game homestand, I don’t think he plays in any of these seven games,” Malone said. “Hopefully I’m wrong. We’ll have a much better outlook, if you will, in the next couple of days when we really see when the swelling goes down, where it’s at. But we’re going to prepare moving forward without Gallo for the time being.”

Malone said he tried different combinations of players during practice Sunday but hadn’t determined who is going to start games while Gallinari is unable to play.

Denver’s seven-game homestand begins against Memphis, whose roster has undergone an extreme makeover. Trades and a season-ending foot injury suffered by center Marc Gasol have remade the Grizzlies (34-24) into a smaller, spread-you-out team. They can still get physical on the offensive end with Zach Randolph, but the grit-and-grind personality they have been known for has generally been replaced by smaller lineups with more finesse.

That will help the smaller Nuggets (23-36) in matchups.

“I’m not sure right now, to be very honest,” Malone said of his lineup. “We could go with Will (Barton), we could go with JaKarr (Sampson), we could go with (Darrell Arthur). We could go really small, we could go really big. So, we have some options.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost

MEMPHIS AT DENVER 7 p.m. Monday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Vince Carter:

Eighteen seasons in the NBA haven’t sapped all the energy from Vince Carter, one of the best dunkers in the history of the league. At 39 years old, the North Carolina product doesn’t fly nearly as high. But lately he has been very productive. In his past five games, Carter is averaging 12.8 points and 3.4 rebounds. And he has been a big-time threat from 3-point range, making 46 percent of his shots during that span. Five of his eight double-figure scoring games this season have come in February. He had 19 points in 20 minutes Friday in Los Angeles against the Lakers.

NOTEBOOK

Nuggets:

Jameer Nelson suited up for the past three games but didn’t play, primarily because of a wrist injury. He has been downgraded to doubtful for Monday’s game against the Grizzlies. D.J. Augustin has been the backup point guard with Nelson out of action. … This is the start of the Nuggets’ second-longest homestand of the season. When these seven games have been played, the Nuggets will have only six home games the rest of the season.

Grizzlies:

Marc Gasol had season-ending surgery Feb. 20 to repair a Grade 2 nondisplaced fracture of a bone in his right foot. The 7-footer from Spain finished with averages of 16.6 points and 7.0 rebounds per game. The Grizzlies have played well without him, going 4-2 in the six games he has missed.

Christopher Dempsey, The Denver Post