Contribution

Presley Sanderson is an autodidact and a student majoring in economics and minoring in political science at the University of Texas at Tyler (UTT). Prior to UTT he was self-educated (home schooled) beginning in the fifth grade and continuing into high school. Most of his personal studies include the literature of the Classical and Enlightenment eras. His studies have included "The Age of Reason" by Thomas Paine, "Poor Richard’s Almanac" by Benjamin Franklin, "The Way to Wealth" by Benjamin Franklin, "Republic" by Plato, "Rights of Man" by Thomas Paine, "Moral Sentiments" by Adam Smith, all four books of "The Wealth of Nations" by Adam Smith, and many other works of philosophy, politics, and economics. Presley has spent the majority of his life in a small town in Texas providing him the solace of solitude in long walks of contemplation where he argues with himself, recites speeches, and ponders philosophy. His innate interest in the causes and solutions to the human condition provides constant cause for thoughtful meditation. In tandem with his early education, he also honed leadership, rhetorical, and servile skills by staying active in the community with local and county 4-H, 4-H Ambassadors, Texas 4-H Senate (where he wrote and debated bills on the Texas senate floor in mock legislature), National 4-H Congress, Henderson County Teen Court (where he was a juvenile attorney over real cases), and more. Today, he is a member of the College Constitutional Conservatives and The Economics Society on the UTT campus. He has also been elected delegate to the Republican State Convention. He is the first Campus Contributor to The Blaze, a writer for Patriot Talon, and the author of The Lyceum Blog.

My local party elected me as a delegate to the Texas Republican State Convention, and after watching what went on at the convention I became outraged.

I have observed this nonsense before, but now I am thoroughly irritated. There is a war being fought in the Republican Party, but it’s more than that. It is a war being fought in both parties for the future of our nation.

Texas is the battle ground for the future of the United States. Texas is the business, growth, technology, and freedom center of the United States. There is a reason Battleground Texas is standing on my doorstep. (See TheBlaze Magazine coverage of what happens if Texas flips from red to blue.)

Texas is a bastion for freedom, but forces internal and extraneous conspire to change that. We are under threat from a plague infesting BOTH parties.

The infestation I’m talking about is fascism. This disease of fascism plagues our political system, and there are two strains of this pestilence. One strain says God is the government, and the other strain says the government is God.

I get outraged when I see people defining themselves as Republican, pro-freedom, pro-American, or conservative when they are NOT.

The Republican Party has a history of advocating equality and freedom, but now we are suffering the plague of progressive fascist crackpots and “Republican” theo-fascist crackpots. One who says, “No! You can’t do that. Government, back me up here.” While the other says, “No! You can’t do that! My God says so.”

The Texas Republican State Convention was where we would decide our platform, and where we would set the stage for the legislation we would advocate. How are we going to turn Texas into the political “burial ground” of the left, as Rick Perry put it, if we suffer a fascist infestation ourselves?

There were several proclamations in the platform contrary to conservative freedom ideas. The Republican Party platform reads:

“We believe in: Self-sufficient families, founded on the traditional marriage of one natural man and one natural woman.”

And the platform calls for legislation to prevent gay marriage. What is this crap?!

Can someone explain to me why the party that is supposedly pro-freedom is writing in its platform that people don’t have freedom to choose their lifestyle? Besides the logical inconsistency, denying homosexuals (or anyone else for that matter) equal protection and rights is illegal per the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. Believe what you will about any issue, but you cannot force others to believe and act with you or conform.

I simply cannot comprehend how someone can say,”Equality, freedom, and equal treatment under the law… Well, except for you guys. I don’t like you.”

Just as hypocritically, there was a knockdown, drag out over medical cannabis in the platform.

A few people spoke in favor, and a few people spoke against medical cannabis. Right as the pro-freedom individuals started gaining traction, the chairman called for a vote to cease debate after only five people spoke. The vote was too close to call, and after several more votes he claimed we would have to do a roll call vote from about 5,000 people. That vote lost, and the majority successfully silenced the minority.

To draw a comparison, the Republican Party vehemently objects to The Affordable Care Act because it tells we the people what health care we can and cannot have, and it is government coercion through penalties in the form of fines and taxes. How can we object to this and not favor the FREEDOM TO CHOOSE what medical care you will receive including cannabis?

I am sick and tired of this nonsense. These Republicans are not pro-freedom. They are theo-fascist crackpots. These are people who do not realize that their interpretation of divine law has no place in the state. I repeat a slogan I’ve found of which I’m very fond, “Mr. Jefferson, build up that wall.”

The second strain of fascism gives the government godlike powers. In the minds of progressives, morality comes not from God or self-evidence in nature, but it comes from the government. They see the government as the provider, the aid to the poor, the enforcer of some twisted view of equality, et cetera.

The rest of us normal and sane people have to combat fascism whether we are on the left or right. These people want to order our lives, and we cannot let them.

Fortunately, we can say that things are looking up. A frequent attendee to the convention told me that the previous year there wouldn’t even have been a debate on these issues. The Tea Party and Libertarian Party never failed or dissolved. We just went under the radar, and we are quietly taking over.

We must win the war on fascism, and it seems to me the best inoculation we have against the disease of fascism is ridicule. These idiotic, totalitarian, fascistic, crackpots need ridiculing for what they are.

You can find Presley on his Facebook page and his blog The Lyceum.

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.