Keith Turgeon, left, and James McDonald of Namtek with their data center rack which powers their call center in Bedford. (David Lane/Union Leader) Keith Turgeon, right, and James McDonald of Namtek interview in Bedford. (David Lane/Union Leader)

Advanced Kiosks in Franklin is preparing to ship out a touch-pad kiosk to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in the next few weeks to use in West Virginia."We had to fill out all the paperwork for West Virginia and become a vendor in West Virginia," Howard Horn, the company's president and CEO, said last week. "Why does the FDA have to go through the state of West Virginia?"Another time, a few years back, the company of 15 employees shipped 60 touch-screen kiosks to an Army base in the United States with the Army's request that the hard drives contain no software. When Horn followed up a few weeks later, a secretive Army official told him not to expect any recommendation or even acknowledgement."Still, to this day, I don't know what the kiosks were used for," Horn said."What is bizarre about how the government works? At the end of the day, you really don't know what kind of situation you're going into when you're talking to the government, and it's always a different situation," Horn said.New Hampshire companies racked up $1.68 billion in prime federal contracts - more than $2 billion if subcontractors are included - during the 2014 fiscal year, which ended Sept. 30, 2014, according to Dave Pease, program manager for the New Hampshire Procurement Technical Assistance Program, part of the state's Division of Economic Development.A contract can get counted in one state but much of the work can happen in another.For example, General Electric's plant in Hooksett makes jet engine parts and employs more than 400 there, Pease said. But how much of the Hooksett operation gets booked for New Hampshire?"Zero," Pease said, because the contract is based with GE in another state."I think the assumption in general is it washes out," Pease said. "The flow of money is very complex."Federal contracts are a boost for New Hampshire's economy."It's good business," said Pease, who provides advice to companies about doing business with the federal government. The federal government is "a customer that pays its bills. They don't go out of business. They don't move out of town. They don't jump overseas. There's a lot of pluses. There's also some negative, it's bureaucratic and they are pretty tight with the buck as we would want them to be as a taxpayer."The federal government's procurement process includes thousands of companies or "schedule holders" who work with the General Services Administration, including Bedford's Namtek Corp."You have a catalog of goods you offer to the government," said Keith Turgeon, Namtek's president and co-founder. "We're brokering relationships between people in need and people who have an offering or a solution."Recently, Namtek was awarded a NASA contract that even further streamlines the process for the government to purchase information technology goods, he said. Turgeon said the company, which earns around $20 million in annual sales, could book revenues totaling around $1 billion over the next decade. The company now gets 75 percent of total revenues from its work with the federal government."Competition drives the best price for the government," Turgeon said, adding the process is "maximizing the government's budget every single year."Pease said Namtek is "a kind of a consolidator. They find the best deals from innovative businesses that often don't have the capacity to sell to the government themselves."Namtek often handles sales to the federal government for Advanced Kiosks, which pays Namtek 10 percent of the purchase price. (Namtek said the percentage it receives varies by client.)"At the end of the day, there are some contracts that if I had to go just out to bid ... it's going to be a nightmare and probably would never happen," said Advanced Kiosks' Horn.Another New Hampshire company that has had a NASA contract - a way through which federal agencies can shop for IT goods - for about a half-dozen years is Red River Computer Co. Inc. in Claremont."It's been a huge contributor to our business and our work with the federal government," said Dan McGee, the company's senior vice president of operations.He said the company, which employs 75 of its 155 workers in Claremont, derives 90 percent of its business from the federal government. He said sales involving the government during the 2014 fiscal year sales totaled more than the $273 million figure noted on usaspending.gov, a government website that let's people track how federal tax dollars are spent.McGee said his company knows how to maneuver through the government procurement process and does the paperwork that goods suppliers often don't want to deal with in exchange for a percentage.Pease said there are "a lot of disconnects" with the government's purchasing system."Everyone wants transparency; everyone wants fairness," Pease said. "We plug a bunch of social goals into our government spending and the end result is about 10,000 pages of procurement regulations. That doesn't lower costs."