Topics: GlobalPost, World War I, wwi, News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

On a slab of soft white stone, a laser-guided drill carves one family’s message to a long lost boy.

Slowly, the words emerge: “God has saved from weary strife, in its dawn this fresh young life.”

The gravestone belongs to a private in the British army’s Leicestershire Regiment, killed in France on Oct. 31, 1914 and named only as W. Walker. He was 28.

Walker was among 16 million soldiers and civilians who lost their lives in World War I.

Later this week, the world will mark 100 years since the assassination of an Austrian prince in the Bosnian city of Sarajevo dragged the great powers of the time into a conflict they called “the war to end all wars.”

Memories of WWI are fading — British sailor Claude Choules, who died in 2011 at age 110, is believed to have been the last surviving combat veteran.

But in cemeteries and memorial sites around the world, there’s no letup in the global operation to honor the fallen.

During a time of tight spending, the governments of Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand,South Africa and India increased the budget of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission by almost 4 percent last year to $99 million.

That enables the CWGC to maintain graves and memorials to 1.7 million combatants from the former British Empire who died in the two world wars.

“We are here to help people understand what happened, what the sacrifice of those soldiers meant,” says Nelly Poignonnec, a Frenchwoman who serves as communications supervisor for the CWGC.

“We have a duty to commemorate them in perpetuity.”

The Brits aren’t alone.

Germany‘s War Graves Commission has a $55 million budget, raised mainly by public donations to maintain memorials to soldiers who fell in both world wars. For France, a special service of the Defense Ministry cares for 1.3 million war graves.

The US Battle Monument’s Commission employs 50 people overseas to tend the graves of 124,908 American war dead, including 30,000 from WWI. Nearly half lie in the Meuse-Argonne American cemetery, a 2.5 hour drive southeast of here.

Every year, the Commonwealth War Graves Commission engraves thousands of new headstones.

A handful will mark new graves for bodies that are still occasionally uncovered by farmers plowing their fields around here. The vast majority will replace stones eroded by decades of exposure to the elements.

Pvt. Walker’s is one of 22,000 to be cut this year in the workshop the CWGC runs in this northern French town set amid rolling farmland where some of the war’s bloodiest battles were fought.

Quarries in southern England producing the original Portland stone used for the graves in France and Flanders can no longer keep up with demand, so alternatives are shipped in to Beaurains from Italy, Bulgaria and farther afield.

After they are engraved — either using computer-guided machines or by hand by the commission’s team of trained craftsmen — the memorial tablets are sent out around the world.

Headstone production manager Alan Jarvis points to a stack of stones destined for shipment to the Gaza Strip, where more than 4,400 Commonwealth casualties are buried. The previous week, he says, a consignment was sent to Benghazi, Libya, last resting place for 1,214 British Commonwealth soldiers from WWII.

The CWGC employs 1,300 people tending 23,000 sites in 153 countries.

The scale of its operation to care for cemetery gardens and maintain the memorials gives an indication of the worldwide scope of the Great War’s carnage.

There are 15 members of Lincolnshire Yeomanry laid to rest in Algeria after their transport ship was torpedoed by a U-boat in 1915. Maala cemetery in Yemen contains the graves of 142 servicemen killed in WWI defending the city of Aden against the Turks.

However, it’s the vast graveyards of northern France and southern Belgium that reveal the industrial scale of the WWI’s slaughter, and its impact in shaping today’s world.

A short drive from Beaurains, a ridge of highland known as the Lorette Spur is topped with a stout white church surrounded by the graves of 45,000 French soldiers — the country’s largest military necropolis.

Down the hill in Neuville-Saint-Vaast stands a forest of gray crosses marking the tree-shaded resting place of 44,833 German soldiers. It’s especially poignant given Germany’s post-WWI history that 129 tablets engraved with the Star of David are mixed among the crosses.