Thrust into a position of added influence by a Republican midterm election sweep, U.S. Sen. Pat Toomey, R-Pa., told business leaders Thursday that there are places the GOP can work with President Obama to put an end to gridlock.

"My biggest priority when the Republican Party takes over the Senate in January is to reopen the Senate for business," Toomey said.

He listed three early priorities: repealing the medical device tax that helps fund Obamacare, approving construction of the Keystone Pipeline and exempting small- and midsized banks from Dodd-Frank reporting requirements.

If ground can be gained on that front, Toomey said lawmakers need to take on larger problems, specifically reining in unsustainable federal spending.

But he warned that Republicans shouldn't interpret the election as a demonstration of broad-based support for their party, but a general unease with the economy and security, and dissatisfaction with federal government dysfunction.

"It was mainly a rejection of our failed status quo," he said.

He made the remarks Thursday at the Greater Lehigh Valley Chamber of Commerce's annual meeting at the Sands Casino Resort Bethlehem.

The annual spectacle began with Chamber President and CEO Tony Iannelli landing on the stage in a spacesuit to the sounds of the classic David Bowie tune "Space Oddity."

New Air Products CEO Seifi Ghasemi led the business agenda. Ghasemi took the helm at Air Products in the summer.

He assured Chamber members that the company, a fixture in the Lehigh Valley, is here to stay.

"I can assure you, we will be here another 75 years," he said.

The event also featured a big thank you from Jim and Rob Brooks, co-owners of the Lehigh Valley Phantoms, who started play at Allentown's new PPL Center arena last month. They were joined on stage by Melvin, the Phantoms' mascot.

Well-known hockey personality and ESPN anchor Bill Clement was also in attendance, giving a humorous keynote address.

The annual event, aimed at recognizing the Chamber's supporters, promoting networking and instilling pride in the region's business community, also featured a series of regional business awards. They are:

• Business of the Year Award: National Penn Bank

• Milestone Awards: IBEW Local 375 (100 years old) and Morris Black and Sons, (106 years old)

• Community Partner Award: Service Electric Cable TV & Communications

• Volunteer of the Year Award: Laurie Hackett

scott.kraus@mcall.com

Twitter @skraus

610-820-6745