I was a truly lousy basketball player in elementary school. I just didn't have the skills, and it frustrated me to no end because I wasn't horrible at other sports I tried.

After another embarrassing performance during a weekend morning “B-team” game, my dad offered some gentle advice. He noticed that I didn't commit a single foul and said I could improve by getting more aggressive on the court.

Tired and humiliated, I burst into tears. “But I don't want to foul out!” I cried.

I hate that story because it makes me look like a big baby, but I learned from it and found that a few sharp elbows helped me play better.

So what do we take away from this story? I'm certainly not advocating that Gov. Bruce Rauner and House Speaker Michael Madigan get more aggressive with each other. Just the opposite.

The lesson is that I reacted to sound advice like the child I was.

Instead of saying, as I eventually did, “Yeah, that's a good idea,” I cried about not wanting to foul out of games, as if that were the only alternative to no fouls.

It was a completely childish and illogical argument, but it's the same sort of stuff I'm seeing and hearing all the time as we await Rauner's State of the State speech on Jan. 27.

Rauner and the Republican leaders of the General Assembly have proposed a sweeping plan to take over Chicago Public Schools and put it into bankruptcy.

“Are we supposed to stand by and watch CPS burn to the ground?” asked state Rep. Ron Sandack, R-Downers Grove.

Um, no. But how about proposing something that actually has a chance of passing both Democratic-controlled legislative chambers with support from the mayor? Because doing stuff that is purely designed to inflame the situation—which is all that proposal was about— isn't getting anybody anywhere while the school system's finances burn.

And I don't mean to single out Sandack because, frankly, I like the guy and he is far from alone and usually acts responsibly.

But there's a pervasive attitude out there that Rauner or Madigan (take your pick) is right and that's just it.

I cannot tell you how many times I've heard or seen this childish question: “Is (insert hero's name here) supposed to just cave to (insert villain's name here)?” I shouldn't even need to address this because it seems so downright silly, but, no, I don't think either man should surrender to the other. What we need is sober, pragmatic realism and a doable conclusion.

Madigan's claim that Rauner wants to hurt middle-class wages by gutting union strength has some merit, but wouldn't a tax hike do that to an even greater number of middle-class Illinoisans? The last income tax hike Madigan supported, in 2011, legislated away a week's pay from every taxpaying resident of Illinois. How about we find a way to help improve everyone's lives?

Rauner actually said with a straight face the other day that Fairfield, Conn.-based General Electric decided not to move its corporate headquarters to Chicago because of the “trajectory” of Illinois' problems. I'm not sure he or his supporters realize it, but that means the loss of that headquarters is also on him. Yes, we had lots of problems before he became governor, but their “trajectory” has only worsened during the past year. So own up to it and start coming up with some new ideas to get us where we need to be.

In other words, act like adults.

A contributing columnist to Crain's, Rich Miller publishes Capitol Fax, a daily political newsletter, and CapitolFax.com.