SANTA FE, N.M. (AP) — A spot survey by state analysts found low-income Medicaid patients in New Mexico are waiting on average from three weeks to nearly two months to get an appointment with a doctor, prompting new concerns about barriers to health care access for the poor and disabled.

Staff at the Legislative Finance Committee on Wednesday released results of a "secret shopper" survey that they devised after struggling to find any other meaningful measure of wait times in multiple Medicaid contract evaluations for managed care organizations.

In many instances, printed and online directories for making doctor appointments led to dead ends by telephone. In Bernalillo and Santa Fe counties, fewer than half of providers contacted were accepting new Medicaid patients.

Medicaid enrollment has grown by two-thirds in the state's main metropolitan area since Republican Gov. Susana Martinez agreed to expand coverage in 2014 under the federal Affordable Care Act. In some remote areas, enrollment has doubled, straining health care provider networks already stretched thin by rural geography and poverty.

The wait-time survey found significantly fewer care providers accepting new Medicaid patients than has been reported by the managed care providers themselves.

Analysts called a sampling of primary care providers in seven urban and rural counties — all among the top 10 in Medicaid enrollment growth for the state.

The survey, combined with other recent reports from the Human Services Department that oversees Medicaid, "leads to concerns that some Medicaid recipients in New Mexico may face barriers when they attempt to access the health care system," legislative analysts concluded.

New Mexico officials recently reported that Medicaid patients are resorting increasingly to emergency room visits for routine medical issues amid gaps in provider networks. Emergency room costs for Medicaid patients in 2015 increased by 17 percent from the previous year to $116 million.

The Human Services Department overseeing the state's Medicaid program for the poor and disabled said Wednesday that the spike in emergency room use for routine medical conditions should not be seen as a long-term problem.

Human Services Secretary Brent Earnest cited a study of California Medicaid patients that showed both a spike and a subsequent large decline in emergency room use. He expects to see a similar outcome in New Mexico.

He said the spot survey on doctor appointments was "limited in scope" but may be helpful in identifying coverage gaps.

The Human Services Department has applied more than $5.5 million in sanctions against managed care groups while enforcing Medicaid contract provisions. The Legislative Finance Committee says the sanctions were mainly for inaccurate or late compliance reports and issues related to call centers and nurse lines.

"The department has not been equally forceful when it comes to addressing the gaps in access to care that are revealed" by those reports, staff at the Legislative Finance Committee wrote.

Copyright © The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

0 Pending Comments