Tom McCool, Ed.D., was awarded the Person of Purpose award by California-based Hillside House, for his lifelong work in improving the lives of individuals with developmental and emotional disabilities.

Tom McCool was awarded the Person of Purpose award by California-based Hillside House, for his lifelong work in improving the lives of individuals with developmental and emotional disabilities. Many of the organizations he has led and worked with are based in Central Jersey. (Photo: Photo Courtesy of ABK Communications) Story Highlights Tom McCool, Ed.D, a leader in the field of developmental disabilities received the Person of Purpose award.

McCool runs TMC Consulting where he provides management consultation services for children and adults with special needs.

McCool has dedicated his life to the field of developmental disabilities

Tom McCool was awarded the Person of Purpose award by California-based Hillside House, for his lifelong work in improving the lives of individuals with developmental and emotional disabilities.

Hillside House is a residential facility for people with developmental disabilities, including intellectual disabilities, cerebral palsy, autism and epilepsy. Based in Santa Barbara, California, it has served the community since 1945.

For more than 30 years, McCool has dedicated his life to the field of developmental disabilities, with many of those years working for and with different Central Jersey-based organizations. His work includes leading two service organizations, appointments on boards of several national organizations and working with governmental officials to affect change and policies in the autism and developmental disabilities communities.

After graduating West Chester State University with a master’s degree in education and earning a doctorate in educational leadership from Fairleigh Dickinson University’s Institute for Leadership Studies, McCool began his life work. Most notably, McCool has led two large organizations focused on serving and educating people with developmental disabilities: president/CEO of Eden Autism Services in Princeton, and vice president of developmental and government affairs at Devereux, a nationwide network of behavioral healthcare.

Currently McCool serves on the QABA Credentialing Board; co-founded and served in leadership positions for National Association of Residential Providers for Adults with Autism; NCASES (National Commission on Accreditation of Special Education Services; and the Autism Services Group. He has served on the board of the National Association of Private Special Education Centers, where for three years he served as president.

Among his most personal significant achievements, McCool counts his participation in a congressional hearing where he provided testimony before the House Foreign Relations committee on the topic, “The Global Impact of Autism”; his participation as one of five presenters at the Meeting of Autism Societies, which resulted in the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the U.S. Congress and Northern Ireland. McCool was cited by the New Jersey State Firefighters’ Mutual Benevolent Association as Humanitarian of the Year; was named the Princeton Chamber of Commerce Innovator of the Year; and served as commencement speaker for his alma mater, West Chester State University, at the Graduate School of Education Ceremony in 2013.

“To understand the why of one’s life, you have to go back to the basic principles by which you were raised, what your family values are, and what brings you satisfaction,” he said. “My father drilled into us two major mandates: Always leave a place in better shape than you found it and treat people the way you want to be treated. These values have shaped who I am and resulted in my desire to make a difference.”

McCool is still seeking to make a difference through ;his own consulting business, TMC Consulting, providing management consultation services to promote quality programs and services for children and adults with special needs. He splits his time with his work in California as well as New Jersey where he is currently working with First Children in Fanwood, REAL and YALE Schools in Cherry Hill and Rock Brook School in Skillman.

For more information on TMC Consulting. contact tmccoo125@gmail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1MA1JTr