(From left, teacher Tim, students Jackson, Grant, Henry, Riley)

As we noted in an earlier story, Explorer West Middle School (WSB sponsor) 8th graders are tasked with working in groups on major projects to research, plan, and present big ideas to “change the world.” Rather than just let their ideas and proposals stay within the confines of the campus, most if not all of the groups found ways to share them with the community. In the case of one group, its members wrote a story about their project and invited us to publish it:

One of the group members, Riley Walden , pitched his idea of using retrofitted shipping containers as temporary or even permanent homes. They decided to specifically work on this idea, and with more research, they found that Seattle was a perfect place to house the containers.

After extensive research, they wrote to elected officials Kshama Sawant, Sally Bagshaw (Seattle City Councilmembers), Larry Phillips (King County Councilmember), and Bill Bryant (Seattle Port Commissioner).

As they researched how this could work, they also looked at possible locations for these retrofitted shipping containers. The ideal location they came up with was Terminal 5 in Seattle. This was the ideal location because it was inbetween West Seattle and Downtown Seattle to give homeless people a wide variety of places to work; one of the issues that homeless people face is getting a job near a place to live, so Terminal 5 was ideal because you could easily get anywhere from A to B without a massive amount of bus transfers. It also was being cleared out for an “upgrade,” so there was a lot of space for the containers to be placed. They also looked at the security that Terminal 5 offered, as it is already fenced off from the public.

They wrote letters to members of the Seattle City Council and the King County Council, and within days received replies back from the officials. Kshama Sawant expressed great interest in this idea, and even invited them to speak at the Affordable Housing Town Hall meeting on April 23rd, where they presented the idea.

(Henry, Riley, and Grant at City Hall)

Almost 500 people were at the meeting and gave the students very good feedback, including some from Sawant herself.

Another reason they believe that shipping containers could be used is because of their portability. Instead of building a million-dollar structure you could house a family of homeless in a twenty thousand dollar, refurbished shipping container with everything you would find in a house. One other advantage of using shipping containers as housing is they can last up to 25 years with no maintenance so that would only be an average purchase price of eight hundred dollars a year. Assuming there are over 800 people in West Seattle you would only pay less than one dollar a year. There is also the fact that we don’t need to put this in one location, we can put it on 50 locations or 5 locations throughout King County and we would pay such a small price to house a tremendous amount of homeless. Let’s not forget that there is an surplus of containers.

With all of the vacant lots around the country, they could easily be moved. This would also allow us to spend very little money on property, as we could make it a possibility that the working homeless pay a small part of the expenses (probably around five pecent) so we could continue expanding the program. We also thought of things like solar and wind energy to produce electricity so we don’t have to take so much in from the city’s power. The only issue with that is, solar power would only generate power during the day, and no one wants a 500-foot wind turbine, so we wanted to create a way that you can create energy from wind that is high enough that trees don’t get in the way but not so tall that they block views or are an eyesore, so we decided that two or three shipping containers could supply enough height for a small wind turbine to produce a good amount of electricity.

A normal container is eight feet tall and high cube containers around nine foot six inches, so achieving a 24- or 28-foot-six-inch high structure is not all that bad looking; remember that these are retrofitted, so they can look quite nice. So with a few solar panels and a few small wind turbines, you can certainly produce enough energy for homeless people living there. Another possibility we thought of was possibly a small garden for people to care for while they are staying there. Another possibility: A volunteer service project to help homeless people who are on the streets get into their homes. They can also work for a company that hires homeless people, doing work at a food bank, or they could work to build affordable housing for homeless people.