Buy Photo A student arrives at the Lakewood Cheder School on 9th Street at Route 9 in Lakewood. As part of a courtesy busing protest, parents were told to drive their students to schools in the town. (Photo: Thomas P. Costello/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

LAKEWOOD – Township and county officials are preparing for two days of a potential traffic nightmare, as a protest against the proposed elimination of courtesy busing for students appears to be on.

Officers with the Ocean County Sheriff's Office will assist the Lakewood Police Department in coordinating traffic at large intersections along Routes 9 and 88 and elsewhere in town, Sheriff Michael G. Mastronardy said.

"Whatever the chief wants us to do, we will do," said Mastronardy, regarding Lakewood Police Chief Robert Lawson.

The protest's organizers want parents of nonpublic school students who stand to lose courtesy busing to drive their children to classes today and on Thursday as a "drill" for what may happen in September, when the nearly $4 million practice is due to be eliminated for those in grades four to 12.

Follow our live coverage from the protest today.

The protest originally was set for Tuesday and today, but organizers pushed it back a day as nonpublic school leaders met with Lakewood School District and state Department of Education officials in Trenton on Monday.

Superintendent Laura Winters could not be reached for comment Tuesday on how the meeting went. On Monday evening, a state official said he could not go into detail of what occurred during the meeting.

Winters has said that Lakewood's buses will follow their regular schedules and will make all usual stops along their routes during the protest.

Today and Thursday, the Lakewood Emergency Services Department will have additional personnel on hand in case the additional traffic negatively impacts response times, officials said.

Currently, nonpublic and public school students who live within 2.5 miles of their schools can ride a public school bus from their homes to their classes. Of the approximately 10,450 students who use it, more than 8,100 attend private schools, according to district documents.

Last month, the Lakewood Board of Education eliminated all courtesy busing from the 2014-15 budget as a way to meet tax hike caps set by the state. Courtesy busing for kindergarten to third-grade students was subsequently brought back.

Rabbi Yisroel Schenkolewski, a longtime political and community leader in Lakewood who wrote a letter last week calling for the protest on behalf of Iggud Hamosdos — a consortium of private schools in Lakewood — could not be reached for comment Tuesday.

Read or Share this story: http://www.app.com/story/news/local/jackson-lakewood/lakewood/2014/06/10/lakewood-protest/10299747/