Morning lineup:

Meet The Press: Gérard Biard (Charlie Hebdo Editor-In-Chief); Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC); White House Senior Advisor Dan Pfieffer; Matt Kibbe (FreedomWorks); Katrina vanden Heuvel (The Nation); Roundtable : Carol Lee (Wall Street Journal), Former White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, Former RNC Chairman Michael Steele and Kelly O'Donnell (NBC News). Face The Nation: British Prime Minister David Cameron; White House Senior Advisor Dan Pfeiffer; Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL); Former CIA Deputy Director Mike Morrell; Roundtable : Mark Halperin (Bloomberg News), Democratic Strategist Stephanie Cutter, Michael Gerson (Washington Post) and Nancy Cordes (CBS News). This Week: Director of Europol Rob Wainwright; Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee (R); Roundtable : Republican Strategist Matthew Dowd, Alicia Menendez (Fusion), Former Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm (D) and Rep. Adam Kinzinger (R-IL). Fox News Sunday: Sen. Ron Johnson (R-WI); Sen. Ben Cardin (D-MD); Same-Sex Marriage Attorney Ted Olson: Tony Perkins (Family Research Council); Roundtable : George Will (Washington Post), Former Sen. Evan Bayh (D-IN), Kimberley Strassel (Wall Street Journal) and Juan Williams (Fox News). State of the Union: Sen. Richard Burr (R-NC); Sen. Chris Murphy (D-CT); Rep. Jason Chaffetz (R-UT); Former Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli (R); Rabbi Matt Gewirtz; Roman Catholic Priest Father Edward Beck; Muslim Chaplian Yahya Hendi.

Evening lineup:

60 Minutes will be preempted by coverage of the AFC Championship game.

On Comedy Central...

Jon Stewart questioned France's commitment to free speech. (01/14/15)

The Daily Show:

Monday : Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee (R); Tuesday : Actress/Singer Jennifer Lopez; Wednesday : Actress Anne Hathaway; Thursday : Actress Jennifer Aniston

Elsewhere...

Rep. Randy Weber (R-TX) criticized President Obama for not being enough like Hitler.

A Texas congressman was pilloried on Tuesday for posting a tweet that used the terror attack in Paris as an excuse to compare President Barack Obama to Adolf Hitler. Republican Randy Weber's official account, @TXRandy14, tweeted on Monday night: "Even Adolph Hitler thought it more important than Obama to get to Paris. (For all the wrong reasons.) Obama couldn't do it for right reasons" [...] Weber has a history of inflammatory remarks, and misspellings, on Twitter.

Meanwhile...

Ben Carson argued that ISIS is just like the Founding Fathers. (For all the wrong reasons.)

"A bunch of rag tag militiamen defeated the most powerful and professional military force on the planet. Why? Because they believed in what they were doing. They were willing to die for what they believed in," Carson said during a speech at the Republican National Committee's winter meeting. "Fast forward to today. What do we have? You've got ISIS. They've got the wrong philosophy, but they're willing to die for it while we are busily giving away every belief and every value for the sake of political correctness. We have to change that." Carson preemptively criticized journalists for twisting those words to make him sound nutty. "Now I recognize that there's press here and some of the press will say, 'Carson said that ISIS is the same as the United States,'" he said. "They are just so ridiculous, so ridiculous."

And then...

He tried to convince the audience that he isn't crazy.

Speaking to the Republican National Committee's winter meeting, Carson tried to challenge the caricature of him as a right-wing zealot by addressing—one by one—many of the individual controversies that have surrounded him, and dismissing them as lies from "the liberal media." Carson defended, among other things, his statements about Obamacare being the worst thing since slavery; comparing present-day America to Nazi Germany; and calling last year's Veterans Affairs scandal "a gift from God" because it revealed holes in the system. "I stand by those" remarks, Carson told the crowd. "I don't think there's anything crazy at all."

EPIC FAIL.

- Trix