Several conservative House Republicans insisted that the press should be asking tougher questions of likely Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton."Ask her the tough questions," Rep. Raul Labrador, R-Idaho, said at Wednesday's "Conversations with Conservatives," a monthly conclave of House GOP conservatives moderated by the Heritage Foundation.Labrador, who supports Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul for president, said Clinton should be queried by the press about her record as secretary of state and as a senator.Freshman Rep. Dave Brat, R-Va., recalled how Clinton had said if she knew in 2003 what she now knows about Iraq, she would not have voted for U.S. military action."So someone should ask 'would Hillary Clinton have voted for Obamacare if she knew what she now knows about it?'" said Brat.At the time Obamacare was enacted by Congress in 2010, Clinton had left the Senate but was part of the Obama administration as secretary of state.Labrador, Brat, and other conservative lawmakers also said it is an asset to the Republican Party to have the dozen-plus announced and potential presidential candidates it now has for 2016."I'm glad we have so many candidates," Labrador said, dismissing widespread press assertions that the preponderance of contenders dilutes Republican chances. "I’m very passionate about this."Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, agreed. He recalled the crowded field of GOP candidates in 1996 and how polls at the time "showed in eighth place was Morry Taylor [Illinois manufacturing company owner and first-time candidate]. Today, you know who’s in eighth place in the polls? Bobby Jindal, a two-term governor [of Louisiana] with a great record in public life. We’ve come a long way."The conservative House members also made it clear that, their personal preferences for president aside, they had no problem with other candidates seeking the nomination.Jordan, for example, is so far neutral in the race but is known to be close to his fellow Ohio Republican, presidential hopeful and Gov. John Kasich. But when asked how Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker did in a recent closed-door meeting with members of Congress, Jordan replied without hesitation: "He did a great job."Paul-backer Labrador, when asked if Jeb Bush would have problems with continued questions about the record of older brother George W. Bush, said: "It may be more personal for him, but I don't think it will be an issue."

John Gizzi is chief political columnist and White House correspondent for Newsmax.