Elon Musk’s Hyperloop: Innovating Our Problems Away

While governments pass climate decrees, Elon Musk and his team are doing amazing things with their newly proposed transport, the Hyperloop.

In the face of human problems big and small–say, the potential long-run problems associated with climate change–we have two basic options regarding how we game these issues: control or innovation.



The former option of command and control is currently on display at the Paris Climate Change talks, as CNN reports:

Leaders of 150 nations, along with 40,000 delegates from 195 countries, are attending the conference, called COP21. COP stands for Conference of Parties, an annual forum to try to tackle climate change on a global political level. The leaders have one mission: Agree on legally binding reductions in greenhouse gas emissions meant to hold global average temperatures short of a 2 degrees Celsius increase over preindustrial global temperatures.

Now, we all should know by now what “legally binding” entails: a complex regime of regulations and taxes administered by the governments of the world.

Color me skeptical, but I do not think such an accord (1) will actually accomplish any of its stated goals and (2) is the optimal approach to dealing with these issues. The “leaders” of the world can decree and plan the lives of billions all they wish, but unless someone creates new ways of producing and consuming energy, there is little those with the legal guns can do to spur positive change.

They can only control or destroy what already exists.

You see, man’s progress is not the province of those who would seek to, “lay snares for the many, and call it state: they hang a sword and a hundred cravings over them.” Such destroyers, claiming forever that man’s liberty is holding him back, will never lead us to a greater peace, prosperity, or security.

No, progress is built. Progress is discovered. Progress is the province of the innovator. And I cannot think of a better example of “the innovator” than Elon Musk.

Take, for instance, Musk’s new transportation project, The Hyperloop:

Back in 2013, Elon Musk unveiled open plans for the Hyperloop. A train that would transport passengers along 400 miles of electromagnetic tubes at 760 miles per hour, connecting Los Angeles and San Francisco. Travel time would be a mere 30 minutes, and the ticket price? Only $20. It’s able to achieve these speeds by ditching the wheels that create too much friction in traditional train systems. As outlined in the Alpha report, “Wheels don’t work very well at that sort of speed, but a cushion of air does. Air bearings, which use the same basic principle as an air hockey table, have been demonstrated to work at speeds of Mach 1.1 with very low friction.” What’s more, the Hyperloop will be a self-sustaining system powered by renewable energy, including solar, wind, and kinetic. Gresta explained, “It will consume less electricity than we produce. We can resell electricity. In this model, it will allow us to recoup the entire investment in six to eight years depending on where you build it.”

Furthermore, the Hyperloop project is being organized through “crowdsourcing,” directly interacting with the communities affected by the proposed transportation technology.

As Dirk Ahlborn, CEO of Hyperloop Transportation Technologies (HTT), told ReasonTV:

I’m the CEO because someone has to be the CEO. But, we are a crowd powered company. So, haha, actually when we started, I met Tim Draper, the venture capitalist, who told me ‘Man, that’s amazing. If you guys are successful, what do we have governments for?’

Exactly, if the world had more people like Elon Musk and his team, what do we have governments for other than to control us in the name of saving us?