Fourth-line center Matt Tabrum took the opening faceoff Saturday night for the University of Denver, and the Pioneers’ starting defensemen were their third pairing that includes 5-foot-7 Matt VanVoorhis.

DU’s goalie was freshman Tanner Jaillet, who is no longer considered the backup.

Tabrum, VanVoorhis and Jaillet went on to make key plays in DU’s 4-1 victory that capped a two-game National Collegiate Hockey Conference sweep of St. Cloud State before a crowd of 5,048 fans at Magness Arena.

“It’s a real good sweep,” DU coach Jim Montgomery said. “We needed to sweep a high-quality team in our conference, and this was a good showing for our guys in a lot of ways.”

Tabrum beautifully set up Nolan Zajac’s second-period goal, the lone tally in the first 40 minutes. St. Cloud State tied it on Nick Oliver’s fluke goal. Then it was all DU.

“We just took over the game. It wasn’t close,” Montgomery said. “You’re waiting for a response from your team, and it was great to see. It was everybody.”

PHOTOS: The University of Denver hosted St. Cloud State on Saturday, January 17, 2015.

VanVoorhis got the primary assist on Danton Heinen’s game-winner 6:50 into the third. Jaillet was flawless, with the only puck getting past him coming off an intended St. Cloud State pass that caromed in off the skate of defenseman Josiah Didier.

Jaillet, who came off the bench to backstop DU to Friday’s 3-1 win in the series opener, has allowed just one goal in his past three appearances, including two starts.

Jaillet, 21, is older than sophomore Evan Cowley, 19, who has struggled in his last two starts.

“Tanner is playing really well. He’s really calm. Some of our players call him a miniature Sam Brittain,” Montgomery said of DU’s top goalie last season. “I know we’re going to need both goalies the rest of the year. Evan’s really good and he’s won us several games. He’s going to get it back.”

Returning All-America defenseman Joey LaLeggia scored his eighth goal of the season with 6:55 remaining to clinch it for DU, and left winger Trevor Moore added further insurance with 5:15 to go.

Zajac and LaLeggia finished with multiple-point performances, and fourth-line winger Larkin Jacobson, top-four defenseman Will Butcher, second-line center Quentin Shore and third-line center Gabe Levin had assists.

DU (13-7-1, 6-5) got a little to a lot from everyone to sweep St. Cloud (9-12-1, 4-7), the defending NCHC regular-season champion.