SHEFFIELD — Employees across the school district received small raises under new contracts that also call for them to pay larger insurance deductibles.

The school board approved 1 percent raises for employees in the district’s two unions representing teachers and all other staff, as well as for administrators of Sheffield-Sheffield Lake Schools who aren’t backed by a union.

Employees previously paid $75 deductibles for single coverage and $125 for family coverage under health care plan.

Deductibles will now be $250 for single coverage and $500 for family under new plans. Those who participate in a wellness program would have the option of seeing deductibles drop to $150 and $300, respectively.

According to U.S. News & World Report, 80 percent of insured workers in 2014 had health care plans that included deductibles and the average annual deductible has risen to $1,217 from $826 in 2009.

District Treasurer Josh Hill said raises for all employees will cost the district an additional $84,000 annually, although the larger insurance deductibles will save $75,000 annually.

Superintendent Mike Cook said he’s aware some might not like the idea of any raises in light of the district’s recent financial woes, large-scale cuts and appeals to the community for passage of a levy that was approved by voters in May.

But he said all pay was frozen from 2010-13, last year employees received 1 percent raises and the board wanted everyone to have a 1 percent raise again this year. Employees represented by unions also receive regular step increases based on seniority that are negotiated during contract talks. Cook said unions asked to keep insurance the same during the pay freeze and they have generally frowned upon any changes to insurance policies.

Hill said the adjustment in deductible payments is a step toward avoiding future “Cadillac taxes,” a reference to expensive insurance plans and the taxes that will be imposed on such plans under the Affordable Care Act.

Under the Affordable Care Act, if an individual health-insurance policy costs more than $10,200, the employer has to pay a 40 percent excise tax for any amount above that threshold, Hill said. For family policies, the corresponding threshold is $27,500.

“The health insurance changes get us closer to being under these thresholds to not have to pay these excise taxes in 2018,” Hill said.

Cook said the hope is that unions will agree to additional health care changes in the future when contract negotiations come around again.