John Podesta of the Center for American Progress is coming on board as an adviser/boss to the man that his political group and their left-wing billionaire funders put into office.

With Obama's poll numbers plummeting, who better than the founder of the think-tank that makes policy for Obama and by extension the entire country to turn things around.

That is if the Little Green Men don't get him first.

In 2002, Podesta called on the federal government to declassify records relating to UFO investigations. “It is time for the government to declassify records that are more than 25 years old and to provide scientists with data that will assist in determining the real nature of this phenomenon,” he said. In 2010, Podesta wrote the foreword to a book on UFO investigations, writing, “As someone interested in the questions of UFOs, I think I have always understood the difference between fact and fiction. I guess you could call me a curious skeptic.” Adding more fuel to the fire, Podesta wrote the foreword to Leslie Kean's 2010 New York Times bestseller, "UFOs: Generals, Pilots, And Government Officials Go On The Record": I'm skeptical about many things, including the notion that government always knows best, and that the people can't be trusted with the truth. The time to pull the curtain back on this subject is long overdue. Presenting the facts, the book includes statements from only the most credible sources -- those in a position to know -- about a fascinating phenomenon, the nature of which is yet to be determined. It's time to find out what the truth really is that's out there. The American people -- and people around the world -- want to know, and they can handle the truth.

But they can't handle the truth about ObamaCare. Or maybe even aliens.

Podesta immediately became a big fan of UFO proponents, but now he has lost favor with the group. Recently, he asked Will Allen, known for his photographs of UFOs over Capitol Hill, to cease and desist. According to reports, Podesta stated that these reports could "destabilize society."

If you like your probing, you can keep your probing.

Perhaps Podesta spent too much time reading the works of fellow UFO Socialist Juan Posadas, who wrote, "We must appeal to the beings on other planets, when they come here, to intervene and collaborate with Earth’s inhabitants in suppressing poverty."

Why are illegal aliens always such liberals?