The Pirates have one of the best bullpens in baseball. Someone needs to remind manager Clint Hurdle of that fact. Hurdle managed like it was April not August; like it was Gerrit Cole and not Jeff Locke on the mound.

A partial result of Hurdle’s hesitancy was a 4-3 loss Tueday night at Busch Stadium to the St. Louis Cardinals. The defeat dropped the Pirates to six games behind the first-place Cardinals. While the Pirates have full focus on catching the Cardinals, they are much closer to third place than first. With a win over Milwaukee last night, the Chicago Cubs moved to within 2 1/2 games of second place.

Locke, the most erratic of pitchers, did not have it last night and that was fairly obvious almost from the outset of the game. He allowed two hits and a run in the first, two hits and a walk in the third, a double in the fourth. But he was good with men on base and had a 3-1 lead into the fifth.

Surely, Hurdle, well attuned to the stats of the game, knew that Locke is highly vulnerable once he gets through the opposing lineup twice. Opponents had a .301 batting average and an .851 OPS against Locke when facing him for the third time in a game.

That’s where Locke was, facing the No. 2 hitter in the St. Louis lineup, to start the fifth. When the first two batters walked, that should have been enough for Hurdle. With the recent much-improved pitching of Arquimedes Caminero and Antonio Bastardo, the bullpen goes six deep with trusted relievers. Caminero or Bastardo would have been a far better option than Locke at this point in the game.

But Hurdle stuck with Locke and Jason Heyward singled to score a run. That certainly should have been enough for Hurdle to remove Locke. But he did not. After a force out at home, Yadier Molina hit a sacrifice fly to tie the game.

With Heyward on third and outstanding rookie Stephen Piscotty coming to the plate, the situation screamed for Caminero. Hurdle stuck with Locke. Piscotty singled to give the Cardinals a lead they would not relinquish.

Carlos Martinez gave the Pirates runs in the first, third and fourth and looked almost as shaky as Locke. But he got stronger as the game progressed and worked through the eighth inning. Closer Trevor Rosenthal struck out the side in the ninth -- Neil Walker (on a pitch that was a ball), Pedro Alvarez and Francisco Cervelli.

Hurdle’s consistent reluctance to go to his bullpen early is often good strategy. But not in August; not against St. Louis; not with the bullpen well rested after an off day on Monday; not with Locke on the mound.

As it was, Caminero replaced Locke to start the sixth and retired the side on one hit. Bastardo pitched a 1-2-3 seventh. Both performances were too late to help the Pirates.

The loss adds a little more pressure to the Pirates in this three-game series. It was important -- but not mandatory -- to win two of three. That’s not going to be easy now.

There’s a terrific matchup of excellent young pitchers tonight when Cole goes against Michael Wacha. Cole is fourth in the league with a 2.39 ERA; Wacha is 13th with a 2.92 ERA. In his past two starts, Wacha has not allowed a run in 14 innings.

The matchup in the series finale Thursday pits Lance Lynn, with a 2.76 ERA, against Francisco Liriano, who has a 3.13 ERA.

None of the Pirates top relievers have pitched since Saturday. Hurdle has a rested bullpen. Hopefully, he won’t hesitate to use it. It’s August, not April.