LITTLE ROCK, AR - For the past two days Department of Human Services Director John Selig has been on the hot seat, facing livid legislators about a technical services project that's gone $100 million over budget. A result of that delay in getting the software ready is that thousands of people who are no longer eligible for private option coverage could be receiving those benefits on the state's dime.

"I don't want to say people are blameless. We could have managed project better," Selig told the Healthcare Reform Legislative Task Force on Thursday.

Selig faced the brunt of legislators' wrath over a software upgrade project that stalled after launching in January 2014 to allow enrollment for the state's Medicaid expansion program under the Affordable Care Act.

"I'm more frustrated today than I probably have ever been," said State Senator Jason Rapert, R-Conway. "Bottom line is we spent 100 million dollars, and it's not functioning properly and someone should be held responsible for that."

Selig, saying the ultimate responsibility was his on selecting the project vendors and waiting to bring in help to tackle the project as it grew more complex as the federal government continued to change the requirements.

The portion of the project that began to create complications was the portion to verify Medicaid expansion eligibility. As KARK reported earlier, the estimated budget for the project was around $100 million, but the new projections are looking closer to $200 million.

"Has it produced a result that has removed people from the program yet? " asked State Senator Jim Hendren, R-Gravette, who chairs the task force.

The delays in the software programming resulted in a delay in verifying those on the Medicaid expansion rolls who are actually eligible. Those reviews are supposed to occur annually. At this point, a fix has only just allowed for the task to begin.

"How many less people would we be paying for who aren't eligible since January? " Hendren asked.

Selig, responding that he didn't have a definite number, but estimated that it would be between 5 and 25 percent of people currently enrolled may no longer meet the income or other eligibility requirements.

"At 5 percent it's $5 million a months, and at 25 percent that's $25 million, right?" Hendren followed up.

Selig confirmed those numbers were correct. At the 25 percent estimate, that would mean roughly 58 thousand people have received benefits since January at a cost to the state, despite not qualifying.

"It's people who are making some money, and may get a better job and no longer qualify," Selig said following another hearing in front of legislators on Friday. "That would actually be a good thing. We want people to get better paying jobs so they don't have to qualify."

The delays in the certifications was caused by those issues in setting up the new software system, but Selig reassured lawmakers that a recent fix would allow DHS to begin that process, going through files at a rate of 3,000 a day.

"We'll have some real numbers for you about what we're seeing," Selig told lawmakers.

The costs and lack of results have caused frustrations for legislators.

"We've spent more on a way to learn who shouldn't be on the system than we'll save in sum of people kicked off the system," Rapert said. "Nobody else gets to get by with that in business."

And at this point, they're on edge, wanting someone to answer for it.

Governor Asa Hutchinson's office has been working with DHS on the issues with the project. Drew Petrimoulx reports Hutchinson is standing behind Selig and his efforts to get the project back on track. To see that full story, click here: