Jersey City Councilman Richard Boggiano is considered by backers of Mayor Steve Fulop to be the Mr. Negative of City Hall. He's never happy with Fulop initiatives and is generally at odds with the majority of the City Council — which is itself considered property of the mayor.

While Fulop is the captain of Jersey City, for Boggiano, he might as well be captaining the Pequod. He believes the mayor is blinded by his unannounced quest to harpoon the great white whale for most state politicians: governorship. Boggiano tells people this is why the mayor tries to push ideas and programs that he perceives as not having been properly vetted by — or at least thoroughly discussed — with the entire City Council.

Boggiano is often a critic of highly publicized public safety ventures that he says have yet to be successful or even implemented. He argues that the mayor should be fighting to get back the city’s police academy to meet police manpower shortages. While sympathetic to the idea, the city said it has lost its legally grandfathered guidelines for any future cop school. Officials say that after attending a state academy, new officers often have to be retrained for urban policing. Future consideration for a countywide academy is always a possibility.

The recent speed bump (or is that hump?) hubbub about raised asphalt tearing at the bottom of vehicles; the closing of a section of Newark Avenue for a Downtown pedestrian mall; alleged bike lane confusion, and the debate over how to fund and build a proposed City Hall annex — all have drawn negative Boggiano jibes.

Other than provide a path for developers to build their projects, the councilman doesn’t see this administration doing much for the “old city and residents.”

The councilman wants a different direction for his constituents on the Hilltop, which he said is often ignored by various administrations. He has voiced an old quest: secession. Boggiano said he would like to see the old Hudson City become its own municipality. A municipal building governing this new community would be located in Journal Square, he said, just to “put it to Fulop.”

Secession is an old topic. On March 3, 2008, the Political Insider wrote the following:

THE FOLKS ON THE HILL

The members of the Hilltop Neighborhood Association say they have had enough. For years, they have complained about the Dickinson High School students’ scorched earth activities at lunch and after school. They are livid about crime (despite lower police figures), dirty streets, lack of decent development and cloudy skies.

Residents in this part of the city and neighboring communities have felt so ignored and lied to (in their words) that there is talk of seceding from Jersey City.



Naturally, the chief voice of rebellion in the association is Richard Boggiano, who says he speaks for those who are afraid to criticize politicians. It is a little strange to complain about crime because Boggiano is, well, a cop. Nevertheless, he says secession may be broached at future association meetings.

The threat of secession was raised once before during the administration of Mayor Bret Schundler in the 1990s. Back then, the concept of creating a new municipality was raised when the administration wanted to draw new election district lines and planned to move a section of the Hilltop to Downtown. The Hilltop stayed intact.

Should a new municipality spring up, it would include everything north of the Kennedy Boulevard rail cut (in this case the PATH and not just Route 139) and it shall be called, yes, Hudson City. Just don’t order your Hudson City T-shirts yet.

These days, Boggiano would want more of Journal Square for the new city. For him to prevail, he’ll need to get a petition of signatures, probably 10 percent of the amount of folks who voted in the last general election. Then he needs to have people approve the referendum for secession. He should take note that Scotland’s brave souls voted to stay with the United Kingdom — meaning William Wallace was gutted for nothing. Even after all that, he would still need the Legislature’s permission (fat chance).

He also would not have the backing of the other “independent” on the City Council, Michael Yun.

“It sometimes sounds great,” Yun said, yesterday, “but it’s cheaper for the city to operate as a whole. (Secession) is not the answer.”

Yun’s response doesn’t mean he totally agrees with the mayor’s style of governing.

“As a City Council, each member has to make changes,” the Heights councilman said. “Individual council members should know they are independent. The mayor does not hold an IOU over them because they act like he has an ‘I own you.’ ”

Tuesday’s council meeting and possible adopting of the city budget should be interesting.

BOOKER, THE SHY SENATOR

Jeff Bell, 70-year-old Republican challenger for the U.S. Senate seat of former Newark Mayor Cory Booker, is upset that his rival says he’ll only debate him once. Bell said Booker wanted a series of debates and backed out. It seems the extent of their debates are emailed statements responding to attacks or statements, which they hope are read by the media.

I know how Bell feels. Several weeks back, The Jersey Journal requested an editorial board meeting with Booker because we were curious about how he would help cut down the unemployment and high poverty rate in Hudson County (nearly 20 percent). Certainly he has many wonderful tales of his work in Washington.

Booker’s folks emailed us that, because of his heavy work schedule, he could not accommodate us — at any time. It would be great if we had a laugh track here. Translation: we lead by about 10 points, so, why make a mistake now.

Over the years, we never had a senator turn us down. Bill Bradley loved our sessions because it prepped him for more of these Q and A sessions as an election got closer. And he liked visiting the area.

By the way, reported as of June 30, Booker has raised more than $16 million and spent nearly $13 million. I’m sure he has a lot more in the kitty by now. Bell’s campaign funds have not registered a blip on any radar. Gov. Chris Christie has scheduled a pair of fundraisers for Bell that goes beyond a tip jar.

Last chance, Cory. Give me a call. Invitation is open to you as well Mr. Bell, except it would be a one on one with me.

The invitation for an editorial board session also went out to U.S. Sen. Robert Menendez — well, actually to his people and even a personal Facebook request to attorney Donald Scarinci (He’s always on there). We’ll give Bob — that prince of Bergen County — another week for a response.

INSIDE NOTES

- Bayonne Mayor Jimmy Davis is hosting a cocktail reception and fund-raiser on Oct. 7 at The Chandelier (where else?) for Hudson County Democratic Organization freeholder candidate Kenneth Kopacz, a school principal and handpicked candidate of ex-Mayor Mark Smith.

Treasurer for the $125 per ticket event is Keith Makowski, high school vice principal and son of ex-Councilman Joseph L. Makowski. Both father and son endorsed Smith.

Meanwhile, Michael Alonso announced he was running for freeholder as an independent. Alonso worked on Davis mayoral campaign. I guess the independent didn't get the HCDeadO memo about peace and unity on the political front.

- I hear that Senate President Steve Sweeney is hoping for a very hot day tomorrow.