The disagreement that resulted after the Grossen Bart Brewery decided to locate between two St. Vrain Community Montessori School buildings has spawned a piece of legislation currently working its way through the state General Assembly.

After hearing about the dispute between Grossen Bart and the Montessori school, State Rep. Jonathan Singer, D-Longmont, introduced a bill that would solicit local input on a state application for a taproom or tasting room in this legislative session.

"This does not give local government any kind of veto power, it just gives them input," Singer said. "This encourages everyone to come to the table ahead of time."

Singer worked on the bill with both the Colorado Brewers' Guild and the Colorado Municipal League, gaining their support.

Grossen Bart Brewery, 1025 Delaware, Longmont, Friday evening. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

Katie Torres, head of school for St. Vrain Community, says the school doesn't think the bill goes far enough, however, in closing what she called a "loophole" in the law.

When the beard-themed brewery signed a lease for their Delaware Avenue building in June, school parents and staff came to the Longmont City Council, asking them to do something about allowing a brewery with a taproom so near a charter school.

But the city found itself between a rock and a hard place. The brewery had an explicit right to locate in the mixed industrial zone. Plus, city governments don't regulate the operations of a tasting room because it's part of an alcohol manufacturing license, which is overseen by the state. Unlike bars, tasting rooms and tap rooms do not have to keep 500 feet away from schools.

The city also couldn't tell the school to relocate, because charter schools can choose to be in industrial zones.

"We couldn't tell the charter school to be anywhere different from where they were located and we couldn't tell a manufacture brewery/tasting room they can't be there either," said Sandi Seader, Longmont's assistant city manager.

The problem, argued parents and some members of City Council, is that taprooms are no longer for just sampling beer.

"If you're a brewery 10 years ago, you brewed beer and put it into bottles and cans and sent it away," Seader said. "But now tasting rooms have taken on a different flavor so to speak. (Patrons) go to drink and talk and play games and they do other things in these tasting rooms, other than just buy beer and walk away."

Torres said people pulling out of the Grossen Bart parking lot after having a few beers was a particular concern for the staff.

"We certainly value the economic contributions of microbrewers and that's all awesome, but we're a school with little kids and a taproom...with a parking lot where people drive in and out of is not the best combination," Torres said.

In July 2014, the City Council asked Grossen Bart to open its taproom doors later in the school day than 2 p.m., in order to avoid the time before 4 p.m. when parents are picking up kids from school. In a partial compromise, the brewery agreed to open Monday through Wednesday at 4 p.m. On Thursday they open earlier at 3 p.m. and on Friday they open at 2 p.m. Grossen Bart co-Owner Taylor Wise said they haven't had any issues with the school since the hullabaloo raised in 2014.

"We've never had a fight or an issue in the parking lot, never had to call the cops and we've never had a problem with the school," Wise said. "The prices are a little bit higher in a specialty-type of place so most people are not going to sit there and drink as many beers...Our crowd is more of a responsible crowd."

Torres confirmed that there hadn't been any issues with the taproom and the school to date, but added that to them, the situation is still less than ideal.

With its comparatively tiny $3,060 price tag for administrative costs, Singer's bill (House Bill 15-1217) passed both the Business, Affairs and Labor committee and the Appropriations committee. It is scheduled to be read at second reading before the entire House on Monday.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci