Speaker of the House John Boehner was a sad sight trying to enroll for Obamacare, chronicling his plight with tech glitches and leaving messages for the help line in a blog posting for supporters.

In a stylistically simple review of his experience, the Ohio Republican told the tale of one man’s attempt to enroll in the exchange under the President’s health care law.

Boeher, who’s been known to express himself through tears and not shy away from getting emotional in public, is photographed looking dejected and staring emptily at his keyboard as he futilely enters his personal information on the website.

"Like many Americans, my experience was pretty frustrating," he shares, detailing how he received an error message that then led to the fatal "Error 400 - Internal Server Error."

Ultimately, Boehner had to call and leave a message with DC Health Link help line and then wait for a call back.

Boehner uploaded his entry about the Obamacare enrollment experience around 1:30 p.m. EST Thursday.

The posting was updated at 5:35 p.m. to alert supporters that he had received a call from the help line in which he learned that his registration was successful, after two attempts at registering online and reaching out via telephone.

Emotional: John Boehner, far right on Wednesday with Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (c.) and Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, is known to shed tears in public. Fittingly, he looked dejected and stared emptily at his keyboard during his Obamacare trials and tribulations. (J. Scott Applewhite/AP)

"Tried signing up for #ObamaCare today. How'd it go? Hint: #trainwreck," he tweeted about the process.

President Obama has admitted that the rollout process has not gone as smoothly as it could have.

The President said that his administration would “remarket and rebrand” the program, but Thursday the White House denied the program would be renamed.

The legislation, officially titled the Affordable Care Act, was dubbed “Obamacare” by Republicans.

“That was a label that was applied by our opponents and welcomed with open arms by this President and our allies,” White House spokesman Josh Earnest told reporters, denying that the President would try shying away from the label.

llarson@nydailynews.com

On a mobile device? Watch the video here