Alan Grayson is Elizabeth Warren without a filter—but he intends with her help to become Florida’s great Democratic hope. Since Grayson first burst onto the national media scene as a first-term congressman from Central Florida with a savage wit, he has generated near non-stop headlines and Internet hits, calling all manner of political opponents “ whores,” “ vampires” and “ knuckle-dragging Neanderthals.” Even some Democrats who agree with almost all of his policy positions want to keep their distance.

Lately, Grayson hasn’t been doing himself many favors. Last week, he exploded into an expletive-laden tirade after Tampa Bay Times reporter Adam C. Smith asked him about two Cayman Islands-based hedge funds the congressman had set up in 2011, while he was out of office. “Are you some kind of shitting robot?” Grayson asked Smith. “You go around shitting on people?” He said he hadn’t avoided any taxes, and refused to apologize for his language, downplaying his vocabulary as no different from Harry Truman’s. Just this week, the messy details of Grayson’s ongoing divorce yielded another choice sound bite from the congressman, who said of his estranged wife: “Gold diggers gotta dig.” Vintage Alan Grayson: aggressive, off-the-cuff, untamed.

Story Continued Below

Still, antics aside, seasoned observers were not surprised when Grayson, 57, announced in February that he was considering a bid for the Senate seat being vacated by presidential hopeful Republican Marco Rubio. Grayson, after all, has spent the past three years subtly trying to clean himself up for a statewide race, tamping down some of the fire in one of the Democratic base’s favorite firebrands and along the way staking out policy positions closer to the political center that most Floridians occupy. He’s even earned praise for reaching across the aisle in a famously dysfunctional and partisan Congress.

In the six years I have been covering Grayson, in Central Florida and on Capitol Hill, in numerous one-on-one interviews and at campaign and constituent appearances, his outrage has always been sustained, he says, by “the tangible harms that come from the powerful exploiting the powerless.” His tone, however, has been less consistent. After he shot into the national media arena in 2009, Grayson was unbowed, asking me, “Is it a necessary element of this job that I take shit from people? No one gets a free pass if they attack me. I don’t think it’s beneficial to turn the other cheek. There is no reason a Democrat has to be a weakling.” Yet in his 2012 campaign—admittedly not a tight race—I noticed that his rhetoric seemed more restrained. Over a post-election brunch interview, I asked him whether he had intentionally ratcheted down his rhetoric. He brushed me off with a laugh, saying, “It’s not as if I’ve had a lobotomy.”

Now, Florida voters and national donors are beginning to wonder: Which Alan Grayson will show up in the coming months—the hyperpartisan wild man who has become a hero to the left’s populist base or the more pragmatic model of recent years who shows he can play well with others in the Republican-controlled House? And which Grayson, if any, do Floridians want?

Grayson’s chief competition this time around, ahead of the August 2016 primary, is Rep. Patrick Murphy of West Palm Beach, a well-financed former Republican who switched parties to run in 2012, narrowly defeating Tea Party favorite Allen West. In Congress, Murphy has supported Obamacare, but also the Keystone XL pipeline, earning him praise from the American Petroleum Institute. The favorite of the state’s more conservative and middle-of-the-road Democrats, Murphy has drawn early support Wall Street donors, not to mention Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid and the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, which endorsed him on May 4, calling him “the strongest candidate to win the Florida Senate race and flip this seat.”

Still, Grayson is certain he can win against Murphy in a base-left vs. centrist-establishment contest. “I have the Hispanic vote. I have the black vote. I have the Jewish vote. I have the labor vote. I have the vote of liberals all around the state. These are the pillars of the Democratic Party,” he insisted recently to a local Fox affiliate. If he hadn’t run out of breath or air time, he could have included gays and seniors, activist constituencies he has also cultivated.

To boot, Grayson told me in a lengthy interview last week in Orlando that he has talked with populist champion Sen. Elizabeth Warren’s staff about strategy for the race. (“We talk to lots of people who want to hear about our 2012 campaign, and the advice is always the same—run a grassroots campaign and stand up for what you believe,” a Warren spokesperson said.) Grayson, who has not officially announced a Senate bid, told me with the breezy self-confidence many see as arrogance that he plans to “wage an Elizabeth Warren-type campaign.” Even though he expects the race to cost each candidate $5-10 million in the primary and another $25 million in the general election, Grayson, a multimillionaire, vowed he would depend on small contributions and “enormous amounts of volunteers—a people-powered campaign.”

There is reason to believe the forthcoming U.S. Senate run, like all of his previous races, will be a lively one. But that means that at any moment, Grayson, with his a hair-trigger temper, could react to criticism like an amiable Dr. David Banner or by exploding into his alter ego, the Incredible Partisan Hulk, ripping and smashing at all who would thwart him, whether colleagues, opponents or the press.

If recent events are any guide, odds are it will be the green guy with the big muscles. After the DSCC’s endorsement, Grayson followed up with an acrimonious phone call with the committee’s chair, Montana Sen. Jon Tester, Politico reported. Grayson refused to confirm or deny reports about what happened in the interview or afterward. But in a statement, he shot back in classic style: “Florida Democratic voters choose our party nominee, not out-of-touch party bosses sipping cognac in a smoke-filled room in Washington, D.C.”

***