Albany, N.Y. -- The new, updated online system the state Department of Environmental Conservation began using this week to sell hunting and fishing licenses is having its share of problems, and everyone from sportsmen to town clerks are complaining.

Problems are being noted with the issuance of deer management permits (DMPs), the paper and state-issued printers being used to print out the licenses, and the delay in the issuance of this coming year's permits for holders of life-time sportsmen's licenses.

"We call to complain and all we get are lame excuses. It kind of reminds you of the roll-out of Obamacare. Things are all messed up," said Claude Sykes, Van Buren Town Supervisor, a Republican.

"It took the clerk six tries to get my license printed out," he added. "And even after that, the numbers in some cases are out of alignment and there's an 1/8 inch white stripe on every fifth panel. It's nuts."

A DEC press release issued Tuesday announcing the sale of licenses for the coming fall and next year was mum on any problems. However, the release did note: "With the introduction of a new computerized system this year, it may take license-issuing agents some additional time to find previous license holders in the system. DEC asks that license holders remain patient as these agents gain experience with this new system."

The new system was put together by Accela, a San Ramon, Calif.-based company. It replaced the system that was Verizon-based.

"I don't blame the DEC for this. This is the system the staff is being forced to use," said Baldwinsville resident and sportsman Fred Neff.

A spokeswoman from Accela was contacted and promised she'd get back to me. A DEC spokeswoman responded later in the day to a submitted list of written questions I emailed the DEC's press office.

Bob Danikew, of Camillus, a sportsman who is a board member on the Onondaga County Federation of Sportsmen's Clubs, said he went to the Camillus Walmart this past weekend and was told that DMPs were not available.

He went back this morning and was told they were. However, the store did not have the camo-colored paper that was supposed to be used for the coming year. Instead, Danikew said, his license was printed on yellow paper the store had left over from last year.

Sykes said his town clerk has experienced all sorts of problems with the new paper being used, and that several yards of it have had to be stripped off the roll before it would work on the state-supplied computer. He said the town was told by the DEC that not enough time was given to allow the paper to dry and that in places it can be sticky and jam in the printer.

He said the DEC recommended that town staff selling licenses should completely unroll each roll, allow a brief time to dry and then roll it back up before using.

'The paper is also too heavy, thicker," said Lynn Precourt, the Van Buren Town Clerk. "'You try and put it on the printer and it just drops off. You have to strip some of the paper off before it stays on."

She said other town clerks she's talked to are experiencing similar problems: "It's frustrating for everyone," she said.

Dennis Rhoads, of Summerhill, said he has a lifetime license as does his two boys.

"For kicks, this morning I tried to do my 15-year old son Andrew's DMPs (for deer hunting)," he said. "I got on a profile page to put in his info and it then asked for proof of residence. I picked parent's driver license and then went to the box that asked for parent's license number. I put that in and clicked 'continue' ... and it brought me back saying the license does not match the person. The process is ridiculous."

Neff, a lifetime license holder, said he usually has all his paperwork and licenses squared away for the coming hunting season by this time each year. He said everything this year is a couple of weeks late.

"If I don't get my license (for this season) by Sept. 1, I'm going out. Let them deal with it," he said.