As a conservative, indeed as a thinking, breathing, sentient being, one must always be wary of the scribblings of Dana Milbank – a liberal’s liberal who blogs and writes for The Washington Post. Nonetheless a recent post of his commenting on someone else’s effort to show that the legalization of marriage between people of the same sex would lead to an increase in abortions caught my attention.

Milbank lampooned the piece and the author, whose writings were posted on The Heritage Foundation's website, for making such a suggestion and for his efforts to demonstrate the notion empirically. Responding to the theory put forward by attorney Gene Schaerr – that the two issues are “closely linked in a short and simple causal chain” – he proceeded to diagram it thusly: “To wit: Legalizing same-sex marriage devalues marriage and causes fewer heterosexual couples to marry, which leads to a larger number of unmarried women, who have abortions at higher rates than married women.”

Schaerr went on to say, as Milbank cited, “nearly 900,000 more children of the next generation would be aborted as a result of their mothers never marrying. This is equal to the entire population of the cities of Sacramento and Atlanta combined.”



[GALLERY: Editorial Cartoons on Gay Marriage]

According to the time-tested blind squirrel and acorn method of analysis, Milbank is correct. Schaerr seems to want to apply the same kind of dynamic analysis that some economists use when calculating the impact of tax cuts to social policy. Though he is correct in his underlying assumption that legalization of same-sex marriage will change human behavior, his predictions of what will follow are widely speculative and about as reliable as the next man’s might be – and he apparently knows it. “He [Schaerr] freely acknowledged that he had no cause-and-effect proof when I asked him about it at Heritage on Monday,” wrote Milbank, adding that Schaerr admitted the idea was “still too new to do a rigorous causation analysis using statistical methods.”

If the numbers don’t measure up – even something the person who crunched them seems to have admitted – then what is the point in releasing them except for purposes of political manipulation? There is growing sentiment on the right that the battle to block any expansion or alteration in the traditional definition of marriage as being between one man and one woman at one time is being lost. The people may be against it: It is still generally a winning proposition anytime it appears on the ballot for a vote, even in places like California, but the elites who run the judicial system, make the dominant cultural decisions and who have the kind of influence necessary to back such a change in the law seem to be for it in overwhelming numbers. And few people expect the U.S. Supreme Court to uphold the state bans on gay marriage currently being challenged. Indeed, some people wonder why oral arguments are even necessary. The decision, predictably, will come down in favor of multiple definitions of marriage by a vote of five to four with Justice Anthony Kennedy making all the difference.



[READ: Most Americans Think Gay Marriage Is Inevitable]

Forgive the cynicism but it seems that any attempt to link an increase in the number of abortions to a judicial decision expanding the definition of marriage from what it has been for at least the almost 250 years of this constitutional republic’s existence is an act of political desperation at the eleventh hour. Someone apparently believes that if the political power of the pro-life movement, which is considerable, could be activated then what is an almost certain outcome before the Supreme Court could somehow be upended. To call this merely disrespectful would be charitable. It would be like trying to argue that the legalization of same-sex marriage would produce an increase in domestic violence that would jeopardize the free exercise of rights granted to individuals under the Second Amendment to the Constitution in order to enlist the more than 4.5 million members of the National Rifle Association in the marriage fight.

To be clear, you can count me among those who believe marriage is a state that can exist only between a man and a woman. You can call a duck an elephant all you want but that won’t make it turn gray and sprout a trunk. For at least the last few centuries, marriage as currently defined and the family, also as currently defined, has been society’s essential building block. It is the foundation of all other social relationships as well as the communities and countries in which we here in the West live. Whatever the reason behind it, any change in its definition will result in changes to the way we live. Some of those may be benign; others not so much.



[VIEWS YOU CAN USE: Obama's Gay Marriage Lie]

Admittedly, there is a lot at risk for people who believe in what some politicos and academics refer to as traditional values. The outcome of this debate may be toxic to our traditional culture or may actually have little impact, though the latter result it doubtful. None of that, however, excuses clumsy attempts to marry hot-button issues together in such a cynical manner. Fight the issue on its merits, not with straw men raised up to frighten people. It’s an ineffective strategy because, after they are torn down – as they inevitably will be – there will be nothing else left.