Preparing to Fire. (Photo: Mark Grenier, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

The state's official clown car/military transport continues to weave its way toward Comedy Central, as a Senate committee this morning approved a pair of bills aimed at telling the federal government to buzz off.

One of the bills will eliminate millions upon millions of dollars used to prevent diseases in Arizona – federal funds spent for things like immunizations and programs aimed at battling heart disease and stroke and allowing home-health visits.

But no matter.

This, after all, is war.

Fortunately, the Arizona Legislature is ready to take down Uncle Sam, no matter the cost.

First up, with House Bill 2368, declaring that no longer will the sovereign state of Arizona recognize executive orders issued by the president of the United States of America or policy directives issued by the Department of Justice, unless said directives and orders have been approved by Congress.

"When the president uses executive fiat to legislate, he's in violation of the Constitution," said Gen. Bob Thorpe, R-Flagstaff, who is leading our war on Washington. "When Congress provides, for example, the Environmental Protection Agency with the ability to go way beyond their mandate through, for example, Clean Air Acts and Clean Water Acts, they are in violation of the constitution because it's Congress that has legislative authority."

Clean water? Clean air?

What is this country coming to?

Second up, HB 2463, declaring the sovereign state of Arizona will not lift a finger to enforce or administer the Affordable Care Act, which, I believe, was passed by Congress.

"We are not challenging Supremacy Clause but we are saying that if the federal government is going to enact a law then the federal government needs to enforce that law," said Deputy Gen. Justin Olson, R-Mesa, the bill's sponsor. "We're not going to use state resources."

Both Olson and Thorpe are using Prop. 122 as justification for its declaration of war. The ballot measure was narrowly approved by voters last year, giving our leaders the authority to ignore federal laws they don't like.

Never mind the plea from Maricopa County Public Health Director Bob England, who told the committee that Olson's bill could cost us millions upon millions of dollars in federal funding used to prevent disease and promote public health.

It seems all longstanding federal funding for that purpose, including money that previously was administered by the Centers for Disease Control, was moved under the umbrella of the ACA when it was created. That might not be so bad but the Legislature long ago eliminated state funding for immunizations and such.

"This would prohibit us from accepting this money because we would be administering programs that are now affiliated with the Affordable Care Act..," England told the committee. "They (the programs) are hugely important for preventing the crushing increase of chronic disease we are facing in the years to come."

The panel sound sympathetic but in the end, voted 4-0 to pass bills. Democrats didn't even bother to show up. Can't say I blame them, given that they were going to have precisely no impact on getting Republicans to stand down.

This, after all, is war and war is hell.

Especially on babies needing immunizations and citizens hoping to prevent an outbreak of disease that constitutes a health hazard to us all.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1MHuMFm