There is a constant controversy whether nurses are happy with their jobs or not. Some believe that nurses have to deal with many problems such as politics, disrespectful doctors, unpleasant situations, unsafe assignments, lack of teamwork and management. Plus, they seem to be treated as waitresses in some places.

Moreover, a 2014 Nashville Health Stream survey proved that nurses were more unsatisfied with their jobs than other hospital employees in 33 out of 36 categories. Furthermore, one in five of the nurses who work for Hospital Corporation of America resigned from their jobs in 2015.

However, according to other reports, nurses are unexpectedly happy with their careers. Statistics from 2013 established that over 90 percent of the registered nurses were satisfied with their jobs.

Because the number of seniors in the U.S. has grown, the Affordable Care Act provides more people with insurance to pay for medical care. Therefore, the demand for caregivers has increased as well, meaning that U.S. needs more nurses. A nurse with four-year education has a starting salary of $43,000, without night or weekends shifts and any other overtime.

Plus, nurses are granted the chance get higher degrees in various areas. For instance, a nurse practitioner may run her independent medical office, even if not in Tennessee, and can earn over $100,000.

According to Rhonda Poulson, chief nursing officer at CHI Memorial, nurses have many skills making them able to do many complicated things. However, the essence of traditional nursing lies in staying at the bedside of the patient. Therefore, that is the place where nurses seem to be most unhappy.

Bedside nurses have to face intense emotional and physical demands, a higher need to spend time at a computer to justify payments from insurers and the lack of authority to make decisions on their own.

According to Poulson, a nurse has to prepare herself to face any challenge because doctors only spend a few minutes in a hospital room every day. Therefore, is up to the nurse to deal with patients and their families.

All in all, being a nurse has its ups and downs. Your attitude towards your job makes you good or bad at it. Therefore, nurses are the ones who should have a healthy attitude and positive thinking.

Image Source:Youtube