His father is a graphics designer. His mother works in customer service. The kid’s no genetic freak, hardly bred for football greatness. He’s just another kid with a dream, as improbable as the next.

Eight-year-old Montee Ball doesn’t know it’s improbable, though. He doesn’t know that Wentzville, Mo., is hardly prime football recruiting territory, or to play a sport at its highest level requires as much talent as it does determination. He doesn’t know that a decade and a half later, he’ll be paired with arguably the greatest quarterback of a generation, a man who might as well have been raised on another planet, or that their unlikely partnership might help him climb out of the struggles of a tough rookie year.

He just knows he’s going to play in the NFL.

When Ball was in second grade, his teacher asked him what he wanted to be when he grew up. His answer came fast and sure: Football player. The NFL.

“She was like, ‘That’s good, but think of something else you want to do, because the percentage is extremely low,’ ” Ball said. “But … my dad always told me, if you have a backup plan, you’ve already failed.”

Ball hasn’t needed that backup plan. It didn’t matter that he couldn’t play running back until he was 12 and he was finally under the weight limit required to touch the ball. It didn’t matter that when he showed up to Timberland High School the summer before his freshman year, he was just a big back with potential, and that it took his coach, Craig Collins, another two years to realize Ball was a major college talent.

It didn’t matter that when he went to Wisconsin for college, he was third on the Badgers’ depth chart, then still a backup as a sophomore. It didn’t matter, because Ball was going to play in the NFL.

By his junior year, Ball was a human highlight reel. He set NCAA record after NCAA record, most notably scoring 39 touchdowns as a junior to tie Barry Sanders for the most ever in a single season. Ball was the littlest big man on a campus known for producing cornfed lineman, eventually going in the second round to the Broncos — his favorite team as a child — in the 2013 NFL draft.

But the fairy tale ends there, or perhaps it breaks for intermission. Ball’s rookie season — until last Sunday — has been marred by fumbles and time on the bench. But, after rushing for 117 yards against the Kansas City Chiefs, the Ball the Broncos staked their second-round pick on seems to be surfacing.

“Montee has been thrown into the fire as a rookie,” Manning said. “He’s certainly made some mistakes, like all rookies do, all players do. I’m still waiting for somebody to break my NFL record for interceptions as a rookie. Got to be a 16-game starter to do it, though.”

On paper, it’s an unlikely pairing, Manning and Ball, but in reality, these are two of the most single-minded, goal-oriented players on the Broncos.

Since the start of training camp, Manning has pulled Ball aside at practices to offer suggestions. He’s helped slowed down the game for him, Ball said, although the rookie still struggles to stay on the wavelength of a four-time MVP.

“I’m trying to catch up to how he sees the game, but as a running back,” Ball said. “Obviously it’s different as a quarterback. All I can say is he’s really helped me take every play for what it is.”

Even now, Manning and the Broncos are still learning exactly what kind of player Ball can be. At Wisconsin, he rarely caught passes, but turns out, he’s a better receiver than the Broncos imagined. He rarely had to block in college, but when asked to do it, he’s exceeded expectations too. Most important, he’s putting his mistakes behind him.

“I think it’s just kind of unwrapping the whole gift of what he can do,” running backs coach Eric Studesville said.

For a player whose name dots the NCAA record books, the past has somehow become irrelevant. This is a new world, light years from that far-out St. Louis suburb and the comfort of Madison. Ball isn’t dwelling on it, though.

After all, he didn’t tell that teacher he wanted to be a college star. He told her NFL, and here he is, that improbable goal unfolding in front of him.

Joan Niesen: jniesen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joanniesen

NCAA star to pros

Montee Ball set an NCAA record with 77 rushing touchdowns. Here’s a look at the players with the most rushing touchdowns in NCAA Division I history, what draft position they were taken, by what team, and how they fared in pros:

Montee Ball, Wisconsin

77 touchdowns

Drafted 58th by Broncos in 2013

Ran for 117 yards last week

Travis Prentice, Miami (Ohio)

73 touchdowns

Drafted 63rd by the Browns in 2000

Played three seasons

Ricky Williams, Texas

72 touchdowns

Drafted fifth by the Saints in 1999

Uneven 11-year career

Anthony Thompson, Indiana

64 touchdowns

Drafted 31st by the Cardinals in 1990

Played three seasons

Cedric Benson, Texas

64 touchdowns

Drafted fourth by the Bears in 2005

Played eight seasons

Ron Dayne, Wisconsin

63 touchdowns

Drafted 11th by the Giants in 2000

Seven-year career

Eric Crouch, Nebraska

59 touchdowns

Drafted 95th by the Rams in 2002

Option QB never made it in NFL

Colin Kaepernick, Nevada

59 touchdowns

Drafted 36th by the 49ers in 2011

Took his team to Super Bowl XLVII

Ian Johnson, Boise State

58 touchdowns

Undrafted, 2009

Never stuck in NFL

Marshall Faulk, San Diego State

57 touchdowns

Drafted second by the Colts in 1994

Hall of Fame career

Tim Tebow, Florida

57 touchdowns

Drafted 25th by the Broncos in 2010

Had one shining season