Manchester, N.H. – Rep. Louie Gohmert (R-Texas) has taken up crusade once attempted by his fellow Republicans and announced the need for a constitutional amendment that would expand states’ rights and allow them to veto any legislation passed by Congress and signed into law the President of the United States.

Gohmert was well received Saturday at the New Hampshire Freedom Summit in Manchester, N.H., as he spoke of the need for a constitutional amendment that would give power back to state legislatures.

“We got to return that power to the states, and we can do that with a constitutional amendment,” Gohmert said.

The proposed amendment would allow states to work in unison to protect the freedoms of American citizens. In outlining the provisions of his proposal, Gohmert said a two-thirds vote by all the states would effectively overturn any act of Congress which the people of the nation do not favor — such as the Affordable Care Act.

Though Obamacare passed Congress — with a split party-line vote — many Americans disagree with the law and are feeling its negative affects. If Gohmert’s amendment was passed, states could then decide to veto the Affordable Care Act.

“Man, that would make such a difference,” the Texas conservative said. “That would return the power back to where the Founders wanted it.”

Elizabeth Torrey, an 18-year-old student at Saint Anselm College who attended the Freedom Summit, said Gohmert’s proposed amendment is something she agrees with.

“Congress is trying to do too much all at once, and that just won’t work,” she told Red Alert Politics.

Torrey continued, saying Gohmert is a speaker she can identify most with, as the policies he discussed — specifically the state veto amendment — are issues that affect her life.

Rep. Gohmert is not the first person to propose a state veto amendment. In 2011, Sens. Mike Enzi (R-Wy.), John Barasso (R–Wy.), and Orrin Hatch (R–Utah) and Reps. Rob Bishop (R–Utah), Morgan Griffith (R–Va.) and Paul Broun (R–Ga.) led the charge for a similar provision.

Though their amendment garnered support from the Tea Party, discussion surrounding the bill quickly died down within a year.

Gohemrt, instead, has taken up the charge.

In addition to announcing his constitutional amendment — which elicited cheers and praise from the audience — Gohmert also called for the implementation of a flat tax and abolishment of the Internal Revenue Service.

Both calls to action were met with abundant applause from Freedom Summit attendees.