Donna Ediger, front left, waves from the back of a 2011 Harley Davidson Tri-Glide as she and Ed "Stand-Up" Raines take off Saturday morning in front of Hillcrest of Loveland to go for a motorcycle ride. ( Steve Stoner )

Eighty-six-year-old Donna Ediger raised her arms up and cheered as 19 other motorcycles roared to life Saturday morning in front of the Hillcrest.

Seated on the back of a Harley-Davidson Tri-Glide, Ediger was ready to relive a memory from World War II when she used to ride on the back of a GI's motorcycle. This time, she was riding with Ed "Stand-Up" Raines, a member of the Combat Veterans Motorcycle Association, Iron Plains Chapter.

"I just love sitting on the back behind someone else," Ediger said.

Ediger, mother of three and grandmother to 27 grand, great grand and great-great grandchildren, yearned to ride after first being introduced to motorcycles in wartime when she befriended a GI who picked her up and took her for rides when he was off base. This was during her "wild, wooly teen time," she said.

To get this wish granted, the Hillcrest worked with a Wish of a Lifetime, a Denver-based nonprofit that fosters respect and appreciation for seniors 65 and older by fulfilling their life-enriching wishes.

Ediger got her wish the day before National Grandparents Day in the hometown of the founder, Jeremy Bloom, a two-time Olympian and 11-time World Cup Champion in freestyle skiing. He started the organization in 2008 in living honor of his grandmother, Donna Wheeler, to create a cultural shift in how society views aging and to show reverence to seniors.

"When he was an Olympian and World Cup skier, he traveled worldwide and saw how revered seniors were in those countries," said Michelle Gaffga, director of development and communication for Wish of a Lifetime.

Wish of a Lifetime launched the Grandparents Day Campaign, the Grand Honor, to celebrate grandparents during a weeklong celebration that highlights the stories of four grandparents, including Ediger, who received their wishes. The nonprofit has granted more than 700 wishes in four categories, that of renewing lifelong passions, reconnecting with loved ones, participating in a commemorating service and fulfilling lifelong dreams.

"This is her queen-for-a-day day," said Donna Hamernik, activity director at the Hillcrest.

At 11 a.m., the Combat Veterans Motorcycle Association picked Ediger up at the Hillcrest, with residents sending her off, waving flags.

"She wanted to get on the back of a bike and get her arms around a big hunk and hold on," said Ediger's granddaughter, Melissa Lawson of Loveland.

The veterans gave Ediger a 20-minute ride one-way to Beaver's Dam and back.

At the halfway point, they issued her a vest with a military patch, acknowledging the military service of her late husband, Leonard Ediger, a decorated World War II veteran from the U.S. Army, and a patch with her road name of "Peaches." Peaches was Leonard's nickname for her.

"I just enjoy it," Ediger said. "That's what I'm doing now is enjoying whatever life puts in front of me."

To donate, go to seniorwish.org/donate.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com.