Clemson University trustees approved an increase for tuition starting this fall.

The increase for tuition, housing and meal plans will go up by an average of less than 3 percent, which will partially offset mandatory payroll, retirement and health insurance cost increases.

The fees were approved by the university’s board of trustees Wednesday.

“The combination of additional state funding and ongoing efforts by the administration to operate as efficiently as possible has allowed us to minimize the impact of these mandatory cost increases on tuition,” said board chairman David Wilkins.

In-state students will see an increase of 2.6 percent for general tuition – or $171 per semester — and pay a $25 per semester charge dedicated to facilities maintenance and renovations, bringing the total increase to 3 percent. Non-state residents will pay 2.8 percent more for general tuition – or $ 432 per semester — and a facilities fee of $55 per semester, for a total increase of 3.19 percent.

The fee increases, plus anticipated enrollment growth, will generate approximately $11 million, which will help cover anticipated cost increases of $15 million from a state-mandated pay raise for faculty and staff, increased employee retirement expenses and increased health insurance costs mandated by the federal Affordable Care Act.

In addition to partial funding for the mandatory pay raise, the state budget provided $1.2 million for programs to increase four-year graduation rates and provide paid, on-campus internships, programs that university President James P. Clements said will help hold down the cost of education in the long run and increase the value of a Clemson education.

“We appreciate the state’s targeted investment in these two programs that will help students be more successful in the classroom and in the job market,” he said. “One of the best ways to hold down college costs is to get through in four years – and one of the best ways to land a job after graduation is an internship that provides relevant, marketable job skills.”

Student housing and meal plans will increase by an average of 2.3 percent, which will cover rising food and energy costs, insurance and retirement costs, facilities renovations and a 2 percent cost-of-living pay increase for staff mandated by the state.

Actual costs vary depending on housing assignments and dining plan selection. On average, the fee increase will add $47 per semester for housing and $50 per semester for dining plans.