PARK CITY, Utah, May 5, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Supplemental Health Care, one of the nation's premier healthcare staffing firms, has named Travis Furlow as Vice President & General Manager of its rapidly expanding Recruitment Process Outsourcing (RPO) national division.

"The demand for innovative RPO solutions is a fast growing trend in the healthcare industry," said Janet Elkin, Supplemental Health Care CEO and President. "As the necessity for qualified healthcare providers increases under the Affordable Care Act, along with a tightening of the clinical workforce and the highly competitive nature for finding and retaining patient-centered candidates to fill these positions, our RPO solution has become one of the most beneficial and cost-effective solutions in the industry. We are very pleased to have Travis join the Supplemental Health Care team, as he brings a wealth of in-depth knowledge and insight to this position."

Furlow brings to Supplemental Health Care a strong and experienced background in RPO staffing solutions, having served as head of client services for Alexander Mann, HR team manager for Price Waterhouse Coopers and director of account management for Kelly Services Outsourcing and Consulting.

In his new role, Furlow will assume responsibility for the company's rapidly growing RPO division, including strategic growth and expanded client support services. As an 18 year veteran of the Recruitment Process Outsourcing industry, Furlow has held a variety of senior roles with a history of driving innovative leadership and a deep passion for the RPO space.

As the fastest-growing hiring strategy in the healthcare industry, RPO is an efficient and cost-effective staffing solution, providing top-quality candidates for full-time employment. Supplemental Health Care's RPO program provides healthcare organizations benefits in three key areas:

Improving hiring performance by reducing open positions and time-to-fill, while decreasing cost-per-hire;

Reducing costs from staff overtime, contingent labor and third-party recruiters; and

Increasing revenue by focusing on priority positions that have direct impact on hospital performance and productivity.

"I am incredibly excited to be a part of the leadership team at Supplemental Health Care and am looking forward to working with Janet and our current team to lead and grow our Recruitment Process Outsourcing division," said Furlow. "It is an honor to work with an industry leader ensuring healthcare facilities have the clinicians they need to provide quality patient care."

Furlow holds an undergraduate degree in Industrial/Organizational Psychology from Western Michigan University and an MBA from the University of Detroit Mercy. In his role with Supplemental Health Care, Furlow will report directly to Elkin and will be based in the company's Detroit office.

About Supplemental Health Care

Since its inception in 1984, Supplemental Health Care has served as a comprehensive workforce solutions provider that delivers customized strategies to address staffing challenges faced by healthcare organizations nationwide. Leveraging a selection of business solutions such as Recruitment Process Outsourcing, Managed Services, PRN Pool Management and Contingent Staffing, Supplemental Health Care utilizes its deep staffing expertise to deliver wide ranging and creative workforce strategies that afford organizations better access to skilled clinical and non-clinical healthcare professionals.

Headquartered in Park City, Utah, Supplemental Health Care maintains an extensive local office network of more than 58 offices in major U.S. markets and four fully-integrated national divisions: Travel Nursing, Travel Therapy, Supplemental Physicians and Advanced Practice. Visit www.SupplementalHealthCare.com to learn more.

SOURCE Supplemental Health Care