JACKSONVILLE, Fla. - The deadline for Americans to sign up for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act is quickly approaching. We're about a month away from the Feb. 15 deadline, and Floridians rank as some of the savviest health exchange consumers in the country.

"Our enrollment events are very successful and Florida also has one of the highest uninsured in the nation, so it's very exciting to see they're enrolling, enrolling quickly and not waiting until February 15th but were very busy everyday," said Angela DeMonbreun with the Health Planning Council of Northeast Florida.

DeMonbreun isn't surprised by good news concerning Floridians and their habits when it comes to signing up for healthcare. According to Putting Patients First, Florida ranks third in the nation for savviest health exchange consumers.

The list was calculated by a person's estimated number of doctor and specialist visits, hospital stays and surgeries, prescription medications and they also take into consideration tax credits and cost-sharing reduction information.

DeMonbreun is taking the good news for Florida as an opportunity to remind people about the 2015 health insurance deadline, which is Sunday, February 15th.

"That's for everyone including people that had 2014 and still would like to re-enroll, we're encouraging them to do so also because there may be additional help paying for their coverage so were hoping everyone that's currently uninsured and the current insured will re-enroll but February 15th is the absolute deadline," said DeMonbreun.

DeMonbreun said there aren't any major differences between 2014 and 2015, but said the website is much more efficient but recommends people still meet with a navigator for assistance.

"There are fewer clicks then 2014 enrollment period and it's much more user friendly for consumers, but still many are more comfortable meeting with a navigator and we can certainly help with that. It's free to the public so we encourage that," said DeMonbreun.

Remember, if you don't sign up for coverage before the deadline you will face a fine when you file your 2015 tax return. This year the fine is $325 per adult, or two percent of household income, whichever is greater which is an increase from the $95 per adult or one percent of household income penalty from last year.

Click HERE for more information on signing up including how to schedule a free appointment with a navigator. To sign up for ACA, head to healthcare.gov.

Cover Jacksonville is hosting an ACA registration event Saturday, January 24th from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. at the Regency Square Mall right by J C Penney. There will be navigators on sight to help with registration or answer questions you may have about ACA.

Copyright 2015 by News4Jax.com. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.