Jarome Iginla scored a nifty power-play goal at 12:48 of the third period to force overtime:



In a game between two proud teams with just 34 points, the Avalanche blew a 2-1 third-period lead but rallied for a 4-3 overtime victory over the Philadelphia Flyers at the Pepsi Center on the last night of 2014. With a tight deadline, my story heading into the third period was about the Avs’ high-priced forwards again not getting it done, and with two unsuspecting guys without an NHL goal on the season — defenseman Nate Guenin and rookie F Borna Rendulic — lighting the lamp to fuel the victory. But after Vincent Lacavalier and Claude Giroux made great plays/shots to give the Flyers a 3-2 lead, the frantic running game story that’s filed before or at the buzzer turned to this: Patrick Roy’s outspoken frustration about his top forwards continues.

However, Jarome Iginla forced my third re-write with a spectacular shot on a late power play and adjustments were made after Ryan O’Reilly’s overtime goal with 19.9 seconds remaining before the shootout. Avs win, fueled by their top-scoring forwards! The hastily written game story (filed at the buzzer with quotes from the locker room added) is here, although you might find significant information is below. Such as:

— Iginla, Rendulic, O’Reilly and defenseman Jan Hejda — who blocked two shots, the latter while “selling” out in a sideways position that often causes injury — were the last players to take off their equipment and join their teammates in the suit-and-tie room that’s off-limits to the media. This is what happens when a team victory occurs, with multiple guys playing big roles. They take their time getting their skates and other equipment off, and are easily approachable even after they had talked in a media scrum. It was like last season.

Ryan O’Reilly scored his fifth career regular season OT goal (plus one in the playoffs) and his five OT winners rank fourth on the franchise’s all-time list:



— By all accounts, this was a good victory over a good opponent. Philly had lost its two previous games but had collected points in nine of 10 before that. Iginla talked extensively about the similarities and urgency with both teams. “Both teams are in similar positions, both are desperate, we need to move up,” Iggy said. “In the third, getting behind, it was good to stick with it and find a way to score some goals as a team. It’s been tight for us. Good way to end the year.”

— Through an Altitude producer, I learned Michael Del Zotto indeed suffered a nasty gash from his left ear to his cheek from Daniel Briere’s skate blade, and was evaluated and took stitches in the X-ray room after the first period. Apparently, the cut didn’t immediately bleed, which is why we thought it wasn’t serious. Altitude did a post-game interview with Del Zotto, and although I can’t locate it, his gash is significant and another reminder of how dangerous this game can be. Del Zotto was seriously cut in the chest/stomach by Evgeni Malkin’s skate blade in 2010, while playing for the New York Rangers.

— Matt Duchene continues to be the most frustrated Av. The first-line center extended his goalless drought to eight games, and has just two in his last 13. He had just one shot in 17:20 against Philly. “It’s not an easy situation for Dutchy but I’m very confident (in his resolve),” Roy said. “He’s working hard at it. Every day he comes to the rink, he’s asking questions, he does a lot of video with (Timmy) Army and I. He really wants to perform well. He’s the heart of this organization and that logo. He’s playing with a lot of pride and unfortunately for him it’s not going his way.”

— Here’s what Hejda said about his two late blocked shots: “It’s something you have to do in the playoffs, and this is the playoffs for us.”

— Guenin, on his “magic” shot that went through three Flyers and two teammates before landing in the net behind goalie Steve Mason: “I was trying to get the first guy to bite and then get it through. It worked.”

— To “Joe,” the guy who approached my son and gave him a complimentary fourth-row seat in section 120 while he was prepared to buy a $40 ticket and sit by himself: Please email me, I’d like to thank you and wish you happy New Year.