A car break-in victim is warning others about thieves targeting Christmas presents during the holidays.

Shawn Killman says he recently picked up his kids' gifts and left them locked in his car overnight near 31st St. South and West St. in southwest Wichita. Early Sunday morning he woke up to a knock on the door from a neighbor with some disappointing news.

"Telling us the car got broken into, come out here and looked through it and everything for my kids Christmas was gone," he said.

Killman says he ran out to his car to find the passenger window shattered. Thieves tore through the entire car, stealing around a thousand dollars worth of presents and college books.

"My kids' Christmas presents, they really weren't that expensive, it's just the principle of the fact that somebody stole from my kids," said Killman. "It makes me more mad than them taking my books and my property that was in there."

Killman's car wasn't the only vehicle targeted. He says at least two others were broken into in the same lot, but Killman says he was told those were unlocked and thieves made off with stereos. He believes his locked car was targeted because of the presents in the back.

"Make sure you take in your Christmas presents inside, don't leave them in the car," he said.

This time of year, parked car break-ins are always on the rise. KAKE News is on your side with tips to prevent this from happening to you.

First, police say always lock your doors and avoid leaving valuables in your car, but if you have to, keep them in the truck or hide them.

Park in lighted areas and if you become a victim, immediately call police. Officers say don't get in your car until police can process the scene and check for fingerprints and evidence.

Killman says leaving presents in a car is something he'll never do again.

"I hope whoever stole the stuff, the kids have a decent Christmas because of the stuff they took from my kids."

It's also a good idea to make sure your glove box is locked if that's where you keep your registration. If you have a garage opener in your vehicle, keep it locked away or with you so the thieves don't have an easy entrance into your home.