MESA, Ariz., June 6, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- A unique private health care marketplace is now available for businesses through The Mahoney Group.

The Mahoney Group Private Exchange is a private marketplace platform that gives employers an unprecedented range of administrative flexibility and employee health benefit options.

The Mahoney Group is pleased to offer this flexible insurance plan customization to small, middle and large market employer groups. "This platform is about choice, giving both employers and their employees options for designing a benefits plan that works for them," said Glen Nelson, chairman and CEO of The Mahoney Group.

In collaboration with a leading employee-benefits outsourcing partner, Businessolver, this private exchange allows employers to maintain a competitive advantage by offering best-in-industry benefits while removing the heavy lifting of benefits administration. The key advantages include:

The ability to choose either a defined contribution or a defined benefits plan

A prepackaged set of medical and ancillary benefits for employers and their employees

Support for Affordable Care Act recordkeeping responsibilities

Business data integration that enhances the benefit administration experience

Flexible decision support tools that make employee choice easier

"Our product allows employers the flexibility to keep their current benefits program or choose from a variety of networks, plans and contribution strategies, including defined contribution strategies that limit employer costs," said Jim Hackbarth, president and CEO of Assurex Global.

Within the next five years, nearly 20 percent of employees nationwide are expected to get their health insurance through a private exchange, according to Accenture Research.

The Mahoney Group Private Exchange offers national and regional carriers, as well as a variety of ancillary options, such as dental, vision, life, disability, and voluntary product offerings. Specific plans and carriers may vary depending on the market.

About The Mahoney Group

The Mahoney Group is Arizona's largest privately held commercial insurance, risk management and employee benefits brokerage group and has been in business since 1915.

About Assurex Global

Assurex Global is the world's largest privately held commercial insurance, risk management and employee benefits brokerage group. With more than $28 billion in annual premium volume and more than 600 partner offices, Columbus, Ohio-based Assurex Global combines the local expertise and global reach of international brokers on six continents.

CONTACT:

Glen Nelson, CEO

Office: 480-214-2778

ajerger@mahoneygroup.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140605/95747

SOURCE The Mahoney Group