President Obama finally agreed to a six-week extension, to March 31, for all Americans to sign up for affordable health care. But I wonder: How can a health care act built on lies succeed? Obama said that all Americans would be covered. Fact: The Congressional Budget Office has stated that Obamacare will cover less than half of the uninsured. Obama said there would be no new taxes on the middle class (families earning less than $250,000 annually). Fact: Obamacare contains 20 new or higher taxes on American families and small businesses, totaling more than $500 billion in tax hikes over the next 10 years (For a full list of the tax hikes, their effective dates and where to find them in the bill, go to http://jeffduncan.house.gov/full-list-obamacare-tax-hikes). Obama promised that a typical family’s health care premiums would be lowered by $2,500. Fact: Health care premiums for the average family will grow by $2,976. Obama promised there would be no increase in the deficit. Fact: The CBO has stated that the new reform law will raise the deficit by more than $500 billion during the first 10 years. Obama promised that you could keep your present health care plan if you like. Fact: You can’t. Even if the website is fixed, prognosticators are predicting a very low sign-up rate with most of those being the ones with serious medical problems. The main problem is having the young and healthy pay for insuring the very sick. They will be grossly overcharged. If they refuse to pay, then the insurance companies will start losing money instead of making the huge profits they predicted. When that happens, the price of health care will go up again. At that time, the corporations will stop providing health insurance to their employees. Meanwhile, most doctors are planning to refuse to take new patients under Obamacare. The net result of that is going to be to make the emergency rooms even more crowded. The result of all this is that taxes will be raised, jobs will be lost and our national debt will increase exponentially. If you still are not afraid of Obamacare, Wayne Allyn Root has written a book, “The Ultimate Obama Survival Guide,” which might make you pay attention. His views are a little extreme and border on what I call conspiracy theory. Root claims that Obamacare was never meant to lower health care costs. It is actually a purposeful attack upon capitalism and that it will be a success because it will: • Redistribute wealth — the rich, the middle class and the small business owners now have to pay for their own health care at much higher rates and also pay higher taxes; • Eliminate the middle class and make them dependent on government — Root says the IRS predicts that health insurance will be $20,000 a year for a typical American family. If true, they would be forced to seek subsistence from the government; • Eliminate decent paying jobs in the economy thereby making most people wards of the state; • Starve donations to the GOP. Without the middle class and small business owners, there would be far fewer donations to Republican candidates and conservative causes; • Make the IRS all-powerful. Obamacare adds thousands of new IRS agents who will snoop into every aspect of your life, including your finance and your medical information; • Unionize 15 million health care workers. This will produce $15 billion in new union dues, most of which will go to funding Democratic candidates and socialist causes. Obamacare will prove to be a huge success if it kills jobs, ruins the economy, brings down capitalism and we are forced under duress to accept big government. Those who disagree — the people who believe in the Constitution, the people who believe exactly what the Founding Fathers believe, the people who want to take power away from corrupt politicians who have put America $17 trillion in debt, are terrorists, according to Obamacare supporters. I know it is close to Halloween, but I didn’t mean to scare you. Root’s view is extreme but there is just enough of the truth in his predictions to get you to pay attention. So stand up and start fighting. Chuck McDougald served as statewide volunteer chair for Carly Fiorina’s campaign for the U.S. Senate. He lives in South San Francisco with his wife and two kids.