MEDFORD, Ore., -- From the 1960's through the 1990's, a shift occurred as State Hospitals, charged with caring for people with mental illness, started to close. The overrun hospitals discharged patients back into their communities. Federal funding and resources were supposed to follow but largely never materialized. This left communities, families, and individuals fending for themselves for decades. With not enough resources people started falling through the cracks. Many self-medicate with drugs and alcohol. Others find themselves in the ER after a suicide attempt or in the middle of psychiatric break. Either way it takes a toll on an already taxed mental health care system.

Following the closing of State Hospitals there is a noticeable increase in the number of people with mental illness in county jails and state prisons. The National Institute on Mental Illness says an estimate 24% of incarcerated people have an underlying mental illness. That is a low estimate because many people in the corrections system refuse to acknowledge a mental illness, hide a diagnosis, or are unaware and untreated.

The Jackson County Jail is slightly below the national average. Dennis McNamara is the mental health coordinator. He is the only person on staff who works in a mental health capacity with the 20% of inmates who are diagnosed or exhibiting symptoms of a mental illness. He works with the jails medical staff to arrange prescriptions and spends time each day talking with patients who run the gamut between unresponsive, paranoid, and suicidal.

Despite the increase in those seeking care, which is largely attributed to the expanded reach of the Affordable Care Act, most experts and advocates agree the percentage of people with mental illness has not changed over the past several decades. What has changed is how our society provides care for those with mental illness.

As of this fall, the entire Medford Police Department has been certified in Crisis Intervention Training. The goal of CIT is to change the interaction between authority figures and those who have a mental illness. Officer Stephen Meador can see several calls involving some level of mental illness each night. During the call he touches base with a liaison from the Jackson County Mental Health who is on duty 24/7. Often, the officer has to make a judgment call. If a person is brought in on a mental health hold there is only one place for them to go but the Psychiatric Care Unit, or PCU at Rogue Regional Medical Center is almost always full. The 18 beds in the Behavioral Health Unit upstairs are also constantly occupied. Sometimes police officers are forced to wait in an ER room, the hall, or even the ER waiting room with a person on a mental health hold. This can be for hours. MPD says there just isn’t enough room for the volume of people who are taken into custody on a mental health hold.