WASHINGTON — Gov. Asa Hutchinson of Arkansas on Wednesday told an advisory group weighing the future of the state’s alternative Medicaid expansion that he favored keeping it — but only if the federal government allowed changes that seemed intended to appeal to conservative legislators who continue to oppose the program.

Mr. Hutchinson, a Republican who took office in January, created the advisory group to recommend whether to change or replace the state’s “private option” version of Medicaid expansion. The program’s fate will ultimately be decided by the Republican-controlled legislature, which is likely to meet in a special session this year to vote on it.

Arkansas is among the states that have had the largest reductions in their uninsured rates under the Affordable Care Act, according to several national surveys. Under its private option, which Republican legislators devised as a politically acceptable alternative to expanding traditional Medicaid as the federal health law envisioned, the state has used federal money to buy private insurance for more than 200,000 low-income individuals.

But the private option itself has been unpopular among many Arkansas Republicans — even as several other states, including Indiana and Iowa, have adopted versions of it — and the Legislature must reauthorize financing for it every year, putting its future in constant jeopardy.

In a speech to the advisory group and a separate legislative task force, Mr. Hutchinson recommended changes that include requiring enrollees whose income is above the federal poverty level to pay premiums equaling 2 percent of their household income, and shifting people below a certain income level to traditional Medicaid — which may well prove less expensive — instead of giving them private insurance.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He also suggested requiring people with access to employer-sponsored insurance that meets the standards of the Affordable Care Act to sign up for that coverage instead of falling back on Medicaid. The state would cover their deductibles and co-payments, he said.

But Sara Rosenbaum, a professor of health law and policy at George Washington University, said that so few low-wage workers are offered insurance through their jobs that “it means practically nothing.”

For states that have expanded Medicaid, the federal government is paying the full cost through 2016, with its share gradually decreasing to 90 percent by 2020. With that in mind, Mr. Hutchinson also recommended keeping the private option only if the state can squeeze $50 million in savings from its traditional Medicaid program.

He stressed, as he has before, that he did not want those who have gained coverage through the private option to lose it. But he also acknowledged that his preferences may not meet the approval of legislators.

“Sometimes,” he said, “as governor, you’ve got to put some ideas out there that can be shot at.”