Buy Photo Dr. Andrew Moore founded the Surgery on Sunday program. (Photo: Mark Mahan/Special to The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Dr. Andrew Moore II is a retired plastic surgeon, but he also could be called a visionary and a pioneer.

When the Lexington physician decided to start Surgery on Sunday in 2005 to provide poor Kentuckians with free outpatient surgical care, there was no blueprint for him to use as a guide.

Still, he cobbled together a successful program that has flourished over the last decade, serving between 5,000 and 6,000 patients from Kentucky — and beyond — since it began.

"They're extremely grateful," he said.

Typical patients are the working poor who can’t afford basic medical procedures, such as hernia repairs and cataract surgery, to help them lead more productive, happy lives.

"They are people that the health-care system has failed," Moore said, "and really, a lot of them have given up ... until they hear about us."

For coming to their aid, Moore will be honored as the Kentucky Humanitarian of the Year on Saturday at the Muhammad Ali Humanitarian Awards. The awards “celebrate the greatness of people from around the world who are making differences in their communities and beyond,” according to the Muhammad Ali Center.

There’s “no more deserving man than Andy Moore,” said Dr. Paul Anthony Kearney, a general surgeon who succeeded Moore as Surgery on Sunday chair. “I don’t think anybody realizes the complexities of initiating an outpatient surgery program where the entire thing is free. … There are hundreds of moving parts to this thing, and he managed to put it all together in a vision he had to do this for the community. It’s pretty amazing.”

The program serves not only uninsured people but others who struggle despite the Affordable Care Act, which is sometimes referred to as Obamacare.

“There’s thousands of people that fall through the ACA cracks,” Kearney said. They include “illegal aliens. People from other states,” and “there are people now who have health insurance, but they have $12,000 deductibles” that they can't afford. "… We’ve opened the program up to those people."

After years of struggling with her poor vision, Lisa Clark, 54, of Lexington recently had cataracts removed from both eyes thanks to Surgery on Sunday.

Buy Photo Lisa Clark received free cataract surgery through the Surgery on Sunday program in Lexington. (Photo: Mark Mahan/Special to The Courier-Journal)

“I’m tickled pink. I can see again,” said the disabled grandmother who likes to sew and crochet.

Clark has insurance but couldn’t afford its $5,500 deductible. “My right eye was so bad (that) for me to actually see out of my left eye, I had to close my right eye,” she said.

The people with Surgery on Sunday “were all awesome," she said. "I can’t say enough good things about them."

Moore, 67, decided to start the program after it became increasingly difficult to get help for the needy, a population that he, his father and brothers always had tried to care for.

“I come from a long lineage of doctors and when I first started in Lexington in the early '80s, we never turned down people because they didn’t have money,” Moore said. “It was relatively easy to get them taken care of. If you saw that they didn’t have money, you would call the hospital and say, 'Look, I’m bringing in this patient that I’m going to have to do for free because they don’t have the resources, and would you be glad to take care of them?' and it was one phone call. It was a pretty simple process. … However, as HMOs and all that stuff started coming in, and PPOs, it became more complicated to get the hospital to allow you to do that, and so I felt that we needed to do it in a more organized fashion.”

Right now, surgeries are being done every other month, with most of the procedures taking place at space donated by KentuckyOne Health at the Lexington Surgery Center, Kearney said. Services range from skin cancer removal to ear tubes for children.

“In a given Sunday, there may be 10 to 15 physicians there, but there are probably 80 other people that are making it happen,” Moore said.

Moore credits the volunteers when speaking about the Ali award. He's being honored along with Hollywood luminaries, such as entertainer and social activist Harry Belafonte, and other achievers.

Buy Photo Dr. Andy Moore, left, dictated information about the hand surgery he had just performed as part of the Surgery on Sunday program. Moore, the program's founder, said providing the services in Lexington "is just pure joy." (Photo: Pam Spaulding/The Courier-Journal)

“Certainly, it’s a great honor,” Moore said. “From my standpoint, I know that Surgery on Sunday is 400 volunteers; it’s not one individual such as myself. I really accept this award on behalf of all those volunteers and the patients that have endured a failed health-care system. … It validates what we’re doing, and it gives us an opportunity to get a little recognition and get our message out there.”

Patients generally are referred to the program by a primary care provider and live within a 250-mile radius of Lexington. People from farther away are accepted on a case-by-case basis.

Central Kentuckians were the original focus of the program, Moore said, “but it became pretty obvious that the problem was larger than that. We were seeing people from other communities outside our area, and it’s hard to turn down somebody that can get to you.”

As a result, “we’ve actually taken care of people from every single county in the state of Kentucky, from Paducah to Pikeville — wherever — and we’ve also taken care of people from the surrounding states, including Illinois, Indiana, West Virginia, Tennessee (and) South Carolina," Moore said.

Private donations help to fund the nonprofit program, which gets drugs and materials donated by companies, and networks with various indigent clinics.

General surgeons do the bulk of procedures, Moore said, but there also are many other professionals, such as ear, nose and throat doctors, neurosurgeons, orthopedic specialists, and gynecologists, who also donate their time and talents. Moore's mother is a greeter, and students also have been known to volunteer for various tasks.

“I think once you get somebody to participate in this one time and they see how worthwhile it is and how much fun it is and the joy that you derive from that, you’ve got them hooked," Moore said. "It’s an easy sell after that.”

Shirley Ramsey, who has been the program’s clinical coordinator since the beginning, said Moore is a pied piper who draws people to him. She first observed his compassion for patients while working with him as a nurse at St. Joseph Hospital. He and his brothers would take the worst cases, regardless of the patients' income, Ramsey said.

“He is humble. He’s smart. He takes care of his patients like he would take care of his family, and he treats the people that support him — the nurses, the techs, the anesthesiologists — ... with high regard,” Ramsey said. “He treats everybody like they’re an integral part of the plan."

The program has spawned others, such as Surgery on Sunday Louisville, which was founded by Dr. Erica Sutton in 2013. To her, Moore is an inspiration, and she's pleased to see him receiving the humanitarian award.

Dr. Fred P. Hadley, center, a Lexington surgeon and urologist, operates on a patient while volunteering for the Surgery on Sunday program. (Photo: Courtesy of MD-Update/Joe Omielan)

“This one individual, in addition to the countless lives that he’s touched in his own community, has created something that has been a model and affected other communities," said Sutton, a surgeon with University of Louisville Physicians. "He’s more than deserving.”

Jessica Eiseman, 34, traveled to Lexington from her home in Glenwood Springs, Colo., to get surgery for incontinence that had plagued her since the birth of her first daughter eight years ago. As a part-time dog groomer without health insurance, she couldn't afford to get the procedure done on her own.

“Everyone there made you feel so welcome and they didn’t make you feel bad because you couldn’t afford the surgery," said Eiseman, a Lexington native who stayed with family in Kentucky during her recovery.

Because of incontinence, Eiseman had missed out on playing tag and soccer with her two girls. But “I can run around at the park with my children now,” she said.

The gratitude of patients is Moore's true reward. “Many of them are sobbing by the time it’s over, and it’s hard not to react with them because they are such a grateful population," he said. "Their thank you and their handshake or hug means more than the money you would have gotten from it otherwise.”

Reporter Darla Carter can be reached at (502) 582-7068, dcarter@courier-journal.com or on Facebook at DarlaCarterCJ. Follow her on Twitter @PrimeDarla.

Dr. Andrew M. Moore II

Age: 67

Title: Founder, Surgery on Sunday, a Lexington program that provides free outpatient procedures for low-income people.

Winner: Kentucky Humanitarian of the Year. The honor is part of the 2015 Muhammad Ali Humanitarian Awards to be presented Saturday in Louisville.

Profession: Retired plastic surgeon.

Family: Married; three children.

Quote: "Surgery on Sunday is 400 volunteers; it’s not one individual such as myself. I really accept this award on behalf of all those volunteers and the patients that have endured a failed health-care system."

LEARN MORE

To find out more about the Surgery on Sunday program in Lexington, go to www.surgeryonsunday.org or call (859) 288-2495.

For information on Surgery on Sunday Louisville, go to http://soslouisville.org.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1iScckg