Buy Photo Gov. Bill Haslam speaks to the General Assembly in 2014. (Photo: Larry McCormack / THE TENNESSEAN)Buy Photo

With lawmakers from around the state convening on Nashville for the start of the General Assembly, here are five issues to watch.

Medicaid expansion

Right out of the gate the General Assembly will debate a proposal that creates a new, almost entirely federally funded health care program for at least 200,000 Tennesseans. Conservatives blast the idea, saying the state will eventually need to pay for some of it and, by taking the money, it's tacit support of "Obamacare." Gov. Bill Haslam and Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey are adamant the plan is not the Affordable Care Act, but passing the "Insure Tennessee" proposal is certainly the biggest political challenge of the governor's tenure.

Education changes

Tennessee education is in flux. The governor ordered a "vetting" of the controversial Common Core education standards, but there are already bills filed that would move the state to different, Tennessee-specific standards. Teachers unions will continue to push for the pay raise the governor promised, and expect voucher-legalization and charter school debates to surface once the regular session heats up.

Budget cuts

All fall Haslam heard doom and gloom from his agencies after he asked them to prepare budgets with a 7 percent cut. While he's repeatedly said he hasn't determined the amount of a cut yet, Haslam's admitted some cut is needed. Many departments — including the embattled Department of Childrens' Services — have already cut hundreds of positions in recent years, so expect backlash from agencies on almost any proposal from Haslam that involves less funding.

Tax changes

Haslam and Republicans are in an interesting position: the state needs money but there are several taxes the GOP despises. Although Haslam said tax cuts might not be a good idea, look for a push to repeal the Hall investment tax and a conversation around the majority leaders' proposal to cut the sales tax. There's a good chance Haslam or another lawmaker could propose an increase in the state's gas tax as well: the tax hasn't gone up for more than 20 years.

Abortion regulations

The voters of Tennessee voted in November to open the gates to some of the strictest abortion regulations in 15 years. Lawmakers will likely ratify at least three new regulations — requiring "informed consent" before an abortion, new inspection requirements on clinics and a waiting period before going through with an abortion. Expect more debate on more controversial proposals, like requiring an ultrasound before an abortion.

Other issues of interest

Wine in grocery stores



Nashville Democratic Rep. Bo Mitchell proposed changing a 2014 law in order to allow grocery stores to sell wine this July. Right now they can't sell wine until 2016. Mitchell notes 78 communities allowed to vote for wine at their grocery stores overwhelmingly approved the idea. But expect plenty of pushback from lawmakers and liquor store lobbyists, who worked for years before agreeing to allow wine any sales at grocery stores.

The battle for 'Tennessee whiskey'



Distillers continue to fight about whether they can call their product "Tennessee whiskey." Right now state law defines a detailed process one must use in order to market a product specifically as Tennessee whiskey. It's the same process Jack Daniel's uses, but the maker of Johnnie Walker and other distillers want changes so they can call some of their products Tennessee whiskey as well.

Marijuana



Even if it's introduced, don't expect any form of recreational or medicinal marijuana to garner tons of support in the General Assembly. However, Haslam did sign a law last year that calls for a study of the uses of cannabis oil. Marijuana supporters believe that was the first step to changes in Tennessee: look for attempts at more steps this session.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1IBFhWM