LONG BEACH HEALTH PROVIDERS Molina Healthcare and SCAN Health Plan are both among Long Beach’s major employers. Molina Healthcare Molina is for-profit and has more than 8,600 employees in the United States; 2,600 to 2,800 of them work in the Long Beach area. The company deals in plans for patients who are eligible for Medicare, Medicaid and health care exchange plans. Molina offers Medicaid plans in California, Florida, Illinois, Michigan, Ohio, New Mexico, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. Financial results for 2013 and the final quarter of the year are scheduled to be released Monday. In the third quarter of last year, Molina reported about $7.6 million in profits on nearly $1.7 billion in revenue. Headquarters: 200 Oceangate, Long Beach. Job openings: www.molinahealthcare.com SCAN Health Plan SCAN Health Plan is a nonprofit provider of Medicare Advantage Plans in California and Arizona. SCAN has about 1,000 employees and had about 146,000 members, 35 percent of whom live in Los Angeles Country, as of information reported in April. Headquarters: 3800 Kilroy Airport Way, Long Beach Job openings: www.scanhealthplan.com

LONG BEACH >> The only Fortune 500 company headquartered in Long Beach and a nonprofit that offers highly rated Medicare Advantage plans are among the city’s most significant employers.

Molina Healthcare and SCAN Health Plan are both involved in the work of helping patients receive government-assisted health coverage. Molina and SCAN have needs for health care practitioners, people with information technology skills and employees with strong customer service skills who can help people understand often-complicated health plans.

“A typical member’s call is about their benefits. She has to go to outpatient surgery, or she wants to know what her co-pay is,” SCAN member services representative Be Dobson said.

“I become the mediator between the two of them (patient and care provider), and I explain to that provider, which is the doctor’s office or facility, and I tell them that they can’t overcharge,” she added. “I talk to the member and I tell her what her benefits are.”

The atmosphere on the floor were Dobson and her colleagues work is far from the stuffy environment often associated with the business world. SCAN’s member services employees do their jobs in a well-illumninated environment, filled with bright-colored furniture, while being reminded to stay on task by a wall-mounted television letting them know how many people are waiting to have their phone calls answered.

These touches of modernity, however, exist alongside more old-fashioned, if not downright cozy, signifiers of achievement. The floor’s “wall of fame,” situated between the elevators and employees’ work spaces, is adorned with many handwritten notes of thanks from seniors who have received help.

“I think it has to be a people person,” Dobson said. “It has to be a person that loves to conversate with others. It has to be a compassionate, caring person that loves the job of doing this.”

Federal impact

SCAN and Molina operate on different sides of the nonprofit/for-profit divide, and both organizations’ plans can be heavily affected by federal health policies.

The nonprofit SCAN has about 1,000 employees, and although hiring managers plan this year to recruit customer service personnel who can handle the job of answering plan holders’ phone calls, SCAN, which as a Medicare Advantage provider is a private organization that contracts with Washington to offer care plans, is experiencing some headwinds due to federal issues, SCAN Vice President of Human Resources Emily Arison said.

Advertisement

As summarized by The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, budget legislation enacted in December will give doctors a half-percent increase in Medicare payments through April, but federal remuneration to physicians treating Medicare patients is set to be reduced after April. Although overall Medicare payments are expected to increase by billions over the next several years, Washington’s current fiscal plans also, in some cases, reduce Medicare payments to those who receive long-term hospital care.

“The challenges are with the changes in Medicare, but we are growing,” Arison said. “Nursing is always a good career to go into. Coding. As the world changes, the health care world changes.”

Boon to Molina

In Molina’s case, however, federal policies are expected to be a boon. The Affordable Care Act, frequently derided in conservative circles for mandating insurance payments and the much-reported technical problems that beset many Americans’ online attempts to sign up for new insurance plans offered in accordance with the law, is expected to be a major driver for revenue growth at Molina.

Molina has specialized in health plans for patients who are eligible for Medicare or Medicaid and is also among the state’s health plans selected to serve patients who are signing up for insurance through Covered California, which is the state-run insurance “exchange” as a result of the ACA. Exchanges are intended to help those who are eligible for insurance subsidies buy coverage provided by private firms.

In Molina’s case, the company did not provide Covered California enrollment numbers for this article, but top executives have said they expect the ACA, through such provisions as the creation of insurance exchanges and expanded Medicaid eligibility, to result in a doubling of the firm’s 2012 revenues to some $12.5 billion next year.

Around Long Beach, Molina has 2,600 to 2,800 employees, and more than 8,000 people work for the firm nationwide, senior vice president Bob Gordon said. The company hired about 2,000 people across the country last year and is locally expanding its physical presence by moving workers into the former Press-Telegram building on Pine Avenue in downtown Long Beach.

Molina is also renovating the adjacent Meeker Baker building to house employees. Meeker Baker is expected to be ready for business late this year, and Gordon said the company’s physical expansion is intended to accommodate new information technology employees needed as the company anticipates serving a larger number of people.

“We spent last year really building up for the growth period in IT,” he said.

Molina also operates health clinics, and the company’s hiring needs for people such as case managers and registered and licensed vocational nurses reflect that, Gordon said.

‘A challenging field’

Among Molina’s recent hires is Lenore Mallek-Passey, a licensed vocational nurse whose current duties include checking patients’ claims and making sure Molina pays valid claims in a timely manner. She is also taking classes at DeVry University to earn a degree in health information technology.

“It’s a changing field,” Mallek-Passey said. “I’ve always enjoyed being able to learn new things. It’s not a routine type of thing.”

SCAN and Molina executives alike emphasized that an employee needs to fit into their respective company’s organizational culture to succeed.

For SCAN, Arison emphasized hires need to be passionate about helping seniors obtain health care.

“It’s having the sensitivity and understanding for seniors and patients, and knowing your customer,” she said.

At Molina, new hires who work in Long Beach or even if hired in other states are invited to an orientation session with the company’s top executives, such as CEO Mario Molina and CFO John Molina, who are sons of company founder C. David Molina.

“Although it’s publicly traded, it’s still family-run,” Gordon said.

The orientation, he added, “really focuses on the culture and history of the company.”

MemorialCare Health

MemorialCare Health, which operates Long Beach Memorial Medical Center, Miller Children’s Hospital, Community Hospital Long Beach and facilities in other cities, also has its own health plan operation.

Also in Long Beach, MemorialCare Health System created the nonprofit Seaside Health Plan last year as a healthcare network for Medicare, Medi-Cal or commercial insurance customers who are already enrolled in Health Net, L.A. Care Health Plan, Anthem Blue Cross, Blue Shield of California or Care 1st Health Plan.

At present Seaside has 40 employees, according to MemorialCare. Hiring plans call for the addition of 14 people to fill positions in information technology, case management, enrollment, credentialing and support.

Call Andrew Edwards at 562-499-1305.