Topics: College, Editor's Picks, genes, genetic testing, Genetics, Technology News, Life News, News

Gergana Vandova received her DNA spit kit for Christmas. It was a present from her husband. A tool that makes it possible for you to glimpse your genetic blueprint is a rather geeky holiday gift, admitted Vandova, a biochemistry Ph.D. student at Stanford University.

But it was the perfect present for the 27-year-old, who wears purple eyeglasses with an outer space motif. After getting her results, Vandova signed up for a Stanford genetic course that allows students to test their own DNA in order to understand her results better. Originally she had worried that they might show that she was at increased risk for developing Alzheimer’s disease or breast cancer. Instead she found out she was a carrier for cystic fibrosis, a life-threatening genetic disorder that affects the lungs and digestive tract. Because cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive disorder, a person must have mutations in both copies of a gene to develop the disease. When only one copy of the gene carries the mutation, the person is a carrier. Vandova won’t get the disease, but depending on her husband’s status, their future children could.

Forget worrying about the “Freshman 15” — now college students can find out if they are at increased risk of developing certain forms of cancer. Undergrad sweethearts can learn the odds of their offspring having cystic fibrosis and sorority sisters can learn if they have a biological sister out there. All of which is raising difficult medical, ethical and privacy concerns.

“You don’t go to chemistry or math class and walk out finding that your father is not your father,” said Roxana Daneshjou, a 25-year-old medical/Ph.D. student who took the Stanford course.

The company doing most of the testing, Silicon Valley-based 23andMe, doesn’t keep exact data on the number of educational institutions that use its DNA kits. But they receive about five inquiries from educators each week and are in contact with an average of 120 instructors and teachers a year, said public relations manager Catherine Afarian. A number of high schools have expressed interest and 3,000 people have already preregistered for a fall genetics class through online educator Udacity. As these courses become more common, no one really knows how the students and society at large will react to what they reveal.

***

Stuart Kim and co-founder Dr. Keyan Salari designed Stanford’s Genetics 210 – Genomics and Personalized Medicine course for both medical and non-medical students in 2010. For Kim, a professor of genetics and developmental biology at Stanford School of Medicine, it was a way to make human genetics “more engaging.” Instead of learning dry tables and statistics, students learn that they are at low risk of developing type 2 diabetes or high risk of developing cardiovascular disease. Kim theorized that the personal element would aid students in their comprehension. Salari’s limited initial research backs him up: Students in the original 2010 class who underwent personal genome testing both self-reported and demonstrated better understanding of genomics.

Genetics 210 students are not required to test their own DNA and are provided with access to a genetic counselor and psychiatrist. They are walked through the informed consent process and discuss what they might learn and possible legal implications. Although the elective is open to undergraduate and graduate students, the majority of the Genetics 210 students are graduate students. They also tend to test their own DNA. Who tests and who doesn’t is supposed to be kept secret. But because Stanford pays for the testing, Kim knows how many choose to test from the cost and the number of students he has in each course. In his most recent course, all students tested their own DNA. By the same method, he also knows how many have visited the psychiatrist in the four courses he has held — none — and how many have consulted a genetic counselor — two.

Before the first course was held in 2010 a task force of lawyers, ethicists, physicians, faculty members and other experts was established to weigh the issues they felt were important: privacy, security, ethics — none of which the younger students seem too concerned about, said Kim. Of the several hundred students Kim has taught, he is pretty sure some of them have discovered they are at increased risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease. The 23andMe kit tests for variations of the apolipoprotein E gene found in 15 percent of the population that increase risk of developing Alzheimer’s. But no one has spoken with Kim about it.

Another result, a variant of the LRRK2 gene that predicts Parkinson’s disease, a degenerative disorder that leads to tremors and difficulty with movement, has also not come up on a personal level. But paternity has. Kim had a student who thought he was a gentile but learned through the test that his father was Jewish. The student’s mother subsequently revealed that the man who had raised him was not, in fact, his biological father.

“He came up to me at the end of class one day and explained this all, “ said Kim. “I was sort of there with my jaw dropping down […] because this is the most extreme change of life that happened in the class definitely.”

It’s these social implications that University of Iowa pediatrics, epidemiology and biological sciences professor Dr. Jeff Murray thinks will be more of an issue in the future than any medical ones. The federal Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 protects against discrimination by employers or health insurers based on genetics. How genetic information will affect life insurance, long-term care and law enforcement is still uncertain. But Murray, president of the American Society of Human Genetics, worries more about the family secrets. As more and more people enter their personal data in the databases like the one at 23andMe, they will be able to discover who else among 23andMe clients they are related to and in what way. Right now 23andMe has more than 350,000 customers, but a price slash to $99 for the spit test and a new ad campaign will probably increase the numbers rapidly. As that happens, Murray believes there will be “lots of non-paternity that’s going to be exposed.”