Three industry insiders give their views on this contentious issue.“The ACA is already broken from the insurance perspective. Thirty percent of the co-ops designated to administer the system have gone under. Costs are increasing 40% in some states. Adding undocumented – meaning illegal – workers will hasten its inevitable downfall.I don’t think illegal workers should be allowed any benefits. If they’re legally employed, paying taxes and premiums into the system, they should have the same health benefits any other employee has.The ACA was destined for failure from the beginning. It was designed to offer more services to more people for a lower premium with no regard to insurable underwriting.”“Undocumented workers shouldn’t be allowed to buy insurance through the state or federal government exchanges. Much of the current vetting that takes place is geared to ensuring legal presence. This is a safeguard protecting American taxpayers and healthcare consumers, as well as those who are legally present. Our healthcare system is already bowing under the cost of overzealous distribution of benefits.Undocumented workers have access to employer coverage, government clinics, emergency rooms and insurance direct through the carrier. They don’t have the burden of the insurance mandate and penalty; this is a leg up for them. First, do no harm.”“The Congressional Budget Office estimates the cost of the Obamacare subsidies to be around $1.4 billion per year for legal citizens. We’re spending more than $4 billion a year on medical care for another 11 million undocumented aliens.Extending subsidies to undocumented aliens should be done only as part of a comprehensive overhaul of immigration laws, the welfare system and how immigrants can become citizens. Stop the flow of illegals; have a welfare system that helps people become independent rather than supporting them indefinitely; and make it easier to become a citizen, pay taxes and help pay for the healthcare system they want to use.”