Perhaps it was visiting the Mennonite community near Monterey, Tenn., and watching them make sorghum the old fashioned way that directed my thoughts in this direction.

Maybe it was the ongoing, and very bitter, struggle between Obama and the House Republicans over defunding or delaying Obamacare for a year. Perhaps it was some of those Facebook posts by the Tea Party folks that germinated this idea. Anyway, here it is ....

Many politically conservative folks in our country have growing and grave reservations about the ever-increasing long reach of our civil government into our personal lives. The feds are telling us we have to purchase health insurance or face a stiff fine, which seems very contrary to a free market economy and the Constitutional right we all have to make our financial choices freely.

Christian parents now think twice before swatting their rebellious kids on the posterior for fear that someone might notice and report them for “child abuse” to DCS. Expressing your belief that homosexuality is a sin, offensive to God, could possibly get you disciplined or fired at your place of employment — depending on how “politically correct” management might be.

If you want the schools to present Young Earth Creationism, Progressive Creationism, the “Gap Theory,” or any other alternatives to unguided Darwinian evolution to your kids, then you are out-of-luck unless you can afford private schooling.

If providing abortifacients to your employees violates your religious convictions, then expect to get sued all the way right up to the Supreme Court by the Obama administration. Many other examples could be cited, but the point is the tightening grip over our personal lives exercised by our own government.

The Amish, and the Mennonites, could care less about Obamacare. They are exempt from the individual mandate requiring them to purchase health insurance. They do not have Social Security taxes, or Medicaid taxes, taken out of their paychecks — they are exempt.

You will not find OSHA inspectors crawling all over an Amish barn-raising checking to see if the workers are wearing hard hats and safety glasses; the government leaves them alone. Amish children participate in chores that would wear many of us adults into a state of utter exhaustion; they are not charged with violating child labor laws.

The draft? —- forget it, they are exempt. They don’t need vehicle registration or licensing for their buggies on our roadways, they are exempt. They don’t even have to send their kids to school after the eighth grade — you try that with your kids and see what happens.

These two groups come from the Anabaptist tradition in the 1500s; they felt that only believing adults should be water baptized. The Anabaptists were severely persecuted and many were put to death in Europe by both Catholics and Protestants utilizing governmental authority; it’s no wonder they have a distrustful attitude towards civil government.

Back almost 60 years ago our Congress made the decision to require Social Security taxes on the self-employed and farmers. Many Amish would not comply, and the IRS quickly moved to enforce it upon them.

Donald Kraybill, professor at Elizabethtown College and author of “The Amish,” relates how IRS agents actually came out to the farm of an Amish fellow who refused to pay the Social Security tax and confiscated his horses while he was out in the field plowing. It was a public relations disaster; in 1965 Congress passed a law exempting Amish and Mennonite groups from Social Security, Medicaid, and many other governmental programs.

Physicians in general are impressed with the Amish as patients because they always pay their bills. Amish will tell you “We have our own health care.” If they cannot afford their hospital stay, then their church will pay it. If it’s too expensive for their church, then relatives and friends will hold benefit auctions to raise money; they will have “free-will offerings”; it’s also important to note that families contribute monthly towards a medical fund for all of their community. They often negotiate lower rates with hospitals because they always pay in cash.

There is no home insurance; if there is a fire or tornado, then community members all pitch in to repair the damage. There is no huge electric bill to pay; a power outage would hardly be noticed by them. They don’t need nursing homes for elderly care; their community has a long tradition of caring for their own. The way they “have each other’s backs” is truly noteworthy.

I’m personally not a pacifist and I don’t see anything wrong with living modernly with electricity, automobiles, cell phones, etc. I do think, however, that their sense of compassionate community exemplifies what the Bible teaches about Christ-believers truly caring for, and loving, each other. Try getting your church to pay your hospital bill.

So here’s my question: Why should the Amish and Mennonites be the only two groups exempt from the grip of much of federal law in our country?

Conservative Christians likewise are increasingly distrustful of our federal government; there are now emergency funds set up by Christian organizations that help pay your medical bills if you have been contributing monthly to them. Mennonites use electricity and drive cars, so that’s not a requirement. Much of their basic theology is the same as traditional, orthodox, conservative Christianity.

Why can’t some Christian groups come together with the intent of “taking care of their own” and likewise qualify for exemptions from the Affordable Care Act? I’m sure Obama would be enraged, but that wouldn’t bother me any. Is it a legitimate possibility?

◆◆◆

Stephen Rowland is a Columbia resident with a master of arts degree in Biblical Studies who writes on issues from a conservative, Christian viewpoint. E-mail him at mrstephenrowland@aol.com.