Over the last few months, one thing has become increasingly clear: Jeb Bush is not on the side of the Latino community. The rhetoric he has used throughout this campaign and the policy positions he's pushed throughout his career have shown he stands with far-right extremists at our expense.

Unfortunately, Bush will not be held accountable for this when he speaks with Latino voters at the LIBRE Initiative Forum today. That's because the LIBRE Initiative serves to advance the priorities of the billionaire Koch brothers, not those of most Latinos. LIBRE's goal is to drive a Koch agenda; they support regressive policies that benefit corporations over working people; they oppose raising the minimum wage, attack unions and relentlessly attack the Affordable Care Act. Clearly LIBRE won't be standing up to Bush.

Jeb Bush has demonstrated his policies do not support our immigrant community and working families: Bush disparaged citizens born to undocumented parents as "anchor babies." He asserted that "we should not have a multicultural society." He's told voters that to deal with the challenges of trying to make ends meet "people need to work longer hours." He compared President Obama's executive actions that protect DREAMers and families to those of a "Latin American dictator." He believes the U.S. should "phase out" Medicare. These statements aren't just gaffes; they show that Bush has and will turn his back on Latinos and working families to appeal to the anti-immigrant, anti-worker right-wing base.

This is wholly in line with Bush's record as Florida's governor. He supported significant increases to college tuition, and during his time in office, in-state tuition rose by almost 50 percent. During his tenure, we also became one of the states with the highest number of uninsured residents. Jeb Bush supported mandatory minimum sentencing laws, increasing the prison population in Florida for first-time offenders and negatively affecting minority communities.

I'm glad Bush is speaking Spanish on the campaign trail and taking the time to address Latino voters, but that's just not enough. We can't give Bush a pass because his rhetoric is less hate-filled than that of Donald Trump, as the policies he's advocated for and the rhetoric he's used shows how dangerous another Bush presidency would be for immigrants and working families.

Vivian Rodriguez is president of the Democratic Hispanic Caucus of Florida.