Please enable Javascript to watch this video

(KTVI) - A Jefferson County woman tells Contact 2, her medical benefits changed with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

Kelly Planzo`s breast cancer was diagnosed about a year ago. She needed multiple operations. Soon after her first surgery her insurance coverage changed. She says she did not receive notice of the change until her treatment was underway. 'I was very scared because imagine, I have breast cancer and I`m in the middle of reconstructive surgery. I can`t tell you how many times I cried, how angry I was.'

But a spokesperson for Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield says the company sent letters to its members. So what role does the Affordable Care Act play in the change? Kelly thinks she knows the answer. 'Everybody who has individual plans is now going on the exchange. I said wait a minute I didn`t sign up for no exchange.'

She says the Exchange requires all plans include pediatric coverage. But Kelly has no children. And she'd end up paying more out of pocket with the new plan. 'I had a co-pay. A co-pay is like a 25 dollar charge that you pay at each visit. A co- insurance is a percentage of what you have to pay of your total bill. '

Medical bills totaling about 40 thousand dollars started arriving with the second surgery. And her surgeon is not in the new plan`s network of physicians. And that`s scary according to Kelly. 'So what am I supposed to do. I`m right in the middle of my reconstructive surgery. You can`t expect me to find another surgeon'

That`s when Kelly called Contact 2. And we called Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield. The spokesperson now says Kelly will keep her original benefits. They call it grandfathering. That`s something Kelly really worked hard to achieve. 'Between Channel 2, between the Dept. of Insurance and myself, I finally and Wash U helping me, finally got them, Anthem to say we will reinstate your old policy '

Something worth noting.....call your insurance company before you begin major a medical procedure and get the facts about the Health Care Exchange and what's covered.

Call our Contact 2 line with your consumer issues. The toll free number is 800 782-2222. The line is open Monday through Thursday between 11am and 1pm.

Follow Bonita on Facebook and Twitter:

Bonita Cornute on Facebook

Bonita Cornute on Twitter

Email: bonita.cornute@tvstl.com