The Eye

Scarlett Johansson DEFENDS John Travolta Kisses On Oscar Red Carpet: States, 'Nothing Strange, Creepy Or Inappropriate About It'

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images) Scarlett Johansson defended her longtime friend John Travolta for what some called "inappropriate behavior" on the Oscars 2015 red carpet. The actress said the moment was a reunion of two old friends and there was nothing "creepy" about it.

Scarlett Johansson defended her long-time friend John Travolta's behavior on the Oscars 2015 red carpet, insisting that his affection towards her was genuine and that photographers caught an awkward moment between two old friends.



Although the photo looks as if the actress was upset at Travolta's sweet overtures, in fact, Johansson had quite the opposite reaction towards her friend's gesture.



"There is nothing strange, creepy or inappropriate about John Travolta," Johansson told the AP. "He is a true class act and everyone in the business would agree.



"The image that is circulating is an unfortunate still-frame from a live-action encounter that was very sweet and totally welcome. That still photo does not reflect what preceded and followed if you see the moment live. Yet another way we are misguided, misinformed and sensationalized by the 24-hour news cycle. I haven't seen John in some years and it is always a pleasure to be greeted by him," remarked the "Lucy" actress.



The two worked together in the touching 2004 film, "A Love Song for Bobby Long," for which Johansson was nominated for a Golden Globe.



Travolta attempted to redeem himself this year, after an embarrassing flub during the 2014 broadcast where he mispronounced Idina Menzel's name as "Adele Dazeem."



The actor revealed to Vanity Fair that he was thrilled to share the stage with the "Frozen" singer for the first time since the gaffe, where Menzel returned the favor and jokingly introduced co-presenter Travolta as "Glom Gazingo."



Later in the night, Travolta poked fun of himself during the Oscar's broadcast for his infamous flub of Idina Menzel's name with a rehearsed bit in which he caressed the singer's face.



"I loved finishing it. It came full circle," he told Vanity Fair of the Oscars moment. "I loved it because it means I come back [to the Oscars] next year."







SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.