SACRAMENTO >> When lawmakers return from summer break today, they’ll have less than a month to solve two huge problems that have vexed the Legislature for decades: fixing California’s crumbling roads and funding health care for the poor.

If all goes according to plan, solutions will emerge in two special sessions. Requested by Gov. Jerry Brown amid this year’s budget negotiations, the sessions on transportation and health care will force lawmakers to focus on the two topics in hopes of striking some historic deals.

But compromises may be tough to come by.

Democrats hoping to solve the problems by raising taxes — including the dreaded gas tax — can no longer rely on supermajorities, which they lost last year.

Because tax and fee increases require support from two-thirds of lawmakers in both houses of the Legislature, Democrats will need the help of Republicans, some of whom have indicated they’re open to hiking the gas tax for the first time in more than 20 years, but only if the money is restricted to transportation improvements. Democrats also have dangled the idea of boosting tobacco taxes to close the health care gap.

The white-hot tax issues should make the next four weeks among the most exciting Sacramento has seen in years. All eyes will be on Brown, who is poised to ask the Legislature to tax Californians without getting their approval at the ballot box for the first time since he took office in 2011.

“Republicans who fear the end of their careers will need talking points that clearly articulate why the tax benefits their districts,” said Bill Whalen, a fellow at Stanford’s Hoover Institution who was a top aide to former Republican Gov. Pete Wilson. “Voting for taxes isn’t exactly a ticket to longevity in these districts. They have a lot at stake.”

Capitol observers predict Brown will lead negotiations behind the scenes and say he’s pulled off the impossible before. He persuaded Democrats, for example, to cut funding for safety net programs to balance the budget and got farmers and environmentalists to support the same water bond.

Once again, the stakes are enormous. California’s roads and highways are deteriorating and becoming more expensive to repair by the day. And failing to pass a new tax on health care plans would create a billion-dollar hole in the budget overnight.

Advertisement

“This will be an important test of Brown’s ability to deliver some really tough votes,” said David McCuan, a political expert at Sonoma State University.

Special legislative sessions are somewhat rare. In California, only governors have the power to call for them. And when they do, McCuan said, they’re often trying to control the Legislature’s agenda. They differ from regular legislative sessions in that lawmakers may introduce bills only on a single topic.

Former Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger called eight special sessions on the budget to force Republicans who didn’t trust him and Democrats who didn’t like him to work together to solve a series of messy financial crises. Last year, Brown called a special session to create a stronger “rainy day fund.”

The special sessions this year will run concurrently with the Legislature’s regular session, which is scheduled to end Sept. 11.

Brown telegraphed his support for raising prices at the pump in his January inaugural address when he asked Democrats and Republicans to do the “impossible” and craft an agreement to improve transportation infrastructure. Current revenue from California’s 42.35-cent gas tax covers only a fraction of the state’s annual highway repair needs.

Last week, business organizations such as the California Chamber of Commerce and the Silicon Valley Leadership Group said any deal should seek to raise at least $6 billion annually by raising gas and diesel taxes and increasing vehicle registration and license fees.

Those priorities mirror legislation sponsored by Sen. Jim Beall, D-San Jose, that would raise the gas tax 12 cents, boost the diesel tax 22 cents and increase vehicle registration fees $100 for electric vehicles and $35 for gas-powered vehicles and hybrids. The roughly $4 billion the plan would generate annually would help pay for a $59 billion backlog of repairs on state roads and $78 billion in repairs for local roads.

The American Public Works Association estimates that every $1 spent to keep a road in good condition avoids $6 to $14 later to rebuild that road once it has deteriorated beyond repair.

“We’re literally putting ourselves in a hole if we wait any longer to find a way to finance this stuff,” Beall said.

He spent his summer break crisscrossing the state to lobby for the bill and said he believes a few Republicans will agree to support the transportation tax and fee increases when the time comes. Perhaps not wanting to play their hand, Republican legislative leaders have declined to comment on the special sessions.

In the health care special session, lawmakers will try to pass a new tax on health care plans as well as a package of anti-smoking bills that aim to lower the state’s health care costs by reducing the number of Californians who use tobacco products. A new $2-per-pack cigarette tax has been floated but not formally introduced.

UC San Francisco researchers estimate that tobacco products cost the state $18 billion annually in direct health care costs and lost productivity associated with illness or premature death.

Several tobacco-control bills that died in the regular session will have new life — and better chances — in the special session, including legislation seeking to increase the legal smoking age to 21 and regulate e-cigarettes.

Those bills last month failed to clear an Assembly policy committee whose members have accepted more than $170,000 from the nation’s two largest tobacco companies. But in the special session, the proposals will be vetted by all new policy committees.

“Anything you can do to reduce smoking will have a very large, very rapid impact on health care costs,” said Stanton Glantz, a tobacco expert at UCSF. “There’s nothing else you can do that would have such a big effect so fast, so lawmakers are wise to take this on.”

Still, creating a new framework to tax managed health care plans remains the Brown administration’s “No. 1 priority,” said a source close to the governor who was not authorized to speak publicly about special session negotiations.

The tax structure California uses now must be phased out by the end of the fiscal year because it doesn’t comply with new Obama administration rules that dictate how health care plans may be taxed by the states.

Currently, the state taxes only plans that accept Medi-Cal patients and uses all the money it collects to help finance the health insurance program for low-income Californians, which now covers one-third of the state’s residents after it was greatly expanded under the Affordable Care Act. The new tax must hit all plans whether they accept Medi-Cal patients or not.

Convincing Republicans to back a new health care tax will be much harder than getting them to support a transportation tax or fee, political experts say.

“The transportation taxes have broader appeal, but the health care problems are more urgent,” said Dan Schnur, a former Republican strategist who directs the Unruh Institute of Politics at USC. “Getting both taxes passed is going to be more than twice as hard as getting one.”

Contact Jessica Calefati at 916-441-2101. Follow her at Twitter.com/Calefati.