September 16, 2002 - The North American Great Lakes are featured in this true-color image. Several large cities can be seen in the image, including Minneapolis-St. Paul at left center edge, Chicago at the southern tip of Lake Michigan, and Detroit between Erie and Huron. Flowing past Minneapolis and toward the bottom of the image is the Mississippi River. (AP Photo/Stocktrek Images) (Photo: AP)

from the Petoskey News

Members of Michigan’s House of Representatives said the message from voters was clear last month when Proposal 1 was soundly rejected — don’t raise our taxes to fix the roads.

So what did these legislators do? They came back with a plan that, at least in part, relies on a tax increase to generate more money for roads.

The Republican-led House’s plan, which on Wednesday was passed out of a specially created committee to fast-track road funding legislation, will funnel more than $1 billion annually to road repairs by 2019 with about two-thirds of that money coming from the state’s general fund. But, among other measures, the proposal also eliminates special tax credits for low-income families to bring in $117 million more in revenue for the roads.

Of course, this ever crafty group doesn’t call that a tax increase.

We question, how is it not? And why are we asking people who budget every dollar and cent each month to feed their families and pay their bills to take this hit?

Wiping away the tax breaks for already struggling families isn’t the only problem we see with this plan. House lawmakers want to strip funding from the Michigan Economic Development Corporation, an agency that this editorial board views as vital to the state’s growth. The House’s plan cuts $135 million from the organization’s annual budget, amounting to about one-quarter of its funding.

— Click here for full editorial

from the Midland Daily News

Before the Affordable Care Act became law in March 2010, the Midland Daily News wrote a number of editorials, issuing caution and skepticism about Obamacare.

Would it really lower health costs?

Would Americans be able to keep their doctor, as President Obama had promised?

Would it negatively impact the economy, and place a heavy financial burden on small businesses?

Those were just some of the questions that we asked.

Now, there’s this recent news item: Health insurers seek big premium hikes for Obamacare plans in 2016.

According to news reports, the insurers have cited higher-than-expected care costs from customers they gained under the Obamacare’s coverage expansion and the rising cost of prescription drugs and other expenses as reasons for proposing the increases, many of which are in the double-digit percentages.

...The cost of health care is dramatically on the rise. And to us, at least, that comes as no surprise.

— Click here for full editorial

Read or Share this story: http://bcene.ws/1MjkGcw