Tom Jackson's baseball card - if he had one - would report he throws left, writes right. In his columns and blog, "The Right Stuff," southpaw Jackson provides insight into the evolving human condition from a distinctly conservative point of view.

The Democrat half of the contest for Florida’s open U.S. Senate seat just gets better and better, as indicated by today’s lively missive from Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid.

It seems, at last, Alan Grayson, the blunderbuss congressman from Orlando, has embarrassed Democrats beyond their tolerance levels. Accordingly, Reid wants him to resign from the race. (In fact, that’s been Reid’s position for a couple of weeks.) This, of course, would essentially cede the nomination to former Republican squish Patrick Murphy, who represents Florida’s Atlantic Coast east of Lake Okeechobee.

Writes Reid:

We need strong leaders in the Senate — middle class champions dedicated to working hard and getting things done. People just like Patrick Murphy.

What we DON’T need is a disgraceful hedge fund manager masquerading as a “progressive.”

Reports indicate that Alan Grayson may have used his position as a congressman to unethically promote his Cayman Islands hedge fund. Grayson claims to be a “progressive,” but it seems he has no moral compass.

Oh, NOW they notice. But remember: They hit the mute button when he was maliciously maligning congressional Republicans during the stampede to approve Obamacare.

These deeply troubling allegations should disqualify anyone from a seat in the U.S. Senate. Alan Grayson should drop out of the U.S. Senate race immediately.

So now mere allegations are enough to chase someone from a campaign. Really? Politico’s Marc Caputo calls bull hockey on that:

Reid’s interest in Florida is about elections, not ethics. Here’s how we know: Reid is a Murphy supporter and he has maintained an icy silence amid the federal criminal indictment of Sen. Bob Menendez for alleged corruption involving a Florida donor, Dr. Salomon Melgen. So in Reid World, Menendez’s case isn’t worth talking about, but Grayson’s is. And while Grayson doesn’t belong in the Senate, to Reid, Menendez belonged in a powerful Senate committee post.

Though Menendez first came under clear federal scrutiny in January 2013, Reid kept Menendez as Foreign Relations chairman — a position critics accuse him of abusing. After Democrats lost the Senate majority, Menendez remained the committee’s ranking member until his indictment in April 2015. That was about a year after Reid himself was interviewed by the feds in Menendez’s criminal case. So Reid knew at least some of what authorities were looking at. And so did some of Reid’s aides. They ran the super PAC tied to the alleged corruption scheme listed in the indictment against Florida’s third Senator. None of this is to say that Grayson or Menendez are guilty or innocent. But one alleged transgression is clearly more serious than the other, yet the more serious case prompted none of Reid’s calls for virtue in congress.

For his part, Grayson rebuked Reid as “a human cash register” and “everybody’s lobbyist’s best friend.” Is this great, or what?

As Caputo notes, Grayson may have committed no wrongdoing. An ongoing House Ethics Committee investigation that will wrap up in April. What’s the rush? Makes you wonder why, while he’s at it, Reid isn’t also demanding Grayson resign from the House. After all, he’s described his actions as “disgraceful to the halls of Congress.” And all he’s opposed to is Grayson seeking a promotion?

Evidently: “I’m calling on Alan Grayson to drop out. Sign on to join me.” (To quote Chris Christie in another context: There it is. Sign on. Get nine months of pleas for campaign donations.)

Grayson presents a problem for establishment Democrats who are lining up for Murphy (whose lining up might be influenced by donations from Murphy’s parents). Early polling shows Grayson’s guns-a-blazing appeal to unbridled progressivism putting him ahead of the reliable liberal, but it’s an open question whether his feel-the-Bern message can generate a majority in the general election. Particularly if the GOP nominee winds up being Indian Shores’ eminently moderate, pleasant and reasonable Rep. David Jolly, who has a substantial early edge in a crowded, if largely unknown, Republican field.

Evidently, tossing the dice on Grayson is not a gamble the paid-for senator from Las Vegas is eager to make.