Larry Bucshon. (Provided Photo)

INDIANAPOLIS (WISH) — An Indiana Congressman was the butt of the joke on a recent episode of “The Daily Show” on Comedy Central.

Rep. Larry Bucshon, R-8th District, is a Republican who thinks comedian John Stewart is funny, according to spokesman Nick McGee. But McGee wasn’t laughing when he said the Congressman was not available to talk about Stewart’s jokes and that he’s focused on other things.

Rep. Bucshon is a serious man who delivered a stern message to Democrats and the president in a GOP Address on Labor Day weekend.

“Put aside politics and do what Americans do every day,” he said, “and that’s get to work.”

He’s a medical doctor who has worked to improve the Affordable Care Act.

“We can’t go back to the status quo,” he said in April.

But on “The Daily Show,” host John Stewart used a committee exchange between Bucshon and White House Science Adviser John Holdren to make fun of the Congressman for challenging new air quality regulations to address global warming.

McGee accused Stewart of “cherry picking quotes out of context to further the comedy narrative.”

“Of all the climatologists who depend on the climate changing to keep themselves publishing articles,” said Bucshon in a video clip used on the show, “yes, I could read that but I don’t believe it.”

Stewart mimicked him by saying, “I do not believe the scientists because it is their profession not their hobby.” The audience laughed.

And just to prove how serious the Congressman is, his spokesman said, “It is unfortunate that they didn’t show Dr. Bucshon’s request that the EPA come to southwest Indiana to discuss these new regulations with Hoosiers.”

The biggest reason that none of this is funny to Congressman Bucshon is the fact he represents a lot of people who work in the coal industry and new regulations could put them out of business.

He wants voters to know that “The Daily Show” is not a news program.

Share this: Facebook

Twitter

Google

Email

Print

More

Pinterest

Like this: Like Loading...