Summary

As represented in this Forecast, the life science industry includes biopharmaceuticals, medical instruments and devices, animal/agricultural bioscience and commercial research and testing. However, the industry’s R&D spending is driven primarily by the mass and research intensity of the biopharmaceutical sector, which accounts for nearly 85% of all expenditures.

The life science industry’s research activities in the United States continue to lead the world, but it is an area that also remains in significant transition. Not only is life science—led by the biopharmaceutical sector—the leading U.S. industry in terms of volume of research, U.S. life science R&D accounts for 46% of the global total—one of the highest shares in any industry.

Still, pressures persist to improve on productivity, product pipelines and ROI in consideration of expiring patents, cost pressures and the rising complexity of innovation in drug development. While primarily affecting the biopharmaceutical sector, the medical device sector is not immune to some of these trends. A new factor complicating the R&D environment for the life science industry is the set of changes in the U.S. healthcare landscape mandated by the Affordable Care Act. While it is hard to predict exactly how this new law will affect life science R&D, these transitions and uncertainties suggest that while the U.S. remains a global leader life science R&D, it is vulnerable, especially as European competitors and new, emerging Asian competitors target life science research for growth.

For the U.S. life science industry, we project a small rebound over 2013 levels (up 2.2%) to R&D spending of about $93 billion in 2014, with the growth coming primarily from smaller biopharmaceutical innovators and medical device manufacturers.

The global expansion of the life science industry has slowed over the last few years, but the industry is forecast to have a stronger recovery (up 3.1%) to more than $201 billion in 2014.





click to enlarge

Life Science Industry R&D Spending

Source: Battelle/R&D Magazine

Regulatory Context Influences U.S. R&D Outlook

The U.S. life science industry emerged from the combined challenges of the recession and patent expirations with fresh strategies for R&D. Traditional pharmaceutical companies, while still massive and investing significant resources in R&D, continue to struggle with reduced product pipelines and productivity from discovery through development. As these firms rationalize drug development activities, R&D spending often declines and programs are sometimes reduced and refocused. Smaller biotech companies find opportunity in these circumstances, and innovation through acquisition continues to be an important strategy by larger firms. Medical device and instrumentation firms continue on a steady R&D growth trajectory, but also seek greater efficiency. Universities have become increasingly important sources of innovation and collaboration in life science research in applied areas like drug discovery, as well as more fundamental research in systems biology, nanobiotechnology and other areas.

The future operating environment for this industry is complex. As noted, the Affordable Care Act creates uncertainties in areas like the introduction of new medical products. On one hand, expanding the number of Americans who have health insurance coverage may increase the market for medicines and treatments, and certain regulatory requirements like “meaningful use” of electronic data will accelerate new markets and healthcare efficiency, as well as research in health outcomes.

There also are a number of provisions that will regulate the pricing of prescription medicines and medical treatments, such as mandatory prescription drug rebates and discounts under Medicaid and the Independent Payment Advisory Board for Medicare—empowered to set reimbursement rates that would require Congressional action to offer alternative cost savings. At the same time, new regulations that affect product approvals, pricing and reimbursement could increase costs for industry, although this could also stimulate additional innovation.

Another significant influence on life science research is the modernization of regulatory approaches used by the Food & Drug Administration. There is an ongoing effort in the U.S.—as well as a separate initiative in the European Union—to ensure that the FDA has the advanced scientific tools, standards and pathways to evaluate medical products under development and use advanced sciences to create efficient processes that also improve product safety, quality and manufacturing. Though steps have been taken within FDA to improve the turnaround time for new approvals and within NIH to assist in the translational research process, the time to market for individual compounds continues to lengthen as drug development becomes more specialized.





click to enlarge

Sources of Innovation

Source: Battelle/R&D Magazine

What Researchers Think

In our 2014 survey, we asked U.S. industry representatives to provide context on key factors in their R&D investment plans. Their answers were mixed regarding future R&D investment: 45% were more pessimistic about the sufficiency of their R&D budgets, while just 33% were more optimistic. With R&D budgets under pressure, life science industry respondents believe their R&D budgets insufficient to accomplish their corporate research goals, especially as the cost of doing business continues to increase.

As life science companies re-engineer R&D, the well-documented trend toward external partnerships within the U.S. continues. International collaboration still is less common: nearly 60% have no plans for specific foreign engagement. 20% are planning new R&D facilities outside the U.S., and an additional 7% expect to expand existing foreign operations over the next year.

Survey results also made clear that expectations are high for accountability and ROI. 64% of life science firms now calculate ROI against research investments—a higher level than industry at large, where only 48% attempt these complicated calculations.

Origins & Priorities for Innovation

The survey also explored the link between R&D investment and technology development. One conclusion is that open innovation plays a more integrated and pervasive role in life science than in other industries. Considering the degree of reliance on research collaborations, acquisitions and in licensing, internal development capabilities appears to have a slightly smaller role relative to other industries. This suggests that the innovation ecosystem for life science is more complex and inter-related.

The diverse nature of this industry was also reflected in responses about key areas for technology development. The largest was biomaterials, with 68% of the life science respondents seeing future development in this area. Other leading areas of interest included personal genomics (59%) and stem cell applications (54%). In medical devices, increased development emphasis is expected for biomedical monitoring devices (43%) and surgical implants (34%).