When Jennifer Vickery's alarm goes off at 5 a.m., she has an extra incentive to get out of bed, put on her running shoes and hit the pavement. Ms. Vickery, a senior digital-content strategist at the IBM Design Lab at 590 Madison Ave., gets extra money in her paycheck when she meets her company's fitness goals.



"Any little bit of motivation is great," Ms. Vickery, 43, said.



The incentive certainly pays off for Ms. Vickery. Whether it does for IBM, and similar companies that have embraced wellness initiatives to lower health care costs, is the subject of intense debate.



Spending company dollars to create a "culture of health" is now commonplace in corporate America. Ninety percent of companies with more than 50,000 workers have wellness programs, as do half of U.S. employers with at least 50 workers. In recognition of how common such programs have become, this year the Affordable Care Act set new guidelines on their implementation.



But research remains mixed on whether wellness programs deliver. Two recent studies by the Rand Corp. found that promoting wellness in workers, like Ms. Vickery, who are not sick (and may be motivated on their own to stay healthy), does not translate to a financial return on investment. Last June, Rand researchers looked at four large companies with total of more than 200,000 workers. Fewer than 10% of overweight employees enrolled in a corporate weight-loss program; among those who did, the average weight loss after a year was one pound or less. Only 7% of smokers enrolled in cessation programs.



"The lifestyle portion [of wellness programs] doesn't really save money," said Dr. Soeren Mattke, a senior Rand scientist who was an author of both studies. "With respect to improving health, these programs are not a bad thing, but the money-saving is iffy."



Part of the challenge with workplace wellness is that benefits may come years down the road. Still, program backers believe healthy lifestyles make workers more productive. Programs typically offer on-site fitness centers, walking trails, corporate fitness contests, healthy cafeteria food, and online or telephone health coaching, run by workplace wellness vendors.

Good participation

Workers who sign up generally get incentives in the form of lower insurance premiums or money added to their paychecks. At IBM, the maximum benefit is $450 every 12 weeks. Upstate medical-device maker Welch Allyn offers premium rebates for employees and covered spouses up to $625 annually. The company says the program has been popular, and has resulted in fewer absences and lower medical costs. Sixty-nine percent of workers participate, 70% of those who wanted to lose weight did so, and 26% of smokers stopped or cut back. It calculates a threefold return on what it spent on the initiative.



Money spent on workers with chronic conditions may be a sounder investment. The Rand studies suggest that disease-management programs for workers with health problems can successfully keep workers with diabetes, hypertension and back problems out of costly hospital stays.



PepsiCo's disease-management program, for example, focused on early intervention and saved $136 per member per month, largely driven by a 29% cut in hospital admissions, Health Affairs reported.

$625—MAXIMUM PREMIUM REBATE offered as wellness incentive by Welch Allyn



145K—COLLECTIVE POUNDS shed by 15,000 participants in a North Shore-LIJ fitness challenge



But its wellness initiative, focused on healthy lifestyles, did not result in savings on health care expenses, returning only 48 cents for every dollar spent. The likely reason is that these workers already had relatively low medical expenses. The Purchase, N.Y.-based company said it was undeterred by the findings. "Wellness programs play an important role as part of our overall health care strategy, and we will continue to examine ways to enhance these programs moving forward," it said in a statement.



Employers wanting to change worker behavior have experimented with penalties and incentives with varying success. Some companies run into pushback. Unionized Pepsi workers, for example, threatened a labor fight in 2012 after the company announced that smokers who did not sign up for a smoking cessation program would pay more for health coverage.



"Penalties are not a culture of health," said Andy Stern, a former president of the SEIU who is now a senior fellow at Columbia University's Richman Center. Mr. Stern spoke at a December conference in Manhattan co-sponsored by the New York State Health Foundation.



Regardless, as smoking has become less acceptable in public, companies have felt increasingly comfortable targeting workers who light up. Johnson & Johnson has banned smoking on its properties and deducts $600 a year from paychecks for employees who don't participate in wellness programs. The company saves between $2 and $4 for every dollar it spends on wellness, said Dr. Fikry Isaac, vice president for global health services. In 2009, it saved $565 per employee in health care costs.



The key to success is to not make penalties seem arbitrary but part of a larger cultural shift at a company. North Shore-LIJ Health System's first venture into employee health was an impromptu one, said Jeffrey Kraut, senior vice president for strategy and business informatics, also speaking at the conference. "The cafeteria Fry-o-Lator was broken, and a doctor suggested it not be replaced," he said. "There was a visceral reaction."

Fry cooker not negotiable

"This doctor couldn't walk through that cafeteria for weeks," for all the complaints he was getting from employees, including other physicians, said Mr. Kraut. The health system soon bought a new fry cooker, then rolled out a more comprehensive approach with healthy foods and on-site fitness centers. Offerings seen as perks fared better.



The system is still trying to match the success of its "Walk to Paris" fitness challenge. In 2012, workers formed teams of 10, and those who walked the equivalent distance of Long Island to Paris were entered in a drawing for a free trip. The 15,000 participants shed a collective 145,000 pounds.



"Our team was called Twinkle Toes," said Rosemary Ennis, 60, the system's corporate director in the office of community and public health. "We walked from five to eight miles a day, and we never thought we'd win, but we did."



The big payoff for Ms. Ennis: 15 pounds lost and a new commitment to fitness. "What I'd advise other companies is don't penalize employees, inspire them," she said.

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments