Nathan "Nati" Stoliar indicted by a federal grand jury in the US over a green scheme scam which allegedly saw him scoop $42m

PROMIENT Sydney property developer Nathan "Nati" Stoliar has been indicted by a federal grand jury in the US over a green scheme scam which allegedly saw him scoop US$37 million ($42 million).

Mr Stoliar, 64, who once owned Elizabeth Bay mansion Boomerang, is alleged to have generated fake "renewable identification numbers" - similar to carbon credits - which were then sold for a profit, the US Department of Justice said.

He and Las Vegas native James Jariv, 63, have been indicted on a charges under the Clean Air

Act, as well obstruction of justice and conspiracy to engage in money laundering,.

The indictment was made public in the United States on 15 January after Mr Jariv appeared in a federal court in Nevada.

"All defendants are presumed innocent and are entitled to a fair trial at which the government must prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt," the statement, dated 16 January, said.

A US Department of Justice spokeswoman told The Sunday Telegraph he could face more than 20 years in jail if found guilty.

"Stoliar has not been arrested," she said in a statement.

"His max penalties if convicted are: for the conspiracy charge - 5 years; the wire fraud and obstruction charges are 20 years; and the false statement is 2 years. Plus a fine of $250,000 per count."

The alleged fraud relates to company City Farm Biofuel which Mr Stoliar co-owned with Mr Jariv from 2007.

Canada-based City Farm Biofuel produces renewable energy by reprossesing used vegetable oils, the company's website says.

A picture on the website describes Mr Stoliar as the company's president.

A separate Las Vegas company, Global E Marketing, which was owned by Mr Jariv, was all

"The government alleges that these defendants claimed to produce biodiesel at the City Farm facility, claimed to import and sell biodiesel to Global E Marketing, and then generated and sold RINs based upon this claimed production, sale and importation," the statement from the Department of Justice states.

"In reality, little to no biodiesel produced at City Farm was ever imported and sold to Global E Marketing as claimed.

The indictment alleges that the defendants' scheme allowed them to generate $7 million worth of renewable identification numbers, which were then sold to companies that needed to obtain them.

The indictment also alleges the pair sold fuels bought within the United States by another company, MJ Biofuels, as pure biodiesel produced at their City Farm facility - allowing them to increase the price and tell buyers the fuel could be used to generate green credits.

"The indictment alleges that, in doing so, the defendants failed to give to the United States RINs worth in excess of $30 million, keeping this money for themselves instead," the statement said.

Mr Stoliar and Mr Jariv are also charged with creating false records and providing false statements, the United States Department of Justice said.

Mr Stoliar's wife, Miki Stoliar, did not return calls to The Sunday Telegraph's repeated calls.

Mr Stoliar's cousin and former lawyer told The Sunday Telegraph he was aware of the indictment.

"I have not spoken to Nati about it," he said.

Mr Stoliar could potentially be extradited to the United States to answer the fraud charges under a 1974 treaty signed between the two countries. NSW Police, the Attorney-General's department and Australian Federal Police said they do not comment on the extradition process.

As well as formerly owning Boomerang, Mr Stoliar also owned the landmark Point Piper mansion, Villa del Mare.

He is also a former friend of former ALP powerbroker, Eddie Obeid. Mr Obeid confirmed he knew Mr Stoliar "socially" but said he hadn't spoken to him for "six or seven years".

He also said that Mr Stoliar once wanted to purchase land from him in Port Macquarie and the two shared a plane ride north to inspect the property