The Wisconsin Voter The Journal Sentinel's Craig Gilbert explores political trends in a purple state and beyond. SHARE

By of the

The Republican debate train pulls into Wisconsin on Tuesday after a journey already full of twists and turns.

One of those twists is that the home-state candidate didn't make it this far.

Another is that his debate performances were a big reason why.

Gov. Scott Walker's quick exit this fall is one of the surprising byproducts of a GOP debate season that is only one-third over. Tuesday's presidential debate in Milwaukee, sponsored by Fox Business Network and The Wall Street Journal, is the fourth of nine on the Republican side — events that are leaving their own stamp on the 2016 race.

Four years ago, a glut of primary debates helped drive a dizzying roller-coaster ride of a Republican campaign, with one candidate after another surging and crashing before the first votes were ever cast.

The role of the debates this time around is not so easy to sum up, other than their staggering, record-breaking viewership.

"I think it has affected the quality of the debates having 10 or 11 people on the stage. It's very hard for any candidate to break through when there is that much competitive energy," said Northeastern University professor Alan Schroeder, a scholar of debates.

"This year, we've not seen anything like the magnitude of those surges" four years ago, said pollster and political scientist Charles Franklin of the Marquette Law School.

The two polling front-runners, Ben Carson and Donald Trump, have risen to the top seemingly independent of their debate performances, which have drawn mixed reviews.

Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz appear to have benefited from strong debates, but it's not clear how much.

And the biggest breakout debate performances, by Carly Fiorina in the first two debates, had no major lasting impact. She surged briefly, then receded.

"Maybe the debates haven't been as much of a factor (as last time) in swaying opinions up to this point," Schroeder said.

But "you can also look at the casualties," he said.

Those casualties include most of the candidates who've been relegated to the "undercard" in a controversial two-tier debate system meant to accommodate the massive GOP field.

The latest examples are New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, who failed to average 2.5% in the last four major national polls — the cutoff adopted for inclusion on the prime time stage in Milwaukee Tuesday night. Christie's "demotion" comes after what some regarded as his strongest debate Oct. 28 in Colorado. And South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham is the most prominent of the remaining field to fall short of the 1% minimum level of support needed just for a spot in the early debate.

The casualties also include Walker, who dropped out when the second debate on Sept. 16 in California failed to revive his campaign.

And they could include former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, once seen as the front-runner, who has struggled on stage.

"Have they 'made' anyone? I don't think so," one GOP strategist, who asked not to be named, said of the debates. "They flunk you, or they keep you in the game."

Building narratives

On the Democratic side, the one debate so far helped solidify Hillary Rodham Clinton's stature as the commanding front-runner in her party. Two of her four rivals dropped out not long afterward.

But one reason it's hard to predict the impact of debates is that they don't occur in a vacuum. They interact with other campaign developments and with the expectations of the political world. Clinton's good debate combined with her Benghazi testimony — from which she emerged relatively unscathed — dampened doubts among Democrats about her candidacy. Soon after, Vice President Joe Biden opted not to run.

On the GOP side, Trump's flamboyant first debate confirmed his ability to dominate the conversation. Bush's debates have reinforced doubts about a candidacy that has never caught fire. Walker's debates showcased a flat and low-key demeanor that may have undercut the warrior image he was running on.

"Most of the candidates enter into each one of these debates with a basic narrative," said former Walker strategist Ed Goeas, referring to the perceptions, good and bad, that accumulate around a candidate among voters, activists, donors, pundits and reporters.

"Their first goal is, if it's a positive narrative, build on that narrative, or if it's a negative narrative, undo it," Goeas said. "That becomes the key task" in the debates.

And sometime those negative narratives can be too powerful to overcome.

Walker's saga illustrates how debates can damage a candidate in ways that can be hard to foresee both inside and outside a campaign.

The Wisconsin governor was slipping in the polls — but still commanding attention — going into the first debate in early August.

As a "top-tier" candidate, he adopted a low-risk, do-no-harm strategy of not engaging his opponents. Walker committed no gaffes and received mixed reviews for his performance.

However, with so many candidates competing to break through, the governor's failure to make an impression — compounded by short answers that reduced his airtime — turned out to be surprisingly damaging.

High expectations

Walker's problems on the campaign trail weren't confined to debates, as Franklin notes.

But by the time the second debate came around almost six weeks later, he found himself in a Catch-22. He needed a "big debate" to reverse his sagging poll numbers but was largely ignored by the CNN panel because of his sagging poll numbers.

"Everyone walked into that second debate with Walker not with an assumption he had to do better than the first time, but that he had to have a 'game-changer.' Game changers don't occur very often. ... Who decided that was in fact what he needed to do?" said Goeas, who thought his candidate was "kind of set up for failure" by that lofty bar.

"For Scott Walker, this was his debut really on the national stage," Schroeder said of the first two debates. "He came in (to the race) as a bit of a dragon slayer. People maybe expected little bit more ... a more combative spirit, especially among an electorate that seems to be rewarding that this year."

Come Tuesday night, Bush could be in a similar spot, needing to placate nervous donors and undo the narrative of a flagging campaign, but having to do it in a debate setting he has not shown he can master.

"What we're seeing now is Jeb Bush is facing the same kind of criticism (as Walker) for unimpressive performances," said Franklin, coupled with poor polling numbers that increase the pressure for a game-changing debate.

Schroeder said candidates tend to "hate doing debates" because there is so much they can't control — the questions they're asked, what the other candidates do, and to some degree how their performances will be judged.

But what's risky for candidates is rewarding for voters, Schroeder said.

"We don't get to see them in situations where they're not speaking off a script very often. We really have to revel in those moments when we have that."