Are Americans becoming less compassionate?

As we approach the “giving” season, when we also pause to give thanks for what we have, the politics abroad in the land are worrisome.

The leading Republican candidate for president first said he wanted to dismantle Medicare, which provides health insurance for 49 million seniors. Then he said people should set up their own savings plans. We don’t know what he means.

The other leading Republican candidate, who topped the polls for at least 100 days, wants to throw out millions of immigrants who have been living and working in America for years. He wants to wall off the nation to keep undocumented foreigners out.

Another presidential candidate, Ohio Gov. John Kasich, is running into stiff opposition from conservative Republicans because he expanded his state’s Medicaid program, the only health insurance many poor Ohioans have.

Houston voters overturned a city ordinance that would have prohibited bias in housing, employment, city contracting and business services. Opponents complained the measure would have permitted transgenders who were born men to enter women’s bathrooms. (As if unisex bathrooms on planes don’t exist.)

In Kentucky a businessman won the governor’s race despite alienating a lot of Kentuckians, refusing to talk to some reporters, riding around in a gold Cadillac and promising to take away Obamacare from half a million Kentuckians and reject federal funds for Medicaid.

In our politics today there’s increasing contempt for those who need help. It’s alarming.

On the other hand, a study by Indiana University’s school of philanthropy predicts that total charitable giving in America will increase 4.8 percent this year and 4.9 percent in 2016.

And while Ohioans firmly rejected an initiative that would have legalized marijuana, including medical marijuana needed by severely epileptic children — which a majority of people favor — that rejection was attributed to a provision that inexplicably would have created a marijuana monopoly for 10 groups of investors.

So the evidence is mixed. What is probably going on here is frustration and anger at political stalemate along with a poignant cry to “give us new faces.” Washington is broken. The immigration system is broken. The health care system is broken. The concept of fair wages is broken.

By extension, the politicians are saying America is broken.

But that’s not what Americans think. They think the problem is leadership.

This is the problem: If next year’s presidential election were held right now, Hillary Rodham Clinton would get 47 percent of the vote and Ben Carson, the retired neurosurgeon, would get 47 percent.

Of course, a lot will happen in a year.

But it’s clear Americans are almost evenly divided between those who think government can and should solve the major problems society faces and those who want private enterprise to take charge, almost unfettered by government restrictions. Half the people want political compromise; half do not. Half the people want to make drastic cuts in government services no matter who gets hurt; half the people are willing to put up with bureaucracy and even waste, fraud and abuse to keep such services coming.

There is no short-term way to “fix” this. Whoever wins the White House next November will struggle to get anything accomplished … unless we change how we think and talk.

Clinton shouldn’t say, even jokingly, that Republicans are her “enemy.” Carson shouldn’t compare Obamacare to Nazism. Voters must not give credence to Donald Trump’s insistence he should be president because he’s the loudest, rudest and richest. Marco Rubio can’t assume his youth, heritage and dismissive attitude toward his former mentor mean he deserves the presidency.

Voters must demand civility and thoughtfulness. They must insist on serious policy proposals and in-depth knowledge about our problems. An Iowa man recently said, “I’m for Ben Carson because he doesn’t yell.” Really, that is not the gold standard for choosing the most powerful leader in the world.

Nobody promised democracy would be easy. But it’s been around for a long time; there’s no reason it can’t work as it is supposed to work.

Families can learn to live with their differences. If Americans stop the name-calling and work out disagreements with practical solutions, we can get along.

More pragmatism, less ideology and more compassion won’t mean losing our American values but rather keeping them.

Ann McFeatters is a columnist for Tribune News Service.