This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... I ... the ... the Americans still disapprove of Obamacare ... maybe that's why the law's supporters are turning out ads like this ... I ... it's the ... it's ... it's a ... since then ... I ... the ... former Institution Research Fellow Bill Whalen joins me now from California ... I know is that it set for use by enroll America any ad Council ... this smacks of desperation doesn't ... yesterday was ... it's as Syria so he didn't marry and that is failing to sign a women ... between the ages of eighteen and thirty four Ishino of the system works to remain young people on the front end of it for ... less healthy people on the back end ... that young women are not signing up and so are advertising minutes of sitting together in a room somewhere I presume you are ... trying to figure this all this is also looking at the idea of a animal cell ... I might use velvet pants for Obamacare is going to change my mind ... you have some other suggestions that for the ad campaign would give us a fee of ... well it's the ... I was just occurred at Sheehan's ... the conditions will say no to being a seller has no duty at ... any issues are upset about every facet of carriers between ... pregnancy and neonatal care for Concur notions of ... cosmetic surgery from cruise general costly metal helped us live from Kris Jenner for marriages fall apart so ... so was the other potash it's ... the Beaver ... Indian Justin Bieber well Justin Bieber has a problem the problem rests inside the White House ironically enough ... when is the petitioner in a hundred thousand people who went into corners ... so if you're the deeds of you prevent that from happening to present a favor and after Obamacare didn't just off the book on more serious note bail ... outs and politicians like saying Hillary Clinton ... sure I Hillary Clinton Hillary Clinton happens to be America's most respected woman she is more respected in the combined forces of ... Angela Merkel Michelle Obama actually literally in Queen Elizabeth the second ... besides you can trust to into Spiller the truth is the name to be fairly auto plant ... how about the president himself this is his long campaign on that ... I he in the policy Congress and pushed it through and so long ... I'm getting him out there and some ads encouraging people to sign a ... all ... things first off you listen to the status of the Union address ... you can call it Obamacare ... secondly the president has a problem and CNN editor call out this week Mary ... which showed the good news bad news for the president uses his approval rating was up four points from forty five percent ... but here's the bad news and what he can to Obamacare s three fourths of people surveyed in the pulpit in his policies is destined to fail seventh president of rather lousy spokesman endorser of his own plan ... no words in it they didn't get the car that needs to do at the lawns ... Corrections but I don't think unit trust the credit on this is just appears that is ... the distrust of the public on this one is dropped the shark ... and Hoover Institution Research Fellow Bill Whalen thank you so much for joining us ...