BOULDER COUNTY — The first of three convoys came from Lyons on Friday morning carrying loads of residents smiling and waving as they passed the roadblocks amid cheers.

Holli Stetson was waiting.

She found her mother, Cheron Boland, in one of the National Guard trucks coming out of town.

Stetson is still looking for her father, Jerry Boland, who did not evacuate with his wife .

Boland lives on the north side of town.

“With no bridges and too much water, there’s nowhere to go,” Stetson said. “We’re just getting more worried by the minute.”

Stetson said she saw a photo of her parents’ home, which had two feet of water rising along the sides. Stetson’s mother stayed with a family while she waited for help.

Meanwhile, the rain started falling again.

The convoys picked up the residents stranded by floodwaters in Lyons and brought them to drier ground, where the people got on buses to go to an evacuation center at LifeBridge Church.

Buses dropped off dazed people, then turned around to get more.

The evacuees carried boxes, animals, suitcases — whatever they were able to grab. Some elderly people were helped with wheelchairs, and children were still in pajamas.

As they got off the buses, volunteers at the church were crying, watching families reunite.

Jamie and Nate Mohatt had only been in Lyons 10 days when the sirens woke them up in the middle of Wednesday night. They came from Connecticut, where they lived through two hurricanes.

They lost power and sewer service, but their home is on high ground and they stayed in place with daughters Lucia, 3, and Esme, 8.

“The scariest thing was, you never knew when it was going to hit,” Jamie Mohatt said, referring to smelling natural gas through the rain for two days.

When the girls got off the bus, they had on shoes and socks and their pajamas, and they were hungry.

Rob and Lynda Clayton live in a mobile home park in Lyons. They woke up in the middle the night Wednesday and knew there was trouble, so they went to the church in town. When that was evacuated, they went to the shelter set up at the elementary school

“At first, it was all chaos and terrifying,” Rob Clayton said.

They said the people in the community rallied together to get meals, blankets and clothes for everyone.

Lynda Clayton works at the organic market in town. She said she recognized items from the shelves of the market, which had flooded.

For the couple, leaving Lyons was a relief, but also worrisome.

“We don’t know if we have anything,” Lynda Clayton said. “We don’t know if we’re going to get to go home. It’s the not knowing that’s the scariest.”