Rapid City, SD

Tree-thinning projects and careful burning of the slash piles they produce are regular parts of life in the Black Hills. But a thinning project sizzles every day in the middle of Rapid City, with barely a hint of smoke or public notice

The 70-acre project on city land in Skyline Wilderness Park began last September and is scheduled for completion in November.

And as it progresses, a timber crew from Colorado disposes of slash from the tree cutting with a portable incinerator called the BurnBoss.

It burns with very little sign of smoke at any distance from the machine.

"Sometimes, when they load the machine it breaks the air curtain, so you do get brief period of smoke," Lt. Tim Weaver, a wildfire mitigation officer for the Rapid City Fire Department said. "But it's really much, much less than if we were open-burning the material."

There's a lot of material coming out of the Skyline Drive Wilderness right now. And a lot more to come. Weaver says the dense pine trees have the potential to explode into a wildfire with the right ignition. And they also were more susceptible to the spread of mountain pine beetles that have moved into the area.

The project serves the dual purpose of slowing the spread of the mountain pine beetles and reducing the threat of fire. Along with reducing wildfire danger and slowing the spread of beetles, the project will clear pine from some areas to allow hardwoods varieties to grow.

The project is good news to nearby homeowner Ray Berberich, who has worried about the thick forest and its wildfire potential in the Skyline area.

"Yeah, overall, I think this whole skyline project and thinning it out is a good thing," Berberich said. "Not only for fire but also for bugs."

Berberich and several of his neighbors have thinned trees on their property. He's glad the public land is being thinned as well.

And the BurnBoss is essential to the work. The firebox offers efficient disposal of slash, and also eliminates the possible spread of pine beetles, because the wood is burned on sight rather than being transported.

The diesel-powered blower in the BurnBoss creates a curtain of air that gets things cooking at 1,800 degrees in an open concrete box. Wood goes in, but other than small puffs of smoke and barely noticeable ash, little else comes out.

"Because it burns so hot, it consumes all of the products of combustion," Weaver said. "So you don't have any smoke, you don't have any ash."

At least not enough for most people to notice.

News

Outdoors {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.