Jeff Tittel (file photo)

The head of the Sierra Club in New Jersey says the state wants to weaken surface water quality standards to the benefit of “developers and special interests.” But a spokesman for Gov. Chris Christie’s Department of Environmental Protection said no changes have been formally proposed since the department held a June 17 invitation-only meeting when discussion on “looking at these rules and considering ways to change and improve them’’ took place.

The Sierra Club’s Jeff Tittel in a conference call with reporters Wednesday said the DEP wants to make changes for nitrate, total dissolved solids and chloride standards.

One of the changes under consideration, Tittel said, is switching from measuring nitrates at the point of discharge from a sewer point, and instead making the reading at the drinking water supply intake. That would allow for higher levels of nitrates and pollutants to be discharged, Tittel charged.

“This is a sneak attack on our clean water and our drinking supplies,’’ Tittel said.

DEP spokesman Larry Ragonese said, "There is nothing negative or hidden about this process. It is being done openly and in concert with New Jersey stakeholders.’’

“The overall goal is to increase protections in streams over current levels where there are existing or planned potable water intakes, and in streams where there are no potable water intakes,’’ Ragonese added.

Bob Jordan Statehouse Reporter: Bob Jordan has been writing about New Jersey politics and Gov. Chris Christie from the state capital since 2010 for the Asbury Park Press. He blogs on the Capitol Quickies site, which gets 20,000 hits a month, and has provided political analysis for MSNBC, News12, NJTV, My9 New Jersey, Aljazeera America and other media outlets. Via social media, Jordan has 1,000 followers on Twitter and is a prolific engager with other political junkies on Facebook. Jordan previously covered local government and spent more than 10 years as a sports writer on travel beats with the New Jersey Devils, New York Rangers and New York Mets. Among his honors is an FBI commendation as part of the Press’ coverage of the Operation Bid Rig investigation into Monmouth County government corruption.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1mPWWmQ