Earlier this week, Andover, MA-based company Blink close its crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter for its wireless home monitoring and alert system. The project originally sought to raise $200,000 but successfully reached $1,069,386 all thanks to 6,879 backers.

Blink has been dubbed the first ultra-affordable smart home monitoring system that is battery-powered, making it truly wireless, and it is even HD. It is considered one-of-a-kind and equally perfect for rents or homeowners.

Explaining more about the monitoring, the Blink team stated, “Create a system that covers your entryways and windows, monitors the garage, or keeps a watchful eye over the kids’ room. Plus our unique technology delivers more than a full year of battery life for extended, no-hassle peace of mind.”

“Blink is thoughtfully designed to make peace of mind easy and accessible. As soon as motion is detected, video starts recording and an alert is sent to your smartphone or tablet, so you can see exactly what caused the alert and decide how to react.”

Blinks features are the following:

HD Video: Ensures that the user gets a clear view of their home or business, with minimal distortion or blurring.

Motion Detection: When armed, any detected motion triggers the recording of a short video clip.

Instant Alerts: The user can quickly receive a push notification or email alert with a link to the video attached, so you can decide how to respond.

Live View: Easily access on-demand video streaming through the Blink app.

Instant On: Video recording starts within a fraction of a second, so you’ll get a clear look at who or what triggered the alert.

Temperature Sensor: Easily monitor the temperature in the user’s home.

Night Vision: The LED Illuminator, coupled with advanced low-light performance of the company’s proprietary technology, ensures that the user will see what’s happening, day or night.

Built-in Microphone: Allows easy audio access, so the user can see and hear what’s happening at home.

Privacy Assurance: A non-hackable, hardware-based LED indicator and optional audio alert lets the user know when Blink is recording, or Live View mode, so they will never be caught off guard.

Status Alerts: Receive notification when the Wi-Fi connection at home is lost, or when it’s time for a battery change.

During a recent interview, co-founder of Blink, Don Shulsinger, stated that they determined there was no product like the Blink existing on the market today. He also sees Blink being the beginning of a great product line they can offer to consumers. He also commits to be adding Apple’s home kit/iOS integration plus rolling in Android functionality.