Guntram Schneider has called for an “anti-stress law.” Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

BERLIN — According to the cliché, Germany is the land of efficiency. While the truth might not be far off, all that productivity is stressing out the euro-zone’s powerhouse economy.

This week, a minister in Germany’s most populous state called for an “anti-stress law” banning work-related calls and emails outside of working hours. The labor ministry says it has been researching the idea for some time.

Being on call “can’t be fundamentally condemned like the Spanish inquisition,” but the country needs “a law through which employers can’t be allowed to contact employees at specific times,” Guntram Schneider, labor minister of North Rhine-Westphalia told the Rheinische Post this week.

The proposal, which unions have backed for years, comes as Chancellor Angela Merkel and most of the German government relax on summer vacation — although Merkel has spent at least some of her trip on the phone to Russian President Vladimir Putin.

Work stress is currently a hot topic in the German media. Current law demands employers provide a safe and healthy working environment, but unions like the Deutscher Gewerkschaftsbund say many companies are lagging on this with regards to psychological stress.

An article on the front page of Thursday’s Bild-Zeitung tabloid sounded the alarm that “Every fifth person is reachable by the boss after knocking-off time.” According to a study cited by Bild, every third person feels being constantly available is a burden on health, and around one in four employees is too tired for personal commitments after work.

German working hours are amongst the lowest of the 34 countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and about 25% below the OECD average. People in Germany work just under 1,400 hours a year, compared with nearly 1,800 in the U.S. and the OECD average of 1,765 hours.

Clemens Kirschbaum, professor of psychology at the Dresden University of Technology, said those numbers don’t necessarily account for the German mentality geared towards maximum efficiency and productivity at work and in life.

Based on his experience abroad, Kirschbaum said “the whole nation has a different concept of organization and time management. A lot more gets done [in Germany] in eight hours than in eleven or twelve in other countries.”

Multi-tasking work and family life and being constantly available on smartphones and email has led to a “definite” increase in chronic stress here, Kirschbaum said. “Far too little time is spent switched off, just to withdraw in peace. It’s not conducive to good health” and can lead to hypertension, burn-out, and depression, he said.

Germany amended labor law in late 2012 to include employee protection from risks to mental as well as physical health on the job. According to a labor ministry spokesman, research is ongoing into ways of requiring employers to minimize job stress that could form the basis for a legal framework. The new German government, formed late last year, said in its coalition treaty that it plans to address the “drastic increase in [work-related] psychological illnesses,” potentially through government regulation.

Earlier this year, companies and workers in neighboring France agreed to allow certain workers the right to switch off calls and email after hours.

Pending similar legislation in Germany, Kirschbaum suggests tackling work stress by finding time to switch off the smartphone and do something fun – be it sport, cooking, or spending time with friends.