The doctor said it would take one stitch to close the wound. It took two.

I was in the emergency room at Boone County Hospital because of an accident in my MU research lab. A teletype machine (pre-portable computer) had been knocked over, and as I reached out to grab it an edge of the metal sliced open my finger. Although it bled, it didn’t really hurt. The doctor wasn’t worried, and neither was I — until we discussed who would pay for the stitches.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

I was working that summer as a research assistant in the Physics Department. I was not taking any classes but was conducting research toward my degree. I was paid by the university and was therefore a university employee. Or was I? MU said I wasn’t a student because I was not taking classes, but it also said I wasn’t faculty or staff and therefore not an employee. Instead, I was a graduate student — an apparently mysterious entity that worked hard, conducted teaching and research for the university, got paid a minimal amount by the university but somehow really didn’t exist as an employee.

That was in the summer of 1981. In 1982 I was part of a task force composed of graduate and professional students that formed the Graduate Professional Council (GPC). I became its first president. Part of the rationale behind the GPC was to formalize the standing of graduate and professional students within the university and to provide a voice for their unique concerns. At the time of the GPC’s formation, curators were facing a tuition hike and considering two options — they could raise tuition for all students uniformly across the board, or they could raise graduate student tuition more than undergraduate because “it costs more to educate a graduate student than an undergrad.” (That notion is incorrect but continues in various guises to haunt graduate and professional students to this day.)

Graduate teaching and research assistants, including their colleagues in professional schools, are vital to MU’s daily effective operation. Because they are paid a fraction of what it would cost to pay faculty, they lower the cost of an undergraduate education and strengthen the benefit/cost ratio of research, which creates new economic capacity for all Missourians. They are, in truth, essential employees of the university but typically are not treated in a manner commensurate with their daily contributions to effective research, teaching and stakeholder service. Instead, salaries of graduate assistants are maintained at sub-par levels, inexpensive graduate housing is torn down (without planned replacement), critical services such as child care are discontinued and health care subsidies are eliminated.