Topics: Books, Dear Mr. You, Editor's Picks, Love and Sex, mary louise parker, Parenting, Life News, Entertainment News

I was told I’d like Mary Louise Parker. I was inclined to. Not only because I’m a fan of her acting and like that she’s an oddball who seems allergic to bullshit, but because she too is a member of the dead dad’s club, and her first book has her dad’s fingerprints all over it. Parker’s debut, “Dear Mr. You,” is a celebration of the masculine presented in the form of letters penned to various men in Parker’s life, including the grandfather she never met, her accountant and the “future man who loves my daughter” (which appeared in a column Parker wrote for Esquire).

In person, Parker buzzes with an electric intelligence, moving at warp speed between the poetry of Philip Larkin, the life of bees, blow jobs and Yaqui Indian holy days. She is warm, pathologically charming, quick to laugh, and her trademark second-too-long stare — which makes her appear capable of breaking down the molecular structure of a spoon — suggests she is just dialed in deeper to the universe than the rest of us poor fools. Which you’d only need read the book to discover.

Our conversation took place in a diner in Brooklyn Heights. We began talking about how loud it is appropriate to talk in a café, given the ratio of customers on computers to just-there-for-the-brew customers, and ended nearly two hours later recalling our favorite lines from Kevin Young’s “Bereavement,” a poem about the sudden death of his father and the dogs he’d left behind. “Their grief is colossal and forgetful,” we say.

The good news — no, the great news — is that “Dear Mr. You” is a revelation and Ms. Parker, who I hope writes many more books, the real deal.

I’m going to be honest and say I didn’t know what to expect from “Dear Mr. You.” I’ve always been a fan of your acting, but when I heard you had written a book I was like, God, I hope it’s good. I knew you’d written for Esquire, but I had no idea you were such a gifted, natural, amazing like I’m dog-earing-pages-and-underlining-sentences good writer. I could imagine people in the literary world rolling their eyes like, Super, another Tom-Hanks-in-the-New-Yorker situation.

My agent wanted to send it out blind without my name on it. That was a very good idea.

It was a very good idea.

The tricky thing about the book is, you know, Mary Louise Parker wrote a book, but it’s hopefully not the book that you think she would write. There’s very little about acting in the book anyway. It wasn’t like a conscious omission or anything. It wasn’t one of those stories that I was compelled to tell. It’s not like I’m a hugely famous person. It’s not like I’m an icon or something — why would you wanna read it anyway? It would be pretty audacious of me to write a book like that.

And I love books and I love reading and I love writing. I’m not interested in reading those other kind of books, either, and I completely understand that someone would think that’s what I wrote, of course they would be skeptical because why would they think otherwise? Unless they read my writing in Esquire. After a certain point I got used to people making comments, like Did you write that yourself? I didn’t really tell anyone I was writing a book. I just saw a couple of smirks, which I understand, I really do.

Plus, you are a famously private person.

I’m not interested in laying out the story of life in any way or sense. Whatever was revealed about me in this book was by default. I was telling all these stories about these men, and I took a lot of creative license with it. I wanted to write a book that was entirely about gratitude but still unflinching in the way that I depicted certain things — and about the fact that I haven’t figured out all of this.

Some people have called it a memoir but it’s more literary non-fiction.

It was not a memoir to me. How could it be? There’s so little about acting, there’s so little about so much of my life. The term memoir — there’s no give in that definition, that I realized.

I think also you have to write the book you want to read and the book only you can write. Someone else can write a book about you, and if you worked with them it could be a perfectly acceptable representation of your life. But no one else could write this book. Only you could write this book. I don’t know why anybody would waste their time writing something they don’t care deeply about or that they’re not really passionate about. If you really do things wholeheartedly, you wouldn’t want to compromise like that.

What inspired the book, what sparked it was my relationship with my dad. At the end of the day that’s why the book exists at all. On a number of levels, so much of it, even the cover – I wanted that oyster on the cover, you know, for my dad.

My first book — it’s a novel in short stories — is in part about my father.

Really? Some people don’t get that. They’re suspicious of it.

People are suspicious of the daddy thing. And they’re suspicious of women who like men. When a man likes women, it’s a really positive thing. If a woman says she likes men, it’s like warning bells.

I never thought about that before. I think that’s probably true.

When a man likes women, it’s seen as a positive thing. You know, “Oh, George Clooney, he really likes women,” and every one goes, “Wow, how marvelous!”

Why wouldn’t he?

I know. But if a woman who enjoys the company of men, she’s suddenly suspect. It’s, “Oh, she’s one of those women–a woman who doesn’t like women.”

Oh right, right, right. “Who needs that attention?” — which is also true. What’s wrong with that? It’s lovely attention to have, and to bask in it is lovely. Why wouldn’t you want that? If you live your life at the expense of other things, obviously, that’s a different story. But the book is just about things male. Themes male and textures and smells and things like that. Like in “Man out of Time” —

The man you meet at the party with the beautiful shoes, who has cancer…

— the way he’s dressed, there’s something so male about him. He was really beautiful.

That reminds me, we meet his girlfriend in that piece … Some reader-reviewers have objected to the fact that there aren’t more women in the book.

In “Dear Orderly,” I go on about my mother, but the point is, that’s not the book I wrote. I wrote a book called, “Dear Mr. You.” I didn’t write a book called, “This Is the Story of My Life and My Appreciation of Humanity.”

I don’t read comments or reviews or things like that, so it gives me the freedom to kind of imagine whatever book I wanted. I wasn’t doing something to try to please someone, except my Dad, wherever he is, and myself.

It’s really quite simple to untangle. It’s like these are some men that I found heroic, and I wanted to write my own rumination on that, and I wrote it in probably four and a half months. It might have been a different book if I had more time to write it. There are a lot of people I would have loved to have written about.

Did you write any letters that didn’t make the cut?

Oh yeah, many.

Was it because you were dissatisfied with the way they turned out, or in the end, did they not work as part of the whole?

Well, some felt like they were repeating an emotional note. Some weren’t as vivid. Then there was one about this painter that I love so much, and he had a very big effect on my life. I was actually writing it the night that I got sick — that turned into “Dear Doctor.”

And I do like that letter, it just didn’t fit in with the rest of the book. It was tonally very different. But some of my favourite sentences were in that letter.

There is one letter, “Dear Cerberus,” that is written not to one man, but to three beastly ex-boyfriends who you say, “You were the worst of those I called darling.”

That’s a conversation that I still have with myself. I fully don’t understand those relationships, but I am grateful for them as corny as it sounds–there were sweet aspects to those relationships. In the book I say, “I could be the bad person in someone else’s story.”

You are exceptionally even-handed.

There’s one mean line in the entire book, and I just could not take it out, because I liked it so much.

I think I know what it is.

In the end, I admit that “Having sex with you was like making snow angels under a rhino” — I couldn’t take that out.

I knew it. And no, you’re not going to kill that darling,

I didn’t say who it was! When I was writing for Esquire, I once wrote something, or maybe twice if I’m honest … I took a shot at somebody, in some way, for a joke. It was not that funny, the piece was not better — I was so filled with shame when I saw it. I really don’t think I would ever do that again. It would take a lot. Words are so powerful to me, and now they’re so endurable and transferable, and they show up somewhere else 20 years later. There’s no reason.

I wanted to write — I have a son — something positive, something good. These are good stories about people that don’t get told. These men, they’re heroic and incredible, and Father Bob [“Dear Father Bob,” in which MLP asks the minister if there is anyone in Hell] changed the entire way I look at religion just by pausing before he answered my question at the age of nine. It had a profound effect on the way I treat other people.

Is that so?

I’m a deeply, deeply, obviously flawed person but I wanted it to be something sweet. I didn’t want it to be an indictment of anyone or a finger wagging, because I could write that book. It could be really clever, and there are a lot of things I could say that are salacious or whatever. But, that’s not what I want to show my children.

I’ve written things that, at the time, I thought were so clever, so funny, so smart, but in hindsight just seem naked and pathetic. The person who took the napalm to the face doesn’t see it as naked or pathetic, of course; they just see what I wrote as nasty.

The most injurious thing is to make someone believe something unkind about themselves. There’s nothing I can do, there’s no bubble I can put myself in, that will protect me from cynicism and disdain and aggression. I’m totally aware that that’s a world I live in, because I chose to do this with my life. Had there been cell phones and Internet when I started acting, I’d probably be a kindergarten teacher.

If that technology existed while I was in high school, I would have had to kill myself to protect my family’s honor.

No way, no way. There’s no way. There’s so many more ways of being dishonest now that didn’t exist before, in terms of, like, the way people flirt with each other on the Internet. Or the way that people behave inappropriately or things that we say about one another — it depresses me. People have been so kind to me. I’m always so grateful for that.

I really don’t care if someone takes issue with what I wrote for lack of … bitchiness. My children were at the book party last night and I really felt like they understood what was different about my book. My son especially was proud, and that’s, like, as big an achievement as my parents being proud of me. I got to have that moment for just a little second. It’s hard for me to take in things that are good sometimes. I got to feel that for a second. I’m glad that when they grow up — if they choose to read it — that’s the book I wrote.

The first book you wrote.

Yeah, hopefully. I can just flail around for a whole decade. It’s hard to organize me.

It’s just that I can’t decide. Obviously I haven’t had a lot of space to sit around and think, but it just isn’t clear yet. But thank you for saying my first book. I want to so deeply start writing again, because I feel good when I’m doing it. Not a lot of stuff feels this good.

I get it. Nothing in the world feels as good as writing when it’s going well. Writing is the only thing I’ve ever done outside of being a mother that when I’m doing it I don’t feel like there is something else, something else more important, that I should be doing.

I have it on stage as well. It’s hard to give to that and be a mother. So I don’t do as many plays as I used to.

And your kids are proud of you!

Well, they were for a second. But I don’t know if they are, or they should be, because I’m not the world’s most perfect mother.

Who is? Who would like her?

Right, right!

Something that I liked — this gets back to what we were talking about earlier — what would people go for the book for? One thing a certain kind of reader is going to go to the book for is a letter to your ex. [Billy Crudup, who in an act of supreme dickishness left MLP for Claire Danes when she was seven months pregnant.] But he’s not physically there. Instead what we see in “Dear Mr. Cab Driver” is you, hugely pregnant, having an epic meltdown and screaming at a Sikh taxi driver.

I don’t know how you could have any faith in me as the narrator of that book, if I didn’t present myself honestly. There’s a moment where somebody unwittingly held up a mirror — just by staring at me …

We all suffer in different ways.

I was so caught up in myself, and feeling persecuted. Had I reacted a different way that morning, I would’ve been heroic but I had about this much going for me. I feel like you can maybe invest in me a little bit more as the person who’s telling you the stories in this book.