To quote a 5-year-old patient of mine, drinking water with lead is very bad for the brain.

Well, John Kasich’s Medicaid Waiver 1115 is really bad for Ohio. It’s not just more “skin in the game” for more than 1 million Ohio Medicaid patients — it’s skin, flesh, bone, and much more.

The “Un-healthy Ohio” waiver plan calls for monthly premiums, additional co-pays for already down and out, hard-working Medicaid patients, and requires a multi-layer bureaucracy of an elaborate debit card swiping and tracking system which is complicated and costly. It is a prescription for disaster for up to 130,000 Ohioans estimated to be kicked out and denied access to health care.

At a time when doctors and health care systems are trying to achieve the triple aim of better medical outcomes, of a more affordable and higher quality health care, the Ohio waiver is trying to do the opposite. It’s an experiment doomed for failure — as other states have already seen.

When Oregon tried a premium program, 80,000 patients dropped out instantaneously, similar to Wisconsin. When Arkansas tried a similar cost sharing or “skin in the game” program, the cost to run it was so high that the state abandoned it. When Virginia tried the same, it spent $1.39 for every $1 of premium collected and 4,000 children were going to be dropped out. That program is now ended.

When compared to other waiver programs like the Indiana program, the Ohio plan is more severe as it affects patients at a lower Federal Poverty Level, as it punishes patients if they are late with paying the premiums and when dropped from the program, they have no place to go, except maybe to the local emergency rooms for a really expensive and inefficient care. At a time when doctors are beginning to address the important social determinants that affect health care delivery, the Ohio plan takes us back to the pre -Affordable Care Act time period.

The ACA achieved expansion of care to millions of low-income, working poor Ohioans, only to see this potentially undone by an “Un-healthy Ohio” waiver plan. Locking patients out also means interruption of care and treatment of chronic and mental diseases that are so crucial to them and will be disastrous in the long term. The same patients of mine that cannot afford the basic necessities or rent will not afford to pay the premiums.

The public comment period at medicaid.Ohio.gov is now open until mid-May, so can we have 1 million Ohioan voices tell John Kasich to quit kicking Medicaid patients around? Ohio plans to submit the waiver to the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, in June and the federal public comment period starts thereafter. Concerned citizens will then be able to comment to CMS. I definitely will.