In some ways, the Hall County Library System is a microcosm of how budget cuts impacted public services during the economic recession.

Despite public support, libraries are often first on the chopping block when deficits arise.

And a double whammy of cuts from the local and state level “made it really difficult” for the library system in recent years, said Hall County Commission Chairman Richard Mecum.

Two branches were shuttered in Hall County as the library system’s budget fell to about $2.6 million this year from about $3.7 million in 2008.

Layoffs, a reduction in hours of operation and furlough days for workers were among the cuts made.

But while funding has been restored for many programs at both the local and state levels as the economy recovers, libraries continue to face the pinch.

For example, the county library system will lose about $83,000 in funding from the state in the 2016 fiscal year, which begins July 1, resulting in the loss of at least one employee.

The state funds about a quarter of the library system’s budget, but changes to its funding formula have directed more and more spending toward rural communities, leaving local government in places like Hall to consider filling in the gap.

“It feels like 2008,” said Mark Pettitt, a member of the library Board of Trustees.

During a budget presentation before the Hall County Board of Commissioners on Monday morning, Pettitt laid out the library system’s request for an additional $200,000 in local funding. The library received about $1.9 million from the county in the current fiscal year.

If approved, that money would go to end furlough days, and also help bolster a dwindling reserve fund, now down to about $117,000, which has been used to cover shortfalls in recent years.

The library system will benefit from the recent passage of a new five-year round of special purpose local option sales tax, or SPLOST VII, with $2.5 million in revenues earmarked for renovations to the main library branch in Gainesville, as well as the purchase of new materials.

But SPLOST money cannot be used for operational expenses, and library representatives and supporters said they hope Hall County will step up to meet their needs.

“We’re at the bottom of the barrel,” said library system Director Adrian Mixson. “We’re struggling to operate.”

The library Board of Trustees is also pushing for Gainesville and Oakwood to begin collecting impact fees from new development and construction to support local libraries.

Hall County and Flowery Branch are the only local governments to collect these impact fees for the library.

While Hall spends significantly less on library funding per capita than Forsyth and Gwinnett counties, a point library officials made on Monday, commissioners said this isn’t a fair comparison.

Higher home prices in those counties mean more property tax revenues, they said, and Forsyth only doles out money to support one municipality, for example.

“We’re not Forsyth,” Commissioner Scott Gibbs said. “We’ve got to figure out somewhere to cut costs.”

Without additional funding, Pettitt said tough funding choices are coming, and it’s hard for board members to know where to even begin.

“We’re going to have to have a very candid conversation about where to cut,” he added.

The appeals for more funding for the library system during Monday’s budget presentation were highlighted by young Josh Lander.

His mother, Ashley, explained that Josh, who is 5 years old, has a prolonged illness for which he receives treatment at Emory University.

So Josh is taught at home, using the library as a major resource for his learning.

“I cannot reiterate the importance of the library and the resources that are provided there for us and for him,” Ashley said. “We’re library rats. Some people hang out at the gym ... we hang out at the library. And because of that we have been able to keep up with his education ...”

Josh, delivering his own appeal, made it known just how much he values libraries.

“I love the library because I love to read,” Josh said. “Sometimes when I wake up and I want to go to the library ... it’s closed. And it makes me sad.”