On second thought, Virginia . . .

Glendale: Dear Virginia, After carefully weighing all the changes in the modern world, I need to tell you: Your friends may be right about Santa Claus after all. I suspect you are angry with me for lying to you, but it has become unbearable for me to keep the truth from you any longer. I am sending this letter to you now so I can have a clear conscience.

Your parents will not be able to provide for you in ways they dreamed possible. This is due in part to something called debt, which is so overwhelming for some of us. Virginia, Santa Claus, if he ever had a chance of being real, would have escaped with his reindeer to a country where children appreciate having loving parents and place little value on what may be under the tree. Virginia, if I can please be just a tad more truthful about your future, I recommend you grow up and become an astronaut. Maybe you can get in a big rocket ship and plead with Santa to come back to us. Tell him how sorry us humans are about ignoring the magic of Christmas. Jonathan Kiddrane

It sounded holy

Coram, L.I.: A few years back, we were watching the lighting of the Christmas tree, when all of a sudden this beautiful voice started singing “O Holy Night.” Could it be? Yes! It was Bowzer. No one ever topped Sha Na Na. Helen Purdes

It’s about Jesus

Brooklyn: For some, Christmas has become the gift-giving holiday. But Christmas is and always will be the celebration of the birth of Christ. Merry Christmas to all. Lillie Bongiorno

Look it up

Brooklyn: To Voicer Caroline Robicheaux: So you do not need to know the exact date of Jesus’ birth to celebrate it? So that means that you don’t care if His apostles and His disciples never celebrated his birth, right? If you read the Bible, you would know that the only day that Jesus instructed His followers to celebrate was His “death.” Joseph Denis

Happy holidays

Long Island City: To Voicer Marty Goodman: I have never been inside a church. I have been accused of killing Christ since I was a little boy. If you feel Christmas Day should be celebrated by both Jews and gentiles, count me out. You must be smoking or joking. Steve Chaddock

Petty Christmas to all

Cortlandt Manor, N.Y.: So the Daily News now has a problem with Jamie Dimon’s holiday card? Perhaps Dimon should have dressed his family up as generational welfare recipients, tin cups in hand, looking for another handout. What I see in those pictures are a family that is having some fun and apparently loves each other (imagine that!). Finally, the last time I checked, Dimon, a native New Yorker, got to where he is through hard work despite his recent hardships. To drag his family into something made up is a real cheap shot. Michael P. Devine

A crying shame

Old Bridge, N.J.: It’s that time of year again, when otherwise understanding and tolerant people lash out and bash the holiday of Christmas, celebrated nationwide by a decent and diverse population. How did this obtrusive situation come about when Americans have always prided themselves as being a nation of tolerant and good people? Salvatore Cannavo

For the rest of us

Edison, N.J.: To Voicer Marc Hohenstein: Christmas is a lovely time of the year, but it is a completely Christian holiday, and has nothing to do with being Jewish. As Jews, we should respect the religions of others and wish them well during their holidays. However, Christmas is not our holiday to celebrate; we have our own beautiful celebrations throughout the year, and you should revel in those. Cindy Cohen

Cut the Kard

Manhasset Hills, L.I.: Please stop feeding into the no-talent fame-glutton Kardashian media machine. How has Kylie Jenner earned a quarter page promoting beauty tips? Did we need to see the latest Kardashian holiday card? Why be an enabler of these Hollywood junkies? That’s what People magazine is for. We’ve become their suckers! Jim Lolis

Light the way

Staten Island: As we all get ready to celebrate the holidays, many families will have empty seats around their holiday tables. Let’s all please say a prayer for those families and those who gave their life so you and I can live the American Dream. Please show your support by placing a single electric candle in your window for the group of your choice: blue for NYPD and other law enforcement, red for FDNY, firefighters and EMS, and yellow for our military troops. May we all find the spirit of kindness. This is written in memory of Police Officer David Willis, who died in the line of duty in 1995 while assigned to the NYPD’s 10th Precinct. Dave, we miss you. Detective John Madden, NYPD Intelligence Bureau

A prayer

Manhattan: To the NYPD and FDNY: May your working hours be boring, with no horrible accidents or crimes. And may your time off, with or without family, be happy and content. May God bless all of you, now and through the holiday season. Terry Quidone

Neither holly nor jolly

Kearny, N.J.: Our long national nightmare is over. Obamacare? Congress gridlock? No! Beginning today, the Xmas music that started in early November will soon be over. Bye-bye! Kevin Dale

All is lost, all is blight

Middle Village: Political correctness has reached a new low. Some celebrities sing “Silent Night” without the words “Jesus” or “Christ the Savior” in the lyrics. Orlando Metcalf

Misery loves company

Brooklyn: Voicer Jimmy B. Block doesn’t approve of Court St.’s Christmas decorations looking more like a Cinco de Mayo fiesta than the Christmas season. Although I concur totally, what planet is he living on? New York City as a whole has become a Third World country. This process began a while ago, and the transformation is now complete. Most original New Yorkers left our dear city. The middle class had been pushed aside. I, too, am moving to Joisey soon. Never thought I’d say that. Thom Murphy

Actually, he’s pink

Keyport, N.J.: Megyn Kelly, Fox newswoman, says that Santa Claus is white. People of color are beside themselves with anger. Well, as a Caucasian, I am deeply offended that all the reindeer pulling Santa’s sleigh are brown-skinned. No diversity there. Larry Pristavec

Color of fear

North Arlington, N.J.: It is my belief that Jesus and Santa Claus should be whatever color suits the individual. So it didn’t bother me when, on different cable shows over the years, I witnessed numerous people of color say that, in their opinion, Jesus was a color other than white. Evidently it didn’t bother the media either, because I never read anything addressing what was said on this subject. Now Megyn Kelly opines that it is her opinion that Jesus and Santa Claus are white; the liberal media go ballistic over her statements. It’s ironic that the same media completely ignored her reporting on many negative aspects of Obamacare. Could it be that her coverage of Obamacare is the reason that her take on the color of Jesus and Santa are getting so much attention now? Armand Rose

Model citizens

Bronx: In response to Voicer Lara Day’s outrage that Bergdorf’s mannequins are only white, I say this: Lara, with all that is going on in this world, with all the homeless, our soldiers in harm’s way, with starving people — you are concerned about the color of the mannequins? I am sure Bergdorf’s is more concerned about people enjoying their displays and coming into the store to buy rather than people looking at what color the mannequins are! I pass that store on my way to work and I can tell you this — the color of their faces is the last thing I am looking at! I look and admire the beauty of their storefronts, that’s it. Laura Terra

It’s Scripture

Brooklyn: These are the words of Jesus himself: “But from the beginning of the creation God made them Male and Female. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife; and they shall be one flesh.” What he’s saying is that marriage is between a man and a woman! But America, including President Obama, has decided that sacrifice is better than obedience. “They profess that they know God; but in works they deny him being abominable and disobedient.” Michael Dungee