Most Popular

1 The Media Must Decide Whether to Follow Donald Trump Down the Sewer

2 The Democratic Platform Committee Now Has a Progressive Majority. Thanks, Bernie Sanders.

3 Clinton Needs Sanders Supporters to Win, But Sanders Needs Clinton Supporters to Change the System

4 Anthony Weiner Wasn’t the Only One Who Couldn’t Stop Exposing Himself

5 This Will Be a Historic (and Terrifying) Election for Gun Control

To date, My Brother’s Keeper is supported by a pledge of $200 million from the philanthropic community and an additional $100 million from corporations including AT&T, UBS and JPMorgan Chase. No similar infusion of cash has been announced for the Council on Women and Girls, which has been around since 2009.

When I spoke to her this summer for my report on the debate surrounding MBK, Brooklyn-based Girls for Gender Equity director Joanne Smith had similar concerns about the capacity of the Council on Women and Girls, which hosted a research symposium she attended earlier this year. “The hats that Valerie [Jarrett] and Tina [Tchen] wear are admirable, but they’re multiple hats,” Smith said of the Council’s leadership. “The attention that women and girls need will require staffing, will require infrastructure.”

And infrastructure means money. But despite the lack of financial support, a kind of movement focused on the needs of girls and women of color is building steam. In July, AAPF hosted a town-hall meeting in Los Angeles where a dozen women and girls of color testified about their experiences in foster care, juvenile detention and the sex trade.

There will be similar events in New York City in the coming weeks, Crenshaw said. Of finding and partnering with the organizations that serve these girls, Crenshaw said there’s a common denominator: “We find that most of them are starved, both in terms of having champions for the work but also in terms of having resources.”

Leadership from the Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights Under Law and the National Organization for Women will come together Monday to talk about the relationship between gender and police brutality, and new research is circulating, including a report from the NAACP Legal Defense Fund and National Women’s Law Center highlighting staggering stats like this one: while black girls make up just 17 percent of female students, they’re a third of all girls referred to law enforcement and about 43 percent of girls who are arrested because of some school-related offense. The types of offenses, often minor and subjective, show how the nation’s classrooms push out girls of color alongside the boys.

Conversations and research like this are what’s needed to break through the commonly held misperception that girls of color are doing just fine, MBK’s critics have argued.

“What’s important is to actually paint the picture for the community of what has not been seen,” Crenshaw said. “What makes people think that this [MBK] is a common sense approach is because they don’t have a sensibility about what’s actually happening.”