The affordable Healthcare Act or Obamacare has been one of the most contentious issues of President Obama’s administration and Presidency. The Affordable Healthcare Act is also one of President Obama’s most successful and lasting legacies. The success of the Affordable Healthcare system made headlines during its launch. Although, the beginning of the health care initiative wasn’t as idyllic as it was hoped to be.

There were several technical glithces due to which the initial launch of the affordable healthcare act were mired in problems and controversies. Obamacare then tweaked the error on the system and relaunched the program with a robust technology that would preclude any problems.

The contention

Obamacare also became one of the most politically contentious issues. Most of the problems that had challenged the affordable healthcare act were primarily political. Obamacare was a major challenge to get through both the houses of congress.

The health care system basically worked at trying to enable various American citizens to have basic and general medical facilities such as access to a physician. In many cases a majority of the American citizens were not able to have basic healthcare amenities. The affordable healthcare act also allowed most of the lower income group people to have access to basic medical insurance policies and claims.

On the launch of the Affordable Healthcare Act, the opposing Republican Party went out guns blazing claiming that the move to make healthcare a matter of government involvement would be detrimental to the American people and economy. The Republicans are typically a free market proponent and propose minimum government involvement.

The Republican Party had put up a very intransigent front on opposing the Affordable Healthcare Act for the sake of it. Allegations of the Affordable Healthcare Act killing democracy and free market by driving out private enterprises from the region were also made.

An unexpected solution

Nearly half a decade after the Act was passed, the act has seemed to benefit more people than caused damage. The Republican Party has opposed the Affordable Healthcare Act ever since its inception and still do so claiming that they would repeal the bill once they have power of government. On the other hand the majority of the top Healthcare CEO’s of private firms have benefited drastically from the Affordable Healthcare Act and are actively opposing its repulsion. Over 70 percent of the private sector seem to be benefiting from the act and are in favor of its continuity.