A jury convicted Roseville resident Oleg Tarasuk, 52, of second-degree murder this week along with four other felonies in connection with a three-vehicle collision that killed a pedestrian near Washington Boulevard in 2012.

The jury announced its verdict March 5 at a hearing in Roseville after less than three hours of deliberation, finding Tarasuk also guilty of causing injury to another person while committing a moving violation under the influence of alcohol, causing injury to another person while driving with a blood alcohol level of .08 percent or more, having wanton disregard for public safety while evading an officer, and resisting an officer in the performance of his duty.

Tarasuk has been in custody since his arrest on Aug. 14, 2012, when he fled officers while being detained at a recycling center on Washington Boulevard on suspicion of DUI, because someone had called 911 to report him for driving recklessly.

According to witness testimonies, he was cooperative with officers at first but then started his truck, resisted their efforts to turn it off, fled south on Washington at approximately 50 miles per hour and drove over the median at the intersection of Main Street, where a pedestrian, 26-year-old Gregory De La Campa, was standing on the sidewalk with his wife, Julia. De La Campa was killed instantly, and the drivers of two other vehicles were injured in a collision with Tarasuk’s truck. It was Tarasuk’s second DUI arrest in 12 years, and an hour after the collision, a blood test revealed his blood alcohol level to be .23 percent.

Prosecution and defense presented different scenarios of exactly what happened during the collision and which vehicle killed De La Campa, and Tarasuk’s conviction hinged on which one the jury found more plausible.

Defense attorney Ken Giffard called private investigator Larry Fink, who testified that his forensic analysis of the involved vehicles indicated that a Ford Escape driven by Dana Verducci struck De La Campa first, launching him into the air and onto the hood of Tarasuk’s truck, which then broadsided the Escape.

Deputy District Attorney Doug Van Breemen called his own expert witness, retired investigator Michael Allison, to refute Fink’s testimony. Allison said De La Campa would have been launched out of the truck’s way if the Escape had hit him first, and in fact he’d been hit first by the truck and had his legs pinned between it and the Escape for a moment before being thrown to the other side of the street by momentum.

“(Fink’s theory) defies the laws of physics,” Allison said of a body being launched straight up, instead of up and forward, by a car. “That cannot happen.”

Before Van Breemen and Giffard made their closing arguments, Judge Jeffrey Penney briefed the jury on its options and duties. Penney said that in order to convict Tarasuk of second-degree murder, the jury needed to find two things: causation, or that death was a direct and probable consequence of Tarasuk’s actions and would not have occurred without them; and malice aforethought, indicating not that he intended to kill but that he intentionally committed an act knowing that it was dangerous, and that he acted with willful disregard for that fact.

In his closing statements, Giffard reminded the jury that Tarasuk had been calm and cooperative with officers until they tried to tase him and rammed his vehicle trying to stop it, and that before the collision, none of the officers told Tarasuk he was under arrest or asked for his keys. He went on to say that Verducci told officers after the collision that she was afraid she might have hit a pedestrian, and he questioned the application of physics in Allison’s testimony given so many variables.

“You can make references to Isaac Newton… but you have to use a little bit of common sense in these (cases),” Giffard told the jury. “(De La Campa) was hit by two vehicles, and Verducci’s hit him first.”

Van Breemen began his closing statements with a theme – “a selfish act of a selfish man,” characterizing Tarasuk’s behavior as especially reckless since he was a licensed commercial truck driver who had been inundated with information about the dangers of drunk driving.

“If you drive under the influence while you’re evading police, and you drive onto a traffic island where pedestrians are standing, I submit to you, the natural and probable consequence is that one or both of those pedestrians will be killed,” Van Breemen said. “Of all the people who would know that driving under the influence of alcohol is dangerous to human life, it would be a (commercial) truck driver.”

He went on to call Giffard’s defense tactic of blaming Verducci “outrageous,” and he asked the jury to consider why De La Campa would have left his wife on the sidewalk and stepped into the street and oncoming traffic.

“Dana Verducci is not on trial… because she did nothing wrong. Period,” Van Breemen said. “There is no evidence or testimony to suggest her Escape hit Gregory in the crosswalk.”

It was enough for the jury, which found Tarasuk guilty on all five counts.

Having spent more than two years on the case, Van Breemen said he was relieved for the family that Tarasuk’s trial is over.

“I’m glad that the family members can now have at least some measure of closure,” he said.

On March 6, Penney ruled that two further allegations against Tarasuk were true, both pertaining to prior violent felony convictions in 2006.

Tarasuk awaits sentencing in May.