U.S. Rep. Ron DeSantis, R-Ponte Vedra Beach, announced his campaign for U.S. Senate today:

“America needs a new generation of leaders to address the big issues facing the country: alleviating the middle class squeeze and promoting economic opportunity, confronting the significant national security challenges threatening the safety of our people, and reforming the culture of Washington, DC,” said Congressman DeSantis. “As a candidate for Senate, I look forward to offering reforms based on limited government principles that will make our country stronger and more prosperous. I see a bright future for Florida and for America and my campaign will be about the ideas and principles that will help us achieve a more perfect union.”

Other Republicans who seem poised to jump in include U.S. Rep. Jeff Miller, R-Chumuckla, and Lt. Gov. Carlos Lopez-Cantera of Miami. Republicans keeping the door open include former Attorney General Bill McCollum, U..S. Rep. David Jolly of Pinellas County, and state Sen. Don Gaetz of Niceville.

Reaction:

U.S. Senate candidate and Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Jupiter: "Floridians want fresh, new leadership in the U.S. Senate. I am running to end the gridlock in Congress, strengthen Social Security and Medicare, and empower the middle class to succeed. I look forward to sharing my vision with Floridians across the state over the course of this campaign."

Senate Consservatives Fund President Ken Cuccinelli: "We're proud to support Congressman Ron DeSantis for the Senate in Florida. He's a strong conservative, he has grassroots support, and he can win. If he is elected, he will stand up to the big spenders in both parties and fight to repeal Obamacare, balance the budget, and defend the Constitution. We hope conservatives in Florida and across the country will quickly unite behind DeSantis because we believe he gives us the best chance in this race to elect a principled leader who will fight for our values. We will immediately begin raising money for the DeSantis campaign and plan to do everything we can to help him get his conservative message out and win this important race."

Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee: “After six different Republicans passed on Florida’s Senate race, Washington Republicans now have to decide if they will embrace Tea Party extremist Congressman DeSantis who is wildly out of step with mainstream Floridians. Congressman DeSantis supported the government shutdown, voted for plans that would dismantle Social Security and Medicare, and refused to support the Violence Against Women Act. While Republicans struggle in this open-seat contest, Democrats have a strong candidate in Patrick Murphy who is running a great campaign and will continue fighting for Florida families in the Senate.”

Florida Democratic Chairwoman Allison Tant: “Congressman Ron DeSantis, the poster-boy for Washington’s partisan extremism and dysfunction, is in for a rude awakening when he takes his Tea Party record on the road in Florida. Congressman DeSantis is a strong and vocal opponent of a woman’s right to choose, opposes equal pay for women, and even voted against reauthorizing the Violence Against Women Act. He disagrees with the majority of Floridians with his staunch opposition to marriage quality, and even denies the existence of climate change — in the state that is ground zero for its impacts.

“Congressman DeSantis could not be more out of touch with mainstream Florida values. Congressman DeSantis supports ending Medicare as we know it, and his mile-long record against the Hispanic and immigrant communities speaks for itself. He even supported shutting down the government in 2013, costing taxpayers billions.

"Despite all of this, he’s still the first Florida Republican who wants to run statewide in this presidential election cycle. That’s no surprise. After all, Floridians resoundingly rejected the last Tea Party Congressman who made a bid at the U.S. Senate, and if this is the best Florida Republicans can do, it will be déjà vu for them in 2016."

U.S. Rep. David Jolly: "I congratulate Ron on his decision to enter what will be a very competitive primary election to serve our great state of Florida in the Senate. I remain focused on the job I love in the House and intend to make a decision regarding the Senate in the coming months."

FreedomWorks PAC: “I’m proud that Congressman DeSantis is the first endorsement of the 2016 cycle by FreedomWorks PAC. Congressman DeSantis is a fiscal conservative leader who will bring much-needed leadership on important issues to the U.S. Senate,” said FreedomWorks PAC chairman Adam Brandon. “Congressman DeSantis has been a leader on everything from reducing federal spending, trying to stop ObamaCare, and opposing Common Core. I’m confident that our members will be very excited to help him win in November."

Club for Growth: "The Club for Growth PAC strongly endorses Ron DeSantis for U.S. Senate,” said Club for Growth President David McIntosh.” “The Club’s PAC endorsed Ron when he first ran for the House in 2012, and he has exceeded our expectations as a pro-growth lawmaker. He’s fought for the repeal of Obamacare and worked hard to stop Washington’s out-of-control spending. Ron DeSantis has been a courageous voice for economic conservatism in the House, and he’s the best choice to carry on the great work that Senator Marco Rubio has already done in representing Florida.”

National Republican Senatorial Campaign Committee: "We have met with Congressman DeSantis and will meet with anyone interested in running. We respect his candidacy," said an NRSCC aide.

Madison Project PAC: “We endorsed Ron DeSantis for U.S. Congress in 2012 and we’re proudly endorsing him for U.S. Senate today,” said Drew Ryun of the Madison Project. "Since his time in Washington, Congressman DeSantis has been a strong voice for conservatives policies refusing to back down from the campaign promises he made to Florida voters. We need a proven leader like DeSantis in the halls of the U.S. Senate, one who does not fold to the pressures of special interest groups and is willing to stand up for hard-working Americans.”