OKLAHOMA CITY — Brittney Griner filed for an annulment with Glory Johnson-Griner on Friday, a day after Johnson-Griner announced she’s pregnant and a month after the two WNBA players married.

“Last Wednesday, Glory and I agreed to either legally separate, get divorced, or annul our marriage, Griner said in a statement. “I can confirm that today I filed for an annulment. In the week prior to the wedding, I attempted to postpone the wedding several times until I completed counseling, but I still went through with it. I now realize that was a mistake.”

Johnson’s agent, D.J. Fisher, said in a statement that Johnson-Griner was unaware of the filing and was “extremely hurt and blindsided” by Griner’s actions.

“She loves Brittney and made a huge sacrifice to carry a child, put her career on hold, invest in their relationship and their future,” Fisher said.

Griner, the 6-foot-8 Phoenix Mercury star, married Johnson-Griner on May 9, three weeks after they were arrested on domestic violence charges for a fight at their home in suburban Phoenix. Both players were suspended seven games after their arrests and Griner agreed to undergo 26 weeks of domestic violence counseling as part of a plea agreement.

Both players apologized and said they worked out their differences, saying they were happy about the marriage. Johnson-Griner, a two-time All-Star with the Tulsa Shock, announced on Instagram on Thursday that she was pregnant and would miss the WNBA season.

Fisher said Johnson-Griner was in it for the long haul.

“She knows how important marriage is, and made a lifetime commitment and decision to spend the rest of her life with Brittney,” Fisher said.

Earlier Friday, a post on Johnson-Griner’s Instagram account showed a photo of Griner and a message about seeing her again: “One day until I’m reunited with my Wife @brittneygriner . . . This is about to be one CRAZY SUMMER!!!”

Her tune changed later in the day.

“She wishes to ask for privacy at this time as they work through these trials and tribulations,” Fisher said. “She asks her fans for all their love, support and prayers during this trying time.”

Johnson-Griner’s suspension will not start until the 2016 season because she will not play this season.

Griner was the WNBA’s defensive player of the year and helped the Mercury win the league championship last season.

The WNBA season started Friday night.

This story has been corrected to remove a reference to Griner appealing her suspension.