Milestone: Monday marked the fifth anniversary of ObamaCare, and, naturally, backers used the occasion to extol its many alleged successes. But in doing so, they engaged in some daring feats of legerdemain.

Here are some of the biggest exaggerations, shall we say, told about ObamaCare this week, some of them uttered by the president, others by members of a shamefully credulous press:

1)“In many ways, it’s working better than anticipated.”

That was how the president characterized ObamaCare over the weekend. It’s hard to know what he could be referring to, since just about every promise used to sell it to a skeptical public is still unfulfilled.

Premiums that were supposed to have dropped by $2,500 went up by more than that. Millions who were told they could keep the plans and doctors they liked were forced to drop them. Enrollment has been below expectations, and the share needing subsidies has been much higher.

ObamaCare is covering fewer uninsured than promised, is costing workers jobs, and is hurting part-time and lower-wage workers who have either lost coverage or had their hours cut. On and on it goes.

True, the Congressional Budget Office recently lowered its long-term cost projections for the law, but that’s mainly because it thinks ObamaCare will be less effective at covering the uninsured than before. Cost per newly insured has actually gone up.

2) “It’s slowed health cost increases to the lowest rate in 50 years.”

While the annual rate of increase in national health spending has slowed, that trend started before Obama-Care, and the law has had little to do with the spending trend in the more recent years.

The main causes of the slowdown were the recession and the weak economic recovery, as well as the shift in the private sector toward consumer-driven health plans (an idea championed by free-market conservatives and resisted by liberal Democrats).

What’s more, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services — the federal agency that keeps track of national spending — predicts that ObamaCare will push health costs up going forward.

3) “Sixteen million have gained insurance thanks to ObamaCare.” The administration released a two-page paper last week making this claim, and reporters have swallowed it whole, despite the fact it’s hardly credible.

As we pointed out in this space, the 16 million claim rests entirely on a dubious analysis of Gallup’s survey of the uninsured. Census data show the uninsured rate had dropped steadily from 2010 to 2013 — before ObamaCare went into effect.

4) “The law has been a boon to the economy.”

Obama has started to make this claim, now that the economy appears to be growing at a decent pace. If true, it’s hard to see in the data. Annual growth in real GDP since ObamaCare became law has averaged just 2.2% — making it the weakest recovery since the Great Depression. Job growth also has been subpar, and household income is still well below pre-recession levels.

5) “It’s helping reduce the deficit.”

The Congressional Budget Office stopped trying to figure out what ObamaCare’s impact will be on the deficit, because it couldn’t keep track of all the moving parts or the many changes the administration made to the law.

What the CBO has been clear on, however, is that the long-term forecast for federal deficits is bleak, and that’s driven almost entirely by the government’s growing health bill, a bill made significantly larger because of ObamaCare.

Five years ago, Obama signed a law that was sold to the public on false pretenses, passed by Congress using legislative chicanery, has never won public support and continues to be praised by Democrats despite its many ongoing flaws.

If this is something worth celebrating, the country is in big trouble.