Patrick Roy is nothing if not organized. So it was not a surprise Saturday when the Avalanche coach already was sure of how he wants the composition of his regular-season roster to look.

“The plan is to carry eight defensemen, 13 forwards and two goalies,” Roy said after the second and final day of training camp at Family Sports Center.

That is the same plan as last season, as Roy typically likes to carry eight defensemen instead of seven like some teams. The top eight on defense are likely to be Nick Holden, Erik Johnson, Tyson Barrie, Nate Guenin, Jan Hejda, Brad Stuart, Zach Redmond and Ryan Wilson. Still, nothing is guaranteed yet, and some young prospects — including Duncan Siemens, Stefan Elliott, Maxim Noreau and Chris Bigras — looked good in the two days of camp.

Roy said he was especially pleased with the progress of Siemens, the 11th overall choice by the Avs in the 2011 draft.

Siemens played with a mean streak at Saturday’s scrimmage for a Black team that nevertheless lost 3-0 to the Matt Duchene-Ryan O’Reilly-led Blue squad. Siemens nearly fought with veteran winger Cody McLeod and did a lot of banging in the corners and front of the net.

“Happy with the way he’s been playing so far. We played him with (Erik Johnson) and wanted to see what Duncan can do, and give him a fair chance and it seems like right now he’s taking advantage of it,” Roy said.

While Siemens probably is still a long shot to make the club out of camp, he finally could be working his way into the status of being a bona-fide call-up possibility from Lake Erie of the American Hockey League should injuries strike.

Roy said he will “have a decision to make” as to who stays and who goes among the forwards in the wake of the long-term injury to enforcer Patrick Bordeleau.

Forwards on the bubble probably include Joey Hishon, who looked tremendous Saturday skating on a line with Gabe Landeskog and Alex Tanguay, and others such as Paul Carey, Colin Smith, Dennis Everberg, Tomas Vincour and Ben Street.

Will stands out. Roman Will, signed as a free agent by the Avs in May, looked good in goal in one of the two scrimmages Saturday. Will, 22, has been outstanding the last two seasons playing in the top division of the Czech League and could be a serious contender to be the starter with Lake Erie.

Will posted a 1.61 goals-against average with Mlada Boleslav of the Czech League, and 1.87 the season before. His save percentages were .934 and .935, respectively.

Calvin Pickard and Sami Aittokallio, who shared the goaltending duties with Lake Erie, are also in camp and competing for spots.

Will also spent a season playing junior with Moncton of the QMJHL, posting a .913 save percentage, and Roy said he was “very impressed” with him then and now.

Among Will’s highlights Saturday was a doorstop pad save on Tanguay.

Footnotes. Roy said he will use six goalies in Sunday’s Burgundy-White Scrimmage (11 a.m. at Magness Arena) for one period each. … Center John Mitchell (migraines) skated hard on his own Saturday, but has not been cleared for contact yet.