Buy Photo Tyree Sutton of Keansburg celebrates after defeating Matt Correnti of Holy Cross in the 195-pound final at the NJSIAA Wrestling Championships at Atlantic City’s Boardwalk Hall Sunday. (Photo: Peter Ackerman/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

Tyree Sutton wins Keansburg's first state championship

It was a complex tangle of emotions that swirled within the young man in the blue warmup suit atop the podium late Sunday afternoon. And when the public address announcer finally bellowed "and you're 2015, 195 pound champion, from Keansburg, Tyree Sutton. The first ever state champion from Keansburg,'' it barely scratched the surface in explaining it all to those gathered in Boardwalk Hall of the NJSIAA Wrestling Championships.

Buy Photo Rumson NJ The annual Saint Patrick's Day parade marches along West River Road on Sunday. (Photo: Tom Spader)

Shore St. Patrick's parades grow in popularity, volume

Thousands donned their emerald sweaters and kelly green scarves Sunday and marched in two of Monmouth County's youngest St. Patrick's Day parades.

Buy Photo Anthony P. Browne was confronted by Walmart loss prevention officers in the store but left the merchandise and fled the area in a silver Kia Optima, according to Patrolman Chris Fritz, a police department spokesman. (Photo: File art)

Man attempts to steal baby formula, then flees

Walmart loss prevention officers called on Stafford Police for support of an unusual crime in progress on Saturday.

Buy Photo Brick Memorial’s Alec Donovan (left) jumps into the arms of Mustangs’ assistant coach Dean Albanese and grabs Brick Memorial head coach Mike Denver’s hand after winning the 145-pound state championship Sunday at Boardwalk Hall, Atlantic City. (Photo: PETER ACKERMAN/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)

Donovan works his way to 145-pound stae championship

Alec Donovan has experienced both the highs and lows throughout his scholastic wrestling career. He can remember not making weight for the Region VI Tournament his freshman year and former Brick Memorial head coach Dan O'Cone ripping into him for it.

Marlboro natives Alan Denton and Greg Hahn took their love of animation and video games to new heights when they started writing for Sega’s “Sonic Boom” on Cartoon Network. (Photo: Courtesy of Cartoon Network)

10 of NJ's rising stars to watch this year

From Bruce Springsteen to Snooki. From Jon Bon Jovi and Southside Johnny to Jack Nicholson and Danny DeVito. Frank Sinatra. Queen Latifah. Janet Evanovich. Anne Hathaway. Nicole Atkins. Whitney Houston. Peter Dinklage. Philip Roth. Meryl Streep. Jon Stewart. Deborah Harry. James Gandolfini. Judy Blume. Susan Sarandon. Mario Batali. What do they have in common? The mighty Garden State.

Buy Photo The aging party fishing boat the Norma K II sinks dockside in Point Pleasant Beach. This is the same place the Miss Point Pleasant sank in the fall. Both boats are steeped in Jersey Shore party boats fishing history. (Photo: Tom Spader)

Boat sinks near Manasquan Inlet

For the second time in the past five months, Norma Keller received news that one of the boats in her fishing fleet had sunk in its slip near the Manasquan Inlet. This time it was the Norma-K II, a 65-foot long wooden boat built in 1964.

An elevated spa with cascading waterfalls into the outdoor pool. (Photo: COURTESY OF HERITAGE HOUSE SOTHEBY'S INTERNATIONAL REALTY)

$15M Middletown mansion has bowling, 9 suites

A mansion with a $14.7 million price tag should come fully loaded with the most fabulous features imaginable - and this one does.

The essentials:

Monday's weather forecast

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1BXz7Rp