Jon Stewart now has bowed out for real, appearing on “The Daily Show” for the last time Thursday after a 16-year run on the Comedy Central program.

Here’s a round up of the best bits from his final show.

Don’t stop the sniff tests

Stewart developed a reputation for sniffing out when people were full of it, so to speak. So it’s fitting he exited with a plea to guard against B.S.

“If you smell something, say something,” he said. Hollywood Life highlighted this moment from the last show, as the entertainment news website remarked, “Such wise words.”

Read more: 5 favorite moments from Stewart’s 16 years on “The Daily Show”

Even enemies say bye

Plenty of big names have bristled at Stewart’s remarks over the past 16 years. But some of these folks nonetheless made appearances on the final show to say farewell.

“So long, jackass,” Sen. John McCain said to Stewart. In addition to the Arizona Republican, presidential hopefuls Hillary Clinton, Chris Christie and Lindsey Graham showed up.

“Seriously, how can Jon be leaving right now, before what’s shaping up to be an epic presidential election?” asked U.K. news daily Metro, in reviewing the appearances by these politicians.

A tip of the cap from Colbert

Getty Images Colbert and Stewart

Viewers of the last show heard a “Lord of the Rings”-themed tribute to Stewart from Stephen Colbert, the “Daily Show” alum who went on to host his own Comedy Central show and now has moved to CBS to replace David Letterman.

Colbert then got serious and a bit mushy. “All of us who were lucky enough to work with you for 16 years are better at our jobs because we got to watch you do yours,” he told Stewart. “And we are better people for having known you.”

Other “Daily Show” alumni who went on to even bigger things also came back for appearances on the last show, including John Oliver, Steve Carell, Ed Helms and Samantha Bee.

Jersey boys

Stewart, who grew up in New Jersey, couldn’t resist tapping one of the Garden State’s other famous entertainers — Bruce Springsteen — for his final show.

“Lastly, from one Boss to another, Bruce Springsteen brought Stewart’s time on The Daily Show to its rockin’, emotional conclusion,” said TVLine in describing the musical performance.

Jokes still pushed the envelope

Wikipedia Commons Comedian Larry Wilmore

Comedy Central host Larry Wilmore visited Stewart’s set. He didn’t have much else to do as his show — originally called “The Minority Report” but now known as “The Nightly Show” — was bumped by Stewart’s final show.

“Black shows matter, Jon,” Wilmore said.

More from MarketWatch