NAIROBI, Kenya (AP) -- Four large blasts rocked Kenya's Westgate Mall on Monday, sending large plumes of smoke over an upscale suburb as Kenyan military forces sought to rescue an unknown number of hostages held by al-Qaida-linked militants. The explosions were followed by volleys of gunfire, then a thick, dark column of smoke. Military and police helicopters and one plane circled over the Nairobi mall, giving the upscale Westlands neighborhood the feel of a war zone.

Security forces' efforts the previous day to rescue the unknown number of hostages inside failed despite the military announcing that "most" hostages had been saved. Kenyan officials have said preserving the hostages' lives is a top priority, greatly complicating the rescue effort.

Kenya's interior minister says two Islamic extremists were killed Monday as military forces waged an operation to rescue hostages inside an upscale mall in Nairobi. A top military official said he believes the attackers are "a multinational collection from all over the world."

Kenyans and foreigners were among those confirmed dead, including British, French, Canadians, Indians, a Ghanaian, a South African and a Chinese woman. The UK Foreign Office said Monday it has confirmed the deaths of four British nationals.

In Washington, Republican lawmakers said on Sunday that the attack showed al-Qaida is growing in size and strength, belying the Obama administration's claims that it has grown weaker.

A member of the House Homeland Security Committee says the al-Qaida affiliated group behind the deadly attack on an upscale shopping mall in Kenya recruited up to 50 people from Somali American communities in the U.S.

Rep. Pete King said Sunday between 15 and 20 of the Somali Americans al-Shabab recruited remain active.

The New York Republican says the concern is that some may return and "use their abilities on the U.S." King says he assumes the FBI and local law enforcement are looking at Somali American communities to make sure no follow up attacks are planned for the United States.













NEW YORK (AP) -- President Barack Obama is in New York City to open meetings at the United Nations with diplomatic opportunities on three vexing issues: Iran's disputed nuclear program, Syria's chemical weapons use, and elusive peace between Israel and the Palestinians.

All three pathways are fraught with potential pitfalls and hinge on cooperation from often unreliable nations. Obama also risks being branded as naive and misguided if the efforts fail, particularly in Syria, where he's used the prospect of diplomacy to put off a military strike in retaliation for a chemical weapons attack.

Still, the recent developments mark a significant shift on a trio of issues that have long proved problematic for Obama at the United Nations. His former Iranian counterpart has used the annual U.N. General Assembly meetings as a venue for fiery, anti-American speeches. Failed Middle East peace talks led the Palestinians to seek statehood recognition at the U.N. despite American objections. And the Obama administration has been stymied on Syria at the U.N. Security Council due to intractable Russian opposition.

But this year, Iran has a new leader who is making friendly overtures toward Obama, raising the prospect of a meeting at the United Nations. U.S.-brokered peace talks between the Israelis and Palestinians have resumed -- though on an uncertain course. And Russia has joined with the U.S. on a diplomatic deal to strip Syria of its chemical weapons.





WASHINGTON (AP) -- With a week left to hammer out a deal to avoid a government shutdown, some lawmakers seem resigned -- if not rushing -- to that end.

Most say they don't want the first government shutdown since 1996. But if the government happens to shut down, so be it. Republicans say it is part of their effort to dismantle Democrats' health care overhaul, while Democrats defending the law recall that similar standoffs gave them political gains.

And fingers were already being pointed just to be on the safe side.

"I believe we should stand our ground," said Sen. Ted Cruz, a tea party darling from Texas who pushed fellow Republicans to link a temporary budget bill with a provision to defund the Affordable Care Act. Some Republicans have vowed to shut down the government unless they can stop the law from taking hold.

"We don't want to shut down the government," said Rep. Matt Salmon, R-Ariz. "I want to make it clear: We want to shut down Obamacare."



BEIJING (AP) -- A powerful typhoon that slammed into southern China with winds that blew cars off the road has caused more deaths, bringing the toll in Asia to at least 33 on Monday. Typhoon Usagi, which was the season's strongest storm at its peak, forced hundreds of flight cancellations and shut down shipping and train lines before weakening to a tropical depression over the southern Chinese province of Guangdong on Monday. China said 25 deaths occurred in Guangdong, where the typhoon made landfall late Sunday near Shanwei with record sustained winds for the city of 175 kilometers (109 miles) per hour. On Saturday the storm had been a super typhoon when it passed between Taiwan and the Philippines, sparing both of them the brunt of the winds. However, Philippine officials said eight people were dead from drowning and landslides, and Taiwan authorities reported nine people hurt by falling trees. The storm wreaked havoc on travel plans just as many passengers were returning home after an extended weekend for the Chinese mid-autumn festival. At least 13 of the 25 victims in China were killed in worst-hit Shanwei city, where winds blew cars off the road near a gas station and houses were toppled, Xinhua said. One county's electricity and water supply were cut off.





GROSSETO, Italy (AP) -- At his trial on Monday, the captain of the shipwrecked Costa Concordia blamed his helmsman for botching a last-minute corrective maneuver that he contended would have avoided the cruise ship's deadly collision with a reef. Capt. Francesco Schettino, the sole defendant on trial, also pressed his request for an inspection of the crippled luxury liner, which just last week was raised upright in a spectacular salvage operation off the Tuscan island of Giglio. The complicated maritime operation righted the Concordia outside Giglio harbor, where it had capsized the night of Jan. 13, 2012, killing 32 people. Salvage engineers say the now-upright ship would be more accessible for court-appointed experts to inspect. Schettino is charged with manslaughter, with causing the shipwreck and with abandoning ship before its 4,200 passengers and crew could all be safely evacuated. He contends he is being made a scapegoat and that errors by other Costa Crociere SpA crew and mechanical problems aggravated the consequences of the tragedy. The Concordia crashed into a reef, took on water and capsized when Schettino steered it too close to Giglio during what was supposed to be a weeklong pleasure cruise in the Mediterranean.





Catholics at Mass Sunday support Pope's remarks about church's focus



NEW YORK (AP) -- Catholics attending Sunday services around the globe said they were heartened by Pope Francis' recent remarks that the church has become too focused on "small-minded rules" on hot-button issues like homosexuality, abortion and contraceptives. Worshippers applauded what they heard as a message of inclusion from the man who assumed the papacy just six months ago. "I think he's spot on," said Shirley Holzknecht, 77, a retired school principal attending services in Little Rock, Ark. "As Catholic Christians, we do need to be more welcoming." In Havana, Cuba, Irene Delgado said the church needs to adapt to modern times. "The world evolves, and I believe that the Catholic Church is seeing that it is being left behind, and that is not good," said Delgado, 57. "So I think that they chose this Pope Francis because he is progressive, has to change things." Francis, in an interview published Thursday in 16 Jesuit journals worldwide, called the church's focus on abortion, marriage and contraception narrow and said it was driving people away. Last-ever Volkswagen vans roll off Brazilian assembly lines



SAO PAULO (AP) -- It carried hippies through the 1960s, hauled surfers in search of killer waves during endless summers and serves as a workhorse across the developing world, but the long, strange trip of the Volkswagen van is ending. Brazil is the last place in the world still producing the iconic vehicle, or "bus" as it's known by aficionados, but VW says production will end Dec. 31. Safety regulations mandate that every vehicle in Brazil must have air bags and anti-lock braking systems starting in 2014, and the company says it cannot change production to meet the law. Although output will halt in Brazil, there should be plenty of VW vans rolling along for decades if only because there are so many, and they are so durable. VW produced more than 10 million Volkswagen Transporter vans globally since the model was introduced 63 years ago in Germany, though not all resemble the classic hippie machine. More than 1.5 million have been produced in Brazil since 1957. The vehicles have not been sold in the United States because of safety rules similar to the ones being introduced in Brazil.