Thanks to 2013's sizzling stock market, Chicago-area hospitals are reaping outsize investment returns, providing a crucial source of income as health care's tough economics make it harder for them to turn a profit.

Among the biggest winners: Northwestern Memorial HealthCare, Advocate Health Care and NorthShore University HealthSystem. Each took home nine-figure gains last year, empowering them to afford expansions and acquisitions. In fact, Northwestern's $309.1 million haul from investments nearly matched the $312.4 million in operating income that the Streeterville-based organization generated from running its two hospitals and other facilities in the year ended Aug. 31.

Investing, Advocate Chief Financial Officer Dominic Nakis says, “provides a cushion for downturns in operations that may occur when cash flows become unpredictable.”

You have to fight against thinking, 'We can operate at breakeven and make it up on investment income.' — Adam Lynch, Principle Valuation LLC You have to fight against thinking, 'We can operate at breakeven and make it up on investment income.'

But capital markets by their nature are cyclical. After leaping 30 percent last year, the Standard & Poor's 500 Index has slipped 3.6 percent this year, and a recent CNNMoney survey of investment strategists and money managers forecasts a 2014 gain of 6 percent. That could mean trouble for hospitals counting on more sizable returns and lure them to put money into riskier, harder-to-assess investments that promise higher results.

Adam Lynch, a vice president at Chicago-based Principle Valuation LLC, a health care appraisal firm, counsels hospitals to play it safe. “You have to fight against thinking, 'We can operate at breakeven and make it up on investment income.' That's not always going to be there,” he says.

Health system executives counter that they are clear-eyed about their investing. Their portfolios are professionally managed, they say, to sensibly balance risk and return. They don't assume any boost from investment when planning their operational targets, and the proceeds are for fulfilling strategic visions, not plugging year-to-year cash shortfalls.

Hospitals have been playing the investment game for decades, but analysts say the need for alternatives to income from operations has never been more acute. Payments from private and government insurers are shrinking, and admissions are falling. Meanwhile, expenses continue to skyrocket.

President Barack Obama's health reform law adds more uncertainty to the mix. The Affordable Care Act extends insurance potentially to millions, but it's unclear what that will mean to the bottom line.

Hospitals that invest wisely can plow more cash into costly strategic initiatives—constructing buildings, employing physicians, acquiring competitors—that will support their operations for the long term. For example, Northwestern, which has a $3.18 billion portfolio, made a $225 million payment in September for the 900-physician Northwestern Medical Faculty Foundation, with promises to pay at least $118.5 million over the next three years. It also announced a $400 million replacement for its Lake Forest Hospital.

Its rival in the northern suburbs, Evanston-based NorthShore, posted $147.3 million in investment income in the year ended Sept. 30. In January, NorthShore applied for a permit for a $75 million overhaul of Highland Park Hospital.

For its part, Advocate acquired Sherman Hospital in June, making the 255-bed facility in Elgin its 12th. Downers Grove-based Advocate, the state's largest network, boasts the largest portfolio for a health system in Illinois, at $5.26 billion as of Sept. 30. Advocate gained $196.6 million on investments through the first three quarters of the year, about half the $408.4 million it produced in operating income over the same period.

Advocate, which had private-equity and hedge-fund investments valued at $1.01 billion as of Sept. 30, is doubling down, almost literally. In November, its board voted to raise the allocation target for “alternative investments” to 45 percent from 25 percent, pulling dollars from bond holdings, according to a quarterly financial filing. Alternatives, such as hedge funds, private equity, real estate and natural resources, have potential for high returns but are less transparent and riskier.

University of Chicago Medicine's alternative investments totaled about $330 million as of June 30, all of it managed in the university's investment pool. The fair value of the medical center's investments reached about $800 million as of June 30, and it posted a $59.8 million return for that fiscal year.

Ann McColgan, U of C Medicine's chief treasury officer, says that despite greater risk, alternative investments can yield gains even when equity markets slump.