Topics: Documentary, Film, Finders Keepers, I Touched All Your Stuff, In the Basement, Meet the Patels, Movies, Palio, Sneakerheadz, The Barkley Marathons: The Race That Eats Its Young, The House Is Innocent, The Seven Five, Welcome to Leith, Entertainment News

Documentaries used to have the reputation of being the cinematic equivalent of a bran muffin, meaning they were meant to be good for you. But the most intriguing documentaries take viewers into subcultures and worlds they would probably never see. More often than not, these films tell stories that are stranger than fiction.

In 2015 there has been a spate of nonfiction films that have featured bizarre characters and unusual subjects. From the Angulo brothers in “The Wolfpack,” who learn about the outside world through movies, to “The Yes Men are Revolting,” about the merry activists/prank-stars who conduct hoaxes to expose corporate greed, the trend in documentary film has certainly shifted away from “bran muffin” and more toward “you can’t make this shit up!”

Here are a handful of the wildest, weirdest, and most wonderful documentaries to play in cinemas, film festivals and on demand this year.

“The Barkley Marathons: The Race that Eats Its Young”

Opening with a credit that reads, “We are going to try to tell you the truth,” followed by the statement, “The truth is malleable,” this fantastic doc depicts the 2012 Barkley Marathon, an endurance test so grueling that the 40 (among hundreds of) applicants who are selected to run it receive a letter that reads, “Sorry to inform you that you’ve been accepted.” Paying $1.60 and handing over a license plate from their home state for entry, contestants must complete a 130-mile, five-loop course with the equivalent of a 12,000-foot climb and descent through the mountains of Tennessee. In 60 hours. To complete the race, which involves intense hiking on an unmarked trail, entrants must rip out pages of books like “Doomed” and “The Human Zoo” as proof they completed each leg. And speaking of legs, most runners have theirs ripped to shreds by the course’s dangerous brambles. However, those contestants who call for “Taps” after hiking down “Quitter’s Lane” have a camaraderie with the remaining runners that is infectious. Yes, the dropouts tend to the blisters of those sorry athletes who are determined to finish. The Barkley Marathon is the brainchild of co-founder Lazarus Lake, who based the race on James Earl Ray’s failed escape through the local mountains. He named parts of the course “The Pillars of Doom,” “Son-of-a-Bitch Ditch” and “The Bad Thing,” proving he may be a sadist, but he has a sense of humor. This documentary may be as wacky as the race itself, but the life lessons about pain and observations about competition are invaluable.

“I Touched All Your Stuff”

The title of this unbelievable but true story comes from a practical joke played on Chris Kirk, whereby his housesitter covered every object in his apartment with aluminum foil. His books. His shoes. Even his coins. Kirk recounts this anecdote to the filmmakers, Maíra Bühler and Matias Mariani, as he explains how he “touched all the stuff” owned by his girlfriend—a mystery woman known only as “V”—because she wasn’t entirely honest with him. Kirk may not be entirely honest with the filmmakers because he’s talking to them from a Brazilian jail, where he has been incarcerated for crimes undisclosed. “I Touched All Your Stuff,” brilliantly uses computer files, interviews, photographs (the ones of V are all deliberately blurry) and music to tell Kirk’s story. Viewers who go down this rabbit-hole may not discern exactly what happened, but it is impossible not to be impressed (and unsettled) by this strange but true investigation.

“Finders Keepers”

This WTF documentary depicts the “foot fight” that happened when John Wood lost his left leg for the second time. In Maiden, North Carolina, Shannon Whisnant purchased at auction a smoker left in a storage unit. However, the smoker contained amputee John Wood’s leg. Claiming “finders keepers,” Whisnant felt he was entitled to Wood’s leg, and exploited his discovery for cash and celebrity. Wood, however, just wanted his leg back. He’d lost it in a plane crash that killed his father and was saving the muscled and fleshed limb for a memorial. However, Wood succumbed to addiction and became estranged from his family as a result of the accident and its aftermath. John’s mother says, “It’s a funny story born of tragedy,” and filmmakers Bryan Carberry and J. Clay Tweel nimbly tell this tale of what one interviewee calls, “fuckery and shenanigans.” The strangest moment may involve Wood trying to keep his leg at a local Hardee’s, and the strangest character may be the women who is going to peel the skin off the preserved leg “like beef jerky.” There is considerable humor as the case is settled on a very special episode of “Judge Mathis,” but the heart of what is really going on with the two protagonists is what makes “Finders Keepers” so distinctive.

“Sneakerheadz”

A sneakerhead is someone who “forgoes paying their rent so they can own a pair of shoes they will never wear.” In the wildly entertaining “Sneakerheadz,” directors David T. Friendly and Mick Partridge explore this fascinating subculture of enthusiastic people who collect, design, and curate—because resell is an ugly word—sneakers. Now, these are no ordinary gym shoes. A Nike Dunk “Pigeon” from 2005, which has a $69.95 retail value, can sell for $5,500; the Buscemi luxury sneakers can start at $900; and someone paid $100,000 for Michael Jordan’s “flu shoes.” If you want to know about collabs, deadstock and quickstrikes, you need to see “Sneakerheadz.” But be warned: you’ll also see hoarders like baseball player Jeremy Guthrie, who has a vault in his house as a form of “collection protection,” whereas other sneakerheads, who live at home, have their “dad and his 2×4” keeping their sneaks safe. So valuable are some of these limited-edition kicks, that kids will camp out for days waiting for them to go on sale, and collectors will fly to Japan. But if you really want them, sneaker pimps, known as “swag concierges,” can help you find a pair. Yet, as the subjects of “Sneakerheadz” indicate, the art of the hunt is part of the fun. There are, however, downsides to this subculture, and the film does devote time to violence around collecting, and the estimated 1,000 deaths a year that have resulted over people being killed for sneakers. Friendly and Partridge’s documentary celebrates those collectors who are defined by what they wear. In fact, they are so obsessed and so addicted, one collector admits he can’t wear wingtips.

“The Seven Five”

Back in 1993, Michael Dowd, a New York City cop, testified that while he was an officer in the 1980s, he committed crimes including theft, extortion, racketeering, engaging in drugs for personal use, and trafficking in drugs. With crack in its heyday, it was a tough era for crime in New York. Or, as Dowd’s partner, Kenny Eurell, candidly describes Brooklyn in the 1980s, “Welcome to the Land of Fuck!” Dowd, a “crook in a cop uniform” explains how he would enter a house containing a 55-gallon drum of marijuana, guns and a duffle bag full of cash, and walk out with the cash. In the fabulously entertaining “The Seven Five,” Dowd and a colorful rogues gallery of colleagues, dealers, DEA agents and Internal Affairs guys recount stories of the extent of Dowd’s corruption. One plum example has Dowd getting shorted by a dealer he is protecting only to have the dealer put a hit out on Dowd. But the powerful Dowd pulls him over and puts an end to that. “The Seven Five” includes a tense car chase—but in this documentary, it is the cops being chased by the criminals! Dowd and Eurell eventually get on the payroll of Dominican drug dealer Adam Diaz, to advise him on narcotics officers in the area, and supply Diaz’s men with bulletproof vests. By the time Dowd—who reportedly (and not surprisingly) did more coke than he sold—recounts a last-ditch kidnapping and murder plan, he also admits he is “shocked” he got away with what he did for as long as he did. Viewers’ jaws will drop as well at what transpires in “The Seven Five”—especially when a stunner of a late-act twist is revealed. This doc is a Martin Scorsese movie in the making.