LAWRENCEBURG — Whether contestants throw it, toss it, pitch it or just chunk it, they all have one goal in mind — sending the 10-inch cast iron skillet farther than anyone else.

Sometimes, it’s not as easy at it looks, but the contest certainly was a crowd pleaser at the 19th Annual Crossroads of Dixie Antique Tractor Show last month.

The skillet toss — a standard of the Crossroads of Dixie show for the past six years —became one of the main features after heavy rains forced officials to cancel both the slow tractor race and a tractor pull. Organizer Russel Counce said the entire event usually attracts about 15,000, but this year’s attendance totaled about 8,000 due to the weather.

The toss is a female-only event in which contestants age 4 to 100 compete to see how far they can send the skillet flying.

The only rule is that contestants can not step over a designated line as they toss their skillet. The event, although an interesting game to watch, can also be dangerous as the skillets sometimes find unintended targets, like spectators or journalists who get too close for their own good.

“I just threw it,” said Wendy James, an Alabama native who claimed first prize in the 31 to 45 age group. “My husband told me to pretend he was out there.”

Each contestant approached the event with their own personal technique. Some would swing the skillet a few times before making a toss, stepping forward in hopes of giving the iron projectile an extra push of centripetal force.

Others would use their brute strength to launch the skillet with feet planted firmly to the ground. But not matter what method used, contestants who mastered the timing of the whole process seemed to be the most successful.

The game’s history is not entirely clear. Some accounts claim the event began during the times of the westward traveling pioneers, when women would pass the time away competing to see who could throw their cookware the farthest while waiting for their husbands to return.

Another story — perhaps more unnerving to some — is that those women who showed a talent for throwing their skillets with both power and accuracy might have gained the upper hand in their marriages.

And yet organizer Felecia Nix said there just had to be an alternative to a tractor pull.

“We wanted something for the women to participate in,” the competition’s organizer Felecia Nix said.

Competitors were divided between six different age groups. A total of 40 women and girls took part in the competition with three of the farthest throwing gals from each age group receiving an award.

First place winners from each age group took home — What else? — a skillet.