I’m in Portugal — sorry, too jet-lagged to post music this week — where I am attending a conference in memory of Jose da Silva Lopes. (No, I’m not doing interviews — I’m spending my spare time with friends.) And I have been doing some homework about the terrible times Portugal has recently suffered. What especially caught my eye was this:

Photo

We used to think that high labor mobility was a good thing for currency unions, because it would allow the union’s economy to adjust to asymmetric shocks — booms in some places, busts in others — by moving workers rather than having to cut wages in the lagging regions. But what about the tax base? If bad times cause one country’s workers to leave in large numbers, who will service its debt and care for its retirees?

Indeed, it’s easy conceptually to see how a country could enter a demographic death spiral. Start with a high level of debt, explicit and implicit. If the work force falls through emigration, servicing this debt will require higher taxes on those who remain, which could lead to more emigration, and so on.

How realistic is this possibility? It obviously depends on having a sufficiently large burden of debt and other mandatory expenditure. It also depends on the elasticity of the working-age population to the tax burden, which in turn will depend both on the underlying economics — is there a strongly downward-sloping demand for labor, or is it highly elastic? — and on things like the willingness of workers to move, which may depend on culture and language.

Portugal, with its long tradition of outmigration, may be more vulnerable than most, but I have no idea whether it’s really in that zone.

One thing you might wonder is whether currency union makes any difference here. Can’t adverse shocks produce emigration and a death spiral regardless of currency regime? Yes, but. With a flexible exchange rate, adverse shocks will cause depreciation and a fall in real wages; under a currency union, they will produce unemployment for an extended period, until the grinding process of internal devaluation restores competitiveness. And everything I’ve seen says that migration is much more sensitive to unemployment than to wage differentials.

Now, it’s true that emigration in an economy with mass unemployment doesn’t immediately reduce the tax base, since the marginal worker wouldn’t have been employed anyway. But it sets things up for longer-run deterioration.

Oh, and Lisbon is really lovely despite all — and seems, justifiably, to be attracting a lot of tourists, which surely helps.

Now off to my friends’ house.