An Estill, South Carolina man has been charged with attempted murder after shooting at a police officer.

Multiple agencies were on scene searching for the man responsible for shooting Officer Quincy Smith. Units from Hampton, Jasper, and Colleton Counties were all on scene, as well as officers with Estill. Police, Hampton Police and Yemassee Police. There was also a chopper in the air helping find the man who we now know is 27-year-old Malcolm Orr.

According to the owner of a convenience store where it all started, Orr was attempting to rob a customer when police were called. When they responded and approached Orr, he took off. A slight chase ensued before Orr shot at the officers, hitting Officer Smith. Officer Smith was shot behind the Charles Party Shop off Columbia Highway.

SLED is also assisting with the investigation. Some people in the area said the suspect was actually walking around on the other side of town when a concerned resident called police.

Orr was in custody about two hours after the shooting. The Estill Police Department Chief says the quick response is all thanks to a joint effort from law enforcement agencies in the area.

“Any shooting, but when you have one with the magnitude someone has the nerve to shoot a police officer, the responding agencies set up the perimeter. Whatever our agency needs them to do, whatever the sheriff's office, we had people perimeters checking vehicles intersections blocked off limiting flow of traffic. We had officers at the incident location where the suspect was arrested serving warrants and going into homes and looking for the subject. When you have a situation like this it's, a thankless job so whatever the officers need to do to get him in custody. This could have been anyone of us, so whatever's needed, there's no ego. We put it aside and we get it done,” said Chief Keith Parks, Estill PD.

WTOC spoke with a man who sees the officer on a regular basis.

"I was in shock because I just talked to him inside the store when he made his rounds and we just stood there and talked a little while. He came back to the meat market where I work at and he gave back and shook my hands and gave me a hug for New Year’s,” said Ernest Nissley.

Officer Smith underwent surgery on Friday, and we are told he is upbeat and recovering quickly. Chief Parks says he’s “tuned into everything that’s going on around him. Smith has been with the department for about six months.

Copyright 2016 WTOC. All rights reserved.