President Obama and former President Bill Clinton got more attention than the Republican presidential candidates combined with a good-natured exchange on Twitter.

President Obama delivered his first tweet from his personal Twitter account:

Hello, Twitter! It's Barack. Really! Six years in, they're finally giving me my own account. — President Obama (@POTUS) May 18, 2015

The President’s first tweet led to this exchange between former President Clinton and Obama:

Good question, @billclinton. The handle comes with the house. Know anyone interested in @FLOTUS? — President Obama (@POTUS) May 18, 2015

While Jeb Bush is running around the country try to convince people that Obamacare can be replaced with an Apple Watch, Obama and Clinton were owning Twitter.

Republicans don’t have a single person in their party that has as much star power as Barack Obama and Bill Clinton. Democrats have the top four biggest headline getters in either party. The Obama/Clinton Twitter exchange highlights a major problem for the Republican Party. None of the GOP’s presidential candidates has an ounce of charisma.

The cookie cutter Republicans are all dull, and there isn’t a single one of them who won’t get blown off of the debate stage when they stand next to Hillary Clinton. Jeb Bush is about as exciting as cold and unflavored oatmeal, and he is the Republican Party’s great white establishment hope for 2016.

Scott Walker is a walking gaffe machine who is in way over his head. Rand Paul can’t decide whether he is an establishment Republican or Ron Paul’s crazy kid. Marco Rubio looks like a great candidate until he talks, and the rest of the field is made up of a motley crew of has-beens and never-wases that will never be elected president.

President Obama and former President Clinton put Republicans to shame because they perfectly demonstrated what real charisma can do in 140 characters or less. The media has looked at all sorts of angles as the 2016 candidates announce, but the one point they overlook is that the Republican candidates aren’t very likable.

A couple of tweets from two of the biggest heavyweights in the party showed why Democrats are in a good position to keep the White House in 2016.