When comparing competing plans, consider lining up the required Summary of Benefits and Coverage for each one to see what is offered and what's left out.

It's that time of year when we all seem to be mired in alphabet soup – and not the kind you eat. Open enrollment for benefits plans is here, and that includes choosing health insurance coverage.

As employers and insurers shift more of the cost to users, the annual choice gets harder, whether you buy insurance through your employer, the Affordable Care Act exchange or one of the state exchanges.

No matter what your health status, it's important to study your options every year and do some math to find the best option for your family.

"People tend to use richer plans," says Tracy Watts, a senior partner at Mercer. "There's a little bit of a fear factor. We would all be better off if we made better decisions about our health spending."

Even if you like your current health plan, you still should look at all the options – as well as check your current plan for any changes, especially as they apply to doctors you see and medications you take regularly.

"If you already have a plan, I think you want to evaluate whether it has largely been working for you," says JoAnn Volk, a senior research professor at the Georgetown University Center on Health Insurance Reforms. "Pay attention to how that plan may be changing in the year ahead."

These days, the choice of PPO vs. HMO vs. EPO vs. POS vs. any other option may matter less than the specific plan you choose, since there are no standard definitions, and insurance is regulated by state law.

"Those alphabets have to do with the tightness of the networks in the plan," says Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow at the Kaiser Family Foundation. Insurance companies can no longer refuse to insure those with pre-existing conditions. Instead, they are tightening provider networks by including fewer doctors and changing how they cover drugs, especially expensive drugs.

"It's a very good idea to do all the math annually," Watts says. For some people, a higher deductible and a lower premium may cost less than a higher premium and a lower deductible. And a $10 drug in one plan may be a $100 drug in another.

In general, these are the types of plans offered:

PPO (Preferred Provider Organization): You usually do not need a referral from a primary care physician to see a specialist and some coverage may be available for out-of-network care.

HMO (Health Maintenance Organization): You need a referral from your primary care physician to see a specialist, and there usually is no out-of-net-work coverage.

EPO (Exclusive Provider Organization): You usually do not need a referral from a primary care physician to see a specialist, and there is no coverage for out-of-network providers.

POS (Point of Service): These plans may require referrals from a primary care doctor to see a specialist, but some out-of-network coverage is available.

Some of those who buy their health care coverage through the ACA are finding that, for the first time this year, their only options are HMOs or EPOs.

Every plan is required to provide a standard Summary of Benefits and Coverage, which is usually about eight pages. Lining up those summaries for each plan side by side is a good way to start evaluating your options.

Once you've found a suitable plan, it is a good idea to call your doctors and verify they are still participating, and to call your human resources department or the insurer to make sure that you have understood all the fine print. Those shopping on the ACA or state exchanges can get free advice from navigators. If you're self-employed, you can also consult an insurance broker.

Here are 12 questions to ask when choosing among the plans:

What are the costs of the drugs I take regularly? For those who take expensive medications, the drug formularies may be the most important part of choosing an insurance plan. If the drugs you take are in a high tier, "You could be paying $1,000 out of pocket every time you go to CVS," Pollitz says. "We do see some pretty aggressive tiering in employer plans."

Are my doctors and hospitals included? "The O is all about if your doctor's in the network," Watts says, referring to the word organization in plan types like PPO and EPO. Each plan has its own network, so not all Aetna or United HealthCare plans are the same, even if you're comparing an HMO plan with another HMO plan. That means you need to research each plan you're considering.

What is the deductible? This is the amount you must pay out of pocket before your insurance starts covering any costs. Most plans have both an individual deductible and a family deductible. "That's getting high," Pollitz says. "It's typical now of health plans offered at work to have deductibles of more than $1,000 per year."

What is the out-of-pocket limit? Each insurance plan has a limit in how much you have to pay out of pocket each year, with limits for individuals and families.