New Dutch Bros. Coffee stand will be all about relationships, owner says

This artist's rendering depicts the Dutch Bros. Coffee stand that franchisee Nate Frary hopes to build at 43rd Street and U.S. 287 in north Loveland. The shop will feature two drive-thru lanes, and Frary said he hopes to have it open as early as March 2016. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald )

LOVELAND -- The owner of a coffee shop coming to Loveland might make you want to become a customer even if you hate coffee.

Nate Frary plans to build a Dutch Bros. drive-thru coffee stand in north Loveland next year, the first of the Oregon-based franchise north of Colorado Springs.

"There's really no business in the world like Dutch Bros.," Frary said with all sincerity. "Our whole business is about people. Coffee is just the means that we use to connect with people and the community.

"The product that we are selling is relationships and love," he said. "We're there to make a difference in people's lives and brighten their day and do amazing things in our community."

Frary and his wife, Krisanna, own four Dutch Bros. franchises in Kennewick and Richland, Wash., but are selling those shops to move to Northern Colorado. The company requires its franchisees to live in the communities they serve.

Frary is working through the special-use review process with the city of Loveland for approval of two drive-thru lanes. He plans to build a 720-square-foot coffee stand with a walk-up window and patio seating but no seats indoors. It will be at the northwest corner of 43rd Street and U.S. 287 just south of the Sonic Drive-In and have access off 43rd and through Sonic's property, he said.

Opening next spring

Advertisement

Depending on the approval and permit process, and the weather, Frary said the coffee stand could open as early as March 2016. After that, he has plans for four to six more in Loveland and Fort Collins.

In addition to the love and relationships Dutch Bros. provides for free, the business has an extensive menu of beverages, Frary said, including espresso from beans roasted in the Pacific Northwest, iced and hot tea, smoothies, sodas, Dutch Frost shakes and its popular Blue Rebel energy drinks.

As to how a coffee shop can build relationships during a two-minute exchange in a drive-thru lane, Frary said Dutch Bros. visitors often become repeat customers, sometimes returning two or three times a day.

"We don't use a speaker ordering system. We take every order in person," he said. "We learn their names and their drinks and where they work and their kids' names and their dogs' names.

"They become our friends and our raving fans and come to see us as much as they come to get a cup of coffee," he said.

Jen Wheatley, director of public relations at Dutch Bros. headquarters in Grants Pass, Ore., gave an example of how Dutch Bros. baristas touch the lives of their customers.

'This entire team cared'

She said just last month she gave a tour of the corporate building to a group of people who she learned were family members in town for the funeral of an elderly relative. This man and his wife were regular customers of a Dutch Bros. in Grants Pass, she said, and the baristas became their friends, inquiring about the man when he wasn't in the car, going to the hospital when he fell ill and leaving the shop to give the widow a hug when they learned he'd died.

On the day of the funeral, the family members wanted to go see the offices of a business that could produce such culture at one of its coffee stands. "They were so moved by the fact that this entire team cared," Wheatley said.

Dutch Bros. franchisees also get involved in their communities with national and local fundraisers. Frary said all franchises donate a minimum of 1 percent of their gross sales to community causes.

Wheatley said the company's culture of compassion is "rooted with the co-founders, Travis and Dane Boersma ... who were raised in a family that was just a deeply caring family."

The company has 250 stands in seven Western states and is working to add 25 to 30 a year in those states.

The Loveland Dutch Bros. probably will be open 5 a.m. to 11 p.m. seven days a week, Frary said. For more information, go to facebook.com/Dutchbrosloveland.

Craig Young: 970-635-3634, cyoung@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.