What does the murder of Kate Steinle have to do with the rise of Donald Trump? Everything. Americans are tired of politicians who accommodate everyone but Americans.

WASHINGTON, May 5, 2016 — According to CNN, unsuccessful Republican candidates running for president spent $75 million making 64,000 television attack ads designed to “stop Trump” from winning the GOP nomination.

Of that staggering amount, former Florida governor Jeb Bush’s super PAC, Right to Rise USA, spent $10 million on anti-Trump TV spots.

In stark contrast, the Trump campaign spent nearly a half million dollars on hats.

Contrary to all the hysteria over the Supreme Court’s ruling in Citizens United vs. FEC, money can’t buy you the presidency.

Being that the left is so dogged in its two-dimensional thinking, it’s only a matter of time before we hear demands for tight restrictions on the number of silly campaign hats distributed during presidential election years because of their undue influence on American politics.

Pundits on the right credit Trump’s dramatic political success to angry, white, middle-aged workers whose jobs have gone overseas. Or anger among the GOP’s conservative base at the party leadership’s failure to deliver on promises to defund Obamacare, curb federal spending and debt and to get to the bottom of the worst of the many scandals swirling around the Obama presidency – Operation Fast and Furious and Benghazi.

Pundits on the left simply credit Trump’s success to systemic American racism, homophobia, anti-transgender bathroom-ism, hatred of women and an abiding love of authoritarianism that beats within the hearts of all Americans – not them, of course.

All the above are wrong.

Credit for Trump’s rise belongs to Kate Steinle. She was the 32-year-old woman shot on July 1, 2015, by an illegal alien fresh out of county lockup in that beautiful “sanctuary city,” San Francisco.

Cradled in her father’s arms, Kate’s last words were, “Help me, dad.”

A year earlier, San Francisco Sheriff Ross Mirkarimi announced, “My long-held belief is that local law enforcement should not be in the civil immigration detainer business… Public safety is not advanced and could be hindered when immigrant communities fear the repercussions of cooperating with law enforcement.”

Forty-five-year-old illegal alien Juan Francisco Lopez-Sanchez, a seven-time convicted felon who returned to the U.S. after five deportations, clearly felt unhindered by fear of repercussions stemming from the possible actions of Sheriff Mirkarimi and his deputies.

In fact, Sanchez was so comfortable he not only broke U.S. immigration law but also violated the sanctuary city’s prohibition against carrying a concealed firearm – a .40-caliber handgun stolen from an agent of the U.S. Bureau of Land Management.

The evidence clearly shows local and federal law enforcement were especially welcoming and extremely accommodating of Sanchez.

That’s an accommodation extended to this day by the leaders of both political parties and a certain lame duck in the White House.

But a growing number of Americans are done accommodating these accommodating politicians.

In turning to Trump, they have abandoned the left-right paradigm of American politics in answer to a young woman’s desperate call:

“Help me.”