Associated Press Restaurant owner Oui Suthamtewakul, right, and Micheal Ritrovato speak about Aaron Alexis , who was once employed by Suthamtewakul, Monday, Sept. 16, 2013, in Fort Worth, Texas.

By Ana Campoy

Nutpisit Suthamtewakul, owner of the Happy Bowl Thai restaurant in Fort Worth, Texas, said in an interview that he met Aaron Alexis, the suspect in the Navy Yard shootings, roughly three years ago at an area Buddhist temple. Mr. Alexis had recently converted from Christianity to Buddhism, he said.

Mr. Suthamtewakul, who is actually a Christian, not a Buddhist, said the two became friends and drinking buddies. When Mr. Alexis told him he was fighting with a neighbor at his apartment over noise issues, Mr. Suthamtewakul said he invited Mr. Alexis to move in with him and his wife, and personally helped Mr. Alexis move out of the apartment.

“He cursed a lot, but I [didn’t] see him angry very much,” Mr. Suthamtewakul said.

Associated Press This undated cell phone photo provided by Kristi Kinard Suthamtewakul shows a smiling Aaron Alexis in Fort Worth, Texas.

Mr. Alexis was a “hardcore drinker,” he said, and was also skilled in videogames, which he would play for marathon sessions that lasted hours. Another friend, Michael Ritrovato, a government worker, said he witnessed Mr. Alexis playing first-person shooting games online.

Mr. Suthamtewakul said he and his family would sometimes bring Mr. Alexis plates of food during his videogame binges.

Mr. Ritrovato, 50, said he and Mr. Alexis were both native New Yorkers and fans of the New York Giants. He remembered they cheered together after the Giants last won the Super Bowl over the New England Patriots in 2012.

An African American, Mr. Alexis sometimes complained he was the victim of discrimination and racial bias. Noticing that Mr. Alexis did not have steady employment, Mr. Suthamtewakul invited him to work at the restaurant, where Mr. Alexis, who spoke fluent Thai, made a positive impression on customers.

But Mr. Suthamtewakul recalled that once, when Mr. Alexis was moving around in the restaurant, his shirt lifted up, revealing a gun in his waistband. Mr. Suthamtewakul said he told Mr. Alexis that he couldn’t show a weapon inside the business.

Mr. Alexis moved out of the home around May of this year. Mr. Suthamtewakul said there was some friction between his wife and Mr. Alexis over the family’s cats, which Mr. Alexis disliked. He said he was aware that Mr. Alexis had recently gotten a job with a company that did government contracting, and had supposedly flown to Japan as part of the job, but had not been in touch with him in the weeks before the mass shooting. He said he was shocked to hear his old friend was identified as the alleged shooter, and that he was dead.

So were customers at the Thai restaurant, some of whom recalled Mr. Alexis as a polite young man who fixed patrons’ computers and was always smiling and friendly.

Jason Williams, a 37-year-old Christian pastor, described Mr. Alexis as “one of the most polite people I’ve ever met.” He said the two often spoke about religion at the restaurant, but always in a civil manner, despite their religious differences.

More

Background Details on Suspected Shooter Aaron Alexis

Incident Report from Aaron Alexis’s 2010 Arrest