<p>Joy Lewis/Reporter-News</p><p>Medicines, supplements and vitamins are stocked at James McCoy’s Drug Store on Judge Ely Boulevard on Friday.</p>

By Brian Bethel of the Abilene Reporter News

Bret Burlock had been taking medication for pain for about a year and was getting good results with it.

"The reason I take it is diabetic-related neuropathy ? either I take it, or I hurt," said Burlock, who lives in Tye.

The generic combination of perphenazine and amitriptyline that he takes is an "old drug," Burlock said.

"It's been out for years," he said.

Burlock had gotten used to paying around $25 a month for the medication.

But recently, his pills more than doubled in price.

"They kind of get you over a barrel," he said of the $30-a-month increase.

Burlock, 55, said he plans to talk to his doctor about switching medications or possibly getting off his current regimen.

Greg Young, manager of Hendrick Professional Pharmacy in Abilene, said stories like Burlock's are becoming "really common" because of recent fluctuations in prices in certain generic drugs.

"I'm thinking of half a dozen people right now that have been through it in the past few weeks," Young said.

It's a trend being noticed by patients, pharmacists and physicians, and one that's earned a fair amount of scrutiny in recent months.

An Aug. 12 analysis by the popular blog "Drug Channels" found that half of all retail generic drugs have become more expensive during the past 12 months, with some becoming "much, much more expensive."

One out of 11 generic drugs more than doubled in cost, with some increases exceeding 1,000 percent, according to the analysis, written by Adam J. Fein, president of Pembroke Consulting Inc. and chief executive officer of Pembroke's Drug Channels Institute.

Abilene dermatologist Paras Ramolia wrote in an email that he definitely had noticed the trend in his practice, with some common creams rising in price by three to seven times.

"Same with antibiotics," he wrote. "It has changed my prescribing habits, no doubt."

Independent pharmacist James McCoy said he, too, has seen generic prices fluctuate widely.

"We consistently see prices on things jumping tenfold, twentyfold, 400 percent, 600 percent," he said.

One medication that has received much attention for recent price increases is digoxin, a generic version of the drug Lanoxin, which some people take to control heart symptoms, Young said.

A July 8 New York Times article reported that the three companies that sell the drug in the U.S. had increased the price they charge pharmacies, "at least nearly doubling it since late last year, according to EvaluatePharma, a London-based consulting firm."

Connecticut Attorney General George Jepsen is investigating the pricing practices of at least two companies that manufacture the drug.

McCoy said that at the beginning of 2013, he paid around $113 for 1,000 pills.

"Now, when you buy the thousand-count, it's $1,000," he said.

Another common example is the antidepressant amitriptyline, part of Burlock's medication, used to treat certain types of pain syndromes, headaches and other common ailments, Young said.

The cost spikes are concerning, Young said, for several reasons, including what they typically mean for patient compliance.

"If somebody comes in and the price of something has gone up ? doubled, tripled or quadrupled or even more ? then their gut reaction is always: ?I'm not going to take that,'" he said.

But one should never stop taking any chronic medication without talking it over with a doctor, he said, and "stopping any medication abruptly could be problematic."

Contemplating Costs

Sometimes, frustratingly, there is no clear-cut answer for why a generic drug's cost suddenly spikes, McCoy said.

"Everybody wants to blame Obamacare," he said. "But we'll often call a generic company and ask why their price has skyrocketed, and there's just no set answer."

Reasons behind a surge in a generic drug's price are manifold, said Molly G. Minze, assistant professor of pharmacy practice with the Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center School of Pharmacy in Abilene.

Fewer companies making a generic product can cause prices to rise rapidly because of the lack of competition, while drug shortages also can drive prices upward.

Most FDA-approved drugs go through a standard life cycle.

"Brand-name medications only have one manufacturer, and they're usually pricey at the time just because of our market in America," Minze said, the drug manufacturers needing cash to recoup research and related costs.

After a drug goes off patent and becomes a generic, more manufacturers are able to come in and replicate the drug, she said.

Typically, those medicines have the same active ingredients as the brand-name drug, but they may have different inactive ingredients.

"The drug entity is still the same within each generic, but it may be a tiny bit different from one generic to the next," she said.

What recently seems to be happening to "not a lot of generics, but some," she said, is that the number of manufacturers has declined.

"So you almost get into the same type of situation like a brand-name product," she said. "There may be only one generic manufacturer, so then, of course, they're able to increase their price."

In some cases, a particular physician or provider may like to use a certain, not-as-commonly-prescribed product. The laws of supply and demand then go into effect, and the price can rise simply because of scarcity, Minze said.

In certain rare cases, such as with the drug digoxin, there is no cheaper "cousin" to go to if prices increase.

"Digoxin doesn't have that (sort of) similar product, so the best thing (for patients) is to talk with their provider, their physician, to find an alternative," Minze said.

Product shortages appear to be the primary culprit for many recent increases, Fein found.

Fein's analysis found that half of the generic drugs examined (49.8 percent) showed declines in cost compared with July 2013.

The median decline was 6.8 percent, while 16 percent of the sample experienced declines greater than 10 percent.

The other half of the equation, though, saw a median increase of 11.8 percent, much higher than the median decrease, and some products had what Fein called "mega increases."

Among nearly 2,400 generic drugs, 224 ? 9.4 percent of the total ? increased by more than 100 percent, according to his analysis.

In certain cases, cost increases were substantial. The National Average Drug Acquisition Cost for the antibiotic tetracycline, for example, increased from 5 cents to $8.59 for a 500-milligram capsule. Put into percentages, that is a whopping 17,714 percent rise.

The NADAC per unit for a 250 milligram tetracycline capsule rose from 6 cents to $4.26, a 7,340 percent increase.

"The retail supply chain has become very fragile," Fein wrote in an email to the Reporter-News. "For many generic drugs, there are only a few suppliers. Any supply shock to the system, such as a manufacturing problem or FDA action, can rapidly create a shortage because alternative capacity isn't ramping up to meet demand."

The Best Medicine

Although the price of certain prescription drugs, generic or otherwise, can be prohibitive, one must weigh the cost of taking the medicine against the price of not doing so.

Even a very expensive drug still may be cheaper than a hospitalization that could follow if a patient who needs the medicine doesn't take it, he said.

In some cases, a more expensive option could be argued to be better therapeutically, Minze said, but ultimately the best medication is "the medication a patient is going to take."

"If they aren't going to be able to take it or afford it, then it's better to use something that maybe isn't as good of a choice," she said, as long as the medicine is one that will affordably help the patient address their health issue.

"The biggest thing to remember is to communicate with your pharmacist and your doctor," Young said. "If you have a hard time affording a medication that used to be in your price range, this needs to be discussed."