Even Coordinated Health President Jim Tsokanos says the health-care company is one of the best-kept secrets in the Lehigh Valley.

That's an odd thing to say about a company that employs 1,200 people and is on track to top 1,500 by early next year.

Most student-athletes in the Lehigh Valley have surely heard of the South Whitehall Township-based company. Coordinated Health provides sports medicine services to 27 local colleges and high schools.

And you've probably also heard of the company if you know someone who's had a knee or other joint replacement. Coordinated Health got its start in orthopedics in 1988 and it's still the company's bread-and-butter, making up about 50 percent of its services.

But the company is now drawing attention otherwise. It's in part because of a new marketing campaign started earlier this year that will go into full swing in two weeks. It's also due to a major expansion over the last 10 years.

Coordinated Heath now has 17 facilities throughout eastern Pennsylvania and western New Jersey with another four in line to open in the next two years.

"We're growing," Tsokanos said. "In order to grow, you have to redefine yourself."

Beyond its heritage

Coordinated Health is looking to attract new customers outside of what the company calls its heritage in orthopedics and sports medicine. The company has seven what it calls "care-on-demand" facilities with three others in the works, a service where Coordinated Health believes more is more.

That's why they have facilities in what Tsokanos calls every mini-market in the region: Allentown, Bethlehem, Easton, Warren County, the Poconos and the Wyoming Valley. A new facility is due to open July 27 on Emrick Boulevard in Bethlehem Township, Pa., and though it's within four miles of two other company facilities, Coordinated Health sees plenty of new business to gain.

"Ninety-five percent of men and women are working these days," said Coordinated Health CEO and Founder Dr. Emil DiIorio. "They need things close to their homes."

Last week, Coordinated Health received approval from the Lopatcong Township Planning Board for a new medical campus on Red School Lane.

DiIorio never set out to create a large company when he got his start as an orthopedic surgeon in Bethlehem in 1987. He came to the Lehigh Valley from Boston to run Lehigh University's sports medicine practice and soon after opened a private practice on Schoenersville Road.

The company grew organically over the years, he said. Post-surgery patients often need physical therapy, so Coordinated Health started offering those services. Patients also need follow-up care, so Coordinated Health started partnering with primary care physicians.

"We've grown out of necessity for what the patients wanted and what the physicians wanted," said Marianne Buck, a Coordinated Health senior vice president.

Local partners

Another major component of the company's business model is partnering with local companies to provide medical services. Many of these partnerships started through Coordinated Health providing orthopedic services to companies where workers have physical tasks but they've expanded to general health care services, as well, DiIorio said. The general-care services help employers keep their medical benefits costs down, a major concern these days for business owners, DiIorio said.

Coordinated Health has provider contracts with 1,200 local companies, some of which pay for doctors or nurse practitioners on site. Many others refer their employees to Coordinated Health's care-on-demand facilities, a service that makes up a significant component of those facilities' business, Tsokanos said.

Health care is the fastest-growing business sector and the fastest-growing employment sector in the Lehigh Valley and Coordinated Health is part of that, said Don Cunningham, president and CEO of Lehigh Valley Economic Development Corp. While Lehigh Valley Health Network and St. Luke's University Hospital Network are the region's two biggest employers and widely known, Coordinated Health has made a quieter but still significant mark in the region, Cunningham said.

"They really started out strictly with orthopedics and physical therapy-type care, but they're quickly moving into other areas with high quality health care," Cunningham said. "They've been a really integral part of growth and job creation in the region."

National growth trend

As Coordinated Health continues to grow, it fits into a national trend of large health-care companies, which will likely continue to be the norm now that the Affordable Care Act is in place, said George Nation, a Lehigh University finance and law professor whose research fields include health care.

"The ACA adopts a one-size-fits-all model and it's easier to impose that type of top-down control when the entities are larger," Nation said in an email.

Coordinated Health doesn't want to get too big, DiIorio said. The company offers 12 types of health-care services, with specialties in orthopedics, joint replacement, sports medicine, primary care and women's health.

You won't see Coordinated Health opening a general care hospital, DiIorio said. The region is already home to many great general care hospitals, and DiIorio says he doesn't see a need to create services where good ones already exist.

Not a hospital

Another reason some health care companies don't get into the general hospital business is they'd have to provide unprofitable services in addition to those that pay the bills, Nation said.

"The idea of getting together as a for-profit healthcare provider without offering an acute-care hospital makes sense because it allows the company to focus on offering the most profitable services," he said. "For example, sports medicine, orthopedic surgery, angioplasty, cardiac catheterization, enhanced birthing suites, neonatal intensive care, CAT scans, PET scans, MRIs, and ultrasounds are all profitable services. On the other hand things like AIDS care, psychiatric services, emergency rooms, trauma centers, and burn treatment are generally not profitable."

Coordinated Health is a for-profit company, which separates it from St. Luke's and Lehigh Valley, though Easton Hospital is also for-profit. Despite being a for-profit company, Coordinated Health often offers health care services for less money than other local providers, Tsokanos said.

Tsokanos pointed to a recent Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services report that showed Coordinated Health had the lowest cost billed to Medicare for knee replacement in the region -- $37,336 compared to a high of $133,356. The company's hospitals are the only in the Lehigh Valley that bill Medicare less than the U.S. average, according to the CMS report.

"We still pay taxes but have a lower overhead," Tsokanos said.