Flooded homes had about three times more fungal abundance

Former University of Colorado postdoctoral researcher Joanne Emerson hangs an air sampling device from the basement ceiling of a Boulder home. ( Credit: David Oonk/CIRES / Daily Camera )

CORRECTION: This story originally misidentified Shelly Miller, one of the study's co-authors.

If your basement flooded in the Colorado Front Range Flood in September 2013, it's likely your home will have higher levels of airborne bacteria and fungi than it did before — even if you did remodel.

A new study by researchers at the University of Colorado found that out of a sample of 50 South Boulder homes, flooded homes had about three times as much fungal abundance as non-flooded homes, and that the composition of bacteria and fungi greatly differed. There was no difference in bacterial abundance.

Though it may not be surprising that flooded homes were more likely to have a greater presence of airborne bacteria and fungi, Shelly Miller, an associate professor of mechanical engineering and co-author of the paper, said she didn't expect to find such differences in the microbial ecology of the flooded homes after they had been remediated — a process which includes replacing drywall and flooring; treating dried surfaces with chemicals to deter microbial growth; and throwing out old furniture.

The results suggest that bacterial and fungal communities continue to be affected by flooding even after relative humidity has returned to baseline levels and remediation has occurred. This finding could have important implications with how we deal with future flooding.

Advertisement

"We need to rethink how we're remediating flooded homes," Miller said of the results.

Patrick Henning, a mold inspector with DetectionTek in Boulder, confirmed post-flooding mold is still a problem in Boulder.

"We have a lot of cases of people who had dealt with the initial remediation after the flood, and then a season goes by and the smell comes back or symptoms return," he said. "A lot of people took it upon themselves to do the repairs because of difficulties with insurance, but we typically recommend people use a professional remediator."

Stubborn Mold

Elisabeth Root, 38, lives in Keewaydin Meadows and was one of the study's participants.

After the flood, Root said she had about a foot of water in her 1,600-square--foot basement.

The day after the flood, Root pumped out all the water and began the remediation process. In total, she ripped out all the drywall from the downstairs, the carpet, and the cork floor. She also removed about 18 inches of wet insulation and left the walls open for nearly three months to make sure everything had dried out, running fans, heaters and dehumidifers for weeks on end.

"Before we closed up the walls, we had a mold testing and mitigation service in Boulder County come and do sampling/analysis," she said, noting the tests came back within normal ranges at the time.

This past February, Root has a sump pump installed — just in case.

"I feel like we've done all we can and our basement feels just fine — it's not damp and there are no funny smells. It's basically back to pre-flood livability."

Still, she said, it's important for her to know what's in her home.

"We spend so much of our time in our homes. It's really important to know that we're breathing air that won't make us sick."

A Unique Opportunity

Co-author Noah Fierer, an associate professor in the department of ecology and evolutionary biology and a fellow at the Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences, said he was inspired to look into the impact on microbe communities after helping neighbors clean up their basements in south Boulder.

"The flood was very patchy," he said. "If you have two homes next to each other, only one would be flooded."

This is because most of the homes in south Boulder flooded from groundwater, not creeks spilling over their banks.

Though the flood had harsh consequences for many of Boulder's residents, it was a bit of a boon to scientists, allowing researchers to do work that largely has never been done before.

While previous studies on the microbial communities in flooded homes have compared indoor air to outdoor air, the Front Range Flood allowed researchers to directly compare indoor air from flooded homes with indoor air from non-flooded homes in the same area, and neighborhood, thanks to the patchy pattern Fierer mentioned.

In addition, Miller and Fierer were able to use a relatively new DNA sequencing technique to determine the bacteria and fungi present in the homes.

Roughly two to three months after the flood, researchers collected indoor air samples from 36 flooded homes and 14 non-flooded homes.

Using the new technique, they were able to determine the types and abundance of microbes found in the air by sequencing a particular gene. Compared to older methods which relied on culturing samples, this approach is much more accurate, as 99 percent of microorganisms are extremely difficult to grow.

In the end, Miller said they identified about 421 bacterial and 131 fungal species per sample.

Though some molds correlate with adverse health effects such as flu-like symptoms and allergies, for the most part, Fierer says, homeowners shouldn't worry — the dryness of Colorado's climate keeps such things at bay.

"It's hard to say, but the health implications are probably minimal," said Fierer.

What researchers want to emphasize instead is the diversity of microbial communities.

"There are microbes all around us; we're breathing them in every time we're outside or indoors," said Fierer. "I think what we need to be reminded of is how little we actually know about those microbes that live in our homes."