Their addiction to the powerful drug made them lose everything, including their children, but they are building back their lives.

Touring the new home was an emotional trip for how far the family has come.

The Slaights will now call a north Tulsa neighborhood home, all thanks to volunteers.

A Tulsa couple is getting a second chance after battling a drug addiction and starting over after a local church group pitched in and gave them keys to their future.

"You know, we had the house, we had the kids, we had the fence and that all got stripped out from under us," Tyler Slaight said.

Tyler Slaight and his wife Morgan battled an addiction to methamphetamine. Their addiction to the powerful drug made them lose everything, including their children.

Through years of rehabilitation and counseling, the Slaights are coming back together, and their children are sleeping in their own rooms.

"You go through the kind of life that we went through, and you don't expect anything like this. I'm an ex-eight-year meth addict," Morgan said. "And the only reason I'm sober is because God delivered me from that."

The Slaights will now call a north Tulsa neighborhood home, all thanks to volunteers from the Bethany Free Will Baptist Church in Broken Arrow.

"To see her walk through the door - it's just been wonderful," Angela Lane said.

The love from others has touched the hearts of a family once hardened by the despair that comes with a drug-addicted lifestyle.

Once again, they have hope.

"You just don't expect this kind of stuff," Morgan said. "You don't expect the outpouring from the community the way this has happened."

"This hasn't been easy for us, by any means," Tyler said. "It hasn't been easy, but we didn't give up, you know? It's nobody else's fault; what happened in our lives, but the choices we make.

"But now we make the good choices today, and with those choices come restoration."

Touring the new home was an emotional trip for how far the family has come down the road to recovery.

"This is my favorite part - the dining room," Morgan said. "This is where we all get to sit down and pray together and have our meals together and just be together."

More than half of the 500 member church turned out to get the family's house into livable shape.