The marketplace is ready for business as the second year of open enrollment under the Affordable Care Act gets underway this weekend.

Open enrollment will allow people who did not purchase coverage during the last enrollment period or who now need coverage to obtain it. Those who are already covered can also make changes to their plans.

During the first enrollment period from October 1, 2013, to March 31, more than 733,000 Texans selected an insurance plan, exceeding enrollment projections of about 629,000.

The enrollment period runs this time around from Saturday to Feb. 15, half the amount of time given last year.

“You have only three months this time, so you want to make sure you apply early,” said Mario Castillo, Texas organizing director for the nonprofit group Get Covered America.

Applying early gives people a chance to look into subsidies they might qualify for that help with the cost of premiums. Castillo said 84 percent of Texans who enrolled last year qualified for some type of financial assistance.

“The average cost of a plan was $72, so it was a lot more affordable than people realized,” he said. “We’re seeing that you can get quality, affordable health care for about what you pay for your cellphone monthly, or a cable bill.”

All of the plans on the marketplace are required by law to cover 10 benefits the ACA deemed essential.

The required benefits include ambulatory services; emergency service; hospital stays; pregnancy, maternity and newborn care; mental health and substance use disorder services; prescriptions; rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; laboratory services; preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management and pediatric services.

Navigating the plans can be overwhelming, advocates and insurance agents said. But Castillo said there’s help available to those who need it.

“In-person assistance is available in their communities for free and they can obtain that to help with the application process and the enrollment process,” he said. “If you haven’t done this before and it’s something that you don’t really understand or it’s confusing, absolutely seek out the assistance.”

Castillo said those who seek the help are more likely to follow through and complete the process of obtaining coverage. They’re able to ask questions about premiums, deductibles and co-pays and have a better understanding of their plan, he said.

Kim Sanford, an operations manager with Insurance Professionals, agreed.

“I think the most important thing about using an agent is that plan choices are sometimes not self-explanatory,” Sanford said. “If they’re going to apply for a subsidy, it’s definitely worthwhile to go through an agent. They don’t have to be online and get overwhelmed.”

Agents can explain the difference between plans, as some plans provide more coverage and cost more than others. There are additional benefits of going through an agent, she said, including help with plans and claims once a plan is used.

While three months might seem like a lot of time to find and pick coverage, many said it’s better to enroll sooner as it takes some time after enrolling for coverage to actually go into effect.

“For a Jan. 1 effective date, they have to enroll before Dec. 15. If it’s after Dec. 15, their effective date is Feb. 1. After Jan. 15, it’s March 1,” Sanford said.

Later effective dates could mean penalties down the road, something many of those uninsured in 2014 will soon face.

“The last year, if you didn’t end up obtaining coverage and were not covered for (at least) nine months of the year, the penalty is going to be enforced when you file your taxes for 2014,” Castillo said.

The penalty is either $95 per person in 2014, or 1 percent of household income above the threshold for filing taxes, whichever is higher.

For example, a single woman who makes $25,000 a year as a call center operator and was uninsured for all of 2014 would owe a penalty of $148.50. That’s 1 percent of $14,850, her income above the 2014 tax-filing threshold of $10,150.

For 2015, the penalty will rise to either 2 percent of income, or $325, whichever is higher.

Many of the people facing fines are low-

income workers, a group the law was intended to help, though some will qualify for exemptions.

“You can get a hardship exemption if you demonstrate a hardship in paying the premium for the insurance,” Castillo said. “If you fall in the Medicaid gap, you can get an exemption so that you’re not penalized for not having coverage.”

The Medicaid gap, he said, is a result of the Supreme Court’s decision to allow states to opt out of expanding the Medicaid program. Texas was one of those states.

The expansion was designed to cover those people who could not afford to obtain marketplace coverage and did not qualify for financial assistance, but also did not qualify for Medicaid.

“Those individuals are not penalized because the way the law was designed, they should have qualified for Medicaid,” Castillo said.

The waivers were designed to ease the impact of the penalties. But while some exemptions seem simple, others will require math calculations.

Some involve sending in the application by mail with supporting documents, such as copies of medical bills, police reports, obituaries, utility shut-off notices, even news articles. Applicants will have to dig up the documentation themselves — it won’t be like filing the W-2s they get from employers.

Two federal agencies have roles in the waiver process, each with its own time schedule. Some people will apply directly to the Internal Revenue Service when they file their 2014 tax returns next year, or they can apply for the waiver now on the ACA enrollment website, healthcare.gov.

The forms are accompanied by worksheets to calculate the penalties and waivers, if they qualify. But the paperwork could overwhelm people who are used to completing their own tax documents.

“If you are a do-it-

yourself person who is going to try it on pen and paper, all I can say is, ‘God be with you,’” said Mark Ciaramitaro, vice president of health care services at tax giant H&R Block.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.