A luxurious New York City building is prohibiting its rent-controlled tenants from enjoying their terrace so market rate-paying residents — who have smaller balconies — don't get jealous, claims a new report.

The New York Post reports that the Q41 building, a new tower in Queens with stunning views of Manhattan, has installed a 6-foot high wire barrier to stop people who don't pay market rate from entering its huge balcony.

Two such tenants are Erin McFadzen and her live-in boyfriend Erik Clancy, who picked their rent-stabilized, sixth-floor pad because of its wrap-around terrace.

They checked out the apartment in March when there was no fence — and were outraged to see the barricade there on moving day in July.

Residents say the Q41 tower in New York City is fencing in tenants in rent-controlled apartments so they don't get access to the building's huge balcony — and make people paying market-rate jealous

Erin McFadzen and her boyfriend Erik Clancy say they can't get to the terrace due to a 6-foot wire fence

'We’re caged in,' McFadzen, who pays $2,186 for her two-bedroom place, told the Post. 'Every time someone comes over, I have to explain why the fence is there — and tell them we’re rent stabilized, like it’s a badge I have to wear.'

A similar balcony on a market-rate apartment going for $3,692 per month has no wiring, claims the report.

Clancy told the Post he couldn't imagine a prospective market-rate tenant being told: 'You get this beautiful view of Manhattan behind a giant metal fence.'

At least eight units are fenced in, the Post reported. One terrace has been rendered useless with wiring that leaves just a couple of feet of room.

The 117-unit building's developer, Queensboro Development, told the couple the fence was necessary so window washers could set up before clean up, according to the Post.

'It has come to our clients’ attention that you are exceeding your area of usage,' the building's attorney, William Slochowsky, wrote the couple on Oct. 28, according to the Post.

But a former super told McFadzen and Clancy 'the fence is there to stay' because of market-rate residents with tiny balconies, the newspaper reported.

The 17-story Q41 building, at 23-10 41st Avenue in Long Island City, had been stalled until the city pumped $7.6 million in subsidies, according to the Post.

Calls to Queensboro Development went unanswered, the newspaper reported.

This is not the first building in New York City to offer separate amenities for rent-controlled and market-rate tenants.

Developer Extell has drawn much criticism for its plan to build a posh tower on Manhattan's Upper West Side using massive tax breaks — but then make its affordable-housing tenants use a different entrance from high-paying residents

The building's 'poor door' wouldn't be its only difference: under its original plan, some of the higher-paying residents would also have access to different amenities.

Erin McFadzen claims the fence is there so tenants with smaller balconies and who pay market-rate don't get jealous of the amenity she gets for a lower price

Plans for the luxury skyscraper at 1 West End Ave. were slightly altered in August: the building still has separate entrances, but all residents will now have access to such building amenities as a courtyard and river-view roof deck

The affordable segment's lobby will also be stylishly appointed and set facing a park, the developer claims.

Some residents and officials still see the divisions as discriminatory.