President Obama has invited a pro-abortion nun to greet the Pope during his visit to the United States.

Breitbart News reports that Sister Simone Campbell will attend a reception at the White House with Pope Francis as well as his address to Congress next week. In 2010, Campbell helped organize the “Nuns on the Bus,” which was a tour by Catholic women to protest Rep. Paul Ryan’s (R-WI) proposed budget.

Additionally, she’s the executive director of the liberal social justice lobby NETWORK and opposed the U.S. Bishops when they fought against the HHS mandate in Obamacare because of their abortion and conscience concerns.

Bill Donohue of the Catholic League said the following about Sister Campbell: “She is the leader of the “Nuns on the Bus” who actively campaigned for Obamacare with its blatant pro-abortion provisions. We doubt an invitation is on the way to the Little Sisters of the Poor, the nuns being targeted by the administration for remaining true to their Catholic faith and refusing to comply with the pro-abortion mandate. We don’t expect to see them there.”

In 2012, Donohue explained more about Sister Campbell’s pro-abortion organization. He said, “NETWORK was founded in the early 1970s by radical nuns professing a strong belief in social justice but no interest whatsoever in abortion. It is so radical and disrespectful of what the bishops say that it has butted heads many times with the Church hierarchy in the U.S., as well as in Rome.”

“In 1983, it took the side of a dissident nun who refused to denounce publicly funded abortions; when the nun refused, the Vatican stepped in to force her to leave her order. The very next year, Sister Marjorie Tuite, a founder of NETWORK, was herself threatened with expulsion from her order for her pro-abortion activities,” he concluded.

Follow LifeNews.com on Instragam for pro-life pictures and the latest pro-life news.

As LifeNews previously reported, in August, pro-abortion Catholic Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-CT) sent a letter to Pope Francis urging him to discuss certain topics when he addresses Congress on September 24th. Rep DeLauro is a Congresswoman representing Connecticut’s third district and has a lengthy pro-abortion record. In fact, National Right to Life reports that she has a 0% pro-life record and has voted against pro-life legislation 108 times.

In the past, Rep. DeLauro has voted against common-sense measures that would protect women and unborn children from abortion and the abortion industry. For example, in Congress she voted against the Pain Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, the Unborn Victims of Violence Act and legislation that would de-fund Planned Parenthood’s abortion business. Yet somehow, Rep. DeLauro says she is Catholic and believes she has the right to tell Pope Francis what he should say when he visits Congress.

Bill Donohue from the Catholic League said the following about Rep. DeLauro’s letter: “Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-CT), a rabidly pro-abortion Catholic, has sent a letter to Pope Francis — signed by 93 of her House Democratic colleagues — urging him to focus on certain topics when he addresses Congress Sept. 24. And they are not content to have him speak in general terms about concerns like economic justice or the environment.”

“They want him to advance specific items on their agenda, like paid sick leave, a higher minimum wage, and climate change. Nowhere, of course, do they express openness to what he might say on marriage, family or the sanctity of life. Indeed, if he addresses any of these issues from the House rostrum, be prepared to hear these same voices caterwauling about separation of church and state.”