Lt. Col. Bruno Krioussis of the Civil Air Patrol, Colorado Wing, left, talks with 1st Lt. Melvin Callen, pilot, as he checks fuel levels Saturday on the Cessna 182 Skylane following a practice search-and-rescue mission in Larimer and Weld counties. They flew from Greeley to the Fort Collins-Loveland Municipal Airport for the 2 1/2-hour mission. ( Shelley Widhalm )

Before Lt. Col. Bruno Krioussis could start taking aerial photographs Saturday in Larimer and Weld counties, he and his crew were reassigned to search for a downed aircraft in Red Feathers Lake in a Civil Air Patrol quarterly training exercise.

"I didn't need any pictures today," said Krioussis, who began his 2 1/2-hour mission at 8:31 a.m. from Greeley.

Krioussis and his crew -- 1st Lt. Melvin Callen, pilot, and Capt. Stephan Cavarra, observer -- flew in a four-seated Cessna 182 Skylane during the three-day, search-and-rescue exercise, known as SAREX.

"There will be interjections of simulated missing aircraft that took off and didn't arrive," said Rob Pehkonen, emergency services training officer for Colorado Wing of the Civil Air Patrol.

The training exercise practiced incident command at the Fort Collins-Loveland Municipal Airport, with volunteers dispatching and communicating with air and ground crews and the crews conducting various search-and-rescue missions.

The air crews -- there was one in Larimer County, one in Cortes and two in Montrose -- simulated searching for missing aircraft and working with the Federal Emergency Management Agency on gathering photographs of a simulated flood.

"They are very important not only in preparation for operations evaluations, but it also it's important for us to be able to execute a real mission effectively if we're called to do so," said Col. Earl Sherwin, Colorado Wing commander. "We're trying to train like it's a real mission, so when a real mission comes along, it's pretty automatic."

Advertisement

The air crew working in Larimer and Weld counties is part of the Thompson Valley Composite Squadron, one of 37 in the Colorado Wing.

The Civil Air Patrol, founded in December 1941 to help defend the nation's coastline, has three primary missions that include disaster and emergency services, cadet programs for youth ages 12-21 and aerospace education. It is a congressionally chartered, nonprofit civilian auxiliary of the U.S. Air Force.

The patrol is divided into wings for each state, Puerto Rico and Washington, D.C. The Colorado Wing has more than 2,000 members.

"We're unpaid professional volunteers," said Mike Daniels, director of public affairs for the Colorado Wing. "We adhere to the same high standards as the U.S. Air Force."

The Civil Air Patrol conducts 90 percent of inland search and rescue in the United States, coordinates Air Force-assigned missions and provides disaster-relief support to local, state and national agencies.

The patrol, which helped out in the Front Range flood, set up an incident command post Friday night at the airport. Volunteer members labeled different tables in a large room as the planning and the operations sections, the air and ground branches overseeing the crews, and a communications area with radio operators communicating with all practice missions that day in the state.

"It's our job to keep everyone informed," said Lt. Col. Rick Maher, squadron commander for the North Valley Composite in Thornton and one of four radio operators on Saturday. "We don't make any decisions here. We just pass on the information."

Krioussis and his crew, CAP559, included three team members, the pilot, the observer and the scanner. The observer, who sits in the front passenger seat, assists the pilot with radios and the direct finding unit that locates downed aircraft and, like the scanner sitting in back, with searching the ground below.

"My job really is to operate the radio and communicate back to the base with our position reports," Cavarra said.

The crew searched for a practice beacon, a signal box simulating the aircraft electronic location transmission, or ELT.

"Every aircraft has to have an emergency locator beacon," Pehkonen said. "If a hard impact occurs, it sets the ELP off. That gives the homing signal, which other teams can track."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelley.widhalm.wordpress.com