Music

Chauncey Black, Eric Williams, Mark Middleton, Levi Little of Blackstreet. Photo: Tristan Stefan Edouard

Reviewer rating:

Rating: 3.5 out of 5 stars

Blackstreet

The Hi-Fi, April 18

Reviewed by George Palathingal

As the much-sampled Jimmy Castor Bunch once put it: what we're gonna do right here is go back. Way back. Back into time.

Advertisement

To the period from about 1988 to 1998, specifically, when silky-voiced men who could also rap a few bars performed a style of R&B known as new jack swing, often while pneumatic women gyrated in the background.

Sound dated? Look or, more accurately, listen beyond the image. There are no MC Hammer pants or angular afros here – just huge, soulful beats and hooks that still sound terrific in a club (a reincarnation of the site that once hosted Sydney's mighty RNB Superclub, no less), as warm-up DJ Nasser T reminds us via the likes of pre-notoriety R Kelly, Will Smith back when he was gettin' jiggy wit it as the Fresh Prince and one-hit wonders such as Bell Biv DeVoe and Heavy D.

By the mid-1990s the American quartet Blackstreet were kings of the new jack swingers, and so it is with great relief to everyone that the current line-up refuses to taint this old-school party with any material after 1997. Indeed, their worst offence on this night might not be the regular backing of scantily clad female dancers but one oversung ballad too many towards the end.

Either side of those, however, the more upbeat jams from their self-titled 1994 debut and its 1996 follow-up Another Level come together especially smoothly. Both individual opportunities and multi-part harmonies show off the singers' distinct voices while the band's DJ provides grooves that all but force you to dance.

None is hotter than the inevitable finale of No Diggity (well, until it weirdly turns into Tears For Fears' Shout). But debut single Baby Be Mine also skips along nicely, Fix has the various vocals intertwining seductively with their backing, and U Blow My Mind proves its worth restoring the tempo to a sensible speed after the various excursions into "baby making" music, as band co-founder Chauncey "Black" Hannibal described the ballads. (That said, Before I Let You Go is kind of irresistible, especially when it reaches its a cappella climax.)

Living in the past is, of course, not the healthiest pastime – and it's encouraging to know Hannibal isn't exclusively doing so, given his promotion of his new Sydney R&B label Kings Cross Records via support act Lily V. But if this evening proves one thing it's that the occasional trip back in time can be a lot of fun, too.