Pittsburgh’s health care market — and UPMC health system and its president and CEO Jeffrey Romoff, in particular — feature prominently in a new book by Steven Brill, the author of a groundbreaking 2013 Time magazine essay on medical bills.

The portrait is not always flattering.

“America’s Bitter Pill,” released this week by Random House ($28), looks at health care policy and the impact of the Affordable Care Act by Mr. Brill, who founded Court TV, The American Lawyer and Brill’s Content magazines.

The 453-page book makes several mentions of Pittsburgh as an example of “how nonprofit hospitals had become hard-charging big businesses” as it details how provider UPMC and insurer Highmark have so thoroughly dominated the region’s health care. The book also offers some insight into their divorce, consummated this month with the expiration of their in-network contract.

The book recounts how Highmark and UPMC enjoyed a long-standing symbiotic and mutually enriching relationship for years and, according to Mr. Brill, how concerns about an antitrust lawsuit by a then-independent West Penn Allegheny Health System led to their breakup.

But Mr. Brill pays particular attention to UPMC and how the health system bought up area hospitals to create a massive provider network while launching its own health insurance plan to compete with Highmark.

The goal for UPMC, the author contends, was complete domination of the local health care market. He quotes Mr. Romoff saying the acquisitions “were just a step-by-step process of controlling the impediments.”

Mr. Brill does offer somewhat grudging admiration for how, under Mr. Romoff’s leadership, UPMC has grown into an $11 billion, world-class health system — a point noted by UPMC spokesman Paul Wood.

“Brill’s idea of [health care] nirvana may already exist right here in Western Pennsylvania, especially when you combine UPMC’s lowest-in-the-country insurance premiums with our well-recognized ‘top 10 in the nation’ quality care and academic excellence,” Mr. Wood wrote in an email Wednesday.

“The worst thing he says is that UPMC is aggressive/​competitive … but wins.”

At one point, Mr. Brill refers to the health giant as “perhaps the world’s most tough-minded, profit-oriented nonprofit.”

But while extolling the UPMC model of a dominant dual provider-insurer system designed to hold down costs, Mr. Brill also asks, “Do we want Romoff to have all that power?”

Mr. Brill’s recommendation is that we “ensure that accountability by insisting on tight regulation, mostly through the smarter use of federal antitrust law and state regulatory authority.”

Two of his suggested regulations would require that every market have at least two provider-insurer health systems and that operating profits be capped at 8 percent. Mr. Wood pointed out that UPMC’s operating margin was 1.7 percent in fiscal 2014 and 1.3 percent in 2013.

Another proposed regulation would cap a CEO’s salary at 60 times the lowest-paid physician. In that scenario, Mr. Brill writes, Mr. Romoff’s salary would be capped at just over $3 million, which would put him more in line with his counterparts at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio and Geisinger Health System in Central Pennsylvania. Mr. Romoff’s total compensation for fiscal 2013 was $6.55 million.

The author recommended that integrated health systems such as UPMC have a physician at the helm because “the culture of these organizations needs to be ensured.”

UPMC spokesman Mr. Wood countered, “Few M.D.s, while they clearly understand the medicine and the physician-patient relationship, have the business acumen to run an integrated insurer-provider [health care] system.

“Simply take a look at Highmark … their last two CEOs have been M.D.s and they’ve failed spectacularly. WPAHS’s last CEO was an M.D. and that didn’t work out so well for WPAHS or him.”

Steve Twedt: stwedt@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1963.