DALLAS (CBSDFW.COM) – More than 30 North Texas health and community groups will join forces over the weekend to offer free flu shots, health screenings and information about the new health insurance law, the Affordable Care Act, often referred to as Obamacare.

The Be Covered Care Fair will be held at the Dallas Convention Center on Saturday, October 26, from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.

“Be Covered Texas is proud to be partnering with organizations that share our mission of expanding access to health care in Dallas,” said Michelle Riddell, Chair of the Be Covered Texas campaign and Vice President of Community Investment for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas. “This Care Fair creates an opportunity for uninsured Dallas families to access community resources and information that can help them understand their options during the open enrollment period.”

The Dallas Care Fair will comprise several stations, including:

ACA Zone – Attendees will be able to ask questions one-on-one and learn about the Affordable Care Act (ACA) from qualified community experts.

Kids Corner – The family-friendly kid zone will provide children’s activities including Blue Bear, coloring books/crayons, crafts, face painting and other activities.

Medical Center – Attendees can receive free flu shots from the Caring for Children Foundation, blood pressure, cholesterol and glucose screenings, dental screenings, vision screenings and BMI screenings.

Community Resources – Tables and booths of community resources including community clinics, health education, employment, housing, education resources and more.

Story Wall – A place where attendees can share their stories and experiences and tell the Be Covered Texas campaign how it can continue to help build awareness among their families and friends.

Hundreds of families are expected to attend the event. The first 1,000 families will be able to pick up a free bag of healthy groceries in the Farmer’s Market.

Click here to download an event flyer from BeCoveredTexas.org for free parking and for more information about the event.

Latest News:

Top Trending: