Breaking It Down Al Drago/CQ Roll Call The White House and congressional leadership released the text of a major bipartisan budget agreement in the early hours of Tuesday morning.



With just one week left before the U.S. would risk defaulting on its debts unless Congress increases the federal debt limit, the agreement will suspend – or essentially do away with – the ceiling that would have prevented additional borrowing until March 2017.



It also staves off the potential for a government shutdown until after Dec. 11 – the date on which current government funding expires – by raising caps on both defense and domestic spending, and keeps Medicare Part B premiums from majorly increasing.



In exchange, the spending hikes will be paid for in part by cost-cutting measures affecting Medicare and Social Security.



Click through for more on what's in the agreement, what was left out, and what will happen going forward. Debt and Budget Headaches Put Off

Debt and Budget Headaches Put Off Michael Bonfigli/The Christian Science Monitor The top-line portions of the agreement – increasing spending and suspending the debt ceiling – will come as a relief to members of both parties.



At the heart of Congress' struggle to pass annual spending legislation have been across-the-board caps on discretionary spending known as the sequester, put in place in 2011 and meant to be so damaging to both domestic and defense spending that neither party could stomach them, forcing them to come to a larger compromise.



Tuesday's deal is similar to the one worked out in 2013 by then-House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, R-Wis., and Senate Budget Committee Chairwoman Patty Murray, D-Wash., to blunt implementation of the sequester.



It increases spending limits – to be divided between domestic and defense spending by $50 billion in fiscal year 2016 and an additional $30 billion the next year.



After that, unless a new deal is worked out by July 2017, spending levels will snap back to those laid out in the sequester.



The agreement also will increase the debt ceiling through mid-March 2017, meaning the Treasury will be able to borrow past its current limit of $18.1 trillion.



And it prevents a 52 percent increase in premiums for about a third of Medicare Part B enrollees whose coverage of doctor visits and outpatient care is not deducted from their Social Security checks. Instead, increases will go up 14 percent. How They'll Pay For It

How They'll Pay For It (AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster) Much of the money needed to offset the increases in spending will come from adjustments to Medicare and Social Security.



The deal extends the so-called Medicare sequester – a 2 percent reduction in provider payments put in place in the 2013 deal – and includes reforms to the health care program that Boehner said together will total over $30 billion. Another big change, bringing an estimated $8 billion in savings, would eliminate an Affordable Care Act provision yet to go into effect that would require large companies to auto-enroll workers in health coverage.



The proposed pact also makes structural changes to the Social Security Disability Insurance program, standardizing and tightening eligibility programs to cut down on waste and fraud and account for some $5 billion in savings.



The deal additionally would move $150 billion marked for the Social Security Trust Fund to the Disability Insurance Trust Fund as a way to prevent the latter account's impending insolvency.



Other small offset amounts would come from the sale of 8 percent of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve and raising fees paid by employers to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp., which backstops private pension plans. Not Everyone Is Happy

Not Everyone Is Happy The Associated Press The announcement of the deal was immediately met with skepticism on both sides of the aisle, particularly from conservatives who hoped to leverage their reluctance to raise the debt limit into deeper concessions from the White House.



"It's another 'govern by crisis' deal that doesn't reflect the will of the House but rather the will of the speaker," said Rep. Justin Amash, R-Mich., a frequent critic of the House leadership.



Even Ryan, who is all but certain to take the place of departing Speaker John Boehner later this week, had harsh words.



"This process stinks. This is not the way to conduct the people's business," Ryan told reporters going into a GOP conference meeting Tuesday morning, although he said he had not yet read the deal itself. "We are up against a deadline … As a conference, we should have been meeting months ago to discuss a unified strategy going forward."



Meanwhile, the entitlement reforms, long pushed for by Republicans, will be difficult for Democrats to swallow – but not enough for most to vote against a deal that meets their demands of increasing spending caps.

When Will All This Happen?