Cost overruns, schedule delays, bureaucratic mazes. These are just some of the markers of the dark cloud looming over the defense acquisitions world. But there are pockets of light throughout the system; one is just south of Tampa, Florida. As legislators comb through hundreds of independent studies for answers to the DoD’s buying woes, they would be wise to stop and look to MacDill Air Force Base, home of U.S. Special Operations Command’s (SOCOM) Special Operations Forces Acquisition, Technology, & Logistics (SOF AT&L). Fundamentally different from the department’s traditional acquisition hubs in some respects, many of SOF AT&L’s cultural and business principles are innovative and, more importantly, exportable.

Led by Acquisition Executive Jim Geurts, SOF AT&L’s relatively small team manages the lifecycle of over 500 diverse programs, ranging from aircraft armor to freeze-dried plasma. Charged with meeting the “dynamic, global, complex, and time-sensitive needs of SOF missions,” SOF AT&L moves with the rapidness that Rep. Mac Thornberry (R-Texas) and Sen. John McCain John McCainOvernight Defense: Pentagon denies troops on Syrian front lines | Senators push for more Afghan visas McCain files B amendment to boost defense spending Senators push to authorize 4,000 more visas for Afghans MORE (R-Ariz.) are hungry to proliferate across the DoD.

With that in mind, a former leader from the Department’s Joint Rapid Acquisition Cell (JRAC) cautioned that SOF AT&L’s “blueprint” cannot be the magic bullet to fix it all. In terms of structure, scale, and scope, the non-traditional procurement organization’s success is enabled by several unique features:

Flexibility and consolidation—to execute its urgent missions, DoD policies afford the organization “unique acquisition authorities” and added funding flexibility. Beyond these latitudes, SOF AT&L has the advantage of visibility into “all technology development, acquisitions, and logistics” in one centralized location; conversely, traditional procurement centers have the heavy task of maneuvering in a complex and geographically-dispersed web of stakeholders.

Scale and scope— SOF AT&L is optimized to execute lean modernization efforts, not to invent big platforms. For its limited set of larger missions, the organization very often partners with the services. And, in terms of scope, programs intended for long-lasting impact would not do well at SOF AT&L, as the organization’s rapid fielding deemphasizes life-cycle cost and sustainability.

However, in its perennial battle against the “forces of slow”—a label offered by our colleague from JRAC— the DoD acquisitions community can draw insights from SOCOM’s buying arm in meaningful ways:

Openness— it begins with what Geurts calls “radical transparency.” Though clear communication and unrestricted access to information becomes more challenging with size, bigger procurement centers should still push hard to open up their organizations; nothing gets people moving fast like knowing they have the ear of leadership and that their actions are on display.

Productive failures—DoD traditional buying organizations should follow SOF AT&L’s example of being open to and encouraging “productive failures.” If acquisition leadership endorses more daring developments and guarantees that failure is not an automatic career-killer, the Department’s broader acquisitions community could make real strides in breaking a much-criticized culture of risk aversion.

Rapid ideation—while innovative initiatives are not necessarily synonymous with innovative outcomes, SOF AT&L’s “Crazy 8’s Program” is reinforcing this culture of openness and driving creative results. Referenced alongside efforts out of IBM and UnitedHealth Group in the 2014 book The Innovator’s Field Guide, “Crazy 8’s” is a cross-functional team that was founded on the premise of “destroying the organization and recreating [it] with step change improvement in performance.” Bigger buying organizations may face greater bureaucratic obstacles than SOF AT&L in translating fresh ideas into innovative solutions. Nevertheless, there is nothing to prevent other acquisition hubs from standing up rapid ideation cells like SOF AT&L’s “Crazy 8’s” and giving them a shot.

Feedback—SOF AT&L has reversed the feedback channel between acquisition professionals and end-users. Whereas field operators in the deliberateacquisitions arena react to development plans and fielding timelines from procurement staff back at base, SOF AT&L completely flips this model. In speaking with a colleague at the National Defense Industrial Association, he noted that rapid acquisition centers like SOF AT&L tailor their protocols to fit material needs while deliberate acquisition centers often sacrifice speed for process. Though the deliberate acquisition world will not (and should not) be this flexible, better feedback mechanisms and greater reach-back capability for the warfighter can make traditional buying hubs more responsive and effective.

These key ingredients in SOF AT&L’s recipe for acquisition success are already starting to make their way off MacDill Air Force Base and into procurement wings across the services. Since 2009, the organization’s “Ghost Program” has brought over 80 junior Air Force acquisition professionals to SOCOM on 120-day tours where participants "can learn rapid acquisition skill craft and then bring it back to the Air Force." Beyond this initiative, certain SOF AT&L technologies have “trickle[d] down to the services” and glimmers of rapidness have become more apparent throughout the defense acquisitions community.

As Congress and Secretary Ash Carter—a procurement veteran turned Pentagon chief— bear down to bring meaningful policy changes to DoD acquisitions, they should look to proliferate transferrable, innovative practices, such as those found at SOF AT&L. Aggressively exporting such approaches can shed more light than abstract studies on how best to overcome the procurement system’s “forces of slow.”

Haber is a business analyst in the National Security Practice at Censeo Consulting Group. Jeffress is a managing director and head of the National Security Practice at Censeo Consulting Group.