A full moon hangs above the Lake Michigan horizon beside the Ludington, Mich., north pier light, before setting early Tuesday morning, Jan., 9, 2001. (AP Photo/Ludington Daily News, Andy Klevorn) MILUD101 (Photo: AP)

Christmas full moon to rise for first time this century

Don't forget to look up in the sky early Friday morning. No, not for Santa, who'll be long gone — for the full moon, which peaks at 6:11 a.m. ET, according to NASA. The last time there was a full moon Christmas Day was 1977, and it won't happen again until 2034. December's full moon is called the "cold moon" because, appropriately enough, "it is the month when the winter cold fastens its grip and the nights become long and dark," according to the Farmer's Almanac.

Full moon this Christmas is very rare. The last time was 1977, & the next time will be 2034: https://t.co/1sjrKNPfDRpic.twitter.com/5xePACSlYu — NASA (@NASA) December 22, 2015

Dreaming of a white Christmas? Go west, my friend

Dreaming of a white Christmas? Your odds are good in Fairbanks, Alaska, which has seen snow on the ground every Christmas since weather record keeping began. Because of the warming effects of the strong El Niño climate pattern, many places that often have a good chance of seeing snow Christmas Day will miss out this year. Some cities in the central and eastern USA could see record high temperatures on Christmas Day. Despite Bing Crosby's White Christmas wishes (and ours), only 25% to 30% of the 48 contiguous states is typically snow-covered by Christmas, according to AccuWeather. Check the average chances for your city here.

America's new Christmas pastime: Shopping

Blame the Internet. Christmas Day is typically the slowest retail sales day of the holiday season, but its popularity is growing. Why? Because of Web shoppers, especially those on their phones. If you're among those doing some shopping Friday, you won't be alone. This year, Christmas is expected to ring in $600 million in online sales, up from $550 million last year, according to Adobe Marketing Cloud.

Just as Black Friday sales have infiltrated Thanksgiving, retailers are starting to push heavy discounts and clearance items on Christmas Day, targeting a surge in online and mobile shoppers. (Photo: Getty Images)

NBA games will be a Christmas Day treat

Christmas morning is for opening presents. For sports fans, Christmas afternoon and evening are all about the NBA. There will be five consecutive games. First up, at noon ET: The Miami Heat host the New Orleans Pelicans. The day will end with theLos Angeles Lakers and the Los Angeles Clippers, which tips off at 10:30 p.m. ET. Friday's showcase game is a matchup of last year’s NBA Finals participants, the Golden State Warriors and the Cleveland Cavaliers, and the two biggest stars in the game, Stephen Curry and LeBron James. The showdown at 5 p.m. ET is a must-watch.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share USA TODAY Sports' Sam Amick breaks down the NBA Finals rematch on Christmas Day between Stephen Curry and the Warriors and LeBron James on the Cavaliers. USA TODAY Sports

Your ultimate movie guide to Christmas on the big screen

If you're not into the festivities, you'll find there’s something for everyone at the box office this holiday. See what the awards shows are all about this season, and check out the Wall Street exposé The Big Short, based on Michael Lewis' best seller. Looking for something kid-friendly that you’ll like, too? Peanuts is the movie for you. If you need to get away from it all, for as long as possible, duck into Quentin Tarantino’s roadshow, The Hateful Eight. And if you want to just stare in amazement at the screen, Leonardo DiCaprio's true grit in The Revenant is definitely the feature to see. Here's everything you need to know about what's playing.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Brad Pitt, Christian Bale, Ryan Gosling and Steve Carell star in the movie adaption of Michael Lewis' book 'The Big Short.'

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1YGhNaU