Rashad Lawrence, 28, rakes leaves Saturday morning from the overgrown lawn of an abandoned house in the 2700 block of Dumesnil Street as part of the newly relaunched Jesus and a Job campaign. (Photo: Matthew Glowicki)

Gathered on the overgrown lawn of an abandoned building in the city's Parkland neighborhood, a group joined hands Saturday morning to pray for the successful relaunch of an old program meant to strengthen communities.

The Jesus and a Job campaign was created in the late '90s to provide work for those struggling with substance abuse or felony records. In 2001, the program received $200,000 from corporate and personal donations but over time, funding waned.

Rev. Charles Elliott, Jr. of King Solomon Baptist Church founded the program and decided it was time to try it again.

"I'm praying and hoping through this effort we can curb crime and stabilize some of these young men who have abilities, but just made some mistakes in their lives," he said.

Elliott and King Solomon Baptist Church are reviving the campaign with $1,000 to pay 10 men to fix-up an abandoned house on the 2700 block of Dumesnil Street. It's an amount he said he hopes grows as more community partners back their effort and sponsor men to restore the community eyesores.

The 10 men began work Saturday, clearing the dilapidated red-bricked house of garbage and forgotten belongings. For their day of work, they'll each receive $50.

Jimmy Milliner, who lives in Parkland and is unemployed, heard about the campaign on the radio.

"I wanted to help myself and help the community," Milliner said, hauling away tattered carpeting. "This is trying to help open up doors and give you a second chance at life."

Elliott said an investor in California donated the home, valued at about $32,000, according to the Jefferson County Property Value Administration. Ultimately, Elliott said he hopes people without stable housing will live in the home.

Religious and community leaders joined Elliott Saturday to lend their support to the relaunch. Louisville Metro Police Chief Steve Conrad addressed those gathered, noting the early morning discovery of two people shot to death about a mile away in the Algonquin neighborhood. There have been 12 homicides so far this year, Conrad said, up from two at this point last year.

"The city has seen too much violence," Conrad said Saturday morning. "Putting people to work is a solution to crime in our community. Getting rid of blight is a solution."

Rashad Lawrence, 28, raked piles of dead leaves from the front lawn Saturday. He's currently unemployed and has a criminal record and thinks the campaign could help him and other other men, he said.

"It's a good thing for people like myself," Lawrence said. "As a felon, it's hard to find jobs that will take you."

Neal Robertson, president and founder of the West Louisville Urban Coalition, said he hopes the campaign can help curb violence in the city and instill in participants discipline and self-esteem.

"You give a guy some type of employment, some type of responsibility, he'll start feeling good about himself," Robertson said. "Every time they ride by with their kids they can point to it and say, 'I helped fix that up.'"

The donated home sits between two other abandoned buildings. Its windows are boarded or shattered. White paint peels from its warped, wooded gable. There are gaping holes in the house's flooring. Much work needs to be done.

"I've done it before," Elliott said. "We can do it again."

Donate to the campaign

Call: (502) 290-3611

Mail: Jesus and a Job

P.O. Box 1161

Louisville, KY 40202

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1DQ0hbd