About 28,000 patients are scrambling to find new providers after Alabama Psychiatric Services closes on Feb. 13.

But psychiatrists across the state said it won't be easy to accommodate that many patients in a state that is already suffering a shortage of mental health professionals.

A recent report by Mental Health America ranked Alabama 49th in access to care, which measures access to insurance as well as the available mental health workforce.

Dr. Armand Schachter, a psychiatrist at Grayson & Associates, P.C. said all the psychiatrists in the state are very busy, and it's not unusual to have a month-long wait to get a new appointment.

"Alabama does not have a system of care to take over all these patients," Schachter said.

Over the next few months, he expects a bumpy transition as patients adjust to new options for healthcare which may not be as centralized or coordinated as Alabama Psychiatric Services.

"Most likely these patients will find a new home," Schachter said. "But it will not happen overnight."

Alabama Psychiatric services announced its closure to the public on Wednesday, Feb. 4, giving patients about a week and a half of notice. Some advocates wonder whether that was enough time to find another doctor.

Larry Dixon, executive director of the Alabama Board of Medical Examiners, said Alabama Psychiatric Services originally notified the board on Jan. 19 that they would be closing some offices and helping transition patients to new providers. As long as Alabama Psychiatric services provided some notice to patients and provides access to medical records, the company does not run afoul of patient abandonment laws, Dixon said.

"Abandonment would be without any notice whatsoever," Dixon said.

Alabama Psychiatric Services said it is closing due to a dispute with Blue Cross Blue Shield. For many years, the clinics were the only provider of mental health care for patients in the insurer's Extended Psychiatric Services program. A statement from Alabama Psychiatric Services said the company could not reach an agreement with Blue Cross Blue Shield on payments, which led to the decision to close.

Some of the psychiatrists and other providers will be creating new practices, but it may take time to complete the necessary paperwork to get in insurance networks. According to a statement from Blue Cross Blue Shield, providers who have been employed by Alabama Psychiatric Services are being encouraged to stick with the insurance company.

The Alabama Psychiatric Physicians Association released a statement yesterday expressing shock at the announcement. Dr. Sandra Parker, president of the association, said she is concerned that some of the providers employed by Alabama Psychiatric Services may move out of state after the closure.

"We just need to keep them in the state," she said. "We don't have enough psychiatrists as it is."

Psychiatrists have been calling the association to ask how they can help, Parker said.

Schachter also said he has been talking with other psychiatrists about how they can help fill the void left by Alabama Psychiatric Services. In the end, he thinks most of the patients in the cities will find new providers. Patients in smaller communities such as Cullman and Florence that were serviced by Alabama Psychiatric Services may have a harder time, Schachter said.

"It's much tougher in smaller towns," Schachter said. "Some of these patients may have to drive to Birmingham or Huntsville."

For patients, Schachter advised them not to wait until the last day to secure medical records or get medication refilled. Those patients without another provider should find a primary care physician who can maintain their medication. And if patients run out of medicine and start feeling bad or unstable, he suggests that they go to the closest emergency room.

"The important thing is not to let it become a crisis," Schachter said.

Updated 5:46 p.m. to correct date closure was announced.