Good news. The R word — “retarded” — is being relegated to the trash can, just like the N word. A new national poll, commissioned by the Shriver Report, shows that nearly nine out of every 10 people consider “retard” as a boorish, cruel word that simply shouldn’t be used.

The medical establishment agrees. The newest edition of the handbook of mental disorders replaces “mental retardation” with “intellectual disability.” Part of the credit for this increasing civility and acceptance goes to the Kennedy clan and their cause, the Special Olympics. Anyone who has attended a Special Olympics comes away moved by the dignity and perseverance of these athletes.

You’ll get your chance this week to watch the World Summer Games, which launched Saturday in Los Angeles. This is the largest ever event of its kind, with 7,000 athletes from 177 countries (even our new best ally, Iran) competing in Olympic-style events including cycling, aquatics and weightlifting. The Special Olympics was started by Eunice Kennedy Shriver, who was saddened that her own disabled sister Rose had been shut away for life beginning at age 23.

In 1963, Rose’s brother, President John F. Kennedy, called for a new approach, moving the mentally ill and intellectually disabled out of state hospitals into small group homes and their local communities. Though well-intentioned, it was an impractical idea for dealing with the severely mentally ill. Many released from state hospitals now languish in jail cells instead.

But deinstitutionalization has been a huge success for the intellectually disabled. Since Kennedy’s time, there’s been a 98 percent drop in children in state institutions. Now the intellectually disabled can live in more normal circumstances and acquire a measure of independence, instead of being warehoused behind locked doors.

Even so, it’s still a mixed picture for them and their families. Breaking into the workplace isn’t easy. Only 34 percent of the intellectually disabled work, mostly in what are called “sheltered workshops” that pay below minimum wage and still keep them apart from other employees. Advocates are pressuring state lawmakers to end these government-subsidized workshops and require employers to pay at least minimum wage.

Looming ahead is the problem of who will take care of the intellectually disabled — including those with Down syndrome, autism and low IQs — when their parents or other caregivers die. Some 730,000 people with ID depend on a caregiver over age 60.

Considering these challenges, which can outlast a parent’s own life, 67 percent of American women who find themselves pregnant with a Down-syndrome baby abort. That rate is even higher — a staggering 92 percent — in Europe. Behind these statistics are the emotionally wrenching decisions of prospective parents who can’t imagine taking on this task.

In the United States, routine screening for Down syndrome began about a decade ago, and the resulting abortions have caused the American population with Down syndrome to plummet 30 percent since then. For parents who didn’t make the decision to abort and are dealing with the daily challenges and triumphs of the condition, watching the Special Olympics will be especially joyful.

The Games show what’s possible, and the courage and determination innate to all humans, regardless of their IQ.

Take heed, ObamaCare architect Ezekiel Emanuel. He’s argued that organ transplants and other scarce resources shouldn’t go to the mentally disabled, who are “irreversiblly prevented” from contributing fully to society. Fortunately, 87 percent of Americans disagree with that cold calculation, according to the new national poll, and want the intellectually disabled to have access

to organ transplants.

It’s a sign that Americans are becoming ready to embrace the humanity of the intellectually disabled. One reason for that generosity of spirit will be evident when you tune into the Special Olympics. The games are doing a lot to remove the stigma from intellectual disability, though the race is far from won.

Betsy McCaughey is a senior fellow at the London Center for Policy Research and author of “Beating Obamacare.”