Greece on the verge of defaulting and being forced from the EU currency zone. There is a referendum on austerity scheduled for Sunday that was demanded by the country’s left-wing Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras. It may have been a bad move. The country appears evenly split, but the referendum may cost Tsipras his job. EU leaders want him gone, and his popularity has plummeted as Greek banks closed and put severe restrictions on withdrawals. Greg Palkot reporting live from a very tense Athens.

We’re also awaiting news on what happens now in Puerto Rico as the U.S. territory begins to run out of money. It said Monday it can’t pay off its debts of some $72 billion.

Aetna buying Humana for some $37 billion creating the second largest managed health care company in the United States. It’s part of the consolidation of the health care industry as the implementation of Obamacare makes bigger better for most providers.

President Obama spent some time yesterday bragging about the strength of the U.S. economy. At an event in Wisconsin President Obama also attacked Republicans saying they are good people, “It’s just their ideas are bad.” He said the Affordable Care Act is working and is “here to stay.”

There are live events today with Senator Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton. We’ll be monitoring for news.

Former Virginia Senator Jim Webb became the latest to jump into the race for the White House. He became the fifth Democrat to announce he’s running in a 2,000 word blog post.

We’ve also learned Republican Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker is now expected to jump into the race on July 21st.

Republicans are lining up to criticize Donald Trump who upset many with his comments about illegal immigrants when he announced for President last week. Jeb Bush and Chris Christie calling out Trump over the comments (which he’s standing by).

BP agreed to a settlement over the huge Gulf of Mexico oil disaster. BP will pay several Southern states and the Federal Government some $18 billion.

Some 5,000 people in Maryville, Tennessee remain evacuated at this hour after a train carrying toxic gas partially derailed and exploded sending toxic fumes into nearby areas. 10 first responders treated for fume inhalation. 87 were seen at a local hospital. No life threatening injuries. Kristin Fisher reporting.

A Russian supply rocket was launched to carry much-needed supplies to the International Space Station. Three astronauts have been waiting for a resupply mission for weeks. Two recent resupply missions failed spectacularly recently including a Space X Falcon 9 rocket disaster. Today’s Russian launch called flawless.

There’s a big heat wave right in the Western United States. There’s also been some severe storms in Tennessee. We’ll keep an eye on it.

An airplane powered by solar power is scheduled to land in Hawaii today after it’s five day journey over the Pacific Ocean.. all powered by the Sun.

We learned this week that Jet Blue has instituted baggage fees leaving only Southwest without a fee for the first checked bag. It’s yet another sign of how adept the airlines have become at making money from ancillary fees. We’ll talk to prominent travel blogger from the website Pizza In Motion - Ed Pizzarello - today about how you can outsmart the airlines and travel for less.

For more news, follow me on Twitter:

@ClintPHenderson