ANALYSIS/OPINION:

The Republican frontrunner may soon have a partner on the campaign trail. Donald Trump now hints that his wife Melania could begin to make public appearances on his behalf by the end of August.

The former fashion model, jewelry designer and mother of his nine-year old son Baron is ready for presidential politics, according to an extensive interview with the candidate himself in The Hollywood Reporter this week. Mrs. Trump will be along “pretty soon,” her spouse says.

“She wants to do it. She is a very confident person. You’ve seen her on The View, and you’ve seen her on different shows. Larry King. You’ve seen her being interviewed. She’s got a great style, and she would be an amazing first lady with heart,” Mr. Trump told the industry publication.

“He tells me that many in Hollywood are privately voicing their support for him (he won’t say who except to claim one significant name to me, off the record); that the Hillary email drama is ‘Watergate on steroids’; that his wife, Melania, 45, will start campaigning for him in late August,” writes correspondent Janice Min in her commentary on the interview.

Mr. Trump first met the 5-foot 11-inch beauty in Manhattan at a Fashion Week party in 1998; they have been married for a decade. The watchful press is already rumbling about her White House potential. Inside Edition has pronounced her to be the potential “Jackie O of the 21st Century. According to her personal website, Mrs. Trump is active in many charities, including the Police Athletic League and the American Red Cross.

She has a cause in mind should her husband win the election.

“She would care very much about women’s issues. We’re talking about mostly medical issues but women’s issues. She was very strong on that with me the other day,” Mr. Trump said in the Hollywood Reporter interview, adding that both Melania and his daughter Ivanka say the press has not given the billionaire fair treatment when it comes to his attitude toward females.

“My mother was this incredible woman. I have known incredible women. I have many women executives, frankly, that are better than my men executives. I pay them the same or more,” Mr. Trump told the publication.