Topics: From the Wires, News

THESSALONIKI, Greece (AP) — Stooped and unsteady, Djordje Mihailovic walks among rows of discolored marble crosses of Serb soldiers slain a century ago in the horrors of World War I.

For over half a century, the 86-year-old has been a caretaker at Thessaloniki’s Allied War Cemetery in northern Greece. In the centenary year of the start of World War I, Mihailovic is ever more the embodiment of remembrance as another Nov. 11 Armistice Day approaches.

“This is my family,” he said of the remains beneath the rocky soil. “I know many of the names of the soldiers here and many of their stories.”

“Now I tell them to their grandchildren and the great grandchildren,” he said of the Serb visitors who make the pilgrimage to the site.

Mihailovic also has real family buried here: his grandfather, a World War I veteran who became the cemetery’s first caretaker, and his father, who succeeded him. Mihailovic intends to work here until he dies, and then be buried here, too.

Low-flung weeds run across the pathways of Mihailovic’s grounds, unlike some Western Front battlefields and cemeteries where many heads of state this year have walked the manicured lawns. It does not detract from their significance, especially for Serbs.

Serbia, involved in the war from the very beginning, had an army of about 350,000 soldiers, of whom some 130,000 died, outnumbered as they fought off an Austro-Hungarian invasion for more than a year before Germany and neighbor Bulgaria joined the onslaught.

“A third of the army was lost,” said Mihailovic. “It’s a story the world should know.”

The region around Thessaloniki was a rallying point for Serbia’s ravaged army, which endured a harrowing retreat to join Allied troops led by Britain and France in 1916.

“Every family had a victim,” Mihailovic said, sitting at the entrance of a room filled with Orthodox Christian religious icons and dedications left by visitors.

The Mihailovic dynasty of caretakers started with grandfather Sava, who took the job at the cemetery when it was built on the site of a field hospital for the wounded. Djordje’s father, Djuro, took over as caretaker until his death in 1960.