Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Director Richard Cordray speaks in Washington in October. Reuters

In the aftermath of the financial crisis, U.S. regulators imposed new requirements on credit-card companies and mortgage lenders, mandating that they evaluate whether borrowers have the financial resources to pay back their loans. Now, the focus is on high-cost, short-term “payday” loans.

The principle—that lenders should avoid making loans to borrowers who can’t afford them—may sound simple. But translating such a concept into rules lenders can follow is much more difficult in practice, particularly for low-income borrowers who take out payday loans. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is facing such a task as it works on the first set of national rules for the $46 billion payday-lending industry.

The consumer-finance regulator, as we write today, is developing an “ability to repay” requirement for companies offering payday loans, which are typically made for less than $500. Companies would be allowed to make such loans only to borrowers who can pay them back . In addition, the CFPB is weighing whether to create a category of “vanilla” short-term loans—a set of requirements that lenders can follow to ensure they are satisfying the CFPB’s “ability to repay” requirement.

But how should such a standard be drawn? The CFPB is barred by law from putting a cap on borrowers’ interest rates, the main way states regulate payday lenders.

The Pew Charitable Trusts, which has put out several studies on the payday-loan market, says the CFPB should limit borrowers’ payments to 5% of their monthly income, arguing that loans above that percentage should be barred unless borrowers can demonstrate they can meet their financial obligations.

Consumer-advocacy groups, however, want the CFPB’s standards to be even tighter, incorporating borrowers’ expenses and other debts.

Critics say payday lenders don’t always consider borrowers’ ability to pay back their loans and instead profit by hitting borrowers with high fees and repeated “rollover” loans.

“The typical small-dollar lender’s business model depends on having some of its borrowers getting caught in a debt trap of repeated rollovers,” says Adam Levitin, a law professor at Georgetown University. “Any lending model that depends on some borrowers not being able to repay is a real problem.”

Industry groups, meanwhile, say the CFPB is likely to cut off credit to borrowers in need of emergency financial help, and they question whether the regulator can provide a legal justification for its intention to regulate the industry.

And analysts say the CFPB’s regulations are likely to force major changes in the industry. Rules by the CFPB will “force payday lenders to adjust how they do business and it may shrink the size of the payday lending market,” wrote Guggenheim Securities analyst Jaret Seiberg. “This will generally favor the largest players, which are best suited to bear the costs of these changes.”