Affordable Care Act tweaked again - and again

Photo: Rich Pedroncelli, Associated Press Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 FILE - In this Nov. 13, 2013 file photo, Peter Lee, executive director of Covered California, the state's health insurance exchange, announces that sign-ups have accelerated in November for health insurance during the first month of open enrollment during a news conference in Sacramento, Calif. Californians were responding to Monday's deadline for gaining health insurance with heavy activity on the marketplace's website and call centers. Covered California, the agency operating the exchange, had no current plans to extend the deadline by another day, as the Obama administration announced it was doing for the 36 states using the federal health insurance exchange. California runs its own exchange under the federal Affordable Care Act. Those who enroll by the end of Monday will have coverage starting Jan. 1, but will have until Jan. 6 to pay for their policies. (AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli, File) less FILE - In this Nov. 13, 2013 file photo, Peter Lee, executive director of Covered California, the state's health insurance exchange, announces that sign-ups have accelerated in November for health insurance ... more Photo: Rich Pedroncelli, Associated Press Affordable Care Act tweaked again - and again 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

The Obama administration changed some Affordable Care Act rules for the second time in less than a week on Wednesday.

The announcements come as procrastinators are scrambling to meet a March 31 deadline for enrolling in health insurance through an exchange for 2014 to avoid a potential tax penalty for being uninsured.

The administration announced Wednesday that it will let an estimated 500,000 Americans who have non-grandfathered individual policies that don't comply with the Affordable Care Act renew them for two additional years.

Last Thursday, the administration announced a reprieve for certain people who had faced "exceptional circumstances" enrolling in coverage through an exchange because of technical issues.

Neither change is likely to have much impact in California.

Under the legislation, policies that did not fully comply with the law could not be sold or renewed after 2014, unless they were grandfathered, meaning the customer had the policy before March 2010.

After a wave of cancellation notices sparked an outcry last fall, when the federal health care exchange was barely working, Obama announced a change: Any noncompliant, non-grandfathered policy that was in effect Oct. 1, 2013, could be renewed for one more year, if the policyholder's state allowed it and the insurance company agreed to renew. About half of states, excluding California, went along with it.

On Wednesday, the Department of Health and Human Services said it would extend this "transition policy" for two more years. That will let some people keep noncompliant, non-grandfathered policies until 2016 or 2017, but only if the insurer continues to offer it.

In California, almost everyone with a non-grandfathered individual policy has already been transitioned into a fully compliant policy, or will be by the end of March, because of rules imposed by Covered California, the state's health care exchange.

No California benefit

The reprieve for consumers announced last week also is not likely to affect California. Despite several shutdowns, including a five-day closure last month, Covered California has not had the kind of technical difficulties that prevented people from signing up for health care.

The reprieve was laid out in a nearly indecipherable three-page guidance letter from the Department of Health and Human Services.

"Even for those of us who follow this closely, it was difficult to sort out" says Larry Levitt, a senior vice president with the Kaiser Family Foundation.

To qualify for a tax subsidy to offset their cost of health insurance, the law requires people to meet income requirements and buy insurance through a state or the federal exchange (also called a marketplace).

In a nutshell, the reprieve applies in two circumstances.

"One is if someone who had difficulty enrolling and didn't enroll anywhere - in a marketplace plan directly or with an insurer outside of a marketplace," Levitt says.

That person could get retroactive coverage and retroactive subsidies (if they meet the requirements) to Jan. 1.

However, "you would have to prove you had a difficult time enrolling due to technical problems," and it would be up to the marketplace to decide if you are eligible, Levitt says.

The second circumstance is if you had trouble enrolling for coverage through an exchange and bought what is known as a qualified health plan off the exchange, through an insurer. A qualified health plan is one that meets all of the act's requirements and is the same as one that could be purchased on exchange.

In this case, you can get a retroactive tax subsidy and switch to a marketplace plan during a special open enrollment period. But you still must be subsidy-eligible and live in a state that had exceptional circumstances.

The feds will not say which states qualify for this treatment, but said it would be "a small number of state-based marketplaces."

States in play

Names floating around include Hawaii, Maryland, Massachusetts and Oregon. California, despite its recent outage, is not expected to qualify.

"The enrollment functionality was restored early Feb. 24, leaving five weeks until the end of the open enrollment period, which is a comfortable amount of time for people to get through the online enrollment process," said Anne Gonzales, a spokeswoman for Covered California. "So, at this time, we don't see any reason that the federal guidelines would affect Covered California. However, since the guidelines were just released on Friday, our staff is reviewing any possible impacts."