Sometimes there's a silver lining with an eviction.

For Rod Brandenburg, who learned in mid-October that his pawn shop was being kicked out of his Main Street location, that has meant more space and closer parking.

Grandpa's Pawn & Gun Where: 104 Ninth Ave., Longmont Contact: 303-772-7952 More info: www.grandpaspawn.com

Since 1999, Brandenburg had operated Grandpa's Pawn & Gun at 312 Main St. in Longmont. But St. Vrain Lodge No. 23, the Masonic lodge which owns the building, wanted to make upgrades and to raise the rent, two things upon which the sides couldn't agree.

Brandenburg said he literally walked up and down Main Street, knocking on doors and asking property owners if they wanted to sell. They all either said no, or asked for more than Rod was willing to spend.

"We had no other choice; even the sheriff's department said be out by the end of the month (December)," he explained.

Then he found the old Aubry's Automotive car repair shop at 104 Ninth Ave.

"We purchased this place on December 12, and started working on it that night," Brandenburg said.

Brandenburg opened his new location a few blocks east of Main on Dec. 30. Grandpa's new space is three times larger than the old one, brighter and finally has a lot of parking close to his front door.

The original Grandpa's was a narrow shop, with poor lighting and a worn appearance. The biggest complaint from customers was they often had to park a block or more from the front door.

That's no longer an issue.

"I have more parking, more visibility; it's a bigger retail area. It's not just a long, narrow corridor," Brandenburg pointed out as a member of his staff polished a shotgun.

"We had hundreds of volunteers help us move. So there's a statement right there about what you do in a community. It's going to be better now. It was tough to go through it."

Brandenburg is happy about more than just the new location. The public's perception of pawn shops has been changing in recent years, and he thanks television for that.

"Television exposure. The media has exposed pawn shopping in a very positive light," he said. "Pawn Stars, Beverly Hills Pawn, Hardcore Pawn, people are now aware that pawn shops are a fun place to go and you might find a bargain there. You might find a treasure there."

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel