President Obama’s fiscal year 2016 budget proposal has no chance of passing; but, as always, it serves as a compass for his agenda. And when one of that agenda’s key features is an ever-expanding government, agencies that request more things get plenty of consideration.

Take the IRS, which can’t stop complaining about how short-staffed and underfunded it’s been since the GOP side of Congress has sort of, kind of held on to its unwieldy purse strings. The IRS has asked for — and received (from Obama, anyway) — approval for a bump of more than 9,000 employees and an addition $2 billion in its annual operating budget.

From The Daily Signal:

The billions of dollars will help the agency bolster its staff by adding more than 9,280 full-time employees. The proposed jump in employment at the IRS is an 11 percent increase from 2015. To enforce the 46 new tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act specifically, the IRS asked for $67 million. That will cover 483 new employees related to Obamacare’s implementation. … In addition, the agency requested $301.5 million to hire close to 3,000 additional staff to assist taxpayers calling into the agency with questions. The IRS said it needs to staff to address the “increased demand” for assistance resulting from Obamacare’s implementation and managing taxpayer submissions relating to the health care law.

IRS Commissioner John Koskinen, you may recall, has promised even poorer “customer service” from the IRS this year. He told the media in December that Americans shouldn’t expect to quickly connect with a live, helpful IRS representative if they call the agency this year with questions about the new tax code.

“Every time I say you can call us, in the back of my mind I almost feel like I should say: ‘You should be prepared to stay on the line for half an hour before you get through. And a lot of you won’t get through to a live person,'” Koskinen said.

Not that the IRS does a better job when it has more resources. The case has been made more than once that, short of abolishing the IRS, the next best thing to ensure its (relative) efficiency is to keep it on a diet.