HBO host Bill Maher paid a touching tribute to late President John F. Kennedy during his show “Real Time” on Friday. But in doing so, the outspoken liberal slammed President Ronald Reagan, comparing “sex machine” Kennedy to “amiable square” Reagan.

Waiting until the end of his show to pay tribute to JFK, who was assassinated 50 years ago Friday, Maher contrasted the two Presidents in his “New Rules” segment, offering high praise for Kennedy and coining Reagan as a boring President who advocated for the rich. While many on the Right claim Reagan to be the “Republican’s Kennedy,” Maher said they couldn’t be more wrong.



“Republicans must be given some credit today for not saying out loud what they’re really thinking: that [Kennedy] really wasn’t all that great. Now I disagree, but in the interest of reaching across the isle, let me admit, I get that. I do,” he said. “You just don’t get a lump in your throat for John F. Kennedy. You get a lump in your throat for Ronald Reagan. He’s the Republican’s Kennedy.”

Maher referenced a comment made by 2008 Republican Vice Presidential nominee Sarah Palin, who said the GOP was lacking a Ronald Reagan today and noted if there was a Reagan-esque political, she would put her faith in him.

“That’s quite a hold on someone. After all, when Reagan was elected, Sarah Palin was barely 16, probably pregnant but still in third grade,” Maher countered.

The host then reiterated what he believed to be the difference between Republicans and Democrats.

“We have Kennedy, you have Reagan,” Maher said. “We have marijuana. You have Metamucil. We want gays in the military. You want them in the airport restroom.”

The “Real Time” host went on to make a host of comparisons between the two Presidents, noting Kennedy was cooler, younger and ambitious, while Reagan was old, outdated and boring.

“But can we on this day at least agree that Kennedy was cooler? I mean, sorry, but our liberal icon was a smart, sexy war hero who said he wanted to go to the moon,” Maher said. “Yours is an old fuddy duddy who tried to rock denim. Our guy was Don Draper. Yours was Rooster Cogburn.”

The outspoken liberal continued his monologue, saying, “Kennedy’s time was the time of ‘ask not what your country can do for you.’ Reagan’s was the time of “greed is good.’ JFK was far from perfect. But he was a true wit and a sex machine and he knew how to wear a pair of shades. Reagan was an amiable square in a cowboy hat who had sex with a woman he called ‘Mommy.'”

Maher closed his show with saying that no matter how much Republicans claim Reagan to be their Kennedy, Democrats, in the end, walk away victorious.

“Love him or hate him, we win,” he said. “Republicans can call Reagan their Kennedy all they want. But it’s like calling Miller High Life the champagne of beers. … Our Kennedy, is Kennedy.”

Check out the segment below.