By Bobby Harrison

Daily Journal Jackson Bureau

JACKSON – Presidents of Northeast Mississippi Community College and Itawamba Community College say they are not going to get involved in the effort to defeat the citizen-sponsored Initiative 42, which is designed to enhance the state’s commitment to kindergarten through 12th-grade public education.

Both Itawamba President Mike Eaton and Northeast President Ricky Ford said they are going to stay out of the campaign fight despite the fact their colleague, Jones County Junior College President Jesse Smith, using the school’s email system, asked the community college presidents to contribute funds to help defeat Initiative 42.

“I hope you have had some luck in garnering support for the opposition of this initiative,” Smith wrote last week to his fellow community college presidents, using his school e-mail address. “I realize that their are pockets of support throughout our state and we find ourselves in a tenuous position with our local school districts and our superintendents who serve on our board of trustees.

“Nonetheless, I am wholeheartedly opposed to Initiative 42 because it very well may be the straw that could break the community college back, if it passes.”

Some opponents of Initiative 42 have argued that if the citizen-sponsored Initiative 42 is approved by voters in November, it will take funds away from the state’s 15 community colleges and eight public universities. Supporters of Initiative 42 say that is not their intention. They said the proposal is designed to force the Legislature to undertake a program to phase-in full funding over a period of years for the local school districts that have been underfunded about $1.7 billion since 2008.

Both Eaton and Ford said community colleges also are in dire need of additional funding, but they would not fight Initiative 42.

“From ICC’s standpoint, we are staying out of that, taking no position,” Eaton said.

“I got friends on both sides,” Ford said. “… I fully support K-12 education.”

Eaton said his wish is that if Initiative 42 passes, state leaders then would look at the law that mandates community colleges be funded at the mid-level between universities and K-12 education and also undertake that effort. The Legislature also has not met that state-law mandate.

Smith’s email comes soon after state Auditor Stacey Pickering, after complaints from some of the legislative leadership who oppose Initiative 42, warned local school districts not to inappropriately campaign for the proposal.

As if turn about is fair play, a news release from 42 For Better Schools, which supports the effort to change the Mississippi Constitution to enhance the state’s commitment to public education, said a complaint of Smith’s actions has been filed with the state auditor’s office.

In the news release, Rayna Mitchell, assistant superintendent for the Carroll County School District, who filed the complaint, pointed out the Smith email said the Improve Mississippi Political Initiative, for which he was raising funds, was started by Lt. Gov. Tate Reeves and Speaker Philip Gunn.

“This is yet another blatant example of our elected state leaders misappropriating state resources to defeat a citizen-led initiative,” Mitchell said.

It is not clear why Smith, who could not be reached for comment, listed Gunn and Reeves as the creators of the political action committee. They are not listed in the documents forming the Improve Mississippi Political Committee, though, various sources say both have been raising funds to oppose the citizen-sponsored initiative.

The email by Smith also comes after the refusal of both Gunn and Reeves to release their email correspondence related to Initiative 42, citing the fact the Legislature is exempt from the state’s public records laws.

Both Reeves and Gunn said they did not ask Smith to send out the email.

Meg Annison, a House spokeswoman, said the House leaders did not know about the Smith email until it was brought to their attention by the media.

Laura Hipp, a spokeswoman for Reeves, also said the lieutenant governor did not know about the email, though she said he “encourages all who have concerns with Initiative 42 to voice those concerns.”

But Auditor Pickering has said, based on state law, governmental officials must be careful how they voice those concerns.

In a statement, Pickering said, “We have received numerous complaints concerning education officials using public resources to advocate for and against Initiative 42. We have communicated to them Attorney General Jim Hood’s opinion and applicable state law that says it is appropriate to educate their constituents, but it does not allow them to advocate, pro or con, on any issue, but specifically as it relates to Initiative 42.”

Nancy Loome, the executive director of the pro-Initiative 42 Parents Campaign, sent out an email Friday informing K-12 educators that under state law they could express support for the proposal, but could not use public funds to do so.

She said state law also prohibits governmental officials with the power to hire and fire people “to coerce employees to vote one way or another. … I know this is exactly what state legislative leaders are urging state agency heads to do, but it’s illegal.”

bobby.harrison@journalinc.com

Twitter: @BobbyHarrison9