The 4th District State Senate race has software engineer and educator CJ Jawahar versus Jim Nielsen, who has a long history in state politics. Below are some of the highlights from separate interviews with the candidates.

The 4th District includes 12 counties: Butte, Colusa, Del Norte, Glenn, and parts of Nevada, Placer, Shasta, Siskiyou, Sutter, Tehama, Trinity and Yuba.

CJ Jawahar

A software engineer/educator from Roseville, Jawahar, said he is running for 4th District State Senate because "community organizing is my passion."

He has worked in community youth programs, a police forum, helped with anti-bullying efforts and spent five years teaching computer science at a community college.

In 2011 he joined the transportation commission for the city of Roseville, including service as chairman.

He is a proponent of high-speed rail as a way to connect people quickly from city-to-city. With better transportation, high-tech companies could relocate more readily to Northern California, he said.

As for the budget, the candidate said he believes when the state is doing well, debt should be paid back rather than passed along to the next generation.

On the Bay Delta Conservation Program, Jawahar said he is against the twin tunnels. Building storage, including Sites Reservoir and groundwater storage, can better capture water in wet years, he said.

He's also opposed to the tunnels because it would eliminate farm land, he said.

Jawahar's grandfather in India was a farmer, and "at the end of the day we need food on the table."

On the topic of prison realignment, Jawahar said the state cannot continue "spending a pot of money on the prison system," but needs to focus at the root cause of crime.

Jawahar said education is where he would focus the state's recent budget increase.

More specifically, teaching at a community college showed him how difficult it is for students to save money for tuition, which he would like to see lowered or eliminated at the community college level.

When asked about hydraulic fracturing, known as fracking, for oil and gas extraction, Jawahar said the technology is not a fit for California. The practice uses too much water and water is at a deficit, he said.

If it was just water, it would be one thing, but when mixed with chemicals the water cannot be reused, he said.

As for marijuana laws, Jawahar said the state needs to move forward, and look to changes in Colorado and Washington to "learn lesson."

Jim Nielsen

Nielsen said his highest concern is "assisting the citizens of the 4th Senate District."

Most of the workload of his staff is to "go to bat with citizens dealing with issues" particularly "heavy-handed" government agencies such as the Department of Labor, Fish and Wildlife, the Employment Development Department and others.

"We have a policy that almost every contact gets some kind of attention or response."

When asked, Nielsen said he is most proud of is work for a crime victims bill of rights in the 1980s and continued efforts to ensure "someone who does something wrong has to face consequences."

He said the recent prison realignment program results in "destruction of justice."

He said he understands how the justice system works, and how the correction works, and strives for the protection of public safety.

On water issues, Nielsen said he is opposed to the state "usurping local control of groundwater," the use of which he said is a private property right.

He said one of his "greatest accomplishments is area of origin language for the 2009 Water Plan," which he was able to have written into the law.

The highest priority for water is humans, which includes agriculture, Nielsen said. "If we deny farmers the ability to produce agricultural commodities and milk, then you are compromising human rights to survive."

Another important issue is health care, and Nielsen is a member of the state health committee.

The "future of medicine must ensure the doctor/patient relationship," Nielsen said. The result of Obamacare will be rationed care, he said, "more expensive care and diminished care."

Nielsen also opposes tax increases, supports smaller government and wants to improve the business climate.

He has authored legislation to reform the state welfare system and is currently working to limit the government's ability to seize private property through eminent domain.

Nielsen, who lives in Gerber, was a state senator from 1978-1987 and served on the state Board of Parole and Prison Terms from 1990-2007. From 2008-2012 he was a state assemblyman, and in January 2013, he became a state senator.