"The incident has nothing to do with the business… This kind of situation is very hard to deal with for all of us."

The St. Joseph County Prosecutor's Office says a second person has died as a result of the shooting at the Hideout Lounge on Chippewa Boulevard early Sunday morning.When the St. Joseph County Police Department arrived around 4:50 a.m., they found three victims with gunshot wounds.Tyler Layton, 22, was pronounced dead at the scene.Devin Johnson, 21, was taken to the hospital and died Monday night from his injuries. An autopsy will be conducted Tuesday morning.The third victim, a 17-year-old woman, was shot several times but is expected to survive.Layton's autopsy was conducted on Monday and his cause of death was a gunshot wound and the manner of death was homicide.“It could have happened at any parking lot at any place anywhere in the county for that matter. Why they chose this particular parking lot is unknown,” said Lieutenant Matt Blank of the St. Joseph County Sheriff's Department.ABC57 requested the number of calls to the Hideout Lounge and found police have been called there a dozen times since November 1, 2014.Police say that's not an unusually high number.“I don't think I'd call it a problem place. I mean we've had several calls for service outside the last six months or so to that location. But I don't think it's really different than a lot of the other businesses of that type that we have in our jurisdiction,” said Lieutenant Blank.Blank says the bar was closed when they were called about the shooting that killed two and injured a third.“Very unfortunate things have happened in the recent history of this location. However to call it a nuisance property at this point is probably a little premature,” said Lt. Blank.The owner of the Hideout Lounge posted a statement on the bar's Facebook page:The investigation into the shooting is ongoing. If you have any information, contact County Metro Homicide Unit at 235-5009 or Crime Stoppers at 574-288-STOP.