There have been times in recent years, Anthony Grimes admits, that it was hard to argue against those who have called the life and work of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. “an echo” that didn’t resonate today.

But not anymore.

“There’s been this ‘safe’ image of him,” Grimes said. “But this year there have been reminders of what he fought against, aggressive attacks on black lives — that’s why our response has to be stronger, more substantive than it’s ever been.”

In recent months, in the aftermath of deaths that have made headlines both nationally and locally — Michael Brown, Eric Garner and Ryan Ronquillo — Denver has seen a surge in the kind of social protest championed by King. On Monday, the city will pay further homage with its annual Martin Luther King Jr. Marade.

WATCH DPTV: Denver Freedom Riders founder talks about what he saw in Ferguson

This year, the march, from City Park to Civic Center downtown, is only part of what community activists like Grimes hope will lead to the kind of change envisioned by King. On Saturday, youth from around the city met with Mayor Michael Hancock and other city officials. Following Monday’s Marade, a crowd of more than 1,000 people are expected to attend the “Black Lives Matter Conference” at the McNichols Civic Center Building, 144 W. Colfax Ave.

“We just want to take all that energy (from the Marade) and bring it all to one central location,” said Quincy Shannon, one of the conference organizers.

“We want to take all this emotion and translate it into action.”

After the deaths of Brown in Ferguson, Mo., and Garner in Staten Island, N.Y., Denver saw a series of protests in late November and early December that included downtown marches and walkouts by students at a number of area schools.

The actions had an immediate impact, with Hancock scheduling a series of forums to discuss the state of race relations in the city.

Since then, Grimes said his group, the Denver Freedom Riders, and others have reached out to city officials and the office of Gov. John Hickenlooper in an effort to ensure that the momentum built over the last few months remains more than an echo.

“Most (officials) seem open to discussion, but we really won’t know for sure until substantive change happens,” he said. “There’s a raw energy out there. … Ferguson transformed us all, and we can make Denver a better city because of it.”

Anthony Cotton: 303-954-1292, acotton@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ anthonycottondp

Events

• Aurora Motorcade — 7:30 a.m. Participants gather at Aurora Municipal Center and travel to Fletcher Plaza, 9898 E. Colfax Ave., for wreath laying ceremony. Then travel on to Denver’s City Park to join the Marade at 10 a.m.

• Denver Marade — Participants gather in west City Park at 10 a.m. March to downtown Civic Center begins at 10:45 a.m.

• Dinner for Those Who Hunger — Volunteers of America, 1865 Larimer St. 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.

• Black Lives Matter Conference — McNichols Building, 144 W. Colfax Ave., Denver 1 p.m. to 4 p.m.

• MLK Jr. African American Heritage Rodeo of Champions — National Western Stock Show Coliseum, 4655 Humbolt St. 6 p.m.