Donald Trump officially claimed the Republican presidential nomination Thursday. (Photo: Gerald Herbert/AP)

Voters are angry. It's not just Republicans, as some assume based on the circus that is Donald Trump's continuing ascension. Democrats are also angry, illustrated by Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., who continues to hang around and bedevil Hillary Clinton.

We are accustomed to the anger that accompanies partisanship, but the anger we are witnessing now is altogether different. In fact, it could be argued that this anger is a bipartisan anger extending from sections of the electorate on both ends of the political spectrum who are disillusioned with the ruling class and demanding change.

Look at the supporters of both Trump and Sanders, and you largely find what we in the South would call "common folk," a working class proud of their own individual independence and valuing liberty and freedom and the American dream. It's the latter that has so many angry because it seems to be slipping away. Look at the middle class, whose shrinkage began around 10 years ago and continues today. The loss of jobs, of opportunities, of security and of dreams has driven people to demand more than just another example of the same kind of leader as in the past.

Put Sanders and Trump aside, and the remaining field includes U.S. senators and governors and lifelong politicians. Ben Carson's uniqueness is what allowed him to surge and hang around, but he could not match Trump's level of "uniqueness," if that's even an apt description. Even Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, owes much of his success to his past actions as an insider who never drank the Kool-Aid, so to speak, and continually poked his own party in the eye. Somehow, being a contrarian, refusing to seek middle ground and valuing personal political principles over actual governance has become an endearing trait in a leader.

It's the same for Sanders, who is the ultimate insider-gone-rogue. He left the Democratic Party to become an independent, the longest-serving independent senator in history.

And now we find ourselves as a nation in what will certainly be seen by future historians as among the most bizarre and confounding primary election cycles in U.S. history.

On one side we have a Republican who refuses to disavow the KKK, calls for the banning of an entire religion from entering our country, belittles women, lies repeatedly about the most inconsequential things, stokes anti-immigration fears and encourages violent outbursts at his political rallies.

On the other side we have a Democrat who is a self-proclaimed socialist, proposes massive spending programs most Democrats say are unrealistic, labels himself as even more liberal than President Barack Obama and wants to replace Obamacare by expanding Medicare to everyone.

Democratic presidential candidate, Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt. speaks during a rally at Grand Valley State University Field House Arena in Allendale, Mich. on Mrch 4. They may be on opposite ends of the political spectrum, but Sanders and Donald Trump appear to be sharing a catchphrase, which is "huge." (Photo: Nam Y. Huh/AP)

These are the candidates who have stirred the most emotions, incited a groundswell of grassroots support and drawn enormous crowds wherever they go. These are the candidates to whom so many disillusioned voters are flocking.

But don't blame the voters. Don't call them stupid. Don't do as I have done and shake your head at the ridiculousness of their choices. Because while I genuinely fear an America where either Trump or Sanders is president, I also realize the anger that is so prevalent during this primary season is, in many ways, righteous.

Now, don't get me wrong. There are a lot of Trump and Sanders supporters who are attracted to the fear-mongering on the right and the promise of a utopian future on the left. However, I've seen too many otherwise reasonable men and women supporting these two candidates to believe our current state of political affairs is due to anything other than a ruling class of leaders out of touch with the concerns of "common folk."

As a member of said "common folk" class, I can relate to those frustrations. I share some of the same disillusionment over our political leaders. Still, my frustrations are far from a point that I would consider voting for either Trump or Sanders.

I cast my primary vote based on the anger born of partisanship. I wanted someone who has shown a willingness to cross party lines, compromise and make decisions that may be counter to the candidate's personal beliefs but were nonetheless in the best interest of the people. I wanted someone who might could relieve some of the pressure from the partisan boiler that has been steaming for years.

But it seems those of us concerned over the partisan vitriol must wait a while longer for a president who can bring more unity, professionalism and trust to the public stage. It seems that we are destined for a general election where we will choose between "the lesser of two evils" — Trump and Clinton, herself a deeply flawed candidate likely incapable of easing any partisan anger.

While it is nice to hope the elders of both parties might take to heart the anger of the "common folks" across the country who are dismayed and demanding a new direction, it seems only possible if Trump becomes president — forcing Republicans to reconsider their approach to the populous and Democrats to seek the middle ground where they have found success.

But, as I said above, I honestly fear an America where Trump is president, reflective of his self-aggrandizing image, his immoral compass, his xenophobia, his uncivil nature, his lack of international diplomacy, his near-fascist approach to leadership. It would be anything but "great again."

Contact Sam R. Hall at srhall@jackson.gannett.com or (601) 961-7163. Follow @samrhall on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1pBkVLo