BRIGHTON — Commissioners in Adams County on Monday voted to approve construction of a new pipeline to carry crude oil from Colorado to Oklahoma.

The White Cliffs Twin Pipeline will run parallel to an existing pipeline and about 15 feet apart, but is intended to double the capacity. Together, the pipelines will be able to move about 150,000 barrels of oil per day.

Commissioners had few questions, but prompted by Commissioner Eva Henry, the board voted to include a requirement that stipulates the operators must comply with new state air quality regulations.

“Doesn’t matter when it’s going to be put in. If it’s going to be put in before the new guidelines are implemented, you will go ahead and follow the new guidelines anyway,” Henry told the pipeline officials.

They did not object.

The pipeline will cross Adams County through about 23 miles of the northeast corner of the county. In total, the pipelines both span about 527 miles, originating in Platteville and traveling to Cushing, Okla.

A steep increase in oil and gas production prompted the need for the new pipeline as the existing one has been over capacity, pipeline officials said.

Replacing the line with a larger pipeline is not possible because it would require shutting down the operation and would put existing contracts on hold, according to staff reports about the proposal.

The pipeline operators will also build a small facility above ground where a valve for the line would be accessible at the southwest corner of 136th Avenue and Deter Winters Road.

A handful of residents showed up to Monday’s public hearing, most of them in support of the preferred route for the pipeline, placing it parallel to the existing one.

One woman, Kristi Douglas, did speak against the pipeline, saying the county was failing to look to the future and taking too much of a risk. “We’re selling ourselves down the wrong road,” Douglas said. “It’s deplorable.”

Commissioners have also started discussions about options for regulating and profiting from the increase in requests for drilling in the county.

Yesenia Robles: 303-954-1372, yrobles@denverpost.com or twitter.com/yeseniarobles