By Derek Kravitz

UPDATED | Kisook Ahn, a 35-year-old who was killed in Sunday’s Metro-North derailment, was a registered nurse from Queens who was returning from a 12.5-hour shift at Sunshine Children’s Home and Rehab Center in Ossining, N.Y., officials there said Monday.

Ms. Ahn has worked at Sunshine since August 2010. She was on the night shift, from 6 p.m. to 6:30 a.m., the official said.

Metro-North train derailment victim Kisook Ahn at work, in a photo provided by the Children’s Home and Rehab Center.

Ms. Ahn was one of several Korean immigrants sponsored by the home, which treats 54 patients with severe illnesses, said Linda Mosiello, the facility’s administrator. Many of the children are dependent on ventilators and Ms. Ahn spent much of her time working in the nursery, she said.

Ms. Ahn had been one of hundreds of Korean immigrants recruited in Seoul by Perfect Choice Staffing, a Woodbury-based healthcare staffing agency that works with aspiring nurses seeking U.S. work visas.

She arrived in the United States in December 2008 and completed an accelerated one-year bachelor’s degree in nursing at Lehman College in the Bronx, followed by a master’s through its family nurse practitioner program, said Sheldon Meikle, director of Perfect Choice Staffing. Before working at Sunshine, she worked as a pediatrics nurse at Kings County Medical Center, officials said.

“She was a model employee, the epitome of someone who wanted to be a nurse,” Mr. Meikle said, adding that she was in the process of becoming a permanent U.S. citizen.

The Korean nurses who work at Sunshine were described as “tight knit, like a second family,” Ms. Mosiello said.

“Two of the nurses went hospital to hospital looking for her yesterday,” Ms. Mosiello said. “We’re just devastated.”

“She was just loved and adored by all of the nurses and children here,” she added.

She lived for at least the past year with three roommates in an apartment in Woodside, Queens, at least a 1.5-hour train ride to work along Metro-North’s Hudson Line. One of those roommates, Jung “Hannah” Heejung, 28, said she rarely saw Ms. Ahn because of her hours. Ms. Ahn routinely returned home from work at around 8 a.m., she added.

“She would work the night shift and take the train back, always late,” Ms. Heejung said.

Ms. Ahn is survived by a brother and twin sister in South Korea and her parents are deceased, Mr. Meikle said, adding she had no other relatives in the U.S. The staffing agency and Korean officials are helping arrange visas for her brother and brother-in-law to travel to New York and identify her body, he said.