Seven new degree and certificate programs, focusing on health care and high-tech professions, will be added to the curriculum at Mercer County Community College (MCCC) this fall, including a new Associate in Science degree in Public Health — one of the nation's fastest growing career fields. Students are enrolling now for these new programs and more than 100 other programs of study. Classes begin Aug. 29.

"Mercer's ability to respond quickly and appropriately to market demands gives our students a distinct advantage when it comes to matching career objectives with employment opportunities in the region, and that is certainly reflected in these new programs," said Jianping Wang, MCCC president.

Public Health, the practice of maintaining a healthy population through education, research and public policy, is expected to grow by 21 percent through 2022, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Recent high-profile health concerns, such as Ebola, measles and environmental contaminants, have driven the demand for professionals who can contribute to public health education and policy development.

Students obtaining an Associate in Science degree in Public Health from MCCC will have the option to transfer to Mercer's articulation affiliates, including the Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy at Rutgers University and William Paterson University, to pursue a bachelor's degree in their chosen field of specialization. Richard Stockton College and Montclair State University offer a B.S. in Public Health or Health Education, while The College of New Jersey and Drew University offer a minor in Public Health.

MCCC also will introduce an Associate in Applied Science degree in Health Information Technology, which involves the creation and maintenance of health information records — an area of particular interest in the era of the federal Affordable Care Act. Hospitals, long-term care facilities, rehabilitation facilities, insurance agencies and pharmaceutical companies are just some of the employers looking for professionals with this background.

In the technology field, Mercer will offer an Associate in Applied Science (A.A.S.) degree in Cybersecurity, which deals with information security, thwarting cyber-attacks on network systems and preventing security threats. Students with A.A.S. degrees in Cybersecurity have successfully transferred and completed bachelor's degrees at institutions that include the New Jersey Institute of Technology, Fairleigh Dickinson University, DeVry University, Drexel University and Pierce College.

Additional new degree and certificate programs to be offered at MCCC this fall are:

An A.A.S degree and a Certificate of Proficiency in Energy Systems Technology, which prepares graduates to work in energy industries including water, cable, electric, nuclear, gas and solar.

A Certificate of Proficiency in Mobile and Web Computing, which involves the analysis of computer application requirements, and the design, writing and debugging of mobile and web applications.

A Certificate of Proficiency in Electronics Technology, which trains graduates to operate modern electronic testing equipment and construct metal chasses for electronic products.

A Certificate of Proficiency in Accounting: CPA Education Compliance, for students seeking to satisfy the educational requirements for the NJ State Board of Accountancy CPA exam.

For more information on academic programs offered at MCCC or to enroll in fall classes, visit mccc.edu/enroll.

For more advice on the job market, click here.