Topics: Chanukah, Christianity, Christmas, Hanukkah, Judaism, Motherhood, Real Families, Life News

As we walked out of my son’s daycare in a local church last week, his teacher handed me a plastic bag containing thick cardboard cutouts of Mary, Joseph and a donkey.

“Take them home and bring them with you wherever you go. And at night, have your child write in the journal where you’ve been,” his teacher said.

“That’s easy,” I said. “Temple.”

I’m Jewish. My people like to joke, especially in the face of sorrow, like when my son comes home from school singing, “God is great. He is awesome,” or “God is so good, he’s so good to me.” It’s like living with Billy Graham. Last Christmas, with his mild speech impediment, he sang, “No woom at da inn, no woom at da inn, but you will find woom in my heart—” and I almost wept because it was so lovely, until he got to the next line, “Lord Jethuth.”

So why send my kid to daycare in a church? It was close to our house, the teachers really are kind, and it was cheap! And so I suffer the songs and stories, the glitter crucifixes, and the occasional houseguests – and their donkey.

My husband is actually Christian, which means by default, so is a part of my son. But like an open magic marker on a tablecloth, the Christian side of my son is bleeding over to my side, and I feel a need to protect my turf. And so every December, I give a little pushback, trying to extol the virtues of Hanukkah. It’s not easy. Comparing Christmas to Hanukkah is like asking, “Would you rather have ice cream or fiber?” But I stand firm. Every time he says, “After Thanksgiving comes Christmas,” I say, “Actually Hanukkah comes first. Then Christmas,” to which he replies, “No, it doesn’t.” And then I find myself in an argument with a 3-year-old, which I never win because he doesn’t give a lick about being right.

The other day, we bought some Hanukkah gel window decorations, and by the time my son went to bed, he had turned the candles into rocket ships with little flames coming out the back. By morning, the menorah was gone entirely.

“I threw it out,” he declared.

“You don’t have to celebrate Hanukkah,” I said, but like a dog that can’t stop itself from growling, I added, “I’ll just send back your Hanukkah presents.”

“But I like Hanukkah,” he cried. Sure you do, I thought. Two-timer.

My son’s teacher told me they were going to discuss all of the holidays, so I lent them my menorah and candles. My husband said I should lend them my electric menorah, which has little light bulbs instead of candles, because he didn’t think they’d let children near an open flame, but I thought, fire’s all we got.

“Did your teachers talk about Hanukkah at school?” I asked my son.

“Yeah,” he said. “We made a star. We made candy. We made everything.”

“But you talked about Hanukkah?” I asked.

“They said Hanukkah has a little star,” he said, barely listening to himself.

“Well,” I said, “they make it sound very exciting.”

It was sort of an inopportune time to bring home Mary, Joseph and the donkey, in the midst of my efforts to resurrect my son’s Jewish side, but I had no choice. As we walked out of his school with the bag of cardboard cutouts, my son bumped into some classmates, and they began playing tag in front of the school. As we were leaving, one of the mothers began waving her arms urgently to get me to stop. I rolled down the passenger side window.