When Northwell Health officially replaced the former North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System brand name on January 1, officials got an extra marketing boost when the first baby born in New York on New Year's Day was delivered at a Northwell hospital.

According to Northwell, Daniella and Eli Malakov of Forest Hills delivered a baby boy at the stroke of midnight at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in Queens, marking the first baby born in the city in 2016. Then, 31 seconds later, LIJ doctors delivered another baby boy, Austin Sparacio, in the same hospital.

Austin and his parents were featured in a new ad campaign by Northwell to help create awareness for the system's name change.

[Also: Northwell Health, formerly North Shore-LIJ, to spend millions on rebranding, chief says]

"There's no better way to symbolize Northwell Health's new beginning than to highlight the first of more than 42,000 babies who will be delivered at Northwell Health hospitals in the coming year," said Northwell Health President and Chief Executive Officer Michael Dowling in the announcement.

Story continues under video:

Northwell announced the branding change in the fall, saying New York state's largest healthcare system had outgrown the geographic limits of its former North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System name.

Northwell, as a name, signifies its "north" roots while also shifting the focus to "wellness" over sickness, officials said at the time. It had considered as many as 600 names before finally landing on Northwell.

[Also: Northwell to spend millions on rebranding, chief says]

Officials said its marketing campaign tagline is "Look North," representing the first campaign in what will be a months-long, multimillion-dollar marketing blitz to raise awareness for the new name.

None of Northwell's 21 hospitals will see a name change, though the phrase "a member of Northwell Health" will be added to all facility signage.

Northwell pulls in $9.5 billion in revenue annually. In addition to hospitals, physician practices, and ambulatory centers, it runs its own health plan as well as a venture fund.

Twitter: @HenryPowderly