A chart of U.S. federal debt as a percentage of GDP from the summary of the U.S. budget and economic outlook published by the Congressional Budget Office on Jan. 19, 2016. Congressional Budget Office

The Congressional Budget Office released a summary of its latest budget and economic outlook this week. The full version comes out Monday, but the summary and projections contain important information.

A few of the key takeaways:

1. The share of the U.S. economy going to interest payments on the debt will more than double in 10 years. CBO estimates that net interest payments on the federal debt will rise steadily from 1.4% of gross domestic product this year to 3.0% of GDP in 2026. It is the fastest-growing major category of spending but also the least productive. Interest payments on debt provide no public benefit. Yet the government cannot directly avoid or cut it.

2. The public debt is growing faster than our economy. The federal budget deficit, the annual excess of government spending over revenues, is projected to reach 2.9% of GDP this year. That percentage exceeds the growth rate of GDP, which CBO expects to be 2.7% this year, fall to 2.5% next year, and average just 2.0% over the next three years. The public debt (or accumulated deficits) is growing faster than the economy; put another way, our nation’s total economic capacity is unable to keep up with the rising debt.

3. Debt is on an unsustainable path even before it reaches 100% of GDP. Debt will rise from less than 75% of GDP now to more than 86% of GDP in just 10 years. Some seem to think that 100% of GDP, a rate of public debt the U.S. hasn’t had since World War II, is some magic threshold past which the U.S. economy will plunge into crisis. It is not a particular level of debt to GDP that matters but the trajectory. No fiscal burden can grow faster than our capacity to handle it. No one can know for sure where a tipping point might be, when worldwide investors might decide U.S. government bonds are no longer the world’s safest investment and the U.S. suddenly loses its (seemingly limitless) line of credit.

4. Recent legislation has made things worse, not better. Since the last CBO outlook, projected budget deficits from 2016 to 2025 have increased by $1.55 trillion. The December legislation that extended tax cuts and set spending levels for this year cost nearly $850 billion. The CBO summary report indicates that the role of the economy and technical factors may ultimately shrink to less than that of this legislative binge.

Deficits as a share of the U.S. economy had been declining since 2009, largely because of a recovering economy. As more people get jobs, and some move into higher income brackets, less is spent on safety-net benefit programs and tax revenues increase. Long-standing budget challenges—rising pressures on the retirement-age entitlement programs of Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security–and relatively flat revenues from a federal tax system overdue for reform have ended that brief respite. The longer policy changes are postponed, the harder they eventually will be–and the harder they will fall on the future generations that are burdened by them.

Diane Lim is vice president of economic research at the Committee for Economic Development, a nonprofit research group that focuses on public-policy issues. She is on Twitter: @EconomistMom.

ALSO IN THINK TANK:

To Keep Expiring Tax Cuts, Congress Considers Another Borrowing Bonanza

Talk About the Debt During the 2016 Debates

Two Substantive Sides to the Debate Over Obamacare’s ‘Cadillac Tax’

Debunking Budget Myths Before They Become Part of the 2016 Campaign