Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

STEPHENVILLE, Texas (AP) — After several days of evidence focused on the mental health of the former Marine accused in the fatal shootings of “American Sniper” author Chris Kyle and his friend, the trial of Eddie Ray Routh is set to resume Monday in Texas.

Criminal law experts say the case hinges on whether the defense can prove Routh, 27, was insane at the time and did not know the killings constituted a crime.

Here is a look at key points of the case:

___

WHO WAS KYLE?

Kyle served four tours in Iraq and made more than 300 kills as a sniper for SEAL Team 3, according to his own count. He also earned two Silver Stars for valor. After leaving the military, he volunteered with veterans facing mental health problems, often taking them shooting. He took Routh to the shooting range at the request of the troubled veteran’s mother.

The case has drawn intense interest, partly because of Kyle’s memoir. The Oscar-nominated film based on the book has grossed nearly $300 million.

___

PERSPECTIVES ON ROUTH

Family members have said Routh suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder after serving in Iraq. Defense attorneys say Routh, who was taking anti-psychotic medication, was insane when Kyle and his friend, Chad Littlefield, took the former Marine to a shooting range to provide support and camaraderie. Routh, his lawyers say, believed the men planned to kill him.

But prosecutors have said that Routh was a troubled drug user who knew right from wrong, even with a history of mental illness.

Some of Routh’s psychiatrists at Green Oaks Hospital, the hospital where he was admitted in September 2012 and in January 2013, are expected to take the witness stand.

___

THE CRIME

On February 2, 2013, Kyle, Littlefield and Routh drove to Rough Creek Lodge and Resort, which besides luxury accommodations has a 1,000-yard shooting range. About 5 p.m., a resort employee discovered the bodies. Kyle and Littlefield lay on the ground amid scattered weapons; each had been shot several times. About 45 minutes later, authorities say Routh pulled up to his sister’s Midlothian home in Kyle’s truck and admitted that he had killed Kyle and Littlefield, then drove off.

On Thursday, prosecutors presented a video in which officers spoke with Routh as he sat in Kyle’s pickup. He refused to leave the vehicle and eventually sped away, with police in pursuit. The video shows that a police vehicle rammed the pickup, which became disabled along the side of the road.