Have you ever wondered what it feels like to get old? Well, now you have a chance to experience it — through a body suit known as the R70i. Though it looks like an astronaut suit with a jetpack, it’s built to impair your physical movements, eyesight, and overall ability to do things. You know, just like an old person.

The suit was financed by Genworth Financial — a company that sells long-term care insurance and has a particular interest in educating people about aging. The suit simulates the effects of physical decline on your body — creating extra weight for you to carry around, making it hard to lift your arms due to “arthritis” pressure on joints, and recreating what it feels like to gain that extra weight when you’re older. But it also recreates cognitive, sight, and hearing problems — complete with a helmet that uses augmented reality to give you the impression of glaucoma, cataracts, and other eye disorders. Microphones make it harder for you to hear and recreate tinnitus in your ears.

New super suit simulates aging for millennials: http://t.co/d6wYk4uAFM #r70i pic.twitter.com/4XK7lo7t4V — Gogo Lidz (@gogolidz) July 10, 2015

Sound awful? Probably because it is. But Genworth’s ultimate goal is to make people realize how much aging really affects you, and to stress the importance of taking care of your mind and body while you still have youth and energy.

“Having ‘the talk’ about long-term care with loved ones can be an awkward conversation because of the sensitive subject matter,” Tom McInerney, president and CEO of Genworth, said in a 2014 press release (when the original R70 came out). “Furthermore, many young adults often feel invincible to the physical changes and challenges that aging can present.”

Is the ridiculous suit a brilliant way to get people interested in long-term care insurance? Probably. But can it also teach us something really important? Absolutely.

Indeed, consistent exercise, mental challenges, and maintaining a healthy weight all play a role in how quickly you age. Exercise has been linked to a decrease in the shortening of telomeres, which impact cellular aging and the decline of your health. And to add a cherry on top, focus on healthy foods that have been linked to cognitive protection — such as fish, nuts, and blueberries. If you protect yourself, getting older may not be so bad after all.