President Obama’s BuzzFeed video and the death of American ISIS captive Kayla Mueller were today’s Obama whine for Fox & Friends. Of course, Fox sang quite a different tune when President Bush made a slideshow and jokes about looking for weapons of mass destruction in the White House.

Geraldo Rivera stopped by the Curvy Couch for a discussion about a humorous video of President Obama taking selfies, practicing his basketball jump shot and more – all of which were designed to urge people to sign up for ObamaCare before the February 15 deadline this weekend.

Co-host Elisabeth Hasselbeck wasn’t happy. She complained, “ISIS is expanding territory in Iraq and Afghanistan as we’re drawing troops down in Afghanistan. …The timing of it just seems so insensitive.”

In case anyone missed the point, a banner on the screen read, “POTUS goofs in video as ISIS kills Americans.”

Rivera agreed, “The timing is horrible, Elisabeth, there’s no doubt about it.” But he also said that the video had gotten almost 6 million hits (Our count is closer to 25 million). “To reach the crowd that doesn’t consume regular news, I’m not that upset,” Rivera allowed. “If he can reach the young audience with this stuff, to do the right thing, then I’m OK with it.

Brian Kilmeade asked, “No matter how he acts?”

”Well, he can be dumb, I mean listen,” Rivera said in "defense" of Obama.

”It just seems to be a chronic issue after something terrible,” Hasselbeck griped.

”You don’t want him to just be in the White House and be all sourpuss,” Rivera argued.

”No, I want him to be a leader,” Kilmeade grumbled.

If President Obama were a Republican, something tells me the curvy couch crew would be singing quite a different tune. That something is a little slideshow from a 2004 speech in which then-President George W. Bush repeatedly joked about the missing weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. Joking about an invasion fail in which thousands were killed and injured? Fox called the speech “very funny” and attacked its critics as “seek(ing) victim status.”

Watch the video from today’s Fox & Friends below. Underneath are the BuzzFeed video and Bush’s jokes, for comparison.