Items for It’s Your Business can be submitted online at http://cjonline.com/business, by email to iyb@cjonline.com or by mail to The Topeka Capital-Journal, 616 S.E. Jefferson, Topeka, 66607. Items and photographs will run in print as space permits.

NEW FACES

Melissa Herrman has joined the staff of physicians at Cotton-O’Neil Clinic’s family medicine group at 901 S.W. Garfield. Herrman, who received her medical degree at The University of Kansas School of Medicine in 2004, most recently practiced at Family Health Center of Morris County in Council Grove. She is accepting new patients at (785) 354-5225. Cotton-O’Neil is a division of Stormont-Vail HealthCare.

Linda J. Sheppard will join the Kansas Health Institute on June 30 as senior analyst and strategy team leader for KHI’s work surrounding health reform. She will analyze state and federal health reform initiatives, including the Affordable Care Act, and their impact in Kansas. Sheppard most recently served as special counsel and director of health care policy and analysis at the Kansas Insurance Department, where one of her prior roles was project manager for the KID’s implementation of the insurance provisions of the Affordable Care Act. Prior to rejoining the KID in 2008, Sheppard was deputy attorney general for the Kansas Attorney General’s Consumer Protection/Antitrust Division.

NAMES

Greg Hill, who spent 15 years with the Kansas Dental Association in Topeka, recently was named executive director of the Colorado Dental Association in Denver. Hill, a graduate of Kansas State University and the Washburn University School of Law, served as assistant executive director of the KDA and executive director of the Kansas Dental Charitable Foundation. He helped create the foundation and the Kansas Mission for Mercy project in 2003.

Mayor Larry Wolgast has announced the following appointments to three community boards in Topeka:

■ Ryan Freed to fill an unexpired term ending April 30, 2015, on the Topeka and Shawnee County Public Library board of trustees. Freed, the director of the Kansas Corporation Commission’s Energy Division, is filling the position previously held by the late Robert Harder.

■ Beverly Hall and Rodney Miller to four-year reappointments to the Topeka Metropolitan Transit Authority. Hall was elected chairman of the Authority in June, while Miller, senior vice president of the Topeka Branch of Stifel Nicolaus, is immediate past chairman of the Authority.

■ Daryl Craft, of G Trust Financial; Ken Scott, of Capitol Federal Savings Bank; and Stephen Smith, of Stephen Smith Images, to two-year reappointments to the Downtown Business Improvement District Advisory Board.

Rita Broadway, of Wichita, has been named military outreach director for Kansas Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve. Broadway retired as the deputy chief executive officer and director of the Civilian Personnel Management Office for the U.S. Army Reserve Command. She was the first female cadet to receive an Army ROTC commission from Kansas State University in May 1976.

RECOGNITION

Vince Frye, president and CEO of Downtown Topeka Inc., recently was named 2013 Executive of the Year by Sales and Marketing Executives of Topeka. Frye, an SME Topeka member for more than 30 years, was honored for his work on downtown redevelopment and his contributions to the community throughout his career.

Robert Evenson, owner of R.W. Evenson Inc. in Topeka, has been named Health Agent of the Month for May by Pekin Life Insurance Co. Evenson earned the honor by going “beyond the expected” in the field of health insurance sales to make sure his clients are protected.

MISC.

A Project Management Essentials course will be offered from 8:15 a.m. to 4:45 p.m. July 8-9 by the Center for Organizational Excellence at Washburn University. The cost is $645, with organizational discounts available. For more information and to register, visit www.washburn.edu/coe and select Project Management Essentials, or call (785) 670-1399.

The Kansas Housing Resources Corp. is accepting applications for the Moderate Income Housing Program through noon Sept. 5. Awards will be announced in October. For more information, contact Fred Bentleyj at fbentley@kshousingcorp.org or James R. Behan at jrbehan@kshousingcorp.org. To learn about other housing-related programs administered by KHRC, visit www.kshousing

corp.org.