Buy Photo Paul Boden, executive director of the Western Regional Advocacy Project, speaks Thursday, March 12, at a Capitol rally for the proposed Oregon Right to Rest Act. (Photo: KAELLEN HESSEL / Statesman Journal)Buy Photo

Activities such as eating, sleeping and sitting are essential to human existence, but because homeless people are unable to perform these activities in the privacy of their own residences, they do them in public — risking citations and arrests for violating municipal codes.

That's the contention of the Western Regional Advocacy Project, whose members want to end what they call the criminalization of homelessness by overturning and preventing the creation of local laws that prohibit these activities in public spaces.

The Oregon Right to Rest Act would allow the homeless to use public spaces just like anyone else, to have in public the same civil and human rights people have in private, to rest in public spaces, to engage in religious practices in public, and to live in a vehicle that is legally parked on public property or private property with the owner's permission.

Buy Photo A supporter of the Oregon Right to Rest Act wears a jacket that reads, “Sleep is a Human Right,” during a rally Thursday, March 12, at the Capitol. (Photo: KAELLEN HESSEL / Statesman Journal)

Advocates say the bill would extend basic human rights to a class of citizens that faces discrimination while searching for housing.

Opponents worry that the bill could be interpreted as giving special rights to homeless people. They argue that the best way to help the homeless is to create more affordable housing and greater access to social services.

Massive cuts in federal funding for housing have created a homeless epidemic, proponents say. Local governments respond to that problem by criminalizing basic survival needs, said Monica Beemer, a local board member of the advocacy project.

"We feel that is counter to human rights ... and common sense," Beemer said.

Advocacy group leaders have identified 183 laws — on the books in 30 Oregon cities — that they say discriminate against the homeless. They identified 11 laws in Salem that regulate standing and sitting in public, camping and sleeping outdoors, panhandling, sanitation, and public storage of personal items.

Buy Photo Paul Boden, executive director of the Western Regional Advocacy Project, speaks at a Capitol rally Thursday, March 12, for the proposed Oregon Right to Rest Act. (Photo: KAELLEN HESSEL / Statesman Journal)

The regional organization is working to create similar legislation in California and Colorado. Often referred to as a Homeless Bill of Rights, similar laws have been enacted in Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, Illinois and Connecticut.

The group brought its campaign to the state Capitol steps Thursday for a rally in support of the proposed legislation, known as Senate Bill 629. Supporters then organized to give testimony on the bill to the Senate Committee on Human Services and Early Childhood. SB-629 is sponsored by Sen. Chip Shields, D-Portland, and Rep. Joe Gallegos, D-Hillsboro, among others.

"At its core," Shields told the committee, "SB 629 is about this: equality and fairness."

Shields said an amendment is in the works that would clarify that the act is not intended to give special rights to the homeless.

Paul Boden, executive director of the advocacy group, told the committee that although these quality-of-life laws apply to everyone, they are enforced differently for people experiencing homelessness.

Michael Selvaggio, of the Oregon Coalition of Police & Sheriffs, said the law would create ambiguous situations where officers would have to enforce laws differently for those who were homeless and those who were not. If the bill were rewritten so that it applied to everyone, Selvaggio said, his organization could be swayed to take a neutral position on the legislation.

Buy Photo Supporters of the Oregon Right to Rest Act hold signs saying “House keys not handcuffs” at a rally Thursday, March 12, at the state Capitol. (Photo: KAELLEN HESSEL / Statesman Journal)

Scott Winkels, of the League of Oregon Cities, was worried that the bill could create unintended effects. Winkels said the overly broad definition of harassment might prevent police and fire officials from performing welfare checks.

The bill wouldn't preclude private property rights or stop government from enforcing laws on litter, aggressive panhandling or disruptive behaviors, testified Amber Dunks, a homeless resident of Portland.

Albany Mayor Sharon Konopa told the committee that she believes the proposed bill would be a barrier to getting people to accept the social services they need to get off the street. Konopa said that in the decade she's advocated for the homeless, she's seen people who have lived in homeless camps for 15 years. If they were legally allowed to live in public, would they ever look for a job or housing, she asked.

Barry Joe Stull, who has been homeless twice, said the measure would make society pay attention to homelessness and respond to the situation, similar to how the creation of Death with Dignity resulted in improved palliative and hospice care.

Travis Smith, from Portland's Sisters of the Road, said that many of the homeless who are served in Sisters' cafe have a fear of police raiding their camps, taking their possessions and citing them. Having a criminal record makes it almost impossible for those people to go out and get jobs and housing, he said.

"(This bill is) just saying when you're doing your best to survive on the streets, that's OK," Smith said.

khessel@statesmanjournal.com, (503) 399-6743 or follow on Twitter @KaellenHessel

Read or Share this story: http://stjr.nl/1MBUISB