Sioux Falls, SD

One of the most successful NFL kickers of all time is still at the top of his game.

Vinatieri’s legendary career started 13 years ago as he kicked the New England Patriots to a playoff victory during a snowy game against the Oakland Raiders, and then followed it up a few weeks later by kicking the game-winning field goal in the Super Bowl.

But it didn't come easy at first for the former South Dakota State Jackrabbit.

"In the beginning when he was just a walk-on and invited to the camps we really didn't know what to expect. We didn't know if he'd be around for one or two years, or if it'd be five years, but now we're going on 19 year career and it's been really amazing. He's done really well," Vinatieri's sister Christine Erickson said.

Erickson is Vinatieri's only sister and is a Sioux Falls City Council member.

Vinatieri's career has been nothing short of amazing. In his 19th season Vinatieri has missed only one field goal all season and on Sunday he surpassed the legendary Jerry Rice; playing in more playoff games of any NFL player.

"It's been exciting to watch that and just kind of see how he embraces that. He's very modest. He's very humble and at the ended of the day he still does his job like he needs to do his job," Erickson said.

Vinatieri is now 42-year-old and the oldest player in the NFL. It's a career that started at Rapid City Central. Kim Nelson - who now coaches at Sioux Falls Roosevelt - was his high school coach.

"I think the key for him is he never stopped believing in himself," Nelson said.

Vinatieri wasn't drafted by an NFL team out of South Dakota State but continued to work toward his goal of being a professional kicker and has never looked back.

"He just decided I'm good enough to kick there and I'm going to do it and he found a way to get it done. So, I think it's a great example of believing in yourself and sticking with it and good things happen," Nelson said.

Vinatieri played ten years with the Patriots and won three Super Bowls before signing with his current team, the Indianapolis Colts, where he's won one Super Bowl. The South Dakota native has won more Super Bowls than any kicker, kicked more playoff field goals than any other kicker, and scored more points in the playoffs than any other player.

Erickson says it’s more than her family could have imagined when his career began in 1996.

"For him to be so blessed and fortunate to be on good teams, to make it to Pro Bowls, and Super Bowls, and playoff championship games because there are a lot of players that don't make it to Super Bowls or don't make it to the playoffs. So, to have that and to watch that has been fun to walk alongside him," Erickson said.

But after nearly 20 years in the NFL the question is how long can he keep it up?

"That's kind of the golden question is how much longer does he have and as his kids get older, and he wants to coach them in football and soccer, and be dad and be home with them more often,” Erickson said.



“Right now he's healthy, he's doing well, and if the contracts keep being renewed, and he's feeling well and playing well I think you can continue to see him a few more years," Erickson said.

A South Dakota native who keeps on kickin'.

Featured Stories

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.