People celebrate in front of the U.S. Supreme Court after the ruling was announced on the Affordable Care Act on June 25, 2015.

When the Supreme Court struck down the latest challenge to the Affordable Care Act on Thursday, jubilant board members meeting at Trinity Health burst into cheers and applause.

"We're ecstatic," says Ben Carter, chief financial officer of the Livonia, Illinois-based not-for-profit Catholic hospital system with 84 hospitals in 21 states. "A total victory for working people. That's what we're celebrating."

Similar scenes of exultation and relief played out in hospitals and other health centers across the U.S. as administrators and physicians exhaled after months of uncertainty over the King v. Burwell case. At issue was the government's right under the law to keep health insurance subsidies flowing to more than six million Americans in 34 states that did not create their own online insurance marketplaces.

Many hospital executives expressed satisfaction that the latest legal assault on the Affordable Care Act had run its course, clearing the way for reforms enacted by the Obama administration to continue. "This should be considered the last gasp of repeal," says Paul Taylor, CEO of Ozarks Community Hospital, based in Springfield, Missouri, a tiny hospital system that straddles the Arkansas and Missouri borders. "Millions more Americans now have healthcare; I don't think anyone thinks we should turn back the clock on that."

The stakes for hospitals were enormous, says Katherine Hempstead, of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. In 2015, the people in the individual insurance market—those without government or employer-based health coverage who stood to gain the most from the Affordable Care Act—accounted for approximately $39 billion in hospital claims and more than 670,000 hospital admissions, according to Hempstead's analysis of data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. "There was a huge amount of money on the table," she says.





Trinity has health facilities in 14 states with federal exchanges that would have been dismantled if the plaintiffs in King v. Burwell had prevailed. Nearly 4 million people in those states would have lost their subsidies and quite likely their insurance, Carter says, which could have cost Trinity more than $32 million a year in additional uncompensated care.

"Had the decision gone the other way," he says, "we would have immediately shifted our attention to, 'How do we work with these people so they have appropriate access to healthcare?'"

Thousands of hospitals were in similar straits. The loss of so many insured patients would have compounded damage done by deep cuts in Medicare and Medicaid payments that were supposed to offset by revenue from newly insured patients. Just five years after the president signed the Affordable Care Act into law, thousands again faced the prospect of soaring premiums and lost benefits, putting hospitals in jeopardy.

"We're all breathing a sigh of relief that the subsidies are intact,ert" says Rick Pollack, president and CEO of the American Hospital Association.

Now that the law has cleared its latest hurdle, however, hospitals face other critical issues, Pollack says. One of the most pressing is to persuade more state legislatures to expand their Medicaid programs to cover people whose incomes are at, or slightly above, poverty. Twenty-one states, including Texas and Florida, have refused to expand their Medicaid rolls, leaving about 4 million eligible Americans without coverage.

An extreme example of how this affects hospitals is evident at Ozarks, with a 25-bed hospital in Arkansas—a Medicaid expansion state—and another in Missouri, where the republican-controlled legislature has rebuffed the governor's pleas for expansion. "The hospital in Arkansas is flourishing," Taylor says. "In Missouri, we had to dramatically reinvent ourselves. We're still a licensed hospital, but we now staff three beds."

The unwillingness of some states to expand their Medicaid programs has hit safety-net hospitals especially hard. For decades, these hospitals have received federal payments to compensate them for treating a disproportionate share of uninsured patients. Under Obamacare, hospitals are facing sharp cuts in disproportionate-share payments that will add up to approximately $36 billion over a decade, money that was supposed to be offset by Medicaid expansion.

"We've been able to delay implementation of [those] cuts until 2018 because Medicaid didn't expand at the rate we had hoped," Pollack says. "They may have to be delayed further."

Pollack points out that Medicaid expansion is a partial solution for a bigger problem—23 million people who, even ten years after the Affordable Care Act's passage, will remain uninsured. "This is not universal coverage," he says. "When will that be addressed? Who knows?"