If you liked 'My Parents Open Carry,' you'll love 'Help, There are Libs Under My Bed.'

Actual cover image of an actual book. (Photo: Contributed photo)

EDITOR: A blockbuster best-selling kids' book on Amazon is "My Parents Open Carry." It is self-published by two chaps; apparently Simon and Schuster didn't like the cut of their gibberish. The authors helpfully justify the need for this book on the back cover:

"Do you carry a gun and struggle with how to best explain the reason to your children? This book is designed to help parents and children have a meaningful discourse on freedom and the right to bear arms. Have fun with Brenna and her family as they turn an otherwise ordinary day into an open carry adventure."

Bravo to the authors for their choice of names for the parents: Bea Strong and Dick Strong. Subtle. The typos and lack of sentence structure are a nice touch too, clearly separating the authors from the elite with their book-readin'. This is a great way to bring up a few difficult topics with your remaining child, such as why she doesn't have siblings anymore, or a left ear. And it's just in time. The kids were getting tired of "Help Mom, There Are Libs Under My Bed," "My Parents Roll Coal on Priuses," "My Parents Scream at Refugee Kids," "The Brits Fancy Another Go," "Guns Reduce Class Size" and "Jesus Couldn't Open Carry and Look What Happened to Him."

File photo (Photo: Win McNamee, Getty Images)

Letter: Open carry protest did not help cause

This is child-rearing for the barking mad. We live in a nation that has lost its mind.

There is no such thing as a responsible open carry gun owner. The very act of carrying a gun openly is highly irresponsible. This book is a surreal expression of a dystopian future onto whose pages we have stepped.

One way to let the open-carry crowd know you are not willing to guess the good guy from the bad is to leave the restaurant when they show up armed. Stop eating and leave. Let the owner know how to find you and explain why you should pay for eating a meal while your life is being endangered by these insecure imbeciles and hillbillies who carry death around on them on a daily basis.

Jody Hurrish,

Stevens Point

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/VCxZjI