President Barack Obama wrote a personal letter to Thomas J. Ritter, a 49-year-old fifth-grade school teacher in Texas, about the Affordable Care Act – also known as Obamacare – according to a Yahoo! News report on Wednesday.

Obama heckler: Ju Hong disappointed in Obama's immigration debate response

The correspondence was initiated by the Texas school teacher who wrote a letter to the president which was quite critical of Obama’s health care law. Ritter was reportedly quite surprised – as most people would be – when he received a personal response from the president. In Obama’s letter to Ritter, he defended his health care bill and also admitted that health care was not the smart thing to do politically.

Beyond that, President Obama also used the vulgarly derogatory term "tea-baggers" when referring to members of the politically right wing Tea Party members.

Obama wrote that he believes that health care reform will be the right thing for the country. He also wrote that he hopes Ritter will keep an open mind and evaluate it based not on the political attacks but on what it does or doesn’t do to improve people’s lives.

So what was in Ritter’s letter that provoked a response from the president? Ritter wrote that the health care bill has caused such a divisive and toxic environment. He asserted that the reality is that any citizen that disagrees with the Obama administration is targeted and ridiculed. He wrote that he hesitated to write for fear of some kind of retribution. He also said that he watched the president make fun of tea baggers and Press Secretary Jay Carney make fun of Sarah Palin which – according to Ritter – was beneath the dignity of the White House.

Ritter’s response to the letter is that he is going to sell the letter – at an asking price of $24,000 - because he is just so disappointed. He maintains that the Obamacare bill is wrong. Ritter said that Obama told him in the letter what the president thought he wanted to hear. According to Ritter, the letter is just words on a paper and doesn’t mean anything to him because Obama doesn’t mean any of it.