REDDING, Calif. -

Concern about the Zika virus is growing in the U.S. and now a blood bank in Redding is working to make sure it doesn't spread in the Northstate.

Related Get The Facts: Zika virus chances in Northstate

While the Zika virus is mostly spread through mosquito bites, it can also be spread through blood transfusions.

BloodSource isn't taking any chances.

"Our main thing here is to maintain a safe and and consistent blood supply," Account Manager Todd Jones said.

The BloodSource in Redding serves nearly every hospital between Sacramento and the Oregon border, collecting more than 700 units of blood each month. They're always looking for more people to donate blood, but now they're doing something a little out of character. They're asking some people to stop giving, at least for a while.

"There is no test for the Zika virus so we're really relying on this travel referral and donors notifying us if they come down with any symptoms after donation," Jones said. "Zika virus is transferable through blood so we do not want anyone who has any risk of getting the Zika virus that has traveled to those areas to give blood."

Anyone who traveled to Mexico, Central America and South America will be asked to wait at least 28 days before donating blood. Those who traveled to Samoa or Cape Verde off the coast of West Africa will also have to wait to donate.

Jones said if a recent donor begins to show symptoms like fever, rash, joint pain, and red eyes, BloodSource will have to re-examine it's supply.

But Jones believes the Zika virus most likely won't make it to the Northstate and Peter Bonkrude the district manager of the Shasta Mosquito and Vector Control District agrees.

"Currently, we do not have either of the species that are known to transmit Zika in Shasta County," Bonkrude explained.

While the threat of the Zika virus appearing in Shasta County is slim, it's not entirely impossible. Bonkurde said the two types of mosquitoes known to carry the virus, Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, have been detected in several California counties.

"All it would take is someone who is relocating from where that mosquito species is currently found and coming up here and there would have to be enough of those mosquitoes to establish a population," Bonkrude explained.

When it comes to mosquitoes, the Zika virus isn't the only concern. Bonkrude said mosquitoes can transmit many diseases including West Nile virus, dengue fever, and malaria.

"I mean I think people should be worried about all mosquito born diseases," Bonkurde said.

He advises people to protect themselves at all times by doing things like throwing out still water and using repellant.

"Doing anything they can for not getting bit goes a long way to them helping them not only not get sick but also enjoy a barbecue," Bonkrude said laughing.

According to the California Department of Public Health, there have been six reported cases of Zika virus in California since 2013. None were contracted within the state.