By Kathryn Watson | Watchdog.org, Virginia Bureau

ALEXANDRIA, Va. — The gifts scandal, turned indictment, turned trial of former Gov. Bob McDonnell and his wife hasn’t slowed lobbyist spending in Virginia.

Total lobbyist spending was up nearly 5 percent in the 2013-2014 year ending in April 30 over the year before, according to data compiled by the Virginia Public Access Project.

The number of “tangible gifts” lobbyists gave did take a sharp drop from the year before — but 2012-2013 also was an unusually big year for gift giving, VPAP noted.

In other words, lobbyists in Virginia are still spending a pretty penny to buy influence — $1.72 million, to be precise, up from $1.64 million the year before, adjusted for inflation.

Still, it’s clear many of the top lobbying groups were focused on one thing — fighting for, or against, Medicaid expansion.

The conservative Americans for Prosperity, a consistent voice against expansion, spent the most in lobbying expenses in the 2013-2014 year — nearly $480,000.

“No question,” said AFP Virginia State Director Sean Lansing. “Stopping Medicaid was our top priority of the session.

But Lansing called those figures a little “misleading,” because so much of their lobbying was a “grassroots” effort of reaching out to citizens, rather than elected officials.

“Our paid staff who were out in the field knocking on those doors, making those phone calls, are required to file their time by Virginia law as grassroots lobbying,” Lansing said, adding that AFP workers knocked on about 50,00 doors and made about 75,000 phone calls in just a couple of months.

Just behind AFP in spending is the Virginia Hospital and Healthcare Association, which has pushed for some form of Medicaid expansion to compensate hospitals for other money they’re losing through the Affordable Care Act. It recorded roughly $475,000 in lobbying expenses in the same time frame.

The Virginia Hospital and Healthcare Association didn’t return requests for comment.

Like AFP, VHHA had representatives at virtually every meeting of the Medicaid Innovation and Reform Commission, a controversial commission created under the McDonnell administration to find ways to reform and possibly expand Medicaid.

The usual lobbying powerhouses Dominion and Altria spent the third and fourth most on lobbying, respectively. After them, however, come health insurance company Anthem and the Medical Society of Virginia.

The fight over Medicaid expansion isn’t over yet, even though a Republican-dominated General Assembly shot it down earlier this summer. With Health and Human Services Secretary Bill Hazel expected to come up with a plan for some form of expanded health care coverage by Monday, and the General Assembly scheduled to return for a special session on the subject in mid-September, Virginians haven’t heard the last of this yet.

“It remains our top priority,” Lansing said.