By Christian Hill, The Register-Guard, Eugene, Ore. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

June 06 -- SPRINGFIELD -- National crafts retailing giant Hobby Lobby announced Thursday that it will open a store in the Gateway Mall next year.

The confirmation -- on the same day the Oklahoma -based company opened its first Oregon store in Albany -- comes as the Gateway Mall's owner prepares to gut a large portion of the enclosed mall and replace it with a lineup of large retailers.

"We are excited to announce that we have signed a lease ... with an estimated opening in mid-spring of 2015," company spokesman Vincent Parker wrote in an email responding to an inquiry from The Register-Guard.

Parker didn't immediately have other details of the lease, including the size of the store and where it will be in the mall.

Hobby Lobby stores typically top 50,000 square feet. The company opened a 64,000-square-foot store in Albany on Thursday, and a 51,000-square-foot store in Reno, Nev. , last month.

Parker said the Hobby Lobby stores typically hire 30 to 50 employees. Wages start at $15 per hour for full-time employees and $10 for part-time employees, the company said. It typically begins accepting job applications about a month before a store's opening.

Hobby Lobby has made headlines by challenging a provision of the Affordable Care Act . The company cited religious beliefs for its refusal to provide its employees health insurance that included no-cost emergency contraception, as required under the federal law. The law exempts religious employers and nonprofit religious institutions from the requirement but not for-profit businesses.

The U.S. Supreme Court heard oral arguments in March.

Hobby Lobby has been aggressively expanding, with plans to open 70 stores this year, nearly double the number of stores it opened last year. Many of the stores go into spaces left vacant by other companies that have closed or cut back. The Reno store went into a property formerly home to a JC Penney . Hobby Lobby operates more than 575 stores nationwide.

The company opened its first store in Oregon on Friday at the Heritage Mall in Albany , in space vacant since the closure of a Gottschalks department store in 2009. About 100 people lined up for the "soft opening," said Betsy Penson , the mall's general manager. The grand opening is Monday.

Penson said prior to the opening, she received inquires from residents around the state, including in the Eugene area.

Penson said shoppers are attracted to the wide selection -- Hobby Lobby boasts it has more than 70,000 products in 13 departments -- and low prices.

"I'm not crafty and I love that store," she said. "For people who are crafty, it's nirvana or something."

The Eugene - Springfield area already has a number of national and locally owned craft stores, and Hobby Lobby's arrival is sure to intensify the competition among them.

When Rouse Properties , the owner of the Gateway Mall , first approached the city of Springfield about the project last year, their initial plans identified the potential lineup of new retailers: Burlington Coat Factory , Marshalls, Petco and Ulta, a beauty products and salon company. Hobby Lobby was not listed.

Later plans submitted to the city removed the identities of the potential retailers.

A spokeswoman for Rouse Properties declined comment Thursday on specific tenants.

A tenant at the Gateway Mall has said he was told by mall managers that construction would begin this summer or in early fall. Announcements about the project, he said, would be coming shortly.

The city gave final approval to the mall's amended site plan in early March. It is waiting for the mall owner to send back a signed development agreement so officials could begin issuing building permits. The mall owner could also request changes to the approved site plan.

"The ball's firmly in their court as far as how they want to proceed," city planner Andy Limbird said Thursday.

Hobby Lobby founder David Green started building miniature picture frames in his garage and opened the first Hobby Lobby store in Oklahoma City in August 1972 . The family continues to run the privately held company according to Biblical precepts.

___

(c)2014 The Register-Guard (Eugene, Ore.)

Visit The Register-Guard (Eugene, Ore.) at www.registerguard.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 691

[jetpack-related-posts]