HOW TO HELP Donate to the Houseton family's medical expense fund at www.gofundme.com/c5axp59g. Get checked Coverage of mammograms for breast cancer screening is mandated by the Affordable Care Act, which provides these be given without a copay or deductible in insurance plans that started after Aug. 1, 2012. Medicare covers the full cost of a screening mammogram once every 12 months for all women with Medicare aged 40 and older. Diagnostic mammograms are covered with a 20 percent copay after the part B deductible is met. For more information about mammograms at Citizens Medical Center, call 361-570-7277 or go to http://citizensmedicalcenter.org/womens-diagnostic-center/. For more information about mammograms at DeTar Healthcare System, call 361-788-2511 or go to http://www.detar.com/detar-healthcare-system/services/detar-healthcare-system-mammography-584.aspx. Carolyn ringing the bell

After about five hours of chemotherapy, Carolyn Houseton grasped the string on a brass bell in the outpatient infusion unit at Citizens Medical Center.

"This is for you, Eddie!" she called out as she rang the bell. A crowd of nurses and loved ones patiently waited to embrace her in the hospital hallway in a celebration to mark Houseton's last dose of chemotherapy.

Ringing the bell Dec. 2 was an emotional moment she had hoped to share with her husband of 24 years.

But, Eddie Houseton, 55, was two hours away at another hospital undergoing a round of intensive chemotherapy for his own cancer.

He'll have to return to Austin every 21 days for chemotherapy for the next six months.

He was diagnosed with B-cell lymphoma and underwent brain surgery to remove a tumor in October.

The couple was dubbed "Double Trouble" by the oncology staff at Citizens as they went through cancer treatment together, seeing the same oncologist, Dr. Fariborz Gorouhi.

Nurses at the outpatient infusion unit at Citizens could not recall the last time they had seen a husband and wife undergo chemo treatments together.

"It's very uncommon," said Jessica Davis, who has been an oncology nurse for 26 years.

The couple's only daughter, Jennifer Houseton, just completed her last semester at Texas State University and plans to walk the stage in May.

"It's just been so hard knowing that I'm in San Marcos and can't be here," the 22-year-old said earlier this month.

Using her iPhone, she video chats with her parents every day. From the screen on her phone, she watches the effects of the cancer treatment, which sometimes makes her dad really tired or hurts her mom's bones.

"That's the hardest part - just seeing them in pain," she said.

This year sent the Houseton family on a journey they never expected, but it has also shown them the remarkable kindness of others.

"Now if we can just ring this bell for Eddie," said family friend Sandy Walston with tears in her eyes.

Walston went to the hospital to show her support for Carolyn's last chemotherapy appointment and remembers when her friend was first diagnosed with breast cancer in July. Walston said her friend closing her in-home daycare after operating it for more than 25 years was one of the hardest days.

"Then the next one was when we had to shave her head," she said.

Carolyn, 54, said she plans to reopen her daycare as soon as she's healthy enough.

"I miss my babies."

Carolyn has what is called triple negative breast cancer, which means this subtype does not respond to hormonal therapy and tends to grow and spread more quickly than most other types of breast cancer.

"I was totally shocked when (the doctor) told me I had breast cancer," Carolyn said.

She is healthy, having rarely been sick, and has no family history of cancer, she said.

"A lot of people think you have to have someone in your family with breast cancer (to get it), and that's not true," she said.

She had an annual mammogram scheduled in March, but rescheduled her appointment for June, and her doctor was able to catch the cancer very early.

He told her whatever pushed her to change the date might have saved her life.

The biopsy results came back in July, and in August she had a lumpectomy - a surgical procedure that removes a lump or small portion of the surrounding tissue from her breast.

Since her diagnosis, Carolyn has inspired friends and family and even her bank tellers to get a mammogram to screen for cancer.

Carolyn starts her first of 35 radiation therapy treatments Jan. 4.

Eddie found out he had cancer because he started experiencing severe headaches in September.

A year earlier, he was diagnosed with trigeminal neuralgia, which is a rare and chronic pain condition affecting the trigeminal nerve in the face.

But this was different.

"He would turn completely white," Carolyn said. "I knew this wasn't right."

Eddie went in for an MRI Oct. 15 and got a call a few days later explaining he had a brain tumor.

He came home early from work at the Formosa plant in Point Comfort and told his wife he needed surgery right away.

His surgery was on Oct. 26, but doctors weren't able to remove all of the tumor.

Since the surgery, he's worn an eye patch to help with the double vision.

Daily life has changed for the couple.

When they aren't going back and forth to doctors' appointments, they catch up on their favorite soap, "Days of Our Lives," and drink Icees - a craving they've shared since undergoing treatment.

Both have lost weight and have little energy to do the things they once loved such as dinner and a movie on the weekends.

Eddie used to enjoy exercising most days before work as a production supervisor at Formosa, where he's worked for the past 23 years. He is now on short-term disability and misses his unit at the plant.

His co-workers organized a barbecue benefit to help defray the family's medical expenses: They sold 964 plates.

Many people donated on top of the cost of the plates.

"It's like family when you work in a plant like that," he said. Carolyn said the amount of support has been overwhelming since news of their diagnoses spread.

Prayers came in from loved ones and old friends they hadn't talked to in years.

A donation came in from the parent-teacher-organization she was active in when Jennifer was in elementary school.

Their neighbors drop off meals when they can.

"We feel very blessed," she said. "It's just amazing how people have come together. We have a lot to be thankful for." The most important thing she said is staying positive and keeping her faith.

"You can't let it win. You just can't," she said.

She hopes they will be healthy enough to celebrate their 25th anniversary and Jennifer's graduation in May.

"That's another one of my goals," she said. "God willing, we'll have a party."

SHARE