By Joseph Hannagan Jr.

There have been some recent, important changes in the Veterans Administration's healthcare system to assist our veterans in seeking the medical help that they require in a timely fashion.

The Veterans Access Choice and Accountability Act (VACAA), with revisions made on Sept. 28, 2014, was signed into Law as the Department of Veterans Affairs Expiring Authorities Act of 2014 (Public Law 113-175) so that the Department of Veterans Affairs, can provide timely, high quality care for our veterans.

Section 101 of the VACAA will require the Veterans Administration to establish a program known as the Choice Program to improve veterans' access to healthcare, by allowing veterans to use eligible health care providers outside the VA system (non-VA care providers.) Veterans that meet certain eligibility requirements will be able to elect to receive care from eligible non-VA healthcare providers through this program.

Eligibility

A veteran must be enrolled in VA healthcare before Aug. 1, 2014 or be eligible to enroll as a recently discharged combat veteran within five years of separation.

Additionally, a veteran must also meet at least one of the following criteria:

• The veteran is told by their local VA medical facility that they will need to wait more than 30 days from their preferred date or the date medically determined date by their doctor for an appointment.

• The veteran's current residence is more than 40 miles from the closest VA healthcare facility.

• The Veteran resides in a location where he needs to travel by plane or boat to a VA Medical Facility ( there are some other rules on this one).

• The veteran faces a geographic challenge, such as extensive distances around water or other geologic formations such as mountains, that presents a significant travel hardship.

Program is already activated

The VA has mailed some of the Choice program cards to veterans enrolled in VA healthcare already. The Choice card is being issued in three phases.

The first group of Choice cards along with a letter explaining eligibility was sent in November to veterans who may live more than 40 miles from a VA healthcare facility.

The next group of Choice cards were sent to those veterans who are currently waiting for an appointment longer than 30 days

The final mailing of the Choice cards will be sent by the end of this month to the remainder of veterans enrolled in VA healthcare.

Please hold on to this Choice card even if you are not eligible now and never discard your regular VA identification card.



Joseph Hannagan Jr. is Salem County Veterans Affairs Officer. Veterans can contact Hannagan at his office by calling 856-339-8603, via cell phone at 609-774-7450 or via email at Joseph.Hannagan@salemcountynj.gov