Topics: a to z, casey wilson, Editor's Picks, manhattan love story, marry me, Television, Entertainment News

The romantic comedy has, historically, only really worked on TV when it’s not actually a romantic comedy at all. “Friends” derived its narrative momentum from Ross and Rachel’s on/off/on/off thing, but had four more players in reserve to ensure the show wasn’t entirely about an implausibly drawn-out affair. “Cheers” had a whole barful of characters to liven things up when Sam and Diane’s relationship wasn’t foregrounded — and managed to keep going for years after Diane left the scene. And shows from “Roseanne” to “The Cosby Show” have focused on long-term, loving couples for whom the adventures of dating are significantly behind them.

That’s because dating isn’t, in and of itself, interesting, except to the people in the couple. The sort of complications that make the process of getting to know a potential romantic partner worth watching fit perfectly into the length of a movie comedy, but strike false notes when drawn out over the course of the series. If “Friends” had been just about Ross and Rachel breaking up and reuniting, it would be unwatchable. Three new romantic comedies starting this fall attempt to do the impossible — get us invested in a romance that’s, inevitably, going to face an astonishing number of hurdles. Only one succeeds, and it’s the one that doesn’t indulge a twee high concept to try to gin up interest in its characters.

ABC’s “Manhattan Love Story” is the worst of the bunch, indulging a weird streak of nihilism easily mistaken for edge. The show, debuting Sept. 30, begins with its two lead characters’ internal monologues, a concept that runs through the episode as we hear what each is thinking. (It’s never too deep.) Peter (Jake McDorman) is ranking women’s bodies, while Dana (Analeigh Tipton) is ranking their purses. Women love shopping! The couple end up meeting on a blind date in which he mocks her “bucket list” (yes) for her time in New York, specifically taking umbrage at her desire to go to the High Line, which makes no sense, because the High Line is great.

Dana is likable, though far too much of a naif to be believable as a woman hired from out-of-state to take on a job as an editor at a publishing house. In a scene emblematic of the show’s understanding of technology, she frantically runs through different “relationship statuses” on Facebook — including “widowed” — after a date. Meanwhile, Peter is utterly monstrous. (His vocalization of a completely tired rant about how kids today get too many trophies edges out Dana’s internal wondering if crying makes a man gay.) The episode runs through so many reversals in its 22-minute length that one boggles at the thought of a full season — just how many times are we going to see a misunderstanding and then an apology? And given that both characters are paper-thin stereotypes — the naive innocent vs. the mean guy who doesn’t care about love — what do their internal monologues add? The episode’s conclusion asks us to keep tuning in to see whether Peter can move past his cynicism. I’d prefer not to.