Seth Olson believes his background in architecture and math meshes well with his passion for fashion. ( Randy Brooke / Courtesy photo )

Learn more See Seth Olson's menswear designs at artsthread.com/p/olsona62/

I have not written about men's fashion in years. That's because I write nonfiction.

When the hipster trend barfed all over mainstream, men's fashion became an awkward, embarrassing myth. Like the Sasquatch. Which incidentally, recent male fashion was modeled after. See exhibit "Mountain Man Beard Overgrows Onto Neck."

The mainstream hipster movement was a stressful time in fashion for any man older than 23, taller than 5-foot-9 and for peach-fuzzers who grow facial hair only in patches. Those skinny jeans worked only for boys who weighed less than 90 pounds, and those unicorn socks and Ninja Turtles tees somehow worked only on guys whose BMI was twice their IQ. Even then, ironic stopped being ironic six PBRs and a mustache ago.

But, like Colorado's weather, just to keep our cortisol levels in constant panic mode, the fashion world oscillates from one extreme to the next. Which has brought redemption. Finally, it's fashionable for men to look fashionable again.

In other words: It's time to groom. Hipsters aren't hip. Your heart knows this. Now, Boulder, connect your heart with your actions.

Helping lead the way to redemption is Seth Olson.

Olson is a Boulder High product who just graduated from the California-based Academy of Art University's School of Fashion Design with a speciality in men's outerwear. Before pursuing a career in fashion design, Olson worked in architecture and considered majoring in math. As he sees it, fashion fuses both of those passions into one.

"A lot of the drafting you do in architecture and the geometry you use, I am able to apply to pattern-making," he says. "The patterns you make are similar to blueprints you'd make for a house but just on a smaller scale."

He recently presented some of his original designs to fashion bigwigs (including the Missonis) at a professional-grade fashion show in San Francisco. This fall, Olson will join the design team at Abercrombie, where he hopes to share some of his men's outerwear ideas.

Olson wants to bring more texture to men's fashion. He loves mixing contrasting textures — pairing soft fur, fleece and flannel, with sharp, structured fabrics, such as denim and vinyl. The key to making it work for the everyday man: using more adventurous fabrics with traditional silhouettes, or making a unique cut out of a common fabric.

Like a hoody made with vinyl. Or a peacoat made of printed denim. Or using standard cotton to help craft a new style of pants that are pleated, fuller and drapy.

"For so long, very skinny, fitted pants were in, but now it's transitioning into a fuller pant," Olson says. "When you think of pleats you think of an older, dad generation, but it's doing it in a new way. With a fuller pant, it gives it a fresh feel."

Other trends in menswear, according to Olson:

• Slicked back hair with a clean-cut face.

•Experimentation with brighter colors and patterns, such as tribal and even a softer floral.

• Patchwork-style accents on clothing.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Aimee Heckel at 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/Aimeemay.