SALEM — An executive of the technology company in charge of the state’s failed health insurance website hasn’t been served court papers in a state lawsuit against him and the company, the Oregon attorney general’s office confirmed Monday.

Ravi Puri, who was vice president of government consulting for technology giant Oracle, hasn’t received a summons or the complaint from the lawsuit Attorney General Ellen Rosenblum filed Aug. 22, court documents show. Five other executives have been served.

The state, which named Puri more times than any others named in the lawsuit, accuses Puri of giving misleading information as the state scrambled to fix the website months after it was supposed to go live.

“A summons and complaint in a civil case is one way to think of sort of an invitation to the party,” said Portland attorney Russell Barnett. “Until you have actually been personally served, someone actually hands you the summons and the complaint, you’re not being sued.”

“It doesn’t kick off until someone actually serves you with papers,” Barnett added.

Cover Oregon hired Oracle to develop its health insurance exchange. Consumers were supposed to be able to use the website to sign up for a health care plan under the Affordable Care Act. But the exchange missed its original October 2013 deadline and never launched, despite a price tag of more than $200 million.

Puri, who lives in Georgia, didn’t respond to requests for comment.

An attorney representing the other five Oracle executives named in the lawsuit, Robert Shwarts, said he couldn’t comment on the case and sent all questions to Oracle, which declined to comment.

“The Department of Justice has attempted to serve (Puri), and he has not been available for service,” DOJ spokeswoman Kristina Edmunson said in an email.

Edmunson added “the process can take some time.”

Edward Kroll, a Hillsboro attorney who is vice president of the Oregon Criminal Defense Lawyers Association, said the state has other options if it wants Puri’s cooperation in court.

The state can ask for an alternative service, where a judge could allow the plaintiff to serve someone who would report to Puri.

“I think they’ll get him served by some means eventually,” Kroll said. “It depends how critical the attorney general’s office thinks having him be part of the case would be.”

A news release issued Sept. 2 by an international IT company said Puri is the new senior vice president of operations of Rolta International. The company works with state and federal governments on IT solutions, the statement says.

That announcement came just weeks after the state accused Puri and other Oracle executives of recklessly misleading state employees into believing the website would go live on Feb. 3, four months after it was originally supposed to launch.

“At the time Puri made these statements, he knew or recklessly disregarded that Oracle had not resolved all (serious errors) and the state of development of the system made it impossible to launch the (health insurance exchange) on Feb. 3, 2014,” Rosenblum wrote in the lawsuit.

The state says despite not delivering the website on time for its original October launch, Puri “demanded that Cover Oregon pay Oracle more than $24 million for development work.”

The state argues the money Puri demanded was for repair work to the broken website, not new development work, and that Puri knew it.

Cover Oregon paid Oracle $77.1 million for consulting services from June 2013 through June 2014, court documents show. Those invoices include $55.3 million for consulting services that came after the state’s original launch date.

The state has hired Portland law firm Markowitz, Herbold, Glade & Mehlhaf, PC, to help with the lawsuit. The state will pay the firm up to $2 million to fight the case, according to a contract between the state and the firm signed in May, two weeks before Gov. John Kitzhaber asked Rosenblum to file a lawsuit.

Oracle is suing the state of Oregon in federal court, alleging the state owes $23 million for work on the website.

— Reporter: 406-589-4347,

tanderson@bendbulletin.com