Texas’ foster care system can be a bureaucratic morass, even for those who work within the system every day. But for children who are about to age out of foster care, the bureaucracy can also cost them the health care they deserve.

In a complaint filed earlier this month, the Texas Foster Youth Justice Project alleges that the state is making it more difficult for children aging out of the foster care system to get coverage due to them under the Affordable Care Act. Lawyers for the advocacy group say Texas Health and Human Services employees either don’t know the law or are ignoring it. In either case, it is creating a coverage gap for an unknown number of vulnerable young adults by stripping them of needed health insurance.

About 1,200 foster care youth age out of the system each year, either at 18 or 21, depending on circumstances. If they were receiving Medicaid at the time, the Affordable Care Act law allows them to continue receiving health benefits until their 26th birthday. But that’s where the system appears to be failing. When some of these young adults turn 21, state HHS employees are cutting off Medicaid payments, the advocacy group says.

This situation merits a serious review of how Medicaid services are being delivered to youngsters transitioning from foster care into adulthood. This a tenuous time for youths who have already gone through a lot in their lifetimes; they don’t deserve yet one more hurdle in their efforts to build a future.

In its complaint, the Texas Foster Youth Justice Project says, “We have seen youth after youth struggle” to obtain health benefits, and these struggles are “not isolated incidents.” The legal aid group says rejection decisions appear to be at the discretion of individual workers. Once benefits are lost, restoring them is a telephone-calling, letter-writing and Web-surfing nightmare.

State HHS officials say the vast majority of transitioning young adults experience no interruption in benefits but concede that some young adults may have fallen through the cracks, for reasons they don’t know. HHS officials describe this situation as “a small problem in a large system,” but they vow to assess the review process, remind workers of the law and make other corrections.

HHS has to get this right. Medicaid is supposed to be an insurance safety net for the most financially vulnerable foster children as they transition to adulthood. There is clearly a hole in the net. It must be mended now.