FACT: 10% of people younger than 25 years old respond to social media and text messages during sex. FACT: Social networking sites are the top news source for 27.8% of Americans. These are just a few examples of the facts from ProCon.org* that Pivot (Pivot.tv), Participant Media's new television network targeting Millennials (18-34), is getting ready to explore with viewers as part of the social action campaign for Meghan McCain’s new genre-bending docu-talk series, Raising McCain, premiering Saturday, September 14 at 10pm ET/9 pm CT.



This summer, Pivot conducted research on digital and media literacy and found that Millennials are hungry for trusted sources of news and information. Given ProCon.org's national reputation and years of work in supplying nonpartisan research on controversial topics, Pivot approached and has now aligned with ProCon.org to provide the new network’s viewers balanced information and a variety of interactive components on key issues featured in Raising McCain, ranging from privacy to bullying to feminism to spirituality. The research and online resources offers Millennials a welcome destination to formulate their own opinions on these issues, and helps to cultivate a civically-engaged audience through awareness, public discourse, and action.



Kamy Akhavan, President & Managing Editor of ProCon.org, said: "We appreciate that we can help Pivot promote critical thinking by presenting our thought-provoking facts and useful resources on the issues Meghan raises in her program. We believe that our nonpartisan research will help Pivot TV engage young audiences and open up conversations around topics that need a forum for discussion. Some of the facts will be shocking while others will just make for good banter."



"Every topic in Raising McCain is relevant to Millennials. As Meghan seeks to get her own questions answered, viewers can join in on the debate while watching with friends," said Chad Boettcher, EVP, Social Action. "Through our collaboration with ProCon.org our audience will be able to interact with the show."



To engage viewers, a dedicated online hub will launch on Participant's digital platform TakePart.com at



Pivot and ProCon.org will host a season premiere Twitter event (i.e. chat or tweet along), including participation from McCain, as well as weekly Tweet-alongs every Saturday night throughout the run of the series to provide Millennials with more opportunities to speak their mind about social issues presented in the show.



In the series premiere, which focuses on privacy, McCain is joined by guest co-host Michael Moynihan, cultural news editor for The Daily Beast/Newsweek, to explore what privacy means to Millennials and how they can protect their personal information in the digital age. The series is produced by Go Go Luckey Entertainment and Participant Media; Julie Auerbach and Tina Gazzerro.





*For sources go to

Pivot TV, a new television network from Participant Media, selects ProCon.org as its exclusive alliance to promote critical thinking by providing research around the social issues explored in the new TV series Raising McCain, a documentary-style reality program featuring Meghan McCain, the daughter of US Senator John McCain. The show premieres Saturday, Sep. 14 at 10pm ET / 7pm PT.FACT: 10% of people younger than 25 years old respond to social media and text messages during sex. FACT: Social networking sites are the top news source for 27.8% of Americans. These are just a few examples of the facts from ProCon.org* that Pivot (Pivot.tv), Participant Media's new television network targeting Millennials (18-34), is getting ready to explore with viewers as part of the social action campaign for Meghan McCain’s new genre-bending docu-talk series, Raising McCain, premiering Saturday, September 14 at 10pm ET/9 pm CT.This summer, Pivot conducted research on digital and media literacy and found that Millennials are hungry for trusted sources of news and information. Given ProCon.org's national reputation and years of work in supplying nonpartisan research on controversial topics, Pivot approached and has now aligned with ProCon.org to provide the new network’s viewers balanced information and a variety of interactive components on key issues featured in Raising McCain, ranging from privacy to bullying to feminism to spirituality. The research and online resources offers Millennials a welcome destination to formulate their own opinions on these issues, and helps to cultivate a civically-engaged audience through awareness, public discourse, and action.Kamy Akhavan, President & Managing Editor of ProCon.org, said: "We appreciate that we can help Pivot promote critical thinking by presenting our thought-provoking facts and useful resources on the issues Meghan raises in her program. We believe that our nonpartisan research will help Pivot TV engage young audiences and open up conversations around topics that need a forum for discussion. Some of the facts will be shocking while others will just make for good banter.""Every topic in Raising McCain is relevant to Millennials. As Meghan seeks to get her own questions answered, viewers can join in on the debate while watching with friends," said Chad Boettcher, EVP, Social Action. "Through our collaboration with ProCon.org our audience will be able to interact with the show."To engage viewers, a dedicated online hub will launch on Participant's digital platform TakePart.com at TakePart.com/raisingmccain . The site will feature weekly episode clips and viewing guides consisting of key questions and facts developed by ProCon.org pegged to each episode topic in the form of the popular "I've Never" game which viewers will be encouraged download weekly and use in hosting their own viewing parties and discussion. On the site, viewers can also access relevant articles and actions that allow them to learn more and get involved immediately.Pivot and ProCon.org will host a season premiere Twitter event (i.e. chat or tweet along), including participation from McCain, as well as weekly Tweet-alongs every Saturday night throughout the run of the series to provide Millennials with more opportunities to speak their mind about social issues presented in the show.In the series premiere, which focuses on privacy, McCain is joined by guest co-host Michael Moynihan, cultural news editor for The Daily Beast/Newsweek, to explore what privacy means to Millennials and how they can protect their personal information in the digital age. The series is produced by Go Go Luckey Entertainment and Participant Media; Julie Auerbach and Tina Gazzerro.*For sources go to http://socialnetworking.procon.org/