The Keokuk area will have better access to dental care soon, said Ron Kemp, CEO of Community Health Centers of Southeastern Iowa.

His organization received a $1 million grant Thursday from U.S. Health and Human Services, and plans are being made.

“We’re going to have a dental clinic,” Kemp said. “That’s done. We had planned a space, but have to confirm it will be available. We would hope to be as close to (Keokuk Area Hospital) as possible.”

Duane Fitch of Keokuk Area Hospital and owner of Fitch Healthcare, said a new dental clinic would be an asset to the hospital and the community.

“We’re excited about their success in getting the grant,” Fitch said. “The hospital and community health center have been longtime partners. We’ll try to find a spot on campus for them. (Community Health Centers) are on-site now. We’re going to work with them to find a space.”

The dental clinic will start up with a dentist and hygienist, and in the second year, another hygienist will be added, and so on. Kemp anticipates getting two to three dentists and two hygienists as the center grows.

“We don’t know what demand we’ll have,” he said. “This is a start. You grow around the underserved population. We have eight (dental chairs) in Burlington and we need to expand.”

Dr. Ed Kircher, whose dental practice is on the hospital campus, believes the addition of the clinic will result in a net benefit to the community.

“I don’t know how this will affect existing dental offices,” Kircher said. “Some good, some bad. However, I do know that there are a lot of people on Medicaid that can’t get into a dental office for treatment. This should be a great help to this segment of the population.”

The Keokuk dental clinic will see underserved people of all ages and circumstances – children and adults, Kemp said. Charges will be on a sliding scale based on ability to pay or will be billed to Medicaid.

Kemp said public health pushed for CHC to get the funding.

“I recall we wrote a letter of support for it,” said Julie Schilling, administrator of the Lee County Health Department. “It is something we have worked on, recruiting dental staff for Keokuk.

“We are very pleased. This will allow people with managed care organizations to have dental care, to go to dentists who accept Medicaid.”

People have had to travel to the dental clinic in West Burlington, but soon will be able to get treatment in Keokuk and not worry about finding transportation.

HHS expects the award and resulting clinical space to impact approximately 3,360 new patients.

The funding comes from the Affordable Care Act’s Community Health Center Fund, which was extended with bipartisan support in the Medicare Access and Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2015.

U.S. Rep. Dave Loebsack, D-Iowa City, is a staunch supporter of community health centers and their work.

“Doctors in Iowa are second to none in the quality of health care they provide, and community health centers play a vital role in providing access to care,” he said. “These funds will help the health professionals at Community Health Centers of Southeastern Iowa expand while continuing to offer the highest quality of care. I am excited to see the new clinic that will be built using this investment.”