Many Panhandle locals are all too familiar with a buzz and bite that doesn't belong to a mosquito.

"Whenever, you know, you're playing Frisbee golf with friends or going out to the beach it can be pretty back out there," said FSU Panama City student Justice Wobser.

Wobser is a Bay County local and knows just how annoying the panhandle's yellow flies can be.

"By the Bay and usually close to the beach areas as well," Wobser said. "So they definitely live close to the waters."

Yellow flies are one of several biting flies in the area. According to FSU Panama City medical and veterinary entomologist, Dr. John Smith, yellow flies have a year-long life cycle and will appear at the end of May. They die out at the end of June and come around again in August and September.

"The numbers may very from year to year depending on how good of a season they had," Smith said, "and how many survived maybe a mild winter, would make for better survival the next year."

Smith said if you plan an outdoor trip, such as a canoe or kayaking trip along a creek. yellow flies like to bite in the early morning and late afternoon. Smith advised wearing light colors because the flies are attracted to dark colors. He said most bug repellent will not work against a yellow fly. They also tend to seek the shade, much like humans.

"A better way is probably just know that they're going to be really bad if you're going canoeing this time of year," Smith said, "So if you can delay your trip to like July or August, early August, or before June, you won't have near the problem.

But for tourists new to the area and unfamiliar with the yellow beasts, they can make for an unpleasant experience.

"Sometimes the people here on vacation, if it's bad, they've had a bad experience because they'll get eat up," said Joey Ray who works with Shell Island Shuttle at St. Andrews State Park. "They didn't enjoy their stay at the island. Some of them want their money back and stuff but there's nothing you can do about that. There's nothing we can control that."

Year after year, some locals said yellow flies are just part of panhandle living.

"If you come here to the good old Panama City area," Wobser said, "you are definitely going to find them around here and you just gotta be careful and just try to have fun with them around."

Smith recommends hanging a black ball covered in Tangle Trap in your yard. He said it will attract the flies and keep them off of you.