A new study adds weight to a growing body of evidence that making contraceptives free and easily available for teenagers dramatically cuts teenage pregnancy and abortion rates.

The study, which appears this month in the New England Journal of Medicine, involved 1,404 St. Louis-area women between 14 to 19 years of age. The young women in the study were given a choice of what kinds of contraceptives they wanted, but the established benefits of long term contraception options like intrauterine devices and implants were emphasized.

An overwhelming 72 percent opted for these long term measures, far above the average rate for teenagers, which is currently less than 5 percent. That’s not surprising given that many doctors still aren’t equipped to fit etonogestrel implants, while uninsured patients would previously have had to pay anywhere close to $1,000 for an IUD, pricing many teenagers out of using the devices.

From 2007 to 2011, the young women were monitored and given a number of in person and regular telephone interviews to assess their contraceptives use.

The researchers found that the young women were far more likely to keep up with their contraceptive health than the average population, and this also had a direct impact on their pregnancy and abortion rates. In fact, the yearly figures worked out at 34 pregnancies per 1,000 teenagers, and the abortion rate came in at 9.7 abortions per 1,000 women. Comparing that to 2010′s figures using a general population sample of teenagers, the rate was 57.4 pregnancies per 1,000 and 14.7 abortions per 1,000, according to the New York Times.

Lead researcher Gina Secura says that, while considering the limitations of this study such as its reliance on self reporting, its findings remain quite stark: “When we removed barriers to contraception … such as lack of knowledge, limited access and cost … we were able to lower pregnancy, birth and abortion rates. This study demonstrates there is a lot more we can do to reduce the teen pregnancy rate.”

The latest data suggests that the teen pregnancy rate is currently at its lowest since records began in the USA in 1933. In 2013, there were just 274,641 births from mothers aged 15-19, a 10 percent drop on 2012′s figures. That’s a big change and a very positive sign, but it’s still about 5.5 times higher than the rate in Western Europe, suggesting that the USA still has some work to do in bringing down its teen pregnancy figures. As such, insights like those offered by this latest study really matter.

The Affordable Care Act should make accessing free contraceptives easier for young women, though there is by no means perfect coverage. However, this still relies on doctors having the expertise to fit contraceptives like the copper coil, and currently it seems that knowledge in this area is lacking. Given that this research adds to previous studies, all of which have suggested that by making contraceptives free more young women are likely to use them consistently, the need to invest in training front-line medical staff becomes obvious.

What the main take-away from this study seems to be is that, when young women are afforded the opportunity to make responsible and informed choices about their sexual health independent of financial burdens, they tend to choose very wisely indeed. This further emphasizes that young women are worth investing in, are worth helping so they can make their own decisions and, above all, are worth trusting with their sexual and contraceptive health.

—

This post is part of a Care2 series in collaboration with UN Women, in recognition of the 20th anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. To see all the other posts in the series, click here. For more information about UN Women’s Beijing+20 campaign, click here.