"I've been here going on 38 years and never had nothing like this ever happen down here," Donnie Settles said.

Settles and her son, Donnie, say they've actually helped the woman on a number of occasions.

Trey says he and his family have lived in their mobile home for about a year, but the victim had only been living on the property for the last few months.

Neighbors tell News 9 the woman lived alone with her two dogs and say they don't know why anyone would want to kill her.

Neighbors of a woman found dead this week inside a mobile home are speaking out.

Police in Weatherford made the discovery while on a welfare check. The Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation is assisting the Weatherford Police Department in the investigation.

It was just before 9 p.m. Wednesday when police were asked to do the welfare check at the victim's mobile home.

Neighbors tell News 9 the woman lived alone with her two dogs and say they don't know why anyone would want to kill her.

"Saturday was the last time we seen her," neighbor Trey Norfolk said.

Norfolk, 14, says he heard commotion outside his home early Saturday morning.

"Dogs barking, and a couple of nights ago, I seen a truck pull off at 3 a.m.," said Norfolk. "As soon as it saw me, it pulled off."

Trey says he and his family have lived in their mobile home for about a year, but the victim had only been living on the property for the last few months.

6/25/2014 Related Story: OSBI: Woman Found Dead Inside Trailer In Weatherford

"She's a nice lady," said Norfolk. "If you actually get to know her, she's very nice. I actually became friends with her."

"I mean, why would anybody want to kill her," said neighbor Sheila Settles. "She hadn't done nobody nothing as far as I know of."

Settles and her son, Donnie, say they've actually helped the woman on a number of occasions.

"She'd come in the house and sat down and talk on the phone for a little bit, and she would thank my husband and go," Settles said.

"I've been here going on 38 years and never had nothing like this ever happen down here," Donnie Settles said.

Now, a day after the woman's body was found, a Weatherford police officer sits in his car in front of the victim's travel trailer.

Neighbors say she looked like she was in her late 50's or early 60's and had just moved to town from Clinton.

"It's a scary situation," said Donnie Settles. "It's hit too close to home."

"It's just so sudden," said Norfolk. "One day you're talking to somebody; the other day they're dead."

Investigators are still waiting for the Medical Examiner's office to release the woman's name and her official cause of death.

No suspects have been identified at this point.