Kasich's New Campaign Logo Will Be a Constant Reminder of His Love for Obamacare

I really thought this was a Photoshop of Governor Kasich's real logo when I first saw it. Surely, his team can't be this clueless. The three lines above the Ohio governor's name are supposed to look like an American flag, I guess, but if you've been even semi-conscious over the last three years and have had access to the internet, television, or civilization in general, you've had the ♡bamaCare logo* -- also with three red lines -- shoved in your face thousands of times. Probably more. So the comparison is unavoidable.

And it is actually quite fitting, since Kasich has been one of the nation's biggest cheerleaders for Obamacare's Medicaid expansion, not only subverting his own legislature through the use of an obscure Controlling Board to authorize the new spending, but also lecturing, demeaning, and questioning the eternal destiny of anyone who disagrees with him.

In Kasich's version of conservatism (which he says he has the right to define), it's big government's job to provide health insurance for individuals up to 133% of the Federal Poverty Level. According to the Foundation for Government Accountability, the beneficiaries will be:

Able-bodied, working-age adults; almost all of whom (82 percent) have no children to support, nearly half of whom (45 percent) do not work, many of whom (35 percent) with a record of run-ins with the criminal justice system. ObamaCare has picked this population as the winner of its Medicaid expansion. The losers? Low-income children, poor moms, the elderly, the blind, the disabled. The very people Medicaid was created to protect. And what do these ObamaCare losers have in store for them? States that previously expanded Medicaid had to eliminate coverage for life-saving organ transplants, overload waitlists for services, cap enrollment and raise patient costs, all because promises were broken and costs exceeded projections.

And despite Governor Kasich's ridiculous (and debunked) claim that it's being paid for with Ohio tax dollars from the federal pot (that would otherwise go to other states), in actuality, most of the costs are being tacked onto the federal debt. In other words, our kids and grandkids will be paying for the health insurance of these able-bodied, working adults with no children. In fact, the first 18 months of Kasich's Medicaid expansion in Ohio cost federal taxpayers more than $4 billion and the program in Ohio is $1.5 billion over budget -- in just the first 18 months. And while Kasich projected an enrollment of 366,000 in the first year and a half, nearly 600,000 have signed up.

While Team Kasich probably didn't intend for voters to have visions of Obamacare dancing through their heads every time they catch a glimpse of his logo, considering his great love for the federal healthcare mandate, it's simply unavoidable.

* ™ Vodkapundit