The state of Colorado, through executive order issued Friday by Gov. John Hickenlooper, is taking greater measures to protect the greater sage grouse in hopes of avoiding a federal listing.

The sage grouse in Colorado and 10 other western states has been imperiled in recent years as the bird loses habitat to development.

The federal government has to make a decision by a court-mandated Sept. 30 deadline on whether to list it as an endangered species.

Hickenlooper on Friday directed state agencies to take a number of actions. Whether such work will substitute for actual regulations to forest all a federal ESA listing is uncertain.

Hickenlooper’s executive order includes:

• Taking inventory of — and improving habitat within – state lands with grouse populations;

• Launching a market-based habitat exchange;

• Increasing efforts and coordination with Colorado Parks and Wildlife.

“We firmly believe that state-led efforts are the most effective way to protect and conserve the greater sage grouse and its habitat,” Hickenlooper wrote. “Conversely, a decision by the federal government to list the greater sage grouse under the Endangered Species Act would have a significant and detrimental economic impact to the state, as well as threaten the very state-led partnerships that are working to protect the species.”

Once numbering in the millions, grouse have declined rapidly since 1985 to an estimated 200,000 to 500,000 due to agriculture, housing and industrial development.

Much of the state’s greater sage grouse habitat, most of it in northwestern Colorado, is on BLM land.

Last month, Colorado Sen. Cory Gardner introduced legislation to bar the federal government from making a decision on the greater sage grouse for six more years.

Hickenlooper’s executive order also calls on strengthening the role of the Oil and Gas Conservation Commission in relation to the bird.

“Governor Hickenlooper’s greater sage grouse executive order clearly illustrates the dedication of the state and all other stakeholders to ensuring that Colorado’s sagebrush lands are protected,” said Pete Maysmith, executive director with Conservation Colorado. “The historical declines in greater sage grouse populations have shown us that we need to restore balance to this ecosystem.”

Kieran Nicholson: 303-954-1822, knicholson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kierannicholson