Kelly Cooper who works with Peace Child Home orphanage, experienced the April 25 earthquake in Nepal

Bikram, who just graduated from the Peace Child Home orphanage, stands in front of the pile of rocks that used to be his family home in Nepal and was destroyed in a recent earthquake. ( Kelly Cooper / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

On the day the first earthquake hit Nepal on April 25, Kelly Cooper was at her little cement apartment in Pokhara, Nepal with her daughter, Elizabeth. They ran outside and felt the ground shake like "really bad airplane turbulence."

Cooper grew up in Loveland and has been living in Pokhara for six months working at an orphanage and school. She said Nepal has small earthquakes frequently so she knew what it could be like.

If you go What: Silent auction to benefit "House of Treasures." When: 7 p.m. Wednesday, May 27. Where: Rialto Theater Center, 228 E. Fourth St., Loveland. More info: Event to benefit the children of Nepal, particularly the Peace Child Home. There will be light appetizers and a short presentation about House of Treasures. She is also looking for services and items to be donated for that auction. To give a direct monetary donation, visit www.houseoftreasuresnepal.org/.

This one was worse than the others.

"When we got outside and it kept going and it was stronger than the other ones, everyone wondered when it was going to stop," Cooper said at her mother's home in Loveland on Thursday. "It felt like it went on forever but it was probably five minutes. My landlord's wife was standing there holding my arm. It was right before noon. The death toll would have been higher if it were at night."

Advertisement

Pokhara is far enough from Kathmandu, the capital city near where the earthquake started, that there was little damage to the buildings in Pokhara. But many residents were affected, either by losing relatives or losing money in tourism.

Cooper is back in Loveland now, raising awareness and funds for her orphanage. She is hosting a silent auction May 27 to benefit the orphanage and school, as well as relief work in Nepal.

Kelly Cooper, who grew up in Loveland, shows pictures Thursday, during a visit at her parents' Loveland home, that she took recently in Nepal. She talks about living and working there at an orphanage and also what she experienced and saw during the country's recent earthquake. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Cooper said that the biggest issue for villages and towns across Nepal, even if they weren't directly hit, will be the decline in the tourism trade.

"Even the small villages; a lot of their income comes from trekkers, hikers. If they don't come, then it's going to be devastating," she said.

On the day, they didn't realize how bad the earthquake was until the radio started giving reports.

A magnitude-7.8 earthquake caused avalanches that buried villages, killed more than 8,150 and injured thousands more. A second earthquake magnitude-7.3 battered the small Himalayan country again a couple weeks later, killing over 100, according to Associated Press.

Cooper said a lot of incoming relief has focused on Kathmandu.

"The trouble is that when you get into the villages, there are still ones even now that haven't been reached by anyone yet. The need is bigger than the response even now," Cooper said.

Cooper runs a nonprofit called House of Treasures, which raises money in support of an orphanage, Peace Child Home, in Nepal that serves around 23 young children.

She partners with a Nepali nonprofit organization run by a Nepali man, Binod Nepal, to support the orphanage and school.

She and her daughter, Elizabeth, moved to Nepal around six months ago. They will come home periodically to raise support and awareness, as they have this month, but they plan to live in Nepal indefinitely.

Cooper said that Elizabeth was very excited to go to a new place. When they hosted a garage sale to sell all their furniture and belongings, Elizabeth had a lemonade stand to raise money to buy the children at the orphanage ice cream. By the time they left the country, she had accumulated around $150. And that money does go to periodic ice cream parties with the children. They purchase the ice cream in big buckets from a dairy down the road, and they have to return the buckets when they're done.

Another special treat is getting to make and eat momos with the children, which are Nepali dumplings with water buffalo and cilantro.

Cooper said she went on many mission trips through her life — she's now 31 — and the country of Nepal stuck with her.

A man sits in front of the remains of his home near Gorka, Nepal, at the epicenter of the recent earthquake. (Kelly Cooper / Special to the Reporter-Herald)

"I was able to bring (the orphanage) from rice and lentils for kids every day to adding in chicken, eggs, fruits. We added new uniforms," Cooper said.

The orphanage was established to give children a better life and support their physical and emotional needs, she added.

They have purchased land and are raising money to build better homes that can support up to 60 or more children.

"My goal would be to have a neighborhood with individual homes that might house 12 children each, with house parents, so the children grow up in a neighborhood; not an institution but in a home," Cooper said.

And now that so many people have died and so many buildings destroyed in the earthquake (including orphanages), there will be an even greater need for children's homes and quality support for children, she said.

The children range in age from 4 to 18. The oldest student named Bikram just graduated and went back to his family village.

"He was there when the earthquake hit," Cooper said. Luckily, he and most of the villagers escaped the damage, although their homes were completely destroyed.

Bikram wants to go back to college and be an engineer. He might end up returning to the children's home until they can find him a place to live.

Nepal Culture

• The Nepali calendar is not the same as the rest of the world. In Nepal, it is the year 2072. The first day of our month is the 14th of their month.

• Kelly Cooper works at Holy Angel English School, which is in English for all ages.

• The school year starts at the start of the calendar year sometime in April and goes all year. Students have only two weeks off of vacation before a new school year starts. They attend school six days a week and do have October off because there are so many Hindu celebrations.

• The main religion is Hindu, with Buddhism second.

• The food staple is a white rice with lentil soup poured on top, and curried vegetables like cauliflower and potato. A typical Nepali will eat this for breakfast and dinner every day, and maybe have crackers or biscuits for lunch.

• Nepal has a great disparity in poor and rich, with the poorest in Pokhara living in tents and tarps along the sides of roads. Most families live in brick or mud houses without plumbing.

• There are public buses and tourist buses that run between Pokhara and Kathmandu, which is about 150 miles or an 8-hour bus ride. The public buses are more rustic. One time, Cooper rode a bus where there were sheep tied on the roof. Cooper said she usually takes the tourist buses, although they might not be running now after the earthquake.

- Everyone in the neighborhood watches over the children that play outside their homes, including Elizabeth. The Coopers have never felt unsafe.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.