Buy Photo A man raises his hand as Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton looks for questions at Old Brick Church on Wednesday, Dec. 16, 2015. (Photo: David Scrivner / Iowa City Press-Citizen)Buy Photo

Hillary Clinton stopped by Iowa City on Wednesday to talk about raising wages for the middle class and raising taxes for the wealthy ahead of Saturday's third Democratic presidential debate.

She spoke at the Old Brick Church at 26 E. Market St. for a town hall event that drew about 400 people.

Clinton, the Democratic front-runner, was fresh off a Tuesday stop in Minneapolis where she outlined a "360-degree strategy" for defeating ISIS that included identifying and shutting down the terrorist group's online recruiting and training efforts.

ISIS came up at the Iowa City event as well, but Clinton also focused on delivering a message of acceptance to refugees and Muslims who may feel isolated and fearful in the wake of anti-Muslim comments from Republican candidates, including Donald Trump, who has proposed refusing to let any Muslims into the country.

Clinton came out swinging against that rhetoric, calling it "contrary to who we are as Americans."

"It is not only shameful and wrong to be calling people out based on their religion, to be basically accusing one and a half billion people of being terrorists … but it is dangerous," she said.

While she agrees with President Barack Obama's strategy of taking back territory and going after terrorist leaders and finances, Clinton said those efforts are undermined if politicians are alienating predominantly Muslim countries with whom the United States should be working.

Clinton also described her tax plan for wealthy Americans, explaining that her proposals to close the carried-interest loophole, stop certain tax breaks for hedge fund managers and cap tax deductions for the wealthy at 28 percent would help pay for some of the domestic programs she wants to improve. Those include early childhood education, paid family leave, and aid for college students.

"It is time that we begin to ask the wealthy to pay more. They have to pay their fair share," she said.

Her tone and knowledge of the issues earned praise from her audience, including Iowa City resident Cindy Robinson.

"I just think she's the most qualified candidate out there," Robinson said.

Cathy Glasson, an SEIU local 199 member, said Clinton did well to address wage theft and the difficulty for part-time workers to find full-time work.

"We can't rebuild the country if people aren't making enough money to get along," she said. Glasson also praised Clinton's support for children's health insurance and the Affordable Care Act and said she would be caucusing for her.

Clinton was asked about the lack of support for survivors of sexual assault, especially at universities. Many of those survivors are women who end up dropping out and struggling with the trauma and also with student debt, said Iowa City resident Joy Beadleston.

Clinton acknowledged that survivors "don't get the help they need, they don't get the support they need, and the first step is recognizing it and not ignoring it."

Beadleston, a survivor of sexual assault, said she was glad to hear Clinton acknowledge the issue and wanted to hear more from her on it.

"I want her to make that a priority," she said.

Gender has been a talking point for Clinton in her campaign, with the former first lady touting the historic potential of her candidacy.

MORE: Lena Dunham to visit Iowa, campaign for Clinton

"I think the reason why you should vote for me is because I'm the best candidate and the fact that I'm a woman adds to that," she said.

That message won over some audience members, such as UI sophomore Jennifer Anderson, who said she knows Clinton is fighting for women and against discrimination because she's experienced it herself.

"Before this I liked Hillary a lot, but I wasn't really informed on a lot of her stuff," Anderson said. "But after this I can really say I'm a firm supporter."

Clinton, along with fellow Democratic contenders Vermont U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders and former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley, will gather in Manchester, N.H., on Saturday for the third Democratic debate, the last of this year.

A recent poll of the Democratic field, conducted by The Des Moines Register and Bloomberg News, shows Clinton as the pick of 48 percent of likely Democratic caucus participants, compared with 39 percent for Sanders and 4 percent for O'Malley.

Reach Stephen Gruber-Miller at 319-887-5407 or sgrubermil@press-citizen.com. Follow him at @sgrubermiller.

Buy Photo Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speaks to guests at Old Brick Church on Wednesday, Dec. 16, 2015. (Photo: David Scrivner / Iowa City Press-Citizen)

AT THE EVENT

SETTING: The Old Brick Church at 26 E. Market St. in Iowa City.

CROWD: An audience of about 400 packed the church hall.

REACTION: The crowd was enthusiastic, applauding for comments Clinton made about preserving Social Security, and for a comment from someone in the audience who suggested Clinton was restoring sanity to the national conversation.

WHAT’S NEXT: Clinton headed to a 4:15 p.m. town hall in Mason City on Wednesday.

Read or Share this story: http://icp-c.com/1QNRRJB