The State of the Union response is not without its political perils. | AP Photos Who could give the SOTU response

Everyone knows the first speaker on State of the Union night next Tuesday — President Barack Obama — but the Republican who follows him will have a prime opportunity to make a splash on the national scene as well.

Recent history suggests that House Speaker John Boehner and Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell will turn to a Republican with broad national appeal and White House ambitions.

Story Continued Below

The opportunity to capture the eyeballs of tens of millions of Americans is one that few aspiring to bigger jobs would turn down. But it’s not without its perils – Sen. Marco Rubio’s reach for a bottle of water during his 2013 speech or comparisons of Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal to “30 Rock” character Kenneth the Page – can detract from the message and backfire on the messenger.

( PHOTOS: Scenes from State of the Union 2013)

Boehner and McConnell make the choice together, and “there’s no magic formula,” Boehner spokesman Brendan Buck said. “We always seek someone who can effectively communicate our solutions, priorities, and the principles we stand for. And we’re lucky to have a lot of talented people to choose from.”

Tea Party Express, meanwhile, has made it’s choice. Sen. Mike Lee (R-Utah) will speak after the official GOP response.

The leaders could choose to pull a Dick Cheney and choose themselves to deliver the response, but assuming they look outside their small circle, here are 10 possibilities, and the pros and cons for each getting the job:

1) Scott Walker

Pro: The Wisconsin governor has the name recognition and ambitions that would make him a logical choice to respond to the president. He hasn’t been shy about rebutting Democrats’ positions on unemployment insurance and the minimum wage, arguing that the White House’s latest push on income inequality is an effort to distract from problems with the Affordable Care Act. He could also cite his state’s requirement that unemployed people without children must be engaged in a job training program to receive benefits and suggest that the same be required in other states or nationally.

( PHOTOS: Republicans, 2016 contenders)

Con: Will the base like it? Walker’s popular on the economic front, but has avoided talking about the red meat social issues that appeal to Republican voters.

2) Paul Ryan

Pro: Ryan, the House Budget Committee chairman and 2012 Republican vice presidential candidate, could tout the bipartisan budget deal reached last month with Senate Budget Chairman Patty Murray (D-Wash.) as a signal the GOP is willing to reach across the aisle and break the image of Congress as hopelessly deadlocked.

( PHOTOS: Paul Ryan through the years)

Con: Ryan is still remembered as the No. 2 on the losing Mitt Romney ticket. Plus, he gave the GOP response to the SOTU just three years ago.

3) Ted Cruz

Pro: The Texas freshman senator isn’t a favorite of the party establishment has been one of the most visible national Republicans over the past year, especially for his opposition to the Affordable Care Act. He captured headlines in September with his 21-hour anti-Obamacare speech on the Senate floor, and was widely credited (and attacked) as the person most responsible for the GOP’s defund-or-shut down strategy on the health care law, which in part led to a 16-day government shutdown.

Con: The shutdown was a disaster, Obamacare still exists and Cruz had to defend himself against angry fellow Republicans in closed-door meetings last fall.

( QUIZ: Do you know Ted Cruz?)

4) John Cornyn

Pro: Cruz’s fellow Texas senator, Cornyn, the minority whip, who would speak on behalf of the conservative – though not extreme – members of the GOP. Like McConnell in Kentucky, Cornyn and opposed Cruz’s approach to Obamacare and the government shutdown, and faces a primary challenge from the right.

( PHOTOS: The GOP's 2014 SOTU options)

Con: Cornyn doesn’t have the same star power as others on this list and isn’t linked to any national campaign.