An amendment introduced by Sen. Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, would extend federal funding for Medicaid. The amendment has little hope of success but is likely to pop up in campaign advertisements against Sen. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, who faces a difficult reelection battle next fall. | Getty Senate votes designed to exact maximum political pain

Senate Democrats and Republicans Thursday are breaking out their well-trod strategy of forcing each other to cast politically difficult votes, this time on amendments to a budget "reconciliation" bill that would repeal Obamacare. The amendments stand virtually no chance of being adopted, but they'll make for great campaign attack ads.

Many are ripped straight from the headlines, including one Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid plans to offer on gun control, fueled by the Colorado Planned Parenthood shooting and just a day after the massacre in San Bernardino, California. It'll put heat on the four Republican senators running for president, as well as vulnerable GOP members up for reelection this year as Democrats try to take control of the chamber.

Story Continued Below

Other targets range from curbing corporate tax avoidance to suspending the issuance of visas for travelers from countries "with a high risk of terrorism."

Among Senate procedures, the "vote-a-rama" is second perhaps only to the filibuster as a campaign tool. The stretch of roll call votes on amendments offers members a chance to bring pet issues to the floor and show up members of the opposite party, virtually risk-free. Consider them press release votes.

Take an amendment from Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio) to extend federal funding for Medicaid expansion. His office styled it as a move to “protect more than 600,000 Ohioans who gained coverage through the state’s Medicaid expansion from Republican attacks on Medicaid." It’s certain to pop up in a campaign advertisement against Ohio Republican Sen. Rob Portman, who is facing a tough reelection fight this cycle — even though it stands no chance of being attached to the legislation.

Reid is pushing a measure to ban people who have been convicted of threatening health clinics or places of worship from purchasing or owning guns. It's a flourish of political provocation that could only come from the man who once trolled Sen. David Vitter (R-La.) with an amendment denying senators health benefits if there was “probable cause” to believe they’d solicited prostitutes,

Along the same lines, Sen. Patty Murray (D-Wash.) plans to force a vote on establishing a “women’s health care and clinic security and safety fund.” Murray dredged up a 2012 campaign talking point, a “Buffett tax” on wealthy individuals, to cover the cost.

Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) will offer a measure that "would suspend visa issuance for countries with a high risk of terrorism and impose a waiting period for background checks on visa issuance from other countries until the American people can be assured terrorists cannot enter the country through our immigration and visa system."

In another move inspired by recent headlines — this time about the record-breaking Pfizer-Allergan merger agreement announced last month — Sen. Dick Durbin (D-Ill.) is introducing a measure that would make it harder for American corporations to pick up stakes and move abroad to lower their tax bills. Brown’s Medicaid amendment also targets such "inversions," with a funding provision to end "tax loopholes for companies that move investment overseas.”

Sen. Dean Heller (R-Nev.) is pushing a measure to repeal the unpopular Cadillac tax on high-end health care plans — even though the legislation he wants to attach that to would repeal the Affordable Care Act that includes the tax.

Sen. Pat Toomey (R-Pa.) is advancing a provision restoring a tax deduction for medical expenses that exceed 7.5 percent of a taxpayer’s income. The Affordable Care Act eliminated that deduction in 2010.

“This isn’t a tax deduction for rich people, this is a tax deduction for ordinary Americans who are going through very difficult times,” said Toomey, who is also up for reelection this cycle.

Democrats faced a tough call on how to handle today's votes: A vote-a-rama just two months before the first primary gives them a chance to force politically touchy votes on the GOP just as campaign season kicks off in earnest. But the marathon session would have to be a sprint this time around, with Democratic lawmakers hoping to leave town around 7 p.m. to make an appearance at the Paris climate talks.

So Democrats are offering just a handful of amendments.

Democratic presidential contender Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), for example, is not planning to reintroduce a minimum wage amendment he offered in March’s marathon budget vote session. He called the reconciliation bill a “waste of time,” since President Barack Obama has already threatened to veto the bill.

Jennifer Haberkorn contributed to this report.

Authors: