In case you missed it yesterday in all the hubbub surrounding the winter weather, the Wilmington Star-News had a fine editorial critiquing North Carolina’s misguided 2013 tax “reforms” and highlighting some hardships it has brought on:

“Once again this year, Rep. Rick Catlin is sponsoring legislation to help senior citizens who two years ago lost the right to deduct high medical bills on their taxes. A similar effort last year failed; let’s hope his fellow Honorables in the General Assembly recognize this time the need to right a shameful wrong.

In their zeal for ‘tax reform’ that has disproportionately benefited high-income taxpayers and corporations, the Republican-led General Assembly cut deductions, including the one for senior citizens’ medical expenses, that had helped low- and middle-income residents. Rep. Catlin, R-New Hanover, has introduced a bill that would reinstate the deduction for older adults who spend a significant portion of their income on medical expenses such as costly hospital stays or nursing home care.

Good for him. As people age, medical expenses rise. Even though Medicare covers 80 percent of most medical expenses, the remaining 20 percent can add up quickly. When one lives on a fixed income, the loss of a tax credit to help offset that cost might make it difficult to scrape by.

However, older adults were not the only people hurt by tax reform. Most notably, the Honorables killed the Earned Income Tax Credit that helped 900,000 families, as well as the tax deduction for parents who contribute to the state’s 529 college savings fund.

If Catlin wants to help deserving residents, perhaps he would consider taking on these challenges next.

Tax reformers said their goal in cutting personal income tax and corporate tax rates, along with a number of deductions and tax credits, was to lower tax bills for all North Carolinians. But the vast majority of tax savings went to high earners, while the loss of deductions has actually increased overall tax burden for some families.

Senior citizens, most of whom have worked all their lives or otherwise contributed to their communities, deserve a break. And so do families who are struggling to get by in an era when workers’ wages have been stagnant for decades.”