When health exchange enrollment launches, every problem will be under a microscope. | REUTERS How stakeholders will judge ACA

Obamacare allies couldn’t be clearer: The Oct. 1 launch of major new health coverage programs is the dawn of a new era, the first day of school for a nation that needs a health care education.

And just like students, they say, Obamacare’s grades shouldn’t be based on the first day.

Story Continued Below

But Day One does mean something — for the nation’s psyche, for the perception of success or failure, and for the thousands of advocates who have staked their careers on a smooth entry into the Obamacare era. Open enrollment in the new health insurance exchanges may last until March, but White House allies know that a negative narrative can get established early if system failures pile up and people sour on the new programs.

Their challenge: to claim the law is working when every problem will be under a microscope.

( PHOTOS: 25 unforgettable Obamacare quotes)

“I don’t think there’s any question that anything as significant as initiation of the enrollment period can experience anything but a number of glitches,” said Ron Pollack, executive director of the consumer group Families USA. He said he couldn’t think of another health care program that was this complicated to launch — not the Medicare prescription drug program, and not even Medicare itself.

“I think that, to the extent that there will be a number of glitches inevitably, it’s just important to keep some perspective about them,” Pollack said.

Other enthusiastic Obamacare supporters aren’t expecting a polished product on the first day of open enrollment. That’s why one of their biggest fears is that opinions on the health law could start hardening before the close of business on Oct. 1 — aided, of course, by opponents whose “Obamacare has failed” press releases are already being written.

( WATCH: Obamacare timeline)

Pollack said one way to win the narrative on Oct. 1 will be to shine a spotlight on the people who get insurance for the first time. He said his group is “radically enlarging our story bank” of people who are being helped by the law, and plans to hold a rally at the National Press Club on Oct. 1 to showcase the best stories.

Connecticut exchange CEO Kevin Counihan, who helped launch the Massachusetts health exchange that became the model for Obamacare, said the most important metric for him on Oct. 1 will be the “stability” of the complex information technology infrastructure supporting Connecticut’s health insurance exchange.

But even if his state’s IT runs smoothly, the interaction with the federally built data hub that exchanges will interact with could be “clunky” at first, he predicted.

“The problems are going to get fixed and everyone needs to take a deep breath,” said Counihan, who described himself as “pretty confident” that the Connecticut exchange’s technology systems are ready to go on Oct. 1.

( Also on POLITICO: Obama's health care conversion)

In fact, how problems are addressed on the first day could be a measurement of the law’s success, some advocates argue.

“Making sure that problem-solving is working smoothly is more important than having a problem-free first day,” said one enrollment advocate who declined to be identified. “Certainly there will be hiccups in the early going — the most important thing will be to quickly identify those issues, find ways to solve them and then share those solutions with others around the country so that the system as a whole works better and better as we move forward.”

Gary Cohen, the Obama administration’s exchange chief, last week braced Congress for what could be a bumpy rollout — and just hours later, The Wall Street Journal reported that software for the federally run exchanges set to launch in 34 states was miscalculating how much consumers would pay for health coverage.

But Cohen suggested negative opinions formed early in Obamacare’s implementation won’t last forever — citing the turbulent early days of the Medicare prescription drug program a few years ago.

( Also on POLITICO: Obamacare: One blow after another)

“The people who benefit from this law won’t be talking about what happened Oct. 1 or Jan. 1,” when coverage first kicks in, said Cohen, director of the federal Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, which is implementing the health care law.

Of course, the administration wants to see as smooth a rollout as possible. To gauge that success, it’s looking at internal benchmarks like the response time for the consumer call center and whether premiums are being processed correctly, Cohen told the House panel last week.

And then there are the more obvious benchmarks, like how many people sign up. The administration is aiming for 7 million enrolled exchange customers by the end of March, and supporters aren’t expecting a huge enrollment rush in the first few weeks.

“It’s absurd to think that on the morning of Oct. 1, 25 million people without health insurance are going to be struck by lightning and know that they can jump online and get insurance,” said Ethan Rome, executive director of Health Care for America Now. “With the exception of the first shopping day after Thanksgiving — and Election Day — it’s impossible to judge anything by one day.”

( Also on POLITICO: Rand Paul on Obamacare compromise: 'Maybe')

Critics of the law have their own benchmarks for the first day of Obamacare enrollment.

Tom Miller of the American Enterprise Institute said the total failure of any state-run exchange to open on Oct. 1, however unlikely, would be the most obvious disaster.

But Jim Capretta of the Ethics and Public Policy Center had an even simpler metric: the amount of paper used by exchange officials to compensate for technological failures.

“There’s a pretty strong expectation from their people on the industry side that it’s going to be very, very bumpy, and a lot of paper processes are going to have to override a lot of the automated process,” he said.

Doug Holtz-Eakin of the American Action Forum worries the administration could spin the stats on Oct. 1 to present a more favorable outcome.

( Also on POLITICO: At Kentucky state fair, fear and confusion over Obamacare)

“The people who are going to show up on Day One are by definition those with the strongest interest in the program,” the former Congressional Budget Office director said. “I have no idea how much get-out-the-vote effort the administration has mustered.”

Holtz-Eakin also suggested that even if the first day is a technological disaster, the public might never know.

“Suppose someone wakes up in Eugene, Ore., sits down at a terminal and tries to sign up and can’t. They just close their laptop. We’ll never see it,” he said. “There’s a real question about how transparent state and federal officials will be about failures.”