We’ve reached out to all campaigns, asking the seven candidates to reply yes, no or maybe to 15 different issues, from Interstate 526 completion to gathering places to public restrooms at White Point Garden. Pictured is Charleston City Hall, located at the corner of Broad and Meeting street.

All of Charleston’s seven mayor candidates agree the city is gentrifying too quickly — that its lower-income residents are being priced out at an unacceptable rate.

Online To stay up-to-date on the race for Charleston’s next mayor, go to palmettopolitics.com or download the Palmetto Politics app for iOS or Android.

They also agree on the need to complete Interstate 526, that the city should be more involved in the public schools and that more police officers should wear body cameras.

But they disagree on a proposed bike lane over the Ashley River, spending levels on the city’s fire and police departments and whether public restrooms should be built at White Point Garden.

Those are the results of a 15-question survey The Post and Courier submitted to the candidates last week — a questionnaire designed to clarify where they stand on some of the major issues the city will face whoever is elected in November to replace longtime Mayor Joe Riley.

While candidates were asked to give a one-word response to each question — with “maybe” being an acceptable response — many expressed concern that such an approach oversimplified the nature of the job they’re seeking.

What follows is a look at their answers — and their thoughts on the complexities and nuance of some of these issues.

Where they agree

While completing Interstate 526 — from Citadel Mall to the James Island Connector — remains one of the Lowcountry’s biggest political hot potatoes, the city’s next mayor can be counted on to continue supporting the project, just as Mayor Joe Riley does.

Former City Councilman Maurice Washington was one of the few to qualify his support, saying the road is needed but the city also must tackle over-development and pass a growth management plan.

City Councilman William Dudley Gregorie, another mayoral hopeful, called its completion “imperative,” saying it would address traffic congestion, growing commerce and evacuation routes.

While public schools are run by the Charleston County School District — and while Riley has sought to support public schools — all seven candidates said they felt city government should do more to help schools within the city limits.

Gregorie said while Charleston has a world-class reputation, its schools are some of the state’s best and worst. “We must take extraordinary steps to bring public education in Charleston to a standard of excellence for all children,” he said.

The city already has 140 body cameras for its police officers and is seeking a grant for 150 more. Regardless of who is elected, the next mayor can be expected to continue support for this — which became a national issue after a North Charleston officer’s fatal shooting of a fleeing Walter Scott earlier this year.

The candidates seem mostly against the city’s controversial “gathering place” zoning, designed to foster more walkable, urban development in the city’s suburbs. Only Toby Smith, a nonprofit consultant, said she supports it, while state Rep. Leon Stavrinakis said the zoning “is obviously not working right now. But I wouldn’t get rid of all elements of that zoning. I would find the right balance.”

Gregorie also said he supports the intent of the gathering place zoning but would “make the necessary adjustments for connectivity, traffic and livability in the surrounding neighborhoods.”

They also agreed the city is gentrifying too quickly, so affordable housing and even wage scales might remain a hot topic during the next two months. Former City Councilman Paul Tinkler was the only candidate to answer “maybe” to that question instead of yes.

Where they disagree

The next mayor could determine if the city of Charleston will continue to support plans to convert a lane of traffic on the T. Allen Legare Bridge for bike and pedestrian use.

And candidates have a range of positions. Only Smith answered yes to the question of whether she supports the change.

Most candidates answered no, but both businessman John Tecklenburg and Tinkler said they might support it.

Tecklenburg said he has concerns about closing off a lane on the bridge, though he supports the concept of improving bike access across the Ashley River. He said his ultimate support will hinge on a trial closure the county plans for early next year.

“I just want to see if the trial confirms what their reports say on paper,” he said. “If they’re true and there’s only a 10 second difference, I’m for it. What if we have that test and it’s a disaster? I don’t predict that will be the case, but I just hate to lock myself in and all the facts aren’t in.”

Ginny Deerin, former CEO of WINGS for Kids, said the best solution is to replace the bridge with a new one. “We need a new bridge with plenty of room for cars to move quickly through, that also accommodates pedestrians, cyclists and public transportation,” she said.

Perhaps the biggest disagreement came over whether the city should build public restrooms at White Point Garden, where the city once had them but removed them a few decades ago. The lack of public restrooms there has been an issue for tourists and others for years.

Deerin, Tecklenburg, Tinkler and Washington said they don’t support adding restrooms there, while Stavrinakis and Gregorie do. Smith said “maybe.”

“It is important that we accommodate our visitors particularly in public spaces,” Gregorie said.

Four also said they would support splitting the city’s Board of Architectural Review into two boards — one to review new buildings and the other to handle preservation projects — but Gregorie and Washington said no.

Stavrinakis said he might back such a plan. Earlier this year, architectural consultant Andres Duany recommended the change as a step the city could take to try to get better new buildings.

It’s complicated

Several campaigns expressed displeasure with the questionnaire and being confined to a simple yes-no-maybe choice.

And perhaps the most angst was caused by the simple question: “Would you ever raise taxes?” — a sort of local version of the national Americans for Tax Reform pledge that 1,400 state and national officials have signed. Riley raised property taxes and other fees several times during his 40-year tenure.

Deerin, Tecklenburg and Washington said no, while Tinkler, Stavrinakis, Smith and Gregorie said maybe.

Tinkler said he supports raising the state gas tax so a stable source of funding can be established for our crumbling roads — though the next mayor won’t have a say in raising the state’s gas tax.

As for city taxes, Tinkler said he answered “maybe” because he can’t speculate about the city’s financial needs down the road.

While Deerin answered no, she said she would work diligently to never raise taxes or fees, but she also supports raising the state gas tax to fix roads. Smith said she does, too, adding, “We’re going to need additional money to pay for infrastructure.”

Gregorie said he is familiar with the city’s current budget, “and I see no need for a tax increase in the near future.”

Stavrinakis noted he has “a very strong record of not doing that (raising taxes), but I would never say never.”

Candidates also sought to clarify answers to other questions.

For instance, Tecklenburg said while he supports the formation of a citizens advisory committee for the police department, he met with Chief Greg Mullen and feels the committee’s role should be advisory only.

“I’m for a citizens committee as long as it’s an advisory committee. I’m not in favor of a citizens committee that will set the policy,” he said. “We still need the chief of police in charge of the police department.”

Washington said he doesn’t support a citizens’ review board because “policies are a mayor and council responsibility.” But he thinks it’s a good idea to form a citizens’ board to help improve the relationship between the police and the public.

The nonpartisan election is Nov. 3, and eligible voters must register by Oct. 3. If no mayoral candidate gets more than 50 percent, the top two vote getters will face off in a Nov. 17 runoff.

Reach Robert Behre at 937-5771 or on Twitter at @RobertFBehre. Reach Diane Knich at 937-5491 or on Twitter at @dianeknich.