Lisa Wurm (Photo: Provided)

Lisa Wurm is policy manager for ACLU of Ohio.

In 2013, Gov. John Kasich went against the party grain and pushed through expansion of Ohio's Medicaid program. By extending health care coverage for Ohioans earning more than previously allowed, he removed the false choice facing many low-income families between paying for health insurance and putting food on the table. Medicaid expansion also provided an opportunity for Ohio to make progress toward decreasing its infant mortality rate, which ranks fourth in the nation.

Whether bowing to political pressures or presidential aspirations, Kasich's state budget proposal for 2015-2016 rolls back Medicaid coverage. Ohio House Bill 64 would decrease the amount of money a family can make and still enroll in Medicaid. For example, income for a family of three would now be capped at $27,724 a year. Pregnant women, one of the groups who stand to benefit most by having access to regular medical care, are put at serious risk by this plan.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists cites the lack of prenatal care as a primary risk factor for having a premature delivery. Children who are born preterm frequently suffer from birth defects and lifelong health problems. The majority of babies who die before their first birthday are born prematurely.

The logic behind reducing Medicaid coverage is that families now qualify for subsidies under the Affordable Care Act; however, pregnancy is not considered a qualifying event to sign up for coverage. This means that an uninsured woman who becomes pregnant will have to wait for the next open enrollment period, which occurs only between November and February, or for her baby to be born to sign up for health insurance. And even then she will continue to face impossible choices between basic needs, like housing, childcare and transportation, and paying insurance premiums.

Opponents of Medicaid expansion will argue that these are problems caused by the ACA, not Ohio's public insurance limits. But whatever imperfections exist with the national health care law, Ohio lawmakers have alternative solutions available to address these problems. There is no need to create political battles out of what could benefit Ohio's children.

The Kasich budget proposal also is justifying a false savings for the state. We know that prenatal care is essential for identifying and addressing risks to the health of the mother and baby. Any savings created by denying Medicaid coverage to pregnant women will quickly be outpaced by the cost of treating long-term health conditions that result from preterm births. These costs would fall to the state, who would continue to cover children in families of three earning up to $40,189, even though their mothers will be denied public health insurance if household income is greater than $27,724.

In his 2015 State of the State address, Kasich praised work being done to address infant mortality in Ohio. Yet the very state task force working on this issue has recommended access to comprehensive health services in order to promote infant health and well-being.

It is easy to say you want to decrease infant mortality. It is harder to push back against prevailing ideologies and do what is right. It is time for the legislature and Kasich to follow through to ensure that babies and their mothers are not left without coverage.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1bY7eym