Hampton School Board gets update on substitute outsourcing

Bryan Engle, district manager for Source4Teachers, said Wednesday he expects the vacancy rate to improve during the course of next year as the firm is able to better identify the needs of the school division.

HAMPTON — The third-party contractor charged with providing Hampton City Schools with substitute teachers said it was unable to fill about 10 percent of teacher absences during its initial rollout with the school division.

Right now, Engle said the firm filled about 90 percent of all teacher absences since it began serving the division in April.

"I'm confident come this time next year that rate will be at about 98 percent," Engle told members of the School Board gathered at the Ruppert Sargent building in downtown Hampton.

"That represents a good number for a start. This is not a flick-of-the-switch type of solution. You're going to see a gradual increase in the number of fill rate," he said.

Hampton City Schools outsourced its substitute teachers last year, citing rising costs, including the possibility of being required to provide health benefits for substitutes due to the Affordable Care Act.

Source4Teachers has been analyzing trends in teacher absences in the school division. According to Engle, the most popular days for call outs were on Mondays and Fridays.

In response, the firm has a devoted "Friday team" of substitutes available for schools with employees that call out last minute. The company estimates it has increased the available pool of substitute teachers by 30 percent.

Engle said he would be working with the school division to "change the culture" of last-minute call outs, which he says can greatly hinder efforts to fill vacancies.

Phyllis Henry, a member of the School Board, said she wanted to see increased training for teachers and substitutes on creating and implementing lesson plans for days educators are out. "If the planning teacher left a crummy lesson, a day of instruction is lost," Henry said.

"There have been a few bumps along the way," said Robbin Ruth, executive director of Human Resources for Hampton City Schools.

"What I'm very excited about is the partnership we've had. They've identified some issues and concerns for us, and come to us with solutions ready to put in place."

Bogues can be reached by phone at 757-247-4536.