Today, a large number of Colorado students and their families are caught in a tightening vice. On one side, they can see that in a world of global competition and rapidly improving technologies, a college degree or a portfolio of certified technical competencies is more important than ever before.

But family incomes are stagnant, while the real cost of attending college has been rapidly increasing. For example, between 2007 and 2014, the real cost of tuition and fees at the University of Colorado Boulder increased by 42 percent, while the state’s real median household income shrunk by 13 percent.

For too many students and families, the solution to this worsening squeeze has been to load up on debt, which is no solution at all. With $1.3 trillion of student loan debt outstanding in the United States, too many students will struggle for years to be able to buy a home or start a business. This is not the way we want our children to live.

One solution to this problem is to make it much easier for Colorado students and families to accumulate low-cost college credits and technical certifications before they graduate from high school. That is just what House Bill 1128 will do, by creating a consistent, easy-to-understand and easy-to- use way for students to access dual-enrollment courses offered by every public institution of higher education in Colorado.

Today, Colorado’s dual enrollment system is, to be blunt, a confusing and often frustrating mess.

Current law makes no mention of using dual enrollment to obtain technical certifications, and requires only that school districts pay for dual enrollment courses offered by community colleges. It also allows principals to decline a student’s request to enroll in these courses, with no clear right of appeal.

If your child wants to dually enroll in a course offered by any other public institution of higher education, not only can the principal turn down their request but, even if the course is approved, the family, not the district, usually has to pay for these credit hours.

HB 1128 will solve these problems, and create a level playing field for high school students to dual enroll in college credit and technical certificate courses that are offered by any public institution of higher education in Colorado. It standardizes the application process and criteria for being accepted for dual enrollment, and creates a clear and fast appeals process if a request is turned down.

If a student’s dual enrollment request is approved, the bill also obligates the student’s district and the state college to enter into a cooperative agreement that specifies the tuition and fees that will be paid by the district and by the student.

HB 1128 requires districts to clearly inform students and families about the potential financial benefits of using dual enrollment to accumulate low-cost college credits while still in high school.

As chair of the School Accountability Committee at Wheat Ridge High School — at which more than 50 percent of students are at-risk — I see every day how important it is to enable more of our children to accumulate low-cost technical certifications and college credits before they graduate.

I also see what a confusing struggle that is today for hard-pressed Colorado students and families. Reforming our dual enrollment system is long overdue, and provides great benefits to our state. HB 1128 merits the legislature’s strong bipartisan support.

Tom Coyne is a co-founder of K12 Accountability (k12accountability.org).

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.