Stop the buddy system: Of course something has to be done about health care. Politicians will continue to fight about health care until the Republicans get beneath the sheets with the health care givers, the pill pushers and the insurance companies. The minute someone talks about health care reform, they go on the offensive and jump in bed with their buddies. We have to stop this buddy system in America and think about the people. This is the richest country in the world. We shouldn't have hungry people. We shouldn't have people sick and on the street with no place to go. This is the United States, and it should always be great. Our country is going to the dogs because politicians serve the people with money who pull the strings to keep the poor people where they are.

Too much cash for coach: So we have no state budget. Our colleges and universities are worried about financing, yet we can hire Lovie Smith for over $21 million. Talk about a waste of money. We can put that money to better use than to hire a coach.

Undeserved spring break: Dear Illinois and house legislators, how generous of you to give yourselves an early spring break until April 4. How can you be so presumptuous as to think voters aren't noticing? How can there be any wonder as to why our country is showing so much interest in Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump?

Pondering possibility of paid protesters: Everybody is after Donald Trump. I wonder if anyone has heard the term: false flag operation. I was in Washington D.C. during the riots. I can tell you that what was written in the textbooks about the riots and how they started are an absolute falsification. There were people bused in to where the riots started. They had nothing to do with the real facts of the issue. This is the same thing that happened in Batavia when former Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert had his office here and they held an immigration rally. They had paid protesters brought in from all over the place. The Republicans have said they will do anything to stop Trump. How many of the protesters in Chicago were paid protesters? Are they really going to stop Trump? I don't want to stop him. I think the more they do this, the more we need Trump. This country is going to hell in a handbasket.

Alcohol and cigarettes: We put so much emphasis these days on heroin overdoses. Don't get me wrong. I think it's wonderful to try and stop people from overdosing on heroin, but we have a bigger problem than treating heroin as an epidemic. Heroin has been around for a long time. Today, we have an epidemic of alcohol and cigarettes that kill more than heroin does. Alcohol causes drunk driving, heart disease, liver disease and kidney disease. As far as cigarettes, more people die of cancer from smoking than you can shake a stick at.

Vexed by protesters: I would like to comment on the protesters in Chicago. What a bunch of unruly people. Chicago let us down big time. It's pathetic. Bunch of animals. I've never been so ashamed of Illinois. What a rotten place Chicago has turned out to be.

Rally Charles Rex Arbogast, AP People opposed to Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump chant after a March rally on the campus of the University of Illinois-Chicago was canceled due to security concerns. People opposed to Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump chant after a March rally on the campus of the University of Illinois-Chicago was canceled due to security concerns. (Charles Rex Arbogast, AP)

Irritated by illegal immigrants: To put a further blemish on Chicago, it can be known for a bunch of illegal immigrants who upset a Donald Trump rally by waving their flags and creating such an uproar that he couldn't speak. That's what Chicago is known for now. Where were the police to deport all these illegal immigrants? I don't really care if you're for Trump or not, but when you have a bunch of thugs who are here illegally and disrupting the process, it shows just how far down the toilet this country has gone.

Kudos to Chicago cops: I would like to compliment the Chicago policemen. They did their job during the riot. Who let the protesters in the back door? That building was rented. Why don't you find out who it was instead of blaming Donald Trump? God bless the police and keep them safe.

Twisting Trump's words: I'm a Republican who is not crazy for Donald Trump, but I do see that his words are getting twisted. His comment to keep Muslim immigrants out of our country until we figure out what's going on has been misquoted to mean keep them out forever and that he hates Muslims. When he said some illegal Mexicans are bad people, it gets changed to that he hates all Mexicans. Come on, let's be fair to the guy even if you don't like him.

High costs of healthcare: I'm calling about this country that is totally lost. I'm a senior on disability. I get Medicare, and I can't afford a supplement through Medicaid because they want $100 a month. I'm stuck, yet I can't understand these illegal immigrants who get food stamps and free medical care. I have neighbors who get that. I remember when President Obama said illegal means illegal, and he said illegals will not get benefits. Mike Ditka said he is the worst president in history.

Need for responsible behavior: It's time for Donald Trump and the Republican Party to start acting like mature, educated adults. How can you run a country and work with many other foreign lands when you can't get along with the American people? Grow up. Start addressing the problems and concerns of the United States. Stop all the slander and vulgar language. Act like adults.

Editor's note

Speak Out is a reader-generated column of opinions. If you see something you disagree with or think is incorrect, please tell us. Call us at 312-222-2460 or email napervillesun@tribpub.com. Please include "speak out" in the subject line.