By LENA H. SUN

When Ted Goff was hospitalized late last year, barely breathing and with advanced emphysema, his doctor said the prognosis was bad.

They talked about Goff’s last wishes and whether he wanted to be placed on a breathing machine. Goff wasn’t sure.

So his doctor suggested he watch a video explaining this technique and other options for end-of-life care.

The video was direct and dramatic. In a demonstration of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, or CPR, a technician pushed down hard on the chest of a dummy. A white-coated doctor laid out grim odds: “Most of the time, in patients with advanced disease, CPR does not work,” she said. As a result, patients need a ventilator to help them continue breathing.

Goff watched a technician maneuver a metal instrument down the dummy’s throat to prepare for insertion of a tube that pushes air into the lungs. Then the camera zoomed to a close-up of an elderly patient, eyes closed, in a hospital bed. He had a breathing tube in his mouth.

“You cannot eat or talk while on this machine,” the doctor on the video said.

That made up Ted Goff’s mind.

“ ‘I ain’t gonna do that,’ ” his wife, Linda, recalled the retired businessman saying. “Putting him on a ventilator, opening an airway, pounding on your chest … . No, he didn’t like any of that. … It’s just not something he wanted to experience,” she said.

Goff wanted only to be kept comfortable until the end came.

Rare is the person who is willing to grapple openly with death. Health-care providers often don’t talk to patients about their preferences. And patients and their families often don’t know their options and avoid asking about them.

For patients approaching the end of life, that can mean not knowing about palliative-care alternatives, which research has shown can significantly improve patient satisfaction and quality of life. Instead, they continue to get aggressive treatment.

Clinicians and others trying to improve end-of-life communication between doctors and their patient have turned for help to a set of videos such as the one that Goff saw. Developed by two Harvard doctors, the videos aim to better inform patients about their medical options while easing the way for frank discussions.

In clinical trials, researchers found that dying patients were less likely to want aggressive end-of-life care if they had watched the videos than if they had simply been told about the procedures.

The videos are not intended to be a substitute for talking with doctors and other providers. And they need to be used in the appropriate context.

“Not every tool is good for everyone,” said Valerie Sirani, a palliative-care nurse who has used the videos with some of her patients at Kaiser Permanente’s skilled nursing facilities in suburban Maryland. “You don’t want to exacerbate anticipated grief.”