SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — The Rockies’ starting rotation — featuring Jorge De La Rosa, Chad Bettis, Jordan Lyles, Tyler Chatwood and Jon Gray — appears set. Despite a few hiccups, they have pitched relatively well in spring training.

Their cumulative ERA is 3.58, with Bettis (2.57) on the low end and Lyles (5.56) on the high end after a rough outing followed by a strong four innings Friday.

It’s very early, of course. But the early returns are good news for general manager Jeff Bridich, who did not make any trades during the offseason to bolster the rotation, despite Colorado’s 5.27 ERA in 2015 being the worst in the National League.

“I think, for the most part, the outings have been very competitive,” Bridich said. “You can’t go crazy, one way or another. You try to keep a rational perspective on it. But, yeah, they have been competitive.”

Bettis and De La Rosa spent the entire winter working out and throwing at Salt River Fields, and they came into camp prepared to pitch well.

“We are able to start them right away, in games, at three innings,” Bridich said. “I think they really prepared themselves well and I think it shows. De La (Rosa) is physically in good shape and he’s in a good place. It’s fun to watch.”

Tom Murphy’s place

Tom Murphy, penciled in as the Rockies’ catcher of the future, was optioned to the minor-league camp Friday.

It’s not that the Rockies were displeased with his performance at spring training, but they consider him a work in progress. Playing for Triple-A Albuquerque, he will be given an opportunity to play nearly every day instead of getting sporadic playing time as Nick Hundley’s backup.

“That’s part of it,” Bridich said. “Plus, there is some development that he needs to work on. He needs to play, and that development process is best served playing every single day.”



Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post

Spring Training Recap: Rockies 5, Padres 5

At Peoria Sports Complex

Right-hander Tyler Chatwood continued his comeback from Tommy John surgery in strong fashion Saturday. He had a first-inning hiccup, walking a batter to set up a two-run homer by San Diego Padres shortstop Jemile Weeks, but he settled down after that, allowing just three hits and striking out two over four innings. Chatwood’s outing was his longest appearance since he underwent his arm surgery in 2014. “I felt good,” Chatwood said. “The biggest thing was I got better as I went along. The second time through the lineup, I felt sharper, so that’s a big thing for me going forward, building the confidence up.” He was especially happy with how his right arm felt. “This is my first time to go four innings since I got hurt, so this was an exciting day to be able to get out and go four innings,” he said. “Next time I’ll go five and 75 (pitches).”

Hits:

Brandon Barnes broke out of a spring funk, going 3-for-3 with two RBIs.

Outfielder Gerardo Parra had two hits.

Miss:

Left-handed reliever Boone Logan gave up one run on one hit and threw two wild pitches in two-thirds of an inning.

What’s next:

The Rockies host the San Francisco Giants on Sunday at Salt River Fields, 2:10 p.m. MDT (no TV, KOA 850 AM).

Rockies’ pitchers — LHP Jorge De La Rosa, LHP Yohan Flande

Giants’ starter — RHP Clayton Blackburn