By Todd Roberti

Health costs for small businesses in New Jersey are surging. Between 2014 and 2015, companies with fewer than 25 employees saw premiums rise by 24 percent, according to a survey from the New Jersey Business and Industry Association. Eighty percent of New Jersey businesses expect benefit costs to rise again this year.

The Affordable Care Act's insurance exchanges were supposed to end premium hikes like these by allowing small businesses to combine their buying power — and thus gain negotiating leverage with conventional insurers.

It hasn't worked out that way. So employers are searching for affordable alternatives to provide their employees and their families with high-quality benefits. Increasingly, they're opting to self-insure — that is, to use the money they'd otherwise spend on premiums to pay their workers' medical claims directly.

Health benefits have never been more expensive for small businesses. According to the National Federation for Independent Business, at 63 percent of small firms, premiums rose last year.

Here in New Jersey, annual premium increases for small businesses have been as high as 70 percent, according to Kim Greene, a Hillsborough-based insurance broker. "Before the (Affordable Care Act), the highest increase I saw was 47 percent, but it was an old plan with very rich benefits," she told The Star-Ledger.

New small-business insurance exchanges haven't improved matters. The Small Business Health Options Program, or SHOP, has been plagued by software glitches, high premiums, and little choice among plans. Those plans that are available often restrict beneficiaries to narrow networks of doctors and hospitals to keep premiums down.

"I'll put it this way," one Fairfield-based insurance benefits broker told NJSpotlight when asked about the exchanges' shortcomings. "I manage 1,800 small businesses, and I have yet to sell anyone into SHOP."

Speaking before Congress last summer, New Jersey small-business owner J. Kelly Concklin complained about a lack of choice on the online marketplaces. "SHOP exchanges have very little competition," he testified.

Not surprisingly, less than 1 percent of workers covered in the small-group insurance market have a SHOP plan.

The exchanges' defenders argue that they'd offer better, more affordable plans if businesses enrolled in greater numbers. Some want to require small firms to shop in the marketplaces.

But forcing small companies to do so just to prop up the exchanges is unfair. Why should firms be forced to pay more for coverage that may be less generous than what they can secure outside the exchanges — say, by self-insuring?

There's ample evidence that small and medium-sized firms can indeed provide higher-quality benefits at lower cost by doing just that.

If a conventionally insured business's employees stay healthy in a given year, its insurer doesn't rebate the savings back to the firm. But if a self-insured firm's staff posts low claims costs, the company gets to keep what it would've spent on premiums.

The self-insured model also gives companies a strong incentive to invest in their employees' health, through initiatives like wellness and chronic disease-management programs. After all, they have a direct financial stake in the health of their workforce.

Those programs work. Research published last year in Harvard Business Review estimates that every dollar spent on employee wellness programs saves an average of six dollars in long-term healthcare expenses.

In some years, of course, a self-insured company's workers may have to battle costly illnesses. But the firm can purchase "stop-loss" insurance to mitigate that risk. These policies kick in to reimburse firms if their health costs exceed a pre-determined level.

All told, employers that switch to self-insurance can cut their healthcare expenses by up to 10 percent, according to industry experts.

In 1998, only 41 percent of private-sector American employees were covered by self-insured plans. Within a decade, that share had jumped to nearly 60 percent.

Self-insurance doesn't just help private companies. Here in New Jersey, the Township of Freehold adopted a self-insurance model after its health premiums began rising by 20 percent annually. Since 2013, the self-funded approach has kept Freehold's health costs steady.

Similarly, the city government of Pittsburgh plans to move 3,700 employees and retirees to self-insurance. The switch is projected to save taxpayers $11 million.

New Jersey's small businesses have seen their health costs explode. The SHOP exchange hasn't delivered any relief. Self-insurance can — and provide workers and their families with better benefits in the process.

Todd Roberti is CEO and Founder of Premier Healthcare Exchange, a Bedminster, N.J.-based cost management company.