SHARE Wisconsin Department of Financial Institutions Secretary Raymond Allen Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

By of the

Raymond Allen, the new secretary of the Wisconsin Department of Financial Institutions, is stepping into the job at a time that seems calm compared with the rocky financial climate of only a few years ago.

But even though banks no longer are failing, that doesn't mean all is blissful in the financial world.

As the state's top financial regulator, Allen sees a rise in computer crimes that can undermine bank technology and the consumers who use it. He sees the constant barrage of investment scams that target the elderly and others. He sees that some banks and credit unions, particularly smaller ones, are stressed by the costs of new regulations coming from the federal government. He sees the pressure that slow growth and low interest rates have put on lenders. He sees that basic personal finance know-how remains elusive to many consumers, leading them into burdensome debt.

On top of those issues, this summer he faces the retirement of the state's highly regarded longtime bank administrator, Mike Mach, who has overseen Wisconsin's banks through thick and thin.

"Mike has earned the total respect of the banking community," Allen said. "The state should give him a tip of the hat, not just for his longevity but for his even-keeled approach to regulation."

In addition to 18 years with the Department of Financial Institutions, including the last four as deputy secretary, Allen's résumé includes time as the former owner and publisher of The Madison Times weekly newspaper, service on the Madison School Board from 1995 to 2004, and a run for Madison mayor. He is a partner in a company that operates retail stores at Dane County Regional Airport.

Allen succeeded Peter Bildsten, who the department said left to explore opportunities in the private sector.

Last week, Allen talked with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel about a variety of issues. Here is an edited version of that conversation.

Q.Have Wisconsin banks fully recovered from the economic downturn and financial crisis?

A. I think Wisconsin banks are in very good shape. We've pretty much returned to pre-recession levels.

The same would be true for our credit unions.

We came out much better than most of the country. It's a credit, I think, not only to the private sector folks in banking, but to our regulatory folks who work here at the department. I think it's a great compliment to both sides that our lending institutions did their due diligence and managed themselves through that very tough period.

Q.Bankers and credit unions often complain that too many regulations are being piled onto them. Do they have a point?

A. I don't know if there's too much, but I will readily admit that there's a cost to the regulatory burden we put on the banks and the credit unions. The challenge is to try to find a regulatory balance. We're charged with safety and soundness. There were difficult times. You've got the Fed and the CFPB (federal Consumer Financial Protection Bureau) reacting to those times.

We are trying to review that collectively to see where we can find some relief.

Our goal is to be a reasonable regulator here at the state.

Q.There has been a fair amount of consolidation in the financial industry. Do you expect it to continue?

A. I think the trend is going to continue, especially among the smallest credit unions. I think since 2000 we've been averaging about 12 consolidations per year.

What's driving them? You've got a couple of things. At many of the institutions, management is getting older and they don't have real solid succession plans in place.

Then, you've got economies of scale. When you talk about regulatory burden, for small institutions, it's difficult to comply. The larger they are, the more capacity they have to provide the products and services that the public wants, and it's difficult for the smaller institutions to make that kind of investment.

Q.In the Internet age, what is DFI doing to protect consumers from all the scams being thrown at them?

A. We aggressively investigate complaints about potential scams that fall under our regulatory scope. We also work very closely with DATCP (Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection) and DOJ (Department of Justice) on scams that are under our authority to enhance our investigative and prosecutorial functions. We put out a lot of news releases, press releases on Facebook and other areas, to warn consumers about potential scams.

Q.Is consolidation of your agency and another state regulator still on tap?

A. The proposal as it currently stands is DFI and DSPS (Department of Safety and Professional Services). The concept is, we create this new department that is titled the Department of Financial Institutions and Professional Standards.

It kind of creates a one-stop agency.

The proposal is in the budget. It's working its way through the legislative process, and we're watching to see what occurs.

Q.Over the years, your department has done a lot to try to help the average consumer become wiser about personal finance — to learn it as a fundamental life skill. What is being done today?

A. We've partnered with DPI (Department of Public Instruction) over the last four years to issue grants to school districts so that they could develop and implement a financial literacy graduation requirement.

We fund those grants from settlement funds that we get from people who do scams and bad things. No tax dollars go into that.

Fifty percent of Wisconsin high schools now have a requirement.

We will continue to focus on that. We feel it's very important. We are meeting with the DPI superintendent in a few weeks to talk about what we can do going forward and continue our commitment to those efforts. We've been focusing on high school, but we need to move this down to middle school if possible.