Anecdotal evidence and hard data show high-deductible health plans (HDHPs) are gaining market penetration, amounting to nearly 25% of plans selected by consumers in 2015 in the employer-sponsored setting, and for 2016 that trend is projected to continue unabated. Even as more employers offer HDHPs as a mechanism to save money through cost-sharing, market consultants say self-funded plan sponsors and health carriers operating in the fully insured space should be careful in pricing this type of coverage.

That’s because of the battle between two factors: experience and actuarial value, says Mike Gaal, consulting actuary for Milliman, adding that this conflict happens with other plan designs as well. But for HDHPs, many employers are so interested in getting employees to switch over, maybe even making these plans the only choice for their workers, that they misread some telltale signs on pricing, he tells HPW.

Many consumers prefer traditional PPO coverage for a host of reasons, mainly because they know the score of such plans and are comfortable in the design. There is also the fear of high deductibles. All told, this reluctance by some employees, even when shown the possible financial benefits of moving to an HDHP with higher employer contributions, is a challenge for employers looking at full replacement.

“When you as an employer offer a rich PPO next to a HDHP, what they try to do is to encourage the enrollment in that HDHP through a [higher] contribution. And what you will find in many cases is that the pricing of the HDHP can be so irrational that the price tag being charged for the HDHP is much less than the actuarial value of the HDHP,” he explains. “A lot of employers will base that on the experience of the plan. So they’ll look at the experience of their HDHP relative to the experience of their traditional health plans and they will see that the claims costs are running significantly lower, and they will have this false sense of security that it is because the HDHP is a much more efficient plan. But the reality of the situation is that it is running a lot lower because the health status of the individuals in that plan is much better than in the traditional plan.”

Mispricing an HDHP can cause other issues as well, Gaal says. “You end up with a situation where you almost can’t make that move because you have charged so little for the HDHP over time. If you move to a full replacement situation you would have to increase the employee contribution by such a significant amount to actually capture the amount of revenue needed to keep your overall health program cost neutral,” he explains.

This can have serious consequences for health plans. “In a fully insured arrangement that insurer [with an employer pricing HDHPs too low] is effectively on the hook for the difference….The employer is basically passing all of the migration risk to the insurer. So the insurer would not want a situation where the employer is creating this huge incentive for people to enroll in a HDHP. If a lot of enrollment does move and the insurance company has kind of priced it too low based on an experience basis versus an actuarial basis, now that they are risk,” he says. “If you get everyone moved over you won’t be able to collect enough premiums to cover the claims.” But insurers have with the gradual rise in HDHPs learned to spread their risk appropriately over their various business lines, Gaal adds.

Where Does the HDHP Trend Go Now?

In a Sept. 22 report from Kaiser Family Foundation on the employer shift in health care costs to consumers, researchers said 10 years ago only 55% of plans had a deductible. Now, enrollment in HDHPs has nearly doubled since 2010 to 24% in 2015. Kaiser said deductibles have increased 67% over the past five years with the average deductible for single coverage growing from $917 to $1,318.

Mercer found similar results. Molly Loftus, chief actuary for Mercer Investment Consulting Inc., tells HPW the number of employers offering HDHPs has mushroomed in recent times and will track the same way for the foreseeable future.

“We expect to see growth continue from the 48% offering HDHPs now for those employers with greater than 500 lives to 66% doing so over the next three years. We expect significant growth,” she says. The increase in HDHP enrollment has been sharp, according to Mercer’s figures, with membership in such plans at 23% in 2014 from just 8% in 2009.

For 2016, Gaal does not see a spike in the percentage of employees choosing HDHPs to the 30% range, but instead expects the gradual rise seen in recent years to continue for next year. Part of this increase will come on the back of employers trying to beat paying the 40% excise tax (Cadillac tax) that is part of the Affordable Care Act. “As we inch closer to 2018 and the longer it looks like it will be implemented, in 2017 and 2018 we might see a bigger tick up,” he says. The tax now starts in 2018, though there are sustained efforts in Congress and among Washington, D.C., lobbyists to try and derail it (see box, p. 6).

In a Sept. 25 call hosted by Matthew Borsch, securities analyst for Goldman, Sachs and Co., Steve Lewis, regional leader for the employee benefits practice of Willis North America, a unit of Willis Group Holdings, said there has been substantial HDHP penetration of the middle market serving employers in the 100 to 5,000 employee range. “The next phase of that is full replacement HDHPs. We are not there yet but I do have some clients that have gone completely there and some are looking at it as we get to 2018,” he said.

When asked by Borsch what the tipping point will be for employers to offer only HDHPs, Willis said the Cadillac tax is going to be an issue for a lot of employers for at least one of their plan offerings, the legacy benefit-rich ones likely, and could be that tipping point.

To say the sky is the limit for HDHPs is likely too much of a stretch, but Paul Hughes-Cromwick, senior health economist at the Altarum Institute in Ann Arbor, Mich., tells HPW the fact HDHPs went from nothing in 2005 to 24% in 2015 (citing the Kaiser Family Foundation data) “tells me that a penetration rate of as high as 50% in the next decade would not be terribly shocking.”

He relates that a world-class health care economist told him seven years ago that he would bet anything that HDHPs would never cross the 10% penetration mark, given the reluctance of consumers in the past to take on the risk of hefty deductibles. “How did we think that something we always considered a sort of niche could grow to 24% of the market, which was based mostly on hundreds and hundreds of studies showing people don’t want to bear that much risk?” Hughes-Cromwick asks.

© 2015 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a $50 discount on the all-new 20th edition of AIS’s best-selling annual resource Health Plan Facts, Trends and Data.