Dallas hospital systems are slightly more profitable—both in net revenue and margin—than their Houston counterparts, although the reason why may be because of the southernmost mecca’s long-standing prominence of specialty clinic groups like Kelsey Seybold.

Those don’t exist in Dallas the way they do in Houston, says Allan Baumgarten, whose Texas Health Market Review studies the profitability of hospital systems and the proliferation of HMOs and other plans.

“My sense is that, in Houston, there’s a little more parity in terms of bargaining power and economic power, which puts a little bit of a damper on the margins and the profitability on the hospital side,” he says.

D Healthcare Daily reported on the broad profitability of Dallas/Fort Worth area hospitals on Wednesday. Despite declining or stagnant inpatient rates, hospital systems here made quite a bit of money in 2013. They recorded $1.998 billion in net patient revenue, less than the $2.034 billion in 2012, but still good enough for a 12.1 percent margin.

Houston hospitals logged an 11.1 percent margin for net patient revenue in 2013, bringing in $1.98 billion. In Houston, there’s more risk sharing between insurance plans and providers, Baumgarten says. Kelsey-Seybold, for instance, has a longstanding history of providing care alongside insurance plans like Aetna and Prudential, which came into town in the 1980s looking to partner with a local provider group to offer Medicare Risk plans.

These partnerships acted like early accountable care organizations (ACOs)—or maybe an ACO is just a later form of risk sharing, Baumgarten joked—and provided incentives for keeping patients out of hospital beds. North Texas, meanwhile, is beginning to shift into this fee-for-value model, away from the volume-based care that proliferated around the area pre-Affordable Care Act. It also lacked large specialty providers like Kelsey, which stood apart from the larger hospital systems.

“The bottom line, in Houston, I do think that because they’ve moved toward a fee-for-value type arrangement to a grater extent, that their revenues and income are more modest than in Dallas/Fort Worth,” he said. “They’re just moving that way today.”

Houston and Dallas could wind up being closer in the future than they are today. Baumgarten looks to Ohio, where the Cleveland Clinic and five other health systems teamed to form a strategic affiliation to share best practices and drive down costs. They’re also looking into offering a statewide network of providers, which would be especially appealing to large employers who have a presence in multiple markets.

The big providers in Texas could soon come together much in the same way—appealing for them because it could help lower costs, appealing for purchasers because it could give its employees access to the market leaders in Texas’ largest cities.

“More and more you have provider systems moving in the direction of forming statewide networks,” Baumgarten says. “Not mergers or acquisitions, but partnerships, so they can form a statewide network or as close to a statewide network that they could offer to employer groups as a preferred provider network.”