, CP Op-Ed Contributors By Ken Blackwell and Bob Morrison CP Op-Ed Contributors

It's a famous Chinese curse: May you live in interesting times. President Obama is living through those times, to be sure. The Chinese have another phrase: Losing the Mandate of Heaven. It is their ancient belief that rulers must govern in accord with Heaven's conception of justice. To rule in violation of what Western philosophers have called the Natural Law, that is, the law written on the heart, is to risk all legitimacy and to put one's record in history at peril, the Chinese have taught us.

Barack Obama went to Planned "Barrenhood" (Parenthood) one year before he accepted the nomination of his party to run for president. Candidate Obama pledged his devotion to an outfit that beheads a thousand unborn children every day.

He has kept his promises to them. He threatened to veto a Continuing Resolution to keep the federal government open if Speaker Boehner and House Republicans took away a single dollar from that evil enterprise. And when he addressed a conclave of abortionists (the first president ever to do so) he even said upon leaving: God bless you.

God forbid! Ronald Reagan called abortion "a wound in the soul of America." He regularly referred in handwritten letters to the killing of the unborn as the slaughter of innocents. Reagan was right.

When as President, Mr. Obama appeared before Congress to push his takeover of our health care system, and bring one-sixth of the U.S. economy under direct government control, he promised some wavering conservative Democrats that "no federal dollars will go for abortions," and "federal conscience laws will remain in place."

Those statements were false. We now know that ObamaCare represents, as Congressman Chris Smith (R-N.J.) has confirmed, the most massive expansion of money for killing the unborn in American history. More than 1,000 unborn children a day will be killed with funding provided under the law Mr. Obama succeeded in ramming through Congress.

Many a pro-life Democrat fell for Mr. Obama's paper assurances. They were taken in by his bogus Executive Order of March 2010. An Executive Order—even if he had meant it sincerely—could never overrule a federal statute.

The non-partisan Government Accountability Office (GAO) has reported on the payments for the killing of these unborn children under ObamaCare and has confirmed that it is proceeding. Our organization, Family Research Council, has been trying for years to determine how many of the plans approved by the Obama administration force taxpayers and insurance subscribers to pay for these cruel and unjust procedures.

It has proven exceedingly difficult to get transparency on this vital issue. Surely, if you asked your ObamaCare "navigator" if a given plan covers tubal ligation or vasectomy, you could readily get a straight answer.

With abortion, all rules are off. Pro-life Democrat Dan Lipinski (Ill) was never taken in. He calls the Obama administration's subterfuge "an accounting gimmick" and says: "Without the GAO study, we may never have known this because it was almost impossible for an individual shopping on the exchanges to find out whether or not abortion – or almost anything else – was covered under each plan. This despite the promise of the exchanges providing clear explanations of what was covered under every plan. Again, the Administration apparently has ignored provisions it had touted when the bill was being considered."

Congressman Lipinski would never stand in the House and yell: "You lie!" as the president was speaking, but he could not be more forthright in this statement.

FRC President Tony Perkins has said Americans are being forced to play "Russian Roulette." That's an apt comparison, since the outcome of that lethal game is very often death.

President Obama admits his record last year, 2013, was disappointing. He even joked at a White House Correspondents Dinner that "the 47% are calling Mitt Romney to apologize."

This year, however, his approval ratings are even worse. His most recent Gallup rating is 41% approve, 54% disapprove. Even his most loyal backers are feeling a sense of loss and grief. TV's Barbara Walters sighs, "We thought he was going to be a Messiah." All over Georgetown, that reliably liberal bastion, bumper stickers are popping up on Mercedes and BMWs that say: "I'm ready for Hillary." What happened to Barack?

He gave a notorious answer to Pastor Rick Warren's probing question--When does the unborn child have rights? Candidate Obama said the answer was "above my pay grade." But his conduct in office proves that his real answer is: Never. No unborn child has any rights at any time before birth. By his own votes and record, those children who survive an abortion attempt should not be guaranteed medical treatment despite the fact that they are Citizens of the United States under the Fourteenth Amendment.

For this and other reasons, history is already judging the Obama administration: You have been weighed in the balance and found wanting. We are bold to suggest that he has lost the Mandate of Heaven.

Ken Blackwell and Bob Morrison are senior Fellows at the Family Research Council in Washington,D.C.