It was the culmination of a political triumph years, perhaps decades, in the making. On October 1, 2013, the Affordable Care Act, known colloquially as Obamacare, would be made manifest in the form of HealthCare.gov, a nationwide health insurance marketplace. It would provide an estimated 7 million Americans with healthcare. It would revolutionize the way Americans shopped for and chose their health insurance.

Except it didn’t. It was a failure of epic proportions, a digital Hindenburg, a disaster of technology mired by gridlocked bureaucratic inefficiency.

Clark Valberg About Clark Valberg, Co-founder and CEO of InVision, a top collaboration and prototyping platform that enables better design.

But in its spectacular failure, HealthCare.gov knocked something loose in the collective mind of the masses. It awakened the design consciousness of America in a way nothing ever had before. Its launch was a pivotal moment that signaled a shift in the expectations of the populace and their relationship to the products they were consuming. Something happened – something changed. The average consumer shifted responsibility from their own sometimes limited tech-savviness, to a failing in the design.

Now, when we say design, we are not talking about colors or fonts or even layouts – we are talking about product design and user experience on a large scale, from start to finish. To borrow a quote: “Everything is designed. Few things are designed well.” No doubt, HealthCare.gov fit this bill.

At the time, I was surprised by the range of responses. People weighing in on the subject were far outside the range of the normal tech and design insiders. Of course, this was facilitated because, well, everyone is cynical about the government. But, if we think back on it, we had been primed for this shift for decades. We’ve seen it in every part of our economy. We’ve seen things like the car interiors being fitted with every creature comfort we can think of. We’ve seen how programming a VCR with a 60 page manual has become a joke as we moved through disc media and onto wholly digital one-click recording even your grandmother can use. We’ve seen a mundane device, the telephone, made into a powerful yet graceful personal command center with the advent of the smartphone. We’ve seen Google build a digital empire out of scouring the collected wisdom of humanity to delivery exactly what we were looking for – and even some stuff we didn’t know we wanted – simply, instantly, and frictionlessly. So, the consumerized American population was perched on the edge of the rabbit hole, one short shove away from tumbling into a plush wonderland of effective user-centric design.

Why this time? There was never such an uproar about Geocities or DMV websites. Every six months or so there was some grumbling about the latest Facebook update, but what was different now? Well, for starters, millions of Americans were legally compelled to sign up for healthcare. When people compared the great experiences they got for free (Google), and contrasted it with the terrible experience they had paid for dearly with their tax dollars (at least 300 million of those tax dollars, by most counts), they were outraged, aghast, tootin’ mad. And rightly so. I mean, after all, so many of the digital products we’ve made a part of our everyday lives were bootstrapped until they proved their right to exist.

Any modern product designer would say that the behemoth project was doomed from the start because it was essentially built to satisfy an arbitrary list of requirements written up by a kaleidoscope-fractionated Congress. But an Average Joe might say: my high school kid made a site for his whole baseball league in our basement, and the government can’t build a friggin’ website?

The failure of HealthCare.gov gave words to a feeling people already had. Ease of use has become paramount. The prevailing, and I think correct, sentiment is that if it’s difficult to use, it’s a badly designed product — it’s the designer’s fault, not my own. The age of spending hours programming a VCR is over.

Responsibility has shifted away from ignorant people to ignorant design. High expectations from the private sector have pivoted, harshly and hotly, like a magnifying glass on an anthill, to the public sector, and, really, to all products we interact with. A revolt has begun against hard-to-navigate airline websites, and consumer unrest and dissatisfaction has led to disruption in industries long deemed unshakeable – look at Airbnb versus the hospitality industry and Uber versus hailing a taxi.

From a design standpoint, there was good news stemming from HealthCare.gov, regardless of your political sentiments: our relationship to design has fundamentally changed. The kind of bad news: our jobs as product managers, designers, and entrepreneurs became one hundred times harder.

You know what? On second thought, that’s good news too.

The HealthCare.gov debacle was, effectively, the consumer nation’s declaration of independence from instruction manuals, call-center help lines, and design frustration. To hell with them. This is where we step in as designers – whether we are designing networks, products, or landing pages. The people are demanding better. We have the chance, now more than ever, to start making deep and disruptive change in places where no one knew change could take place.

Of course, access to healthcare was an incredibly meaningful experience for the many people in the US who would be getting coverage for the first time. And that is why the experience was so monumental, because it had the potential to change lives. Designers should now use it as a reminder that everything we touch with our design should serve a greater, higher purpose, and that the “user” we are designing for is, in fact, a real human being.

Clark Valberg is the CEO and co-founder of InVision, the leading collaboration and prototyping platform that enables better design.