Back in October, 2014, a news item highlighted the prospect of HealthSouth could acquire Encompass Home Health and Hospice. At the time, the news report stated that this was not likely going to happen unless the offer on the table increased. At the time, Encompass was reportedly worth $700 million and the two parties reached an official agreement for $750 million.

“Under the deal, which the companies expect to complete by the end of 2014, Birmingham, Ala.-based HealthSouth will buy the parent of Encompass, EHHI Holdings, with cash and incremental debt. Encompass will retain its name, management team and Dallas headquarters, Grinney said (Modern Healthcare).”

As the landscape of Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements change and as the Affordable Care Act continues to move forward, there is an increase in demand for home health care services across the country. The system, according to Grinney, is moving from what has been labeled a ‘fee for service’ model to one based on population health. In other words, staying healthy and at home is becoming more popular as a choice and is also more cost effective for individuals, insurance companies, and the federal Medicare and Medicaid system.

Grinney noted that it is believed that smaller, less sophisticated home health care companies and firms are going to be marginalized by these larger firms. He also commented that an increase of home health care agencies will provide lower cost options for individuals who require assistance and care but wish to remain at home.

Currently, there are about 72,000 HealthSouth patients being referred to in home care providers every year, but only about 4 percent of them are being referred to HealthSouth agencies while another 1 percent are being referred to Encompass agencies.

During the past year, HealthSouth experienced a 7.6 percent decrease in net income due in large part to startup costs that were associated with new facilities. The company invested approximately $1.6 million for startup costs for three new hospitals in the area and these expenses were incurred during the third quarter.

HealthSouth is seeking to expand its presence throughout the home health care industry and this acquisition will add 140 home health care locations throughout 13 states. That will be in addition to HealthSouth’s current tally of 25 home health care agencies. HealthSouth will be integrated into Encompass, but it’s not yet clear whether they will both retain their names independently or be merged into one umbrella company.