Congress should not cut food stamps while leaving agribusiness largess mostly unscathed.

Food via SNAP. (Photo: Matt Rourke, AP) Story Highlights Monthly SNAP benefits often run out in two to three weeks.

Agriculture Department is doling out tens of billions of dollars of corporate welfare.

If the nation had any soul or sense, it wouldn't take food from the hungry.

Though America is the wealthiest country in the history of the world, one in six Americans — 49 million people — struggle against hunger.

Yet even during the worst economic downturn in decades, the U.S. avoided mass starvation due to the effectiveness of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, formerly known as food stamps. SNAP slashes hunger, protects health and bolsters the economy by creating food industry jobs. SNAP now has nearly its lowest fraud rate in history — 1.3% — lower than the criminality rate in Congress and at many Wall Street firms.

OUR VIEW: End 'heat and eat'

The only real problem with SNAP is that it serves too few people and its benefits are too meager. A recent study published in the journal Health Affairs found that, because monthly SNAP benefits often run out in two to three weeks, hospital admissions for diet-related illnesses spike near the end of each month.

A sensible nation would hike the value of SNAP benefits to enable families to afford food that is both more ample and more nutritious.

The Agriculture Department is doling out tens of billions of dollars of corporate welfare through hundreds of loopholes that ensure agriculture aid goes mostly to the wealthiest entities, a failing status quo derided by progressives, moderates and conservatives alike.

The logical response would be to enact a farm bill that paid for increased funding for SNAP by curtailing corporate welfare. But Congress is doing the opposite, playing Robin Hood in reverse. On top of $11 billion in SNAP cuts implemented on Nov. 1, Congress added $8 billion in SNAP cuts over a decade to the current farm bill, while leaving agribusiness largess mostly unscathed.

To obfuscate their deeds, congressional leaders have mischaracterized one SNAP provision as a "loophole" that allows some recipients in 16 states to supposedly receive an undue allocation of benefits. In truth, governors of both parties have used a perfectly sensible provision to boost food for impoverished families who also qualify for fuel help.

If the nation had any soul or sense, it would expand that option, not take food from the hungry to pay for ever-more giveaways to the wealthy.

Joel Berg is the executive director of the New York City Coalition Against Hunger.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eKLrVb