Oklahoma junior-to-be focused on his expectations, not others

As a sophomore, Alec Hansen took a big step forward, going 5-6 for the Sooners with a 3.95 ERA, producing 94 strikeouts in 82 innings of work. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald / OU Athletics Communications )

In every picture you see of Alec Hansen pitching a baseball, his mouth is wide open.

Yep, he's aware of it, and no, he's not exactly sure why, it's just something he's always done. Not on purpose, it just happened somewhere along the line.

Then again, when the junior-to-be at the University of Oklahoma throws a baseball, it is common for mouths to be agape as the Loveland graduate can hit 100 mph on the radar gun, his fastball averaging between 94-98 during his sophomore campaign for the Sooners.

It was a season that produced a major step forward for Hansen, who after throwing just 11 ⅓ innings for OU as a freshman, came back to be one of their top starters in 2015, posting a 5-6 record with a 3.95 ERA. He struck out 94 batters in 82 innings pitched, cutting his walks down to 44.

It's that combination of raw power and progress that has many projecting that he could be one of the top players taken in MLB's First-Year Player Draft in 2016, if not the first.

Last week, Jonathan Mayo of MLB.com, projected Hansen as one of 10 possible candidates for that top spot. Mayo listed Hansen as one of five collegiate players who could land in the spot, the other five being preps.

As for Hansen, Mayo noted his fastball and the slider he developed last summer, pitches that led to him averaging better than 10 strikeouts per nine innings worked.

It is talk Hansen tries to steer clear of, but he admits it is an honor to be held in such high regard. Bottom line, it is his goal to be a major league pitcher, but instead of trying to live up to the expectations of others, his focus remains centered on being the best he can be.

"It makes me feel good, because he thinks highly of me and all my hard work is starting to play off," said Hansen, back in Norman, Okla. taking some summer classes. "It's not always the best thing to be in that No. 1 spot. More often than not, the guy who is not No. 1 now is not No. 1 next year. I'd like to stay away from that, put my head down and work.

"I try not to see that stuff as much as possible. I know how good I can be, and what I need to do to be that good and reach my full potential. This summer is just all about working hard and getting better and putting it all together for next season."

Originally, Hansen was slated to head to a summer league to throw some more, but as he noted, the innings work load he piled up was three times more than he'd thrown in any one year and quite a leap from the year before. Because of that, the staff at OU encouraged him to avoid the mound most of the summer and work out. Hansen said he is lifting five days a week in June and not throwing at all. In July, he will return to Colorado and do bullpen work with pitching coach Darryl Milne, who is also a special assignment scout for the Baltimore Orioles.

Milne said Hansen has the right mindset about the chatter surrounding him. He has seen in the past where players put the draft before the work, and it seldom works in their favor.

What Hansen is seeking is consistency in performance. While most of his starts were strong, there were others where he struggled with his control.

"That was the main thing. My good outings, which I had the majority of, I had real good control," Hansen said. "That was something I was focusing on. My fastball is what I worked on, so I could throw it for strikes. That helped me a lot.

"But there were some games where I'd have it for an inning, then I'd lose it the next inning. That was what was most frustrating. This next year is about being able to put it all together, every week, every outing. That's what will be truly important. With time and work, that will all come together, just like anything."

Milne, who has worked with Hansen for a few years, has seen his student grow in maturity level, as well as raise his game awareness and how he can control it, aspects of pitching that come with experience.

Hansen, who has grown to 6-foot-8, 235 pounds, is still trying to harness all of that leverage into a consistent pattern of throwing strikes, and Milne — who at 6-6 was a big pitcher himself — said that is where the work will begin. He said being a bigger pitcher can be a bonus, but it also takes time to harness.

"That's what I try to focus on," Milne said. "His athleticism is excellent, and that's what we try to work on is just repeatability in his arm action and his delivery so that control of his fastball is there. You've got to have control before you can have command.

"It's just his balance and posture. When he starts to be able to balance over the rubber and keep that together, and basically when he gets started to go toward home plate, to stay sideways or stay closed as long as possible so his posture at the end allows him to take advantage of the leverage he can create at 6-8. Going downhill with all that power and energy that he generates sounds like an easy proposition, but it isn't. It takes a lot of work and a lot of core strength."

Milne said the goal is to not only find that balance, but also get to the point where Hansen can feel himself get out of whack in a game and make an immediate adjustment.

If he can do that, Hansen will take another step toward reaching his next set of expectations for himself. In next June's draft, he'll find out what scouts think of him then when he'll still have the leverage of having one more year of college if he chooses.

"I wrote down some goals. I just feel like if I can get my fastball command better than it was this year, game in and game out, I'll be a lot better," he said. "Also, I'll know a lot better what to expect and how to be more consistent in every outing.

"It's just getting myself better and knowing how good I can be and be that good. I'll let the rest take care of itself."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard