BEND, Ore. -

State Rep. Knute Buehler, R-Bend, ended weeks of private consideration Tuesday by telling supporters he won't run for governor next year and instead will seek a second term representing Oregon House District 54.

"After several weeks of careful thought and conversations with family, friends and supporters, I’ve decided I will run for re-election to the Oregon House and not run for Governor in 2016, he wrote, calling it "a highly personal, rather than a political decision."

"In the end, I realized I’m not ready -- just yet -- to leave my medical practice, patients, nonprofit boards and business in order to commit 100% of my time that running an energetic campaign for governor requires and deserves," Buehler said in the e-mail announcing his decision.

He told NewsChannel 21's Katie Higgins that his medical practice was the key to his decision



"I'm a doctor first and a politician second," he said. "I love taking care of my patients."



"I've always seen my time of public service being more a journey than a particular destination," he added. "As long as I'm doing productive things and solving problems for the people of Oregon, I'm happy to continue on where I am.".

Here's more of what he told supporters in an e-mail that both announced his decision and sought donations for the re-election bid:

"Serving another term in the Oregon House will allow me to continue serving the community and the state I love while also engaging in a profession that is both fulfilling and allows my patients to lead better lives.



"I am honored to be a voice and vote for the people of Bend. Together, we’ve accomplished some good things. I remain committed to leading with an open mind, tolerant heart and thoughtful voice the next two years."

Buehler was the GOP and Independent parties' nominee for secretary of state in 2012, but lost to then-incumbent secretary of state Kate Brown -- who became governor this year after fellow Democrat John Kitzhaber's resignation.

Brown is widely expected to run next year to complete Kitzhaber's term but she has not confirmed her plans, The Associated Press reported



Buehler is an orthopedic surgeon at The Center in Bend and touted two bills he won passage of during the 2015 session, one to widen birth control access through pharmacies and another, the "right to try" legislation that gives terminally ill patients access to experimental treatments not yet approved for the market.



In his note announce his political plans, Buehler goes on to say he needs help from his supporters, as he's "expecting a tough fight for re-election.



"Last year, my opponents spent more than $400,000 to defeat me in a district with more Democrats than Republicans and that President Obama carried by double digits," Buehler wrote. "I expect the same army of special interests to come after me again."



In seeking campaign donations, Buehler's note goes on to say, "Oregon is blessed with many advantages: independent, creative people, scenic beauty and abundant natural resources, and access to world markets. What we lack is the leadership willing to set higher expectations while being able to challenge the conventional wisdom and narrow labels that too often define politics today.



"I’m ready to do my part.



"With more courageous and creative leadership, we can improve our education system so more Oregon kids graduate from high school and are prepared for college, work and the world. We can strengthen Oregon’s climate for job creation and entrepreneurs so opportunity and prosperity are actually shared across all of Oregon. We can combat poverty, reverse the decline in family-wage incomes, and rebuild Oregon’s shrinking middle class. And we can reinvest and rebuild Oregon’s aging infrastructure – our roads, highways, and bridges – to reduce congestion, improve public safety and create jobs.



"Working together, we can make Oregon an even better place. Thank you for your past support and continued friendship and encouragement. With you by our side, Patty and I know we are the luckiest people in the world."