Neil Brosnan has 25 years of experience with the New Jersey State Police

Neil Brosnan was appointed Chief of Middlesex County College Police Department (Photo: ~ Courtesy of Middlesex County College) Story Highlights Brosnan most recently served as director of security for the Howell Township Public school system.

While with the State Police, Brosnan served as deputy commander of Troop D.

crash reduction program he developed resulted in a 14 percent decrease in automobile accidents.

- Middlesex County College has a new top cop.

Neil C. Brosnan, a law enforcement professional with 25 years of experience with the New Jersey State Police, has been appointed as chief of the Middlesex County College Police Department, according to a statement.

Most recently, Brosnan was director of security for the Howell Township Public School system, where he oversaw security in the district of 12 schools, 900 faculty and staff and 6,300 students.

“This was a job I loved, but when I saw the Middlesex opening, it was an opportunity I couldn’t pass up,” Brosnan said in the statement. “The quality personnel in the department and the support from the College administration make this the opportunity of a lifetime.”

Ronald Goldfarb, special assistant to the president for legal affairs, said he was very pleased Brosnan has joined the college.

“I think his long experience with the State Police will be a real asset to the College,” Goldfarb said in the statement. “He has experience training and supervising officers and efficiently administering departments. I think he will do a great job here.”

While with the State Police, Brosnan served as deputy commander of Troop D, supervising 350 troopers and improving efficiency and increasing safety. A crash reduction program he developed resulted in a 14 percent decrease in automobile accidents, and another initiative reduced crimes in Parkway and Turnpike rest areas.

He also was commander of the Office of State Government Security, charged with ensuring the safety of all state-owned buildings, including the State House and Judiciary Building.

In addition, Brosnan led the redesign of the Police Academy training curriculum. He has received numerous commendations.

Brosnan holds a Bachelor’s Degree from West Virginia University and a Master of Business Administration Degree from Colorado State University.

Staff Writer Susan Loyer: 732-565-7243; sloyer@mycentraljersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1JmJeSa