Gay pride flags at the Supreme Court in Washington (Photo: AFP/Getty Images)

As pastors, professors and other Christians gather at the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary for the Association of Certified Biblical Counselors’ annual conference Monday, members of the Fairness Campaign and other local activists will also be there, protesting what they call an “anti-LGBT conference that promotes harmful ‘conversion therapy.’”

Protests will take place across the street from the seminary, 2825 Lexington Road, at 10 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. Monday.

According to a promotional video on ACBC's website, the three-day conference will focus on homosexuality and aims to “help the church know how to minister to people struggling with this sin.”

The Louisville conference is titled, “Homosexuality: Compassion, Care and Counsel for Struggling People” and includes a pre-conference session called “Transgender Confusion and Transformational Christianity.”

A statement issued Friday by the Fairness Campaign said the counseling practices promoted by ACBC are anti-LGBT. The practices state "homosexual desires and behavior are at odds with human joy and flourishing" and reject "that a human being could possess a gender other than the one indicated by biological sex."

The statement also said conversion therapy — which the Fairness Campaign alleges ACBC promotes — has been linked to increased suicide, depression and anxiety, and it has been opposed by many professional societies like the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American Psychiatric Association.

In a blog on ACBC’s website, Executive Director Heath Lambert called conversion therapy, also referred to by some as "reparative therapy," an “unbiblical approach to change.”

He said there are “positive elements” to the approach — such as the underlying beliefs that homosexuality is harmful and homosexual individuals can change, he wrote — but said it is an “ultimately unhelpful approach to change for same-sex attraction.”

Reporter Kirsten Clark can be reached at (502) 582-4144 or kclark2@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1LalN0t