(Jonathan Ernst / Reuters)

President Obama and House Speaker Paul D. Ryan (R-Wis.) say they're going to try to play nice next year. They even plan to have dinner after the holidays, where they'll ostensibly search for common ground.

But expect no kumbaya between these two leaders. Symbolic dinners aside, Obama and Ryan are signaling they plan to do the exact opposite of getting along.

In fact, all indications are they're preparing for battle mode with each other, with an eye on protecting their legacy and political capital, respectively, and giving their parties a leg up to win the White House.

Consider comments made by both men in year-end interviews:

"We're going to have one heck of a contrast in 2016," Ryan told NBC's Chuck Todd in an interview aired Sunday on "Meet The Press" about his relationship with the president and his plans for his first full year as speaker.

"Since taking this office, I have never been more optimistic about a year ahead than I am right now," Obama told reporters at his year-end conference Friday. "And in 2016, I’m going to leave it out all on the field."

President Obama spoke of the progress he's made in 2015 at a year-end news conference on Dec. 18, saying he's "never been more optimistic about a year ahead," while also pledging to address unfinished business in his last year as president. (AP)

There's a lot for the two to clash on: whether to fund Planned Parenthood, whether to keep or dismantle Obama's climate change regulations, gun control, criminal justice reform and the Affordable Care Act. On foreign policy, expect the two to fight over whether to close the prison in Guantanamo Bay, whether to authorize military force against the Islamic State, whether to approve Obama's 12-nation trade deal and other matters of national security.

In short, 2016 is shaping up to pit Ryan against Obama on a whole range of issues.

But it's also true that the two men's public brawls will be mostly for show -- a battle of titans without the results. Ryan can't get much done without a Republican president in the White House (he said as much earlier this month in his first major policy address as speaker), and Obama is doomed to spend the next year with many of his priorities dead on arrival in a Republican-controlled Congress.

So why has each man calculated it's worth spending time and energy fighting with each other? Because they're not trying to win over each other.

Rather, they're hoping to use each other to win over supporters for the most consequential political fight next year: The presidential election. By turning their priorities into high-profile political fights, the two leaders are trying to shape their respective parties' agendas in an election year -- Ryan by proposing conservative alternatives to how Obama has run the country the past seven years, and Obama by helping lead his party down a continued progressive path.

One of the clearest examples of the Obama-Ryan proxy battle for the White House is a potential relitigation of Obamacare. Yes, the president's signature policy has been the law of the land for five years and survived two Supreme Court challenges. But Ryan thinks conservatives have spent too much time trying to dismantle it rather than coming up with a solution of their own -- a weakness he's predicting Democrats will try to exploit next year.

On Obamacare, taxes, welfare reform and more, Ryan plans to use his 2016 speakership as a kind of "practice run" for what could happen under a GOP president and a GOP Congress (assuming Republicans keep control of the Senate), said Molly Reynolds, a fellow with the Brookings Institution who is studying Ryan's first 100 days as speaker. It makes sense to start with Obamacare, which is held up in conservative circles as the ultimate example of liberal government overreach.

Despite presiding over one of the biggest post-World War II majorities in Congress, it won't be easy for the new speaker. For one, Republicans have not coalesced around an alternative to Obamacare. And when or if they do, Ryan is going to have to navigate an unwieldy conservative faction that is skeptical of any major proposal endorsed by its party's leadership.

[Paul Ryan passed his first test as speaker, but he's still got plenty of trouble ahead]

But if he can get something done, even if it passes the House only to be stopped in the Senate by Democrats, Ryan can hold it up like a shiny object to Republican voters disillusioned with their party: If you just vote for us in November, look what you're going to get.

"If we just do nothing, if we just become an opposition party only, then we will not give the people of this country the choice they deserve," Ryan said on "Meet The Press." "And that's why I know we're going to go on offense in 2016."

Meanwhile, Obama is emboldened by a surprisingly successful year. He's still celebrating those Supreme Court victories on Obamacare and another on same-sex marriage as well as a steady, if not slow, economic recovery. It's now legacy time for him, and that includes handing over the White House to a Democrat.

[The 7 big things on Obama's to-do list, with one year to go]

But the president has his own struggles to convince Americans that another Democrat is what the nation needs right now. His approval ratings on the issues of the day -- terrorism and the Islamic State -- are at record lows. The White House feels they're unfairly low. So the president's biggest struggle will simply be to get across the message to American voters that he's actually done a lot as president, domestically and abroad, despite having to work with a split or entirely Republican Congress for all but two of his years in office.

"Politically," Simon Rosenberg, president of the New Democrat Network, told The Washington Post's Juliet Eilperin recently, "unless the public views his presidency as successful in 2016, there's no reason to elect a Democrat."

So the stage is set for two men, one in the twilight of his political career, the other very much emerging in the national spotlight (for the second time, we should note), to wage the policy battles that will feed into the presidential campaign trail battles. We won't really know who won until Election Day.