Topics: Catholicism, Children, Editor's Picks, Life stories, Motherhood, pope francis, Real Families, Religion, Spirituality, Life News

In my infant daughter’s palm, the gold crucifix looked as if it were resting on the belly of a chubby pink starfish. The fine chain from which the cross dangled wound once around her wrist, trailing across a white baptism shawl trimmed in fringe. The necklace was a family heirloom handed down from the baby’s namesake—her long-departed great-grandmother. Before we left for the church, the godmother draped the chain around the baby’s neck and closed the clasp.

Much has been made of the Francis Effect — the magnetic, humanitarian charm of His Holiness — drawing back parishioners who had given up on the church, but it also extends to those of us who might have never been drawn to Catholicism in the first place. When the Francis Effect landed at our doorstep, it inspired me to entrust the Catholic Church with no less than my daughter’s spiritual heart.

My husband and I, 10 years into our marriage, discussed having a child. There was much to consider. Could we afford it? Did we have the energy? Then, a question that took me quite by surprise: Would you, he asked, be willing to raise the baby Catholic? As a former punk rock kid recently returned to my liberal Presbyterian roots, his request gave me pause.

My introduction to Catholicism was inauspicious. In 2003, my husband and I, still newlyweds, arrived at an Army post to which he had been assigned. At the newcomers fair, we stopped to chat with the priest from the post’s Catholic chapel. My husband explained that we’d had a hasty legal marriage before he deployed, but we were interested in a church ceremony.

“It might be a little complicated” my husband said. “You see, I’m divorced…” The priest winced. “And the marriage wasn’t annulled.” A prickling, uneasy heat traveled up my legs. “And my wife isn’t Catholic…” The priest winced again.

We waited for the priest to say something about helping us plan, or at least invite us to his parish office for further discussion.

“Mike, to be honest, I’m worried about your mortal soul.”

My husband looked like he’d been gut-shot.

I was speechless. Who says that? Who thinks that?

Over a decade later, I agreed, after much deliberation, to a Catholic upbringing for our daughter, born last spring. Why? The cheeky answer would be that marriage involves compromise, even if I only make it a biannual event. In seriousness, credit is due, in no small part, to His Holiness. In his view, our interfaith union is a blessing, not an abomination. He has said that any Christian marriage is a “real vocation, just like priesthood and religious life…” If he held a scorched-earth view like that Army priest, I wouldn’t have considered it, but Francis carries the marks of a social reformer, on this issue and several others. Where I once saw intimidation, I now saw promise. That the pontiff once worked as a bouncer only added to his credibility.

I worried that anti-religion or atheist friends would assume that willingness to have my daughter baptized represented a drift toward the fanatical on my part. But baptism, I found, can bring out a softness even in the most cynical. Maybe because there is a child involved. Maybe there’s something about innocence that reaches us where intellect cannot.

A baptism can turn into a ritual done by rote, the purpose obscured by the busywork of shopping for the white dress, ordering invitations, planning the lunch. Hostess anxiety kicked in. Did I want to serve chicken marsala or orecchiette with broccoli rabe and sausage? The wrong dress was delivered, a stiff organza festooned with iridescent sequins that resembled an elaborate lampshade. The bakery promised a cake with a cross of pink frosting roses — I pictured the blush of a new petal, ballet slippers. Instead, I opened the box to find a shade that could best be described as Vegas Bordello, or possibly Flamingo Explosion.

Intention returned to the fore when we sat down with Sister Kathy for the pre-Baptism interview. Gentle and kind, she saw no issue with ours being an interfaith marriage, and the fate of our mortal souls was not brought into question. At the conclusion, she asked, What do you like about the Catholic Church, and what would you like to see change?

My husband felt that priests should be allowed to marry and have families, and that divorced parishioners and non-Catholics should not be forbidden from taking communion. I wanted to see women in governing roles, as well as significant advancement on gay and transgender issues.

What about Catholicism appealed to me? Despite not feeling the call to conversion, there was much that I loved. The prominence of Mary and the saints, and the sensory richness of Mass, the colors and the Latin recitations, the heady incense as the censer swings by. I admired the rituals woven into everyday life. Crossing yourself in a moment of duress or gratitude, or appealing to Saint Anthony when you’ve misplaced something. Saint Anthony, Saint Anthony, please come down. What was lost must now be found. Around the robust Christian comedy circuit, Presbyterians are referred to as “The Chosen Frozen,” and that buttoned-up austerity has its limits. For whatever reservations I had about Catholicism, there’s something right up-front about it.