By James E. McGreevey

The HIV and AIDS epidemic continues to threaten the lives of thousands of Americans more than 30 years after the country’s first reported case of the disease. Those who are 35 years or younger (born after 1979) will likely have little recollection of the anxiety, pain, and tragic loss that marked that time; and the fear, as well as ignorance, of what this infectious disease posed to Americans and the world. We’ve made major progress in treatment of this life-threatening disease. HIV and AIDS have become more treatable and containable.

But while advances are promising, HIV and AIDS have not surrendered, and neither can we.

To move forward, we must reflect on how we got to this point: Two decades ago, HIV and AIDS were at the peak of their poison, taking the lives of more than 50,000 Americans in 1995. Through the efforts of advocates such as Larry Kramer, David Mixner, and David Rothenberg, we began to the change the dialogue regarding treatment and public acceptance of people living with HIV. The nation banded together to confront this disease through a federal and state partnership known as the Ryan White Care Act (RWCA), named in memory of a high school student who contracted HIV through blood treatment for hemophilia.

Today, the RWCA continues Ryan’s fight, serving as a safety net for those at risk of falling through gaps in coverage and care. The RWCA successfully provides life-saving medications for people with HIV, resulting in essential measures to contain the virus, including inhibiting HIV transmission through early diagnosis and treatment.

In recent months, I have been assisting people living with HIV and AIDS transition from public health programs to the insurance options of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), and during that process, it has become glaringly apparent that the authors of the law may not have fully appreciated the risk that possible treatment interruptions may cause patients, as they navigate the uncharted waters of the ACA.

The ACA has made tremendous strides for HIV patients by protecting people with preexisting conditions and ensuring access to insurance regardless of health status, including HIV and AIDS. However, persons are enrolling for coverage without knowing whether their HIV medications are covered, whether they are covered affordably, and whether they can still visit their current physicians, including infectious disease specialists.

The transition process arguably takes infected residents in the wrong direction. The Center for Health Law and Policy Innovation of Harvard Law School estimates that nationally, on average, 34 percent of Ryan White patients will be newly eligible for Medicaid, and 21 percent will be newly eligible for subsidized private health insurance.

In New Jersey, there are more than 35,000 people living with HIV. The RWCA provides life-saving medication to 3,300 of those HIV-positive New Jersey residents, who could have treatment coverage interrupted and altered if not properly transitioned into new insurance options under the ACA.

More than 1.1 million people living with HIV throughout the country are facing uncertainty about their health coverage and access to essential medication. The numbers are real, making it crucial that under these new ACA insurance options, infected individuals are afforded this transparency to understand their options, access to the same providers with whom they have established trust, and maintain coverage for their current treatment regimens.

As the ACA coverage plans unfold, let’s set aside political hyperbole and focus upon the patients for whom coverage and care is a matter of life and death. We must not allow a lack of sensible federal and state leadership to relinquish our grasp on HIV and AIDS that we have worked so hard to contain. We can take operational risks, but turning back the treatment clock is not a rational risk for these patients.

State governors and insurance regulators must remain vigilant about ensuring that this projected treatment gap does not languish unaddressed. We must work to ensure that HIV and AIDS patients are not transitioned to a new healthcare system at the expense of the progress achieved by RWCA. We need to act now to support our HIV-positive residents through this unprecedented transition, maintain patient treatment access and modalities, and continue to protect America from the spread of disease.

James E. McGreevey is the former Governor of the State of New Jersey