RESTON, Va.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--MAXIMUS (NYSE: MMS), a leading provider of government services worldwide, announced today that six of its U.S. customer contact centers have been recognized as “Certified Centers of Excellence” by BenchmarkPortal. These recognized customer contact centers provide support for Georgia Health Services for Families, Georgia Child Care and Parent Services (GACAPS), Illinois Modification and Employer Services, Indiana Enrollment Broker Services (EBS), Michigan Enrollment Broker Services (EBS) and Vermont Green Mountain Care Member Services.

The MAXIMUS customer contact centers achieved the Center of Excellence distinction based on best practice metrics drawn from the world’s largest database of objective and quantitative performance data from thousands of contact centers. Performance data collected from all six MAXIMUS contact centers achieved BenchmarkPortal’s objective and quantitative criteria in areas such as operational efficiency, service-level standards, customer satisfaction and employee training. Georgia Health Services for Families and GACAPS have now received certification for five and four consecutive years, respectively. Indiana EBS, Michigan EBS and Vermont Green Mountain Care Member Services have now been certified for three consecutive years. This is the first certification for Illinois Modification and Employer Services.

“We are committed to delivering high-quality services to our government clients and the citizens we serve,” said Bruce Caswell, MAXIMUS President. “These customer contact centers have been certified and recertified by BenchmarkPortal, which validates our projects’ superior levels of efficiency and commitment to providing accurate, reliable information in a friendly and helpful manner.”

About MAXIMUS

MAXIMUS is a leading operator of government health and human services programs in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and Saudi Arabia. The Company delivers business process services to improve the cost effectiveness, efficiency and quality of government-sponsored benefit programs, such as the Affordable Care Act, Medicaid, Medicare, Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), Health Insurance BC (British Columbia), as well as welfare-to-work and child support programs around the globe. The Company's primary customer base includes federal, provincial, state, county and municipal governments. Operating under its founding mission of Helping Government Serve the People®, MAXIMUS has more than 13,000 employees worldwide. For more information, visit www.maximus.com.

About BenchmarkPortal

Founded in 1995, BenchmarkPortal is a global leader in the contact center industry providing benchmarking, certification, training, consulting and industry reports. The BenchmarkPortal team of professionals has gained international recognition for its expertise and an innovative approach to best practices for the contact center industry and hosts the world’s largest database of contact center metrics. BenchmarkPortal’s mission is to help contact centers reach peak performance in operational effectiveness and efficiency so that the centers will realize increased levels of agent and customer loyalty while containing costs and building enterprise value. For more information on BenchmarkPortal please visit www.BenchmarkPortal.com.