White House officials estimate 7 million people signed up for private health insurance since the 2013 roll out of the Affordable Care Act.

It is believed that 8 million Americans got coverage through the expansion of medicaid programs. Now, open enrollment is back for those still in need.

"I'm one of the lucky ones," retired military officer Gilda Williams said. "A lot [people] never had health care until the Affordable Care Act was passed."

Williams doesn't need the ACA. But she's done her homework and she urges her uninsured family members to sign up for the health coverage.

"For me, those are the people I took care of as a doctor. It's personal for me," said Karen DeSalvo, acting assisting secretary of health at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. "My sister, last year, for the first time in years got health insurance on the market place and it's a relief for all of our family."

DeSalvo is a former New Orleans health commissioner and said an estimated 100,000 Louisianans enrolled in the market place last year.

"This is a chance for people who have been going to bed at night worrying if they are going to go bankrupt because they're going to get sick, to not have to have that fear anymore," DeSalvo said.

DeSalvo said that the plan includes care, hospitalization and medicines. She added that about six out of 10 people have enrolled for less than $100 a month.

"It's actually cheaper than that in some situations," Williams added. "It depends on the individual's income."

DeSalvo said that compared to other cities, New Orleans clinics, hospitals and health departments did a terrific job getting people of all walks of life to enroll.



"You have a high number of people who work part time jobs. But the way the program is set now everybody will have the opportunity," Williams said.



Here are some key dates to remember:



Dec. 31 - Coverage ends for 2014 marketplace plans



Jan. 1 - Coverage can begin for 2015 marketplace plans



Feb. 15 - Open enrollment ends



Further information can be found on the Healthcare.gov website. A toll free number is also available at 800-318-2595.