SEATTLE — The root of the word “sinister” is the Latin sinistra, meaning “left-handed.” It only evolved over time to mean evil, threatening or unlucky.

All of this applies to the Rockies. Seattle Mariners lefty Roenis Elias on Saturday kicked off a string of five consecutive sinister starters facing Colorado through Wednesday. They still have to face lefties James Paxton, Clayton Kershaw, Brett Anderson and Alex Wood.

Elias started the string with an omen. The lefty struck out seven Rockies in the first three innings Saturday, including the side in the third, and the Mariners left behind the Rockies in an easy 7-2 victory at Safeco Field.

The Rockies are just 6-26 against southpaws.

“The level of our struggles against left-handers is a little perplexing,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said.

Colorado is hitting just .249 against lefties, compared to .272 against right-handers. The Rockies (59-83) have won three games in a row just once since the all-star break in July. The Mariners (69-74) snapped Colorado’s two-game mini-streak.

“It’s been a challenge for us. We haven’t hit them,” Weiss said of lefties. “All kinds. Power guys, crafty guys. It’s all been a struggle. We need to solve it.”

The Rockies sent the minimum to bat through four innings against Elias (5-8). Only Cristhian Adames got a hit, a single in the fourth, before DJ LeMahieu hit into a double play. And Wilin Rosario walked in the fifth inning.

In the third, Kyle Parker, Tom Murphy and Brandon Barnes struck out on 14 total pitches from Elias.

The Rockies struck out 14 times Saturday, eight against Elias. He K’d seven of the first nine Rockies he faced.

“He threw strikes early and then was able to put us away,” said Murphy, the Rockies rookie catcher who made his major-league debut. He went hitless but scored in the fifth. “That’s a recipe for success.”

The Mariners, in turn, found little trouble from Rockies lefty Yohan Flande. Robinson Cano hit a home run that seemed to orbit the sun before it bounced off the second-deck facade in right field to lead off the second inning.

Nelson Cruz lined home Kyle Seager, who doubled, in the third. And Jesus Montero homered to straight center field just over Barnes’ jump at the wall in the fourth.

Flande (3-3) left after 3 innings — the shortest outing of his career — having allowed six hits, with a 4-0 deficit. His relief, former starter David Hale, allowed a home run to Franklin Gutierrez in the fifth.

But the Rockies rallied some in the sixth when LeMahieu and Nolan Arenado small-balled two runs in on a fielder’s choice and a sacrifice fly.

“Real good slider. He was getting to the back foot of our right handed hitters,” Weiss said. “It’s a good arm.”

The Rockies have the unlucky disadvantage of playing in a division with two all-world left-handers in the Los Angeles Dodgers’ Kershaw and the San Francisco Giants’ Madison Bumgarner. Of the Rockies’ 25 losses against lefties this season, five have come against those two.

An interleague series against the Mariners might have provided something fresh. But the Rockies are now 4-15 against American League teams (with right-handers or left) — the worst interleague mark in baseball.

Colorado kept close with stellar defense from right fielder Carlos Gonzalez (a full-extension, backhanded, diving catch sliding from grass to dirt to put out Cruz in the fourth) and third baseman Arenado (a quick-hop back-hand pick-up at his toes to put out Mark Trumbo in the fifth).

But Cruz blasted a two-run home run in the seventh off Hale — Cruz’s major league-leading 41st homer of the year — to put the Mariners ahead by five runs.

“We had a hard time making contact early. We punched out seven times the first turn through the order,” Weiss said. “Their lefty was electric.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke