Baker (Photo: Courtesy of Trish Baker)

EDITOR: A recent letter to the editor claimed that Trish Baker, candidate for Portage County Circuit Court Judge, is one of us. If by “one of us” the writer meant someone who has not been practicing law, he was correct.

Baker has been serving as Portage County Clerk of Courts for over four years, and while the office performs a vital role in county government, it is a non-lawyer position.

The minimum qualifications necessary to run for circuit court judge are that you must be licensed to practice law in Wisconsin for five years immediately prior to the election, be a U.S. citizen who is 18 years old or older and have lived in the county for at least 28 consecutive days before the election.

Baker has been licensed to practice law in Wisconsin for the last five years, but she has not been practicing for more than four.

The clerk of courts oversees the keeping of records, billing and official correspondence of the courts. The clerk’s office has a sign that states that the staff cannot give legal advice. That is because the clerk and her staff are not practicing attorneys.

Baker has satisfied the minimum standards for continuing legal education credits in order to keep her law license, but has not been actively engaged in the practice of law for more than four years. She has been working in other areas of the community, but the fact remains that she has not been involved in the daily application of legal principles in a system where the law is constantly evolving.

The legal experience that Baker lists as qualifications consists of part-time positions as Assistant District Attorney in other counties and a short period of time as a private criminal defense attorney.

While Baker’s qualifications do meet the bare standard for eligibility, she is clearly not the most qualified candidate.

Lisa Pett,

Stevens Point

All letters commenting on Feb. 16 primaries must be submitted by noon Feb. 8. To submit a letter to the editor, visit: http://static.stevenspointjournal.com/submit-letter

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1T15qrs