For years now, many restaurants and other eating establishments throughout California have been required to post calorie content of foods on menus to be in compliance with the state menu labeling law.

Calorie information has been made available to help consumers make informed and healthy food choices. California, along with some other states and localities, are leading the charge when it comes to restaurant menu labeling.

If you plan to be traveling out-of-state during the busy spring and summer travel season, you will likely notice this calorie information lacking at many restaurant locations. Just recently the Food and Drug Administration said it would be delaying enforcement of national menu calorie labeling, again, until 2017.

Initially, these rules were passed in 2010 as a part of the Affordable Care Act, but now, many years later, there is no uniform method to help people across the country make better food choices when dining out.

Some companies, like Subway for example, have met the national requirements before the deadline and already offer calorie information at the point-of-purchase in all restaurant locations. Many grocery stores, convenience stores and other retailers have slowed the process stating the excessive burden they feel the law places on them considering their larger and often more complicated offerings.

The law will eventually require all restaurants and food establishments that sell prepared foods and have twenty or more locations to clearly post the calorie content of food on menus and menu boards.

Since the majority of us are dining out at least once per week and many people eat out more often than that, availability of reasonable restaurant food choices is very important. Plus, now that calories are listed on menus, consumers are more aware of them and are looking for both balanced and delicious menu items.

To meet the demands of local health conscious consumers, many restaurants including Southern California favorites, like Islands and Cheesecake Factory, offer lighter fare menus within specified calorie guidelines.

While we know that mandating calorie information on menus in restaurants will not curb the obesity epidemic alone, experts do believe it’s an important part of creating a healthier food environment. Because people do often underestimate the calories in away-from-home foods, having this information available will help those who have the intention of choosing lower calorie items.

Advertisement

Also, you may have noticed surprisingly high calorie levels of some meals sold where you dine out. Some restaurant menu items even exceed the average person’s daily caloric needs. Public awareness of these less than favorable calorie levels may put some pressure on the food industry to improve the nutritional content of meals, resulting in additional healthy options.

Although, calories are posted at most Southern California eating establishments, there are still many steps you can take to make better food choices when dining out, both locally and when traveling.

• Check online for restaurants’ full menu nutritional data to more easily compare the nutritional value of menu items for things like protein, sodium and fiber. Reading the menu and nutritional info ahead of time can help you plan to opt for a smarter choice.

• When dining out with children, the kids menu is not always the safest bet when it comes to healthy options. Steer away from the fries and chicken fingers and consider sharing an entrée between an adult and a child or a couple children.

• Don’t be afraid to ask for simple modifications to your order. Most restaurants that make food to order are happy to go light on the salt or butter or put the dressing or sauce on the side, helping to cut back on extra fat, calories and sodium.

• Visualize the entire meal from beginning to end before choosing what to order. Starting off with an appetizer and ending with a decadent dessert will steer even those with the best intentions for healthy eating way beyond their limit. Keep in mind, the calorie content of appetizers are often comparable to entrees and desserts are typically meant to be shared.

• Select meals that incorporate veggies. Non-starchy vegetables like zucchini, broccoli and asparagus are nutrient-dense and low in calories. Pairing vegetables with a lean protein and a high-fiber, whole grain is all it takes to create a well-balanced plate.

LeeAnn Weintraub, a registered dietitian, provides nutrition counseling and consulting to individuals, families and businesses. She can be reached at RD@halfacup.com.