SyFy

How do you top a “Sharknado” movie? Add more sharknados.

The third installment of Syfy’s popular “Sharknado” franchise is set to air on July 22 and director Anthony C. Ferrante tells Speakeasy that the new film will feature multiple sharknados terrorizing the east coast. Dubbed “Sharknado 3: Oh Hell No!,” it primarily takes place in Washington D.C. and Orlando, Fla., but will incorporate a road-trip element too.

“The first thing I started pitching was this whole Washington idea, which is basically ‘White House Down’ with sharks,” Ferrante said, referring to the 2013 action film that starred Channing Tatum and Jamie Foxx. “I thought that would be fun to make sharks [the] terrorists.”

“Sharknado 3” was shot in 18 days earlier this year and stars Ian Ziering as Fin and Tara Reid as April, who are once again, tasked to stave off shark-infused storms. More celebrity cameos are lined up, with Mark Cuban, Ann Coulter, Bo Derek, David Hasselhoff, and Michele Bachman slated to appear.

Gene Page/SyFy

“Sharknado 2: The Second One” was Syfy’s biggest original movie, with 3.9 million tuning in live and dominating social media for the night — at one point, all 10 United States top trending topics on Twitter were “Sharknado”-related.

Ferrante says they’re trying to up the ante this time. “There’s a weird child-like joy with what you can do with a ‘Sharknado’ movie,” he says. “There are no rules. We don’t over explain it, we don’t say it’s because of global warming or a scientist created it.”

Along with another devastating weather pattern that causes hungry sharks to rain down from the sky, Ferrante notes that it’s a “different” type of “Sharknado” movie, where Fin’s notion of fatherhood will come to light.

“The first movie was Fin’s reconciling with his family,” he says. “The second one is [Fin saying] ‘I’m committing to my wife again, we’re going to make this work.’ You’re doing ‘Sleepless in Seattle’ with ‘Sharknado.’ This one is about fatherhood and parenthood – and how he deals with his son.”

Along with the new film, Syfy is planning new “Sharknado” merchandise, including a David Hasselhoff bobblehead and an “Archie” tie-in comic released on the same day. There’s also an official “Sharknado” soundtrack, which will feature songs from Camper Van Beethoven, YouTube star Dave Days, and Ferrante’s own band Quint, who contribute two tracks: “(The Ballad of) Sharknado” and “Crash.”

“Sharknado” fans should still expect a heavy dose of campy, nonstop action. “There’s a lot of energy in these movies because it’s an energy of desperation,” he says. “We’re trying to make magic happen. Some of the best stuff that’s happened in these movies comes from the sense of unpredictability.”