ADVERTISEMENT

During a conference call staff meeting on my last day of work, I announced that I was leaving my previous job after 15 years of cumulative service. Few were surprised, but a colleague I had known for many years asked the inevitable and age-appropriate question.

"Are you retiring?" she asked. "Nope," I responded. "I am just getting started."

I am one of millions of seniors in the U.S. who decided to walk away from an established body of work and seek what is commonly referred to as "an encore career." At the age of 24, naive and inexperienced, I lucked into my first job as a newspaper reporter and columnist. After 10 years at two newspapers, followed by five more in the magazine and new-media publishing spaces, I gave up my true calling to work in a far more lucrative career as a globe-trotting technology analyst. Even while relaxing in the business-class cabin of a flight to exotic destinations, it was always my dream to return to the world of journalism. When the opportunity came calling, I knew it was time for an encore.

I was lucky to be in the right place and the right time in regards to new technology. Two of the daily newspapers I worked for moved from analog to digital during my tenure, and I took more than a casual interest in observing the installation of Wordstar writing and editing terminals, not to mention the huge back office servers that would eventually take the place of manual typesetting.

But my luckiest break came in 1993 as head of new media for the San Francisco Chronicle, where led the team that launched the first daily newspaper on the Web. At the age of 40, I learned the language of the internet in its near-native form and was part of its early commercial manifestation. It's been a vital part of my career ever since, giving me the tools for exploration, communications, socialization, and personal expression that have allowed me to work well beyond the traditional point in which one receives his symbolic gold watch for time served.

Now a common term, an encore career represents a number of possible milestones: It can mean taking on a new field after retirement, continuing in your chosen area but in a new capacity, or striking out on your own as an entrepreneur.

Statistics show I have plenty of silver-haired peers working well past retirement age. The U.S. Census Bureau states that 16 percent of retirees remain in the workforce, up 4 percent in a little more than a decade. Far more telling is a peek into the future: A poll from the Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research revealed that 82 percent of workers over 50 believe they will work after retirement. Some 47 percent of those polled said they will be retiring an average of three years later than they thought when they were 40.

Changing course

The increase in the senior labor force is as a result of both economic prosperity and economic need, Professor Mo Wang of the University of Florida told The Kernel. Wang, director of the school's Human Resource Research Center, said that those who have done well financially tend to remain in their careers, wanting to keep their skills fresh and to pass them on to the next generation. For those who are working out of financial need, he added, the post-retirement path is often lower-end service-oriented jobs.

Wang added that health and healthcare both play a role in older Americans working past retirement. With advances in health care, more people are staying fit and mentally sharp after traditional retirement age, and with ObamaCare now providing low-cost healthcare options, workers can afford to strike out into more entrepreneurial activities.

While health care is less of an issue for the older workforce, Wang admitted fear of technology and a lack of understanding of how to use the Internet is a stumbling block for the workers who need it most. In other words, it's causing yet another digital divide.

"Because most people did not find their previous job using the Internet, they have difficulty marketing themselves on sites such as LinkedIn and searching for new jobs," Wang observed. "Older adults would be more motivated to learn about new technology if there were more programs in place to help them."

At 71, Norma Krieger is an inspiration. She was born in the Virgin Islands and raised in New York City — a city whose culture and pulse became the heartbeat of her early life. With a great opportunity in hand, Krieger moved back to St. Croix, where she worked as a hotel quality control manager for years until the she felt something was missing.

"Even though I thought I would slow down in St. Croix, I was really warming up, and I was at my creative best," Krieger told The Kernel. "I realized that I wasn't creatively fulfilled and wanted to change course," she continued. "I took stock of my personal worth and was compelled to create a brand that encompassed all my passions, skills, and interests. My art and advertising qualifications alone empowered me to move directly without hesitation into living my dream."

At an age when many shuffle off to the shuffleboard court, Krieger founded the Krieger Creative Group, a company that represents top talent in the art world. Krieger is quick to admit that embracing rather than fearing technology has been a tremendous help.

"The Internet is everything; it is the global viewpoint," Krieger noted. "I spend a lot of time on the Internet, researching, developing new relationships for the business, and keeping up with new marketing trends. In fact, today I will be participating in an interesting Adweek webinar in partnership with Shutterstock: 'The future of branded video.' I have joined a few Meetup entrepreneurial networking groups as well to keep myself connected to the community."

Read the rest of this story at The Kernel.