Bravo Creative Arts Center will present “Shrek the Musical” Thursday-Saturday at Ensworth Theatre. Shown here are Katie Chance (Dragon), Maggie & Mattie Wilson (Dragonettes), Mackenzie Roberts (Princess Fiona), Bobby Guenther (Shrek), Nick Meyer (Donkey) and Stevie Hollander (Lord Farquaad), (Photo: Submitted )

It’s summertime! Quick quiz: What’s the first “summertime song” that pops into your head? Mine: “Summertime Summertime” by The Jamies. That catchy doo-wop ditty was first released in 1958, but most of us know it from its use in various TV commercials.

I read the lyrics to the original song and, just between you and me, I don’t know how The Jamies escaped summer school! The brother/sister duo sing: “Well, are you comin’ or are you ain’t?/ You slow pokes are my one complaint /Hurry up before I faint / It’s summerti-i-ime.”

The next time a grammar fanatic complains about grammatical shortcomings of modern-day lyrics, kindly forward the “Summertime”lyrics to him/her! The song has other gems, such as “We’ll, shut them books/ And throw ’em away/ Say goodbye to dull school days. ... It’s Summertime!”

Here are a few local entertainment options for your summertime enjoyment (soundtrack optional):

Bravo Creative Arts Center’s award-winning youth theater group will present one of its largest undertakings ever — “Shrek The Musical.”

More than 100 of our area’s talented kids are participating in Bravo’s 30th theatrical production. Filled with all-new songs, dancing and spectacular sets, Bravo brings to life our favorite ogre, Shrek, feisty Princess Fiona and the lovable and chatty donkey. The whole family will enjoy this ultimate underdog tale that teaches the importance of looking beyond outward appearances.

Performances are set for 7 p.m. Thursday-Saturday with a matinee set for 2 p.m. Saturday. All shows will be at The Ensworth Theater, at 7401 Highway 100 in Nashville. Tickets are $10 in advance or at the door. Visit www.bravocreativeartscenter.com or call 599-5314 for more information.

Summertime fun isn’t just for kids. Franklin author Denise Hildreth Jones, president of Reclaiming Hearts ministries, will present her sixth annual Vacation Bible School for Women 7-9 p.m. July 11-13 at Jamison Hall in The Factory at Franklin. The free enchanted-garden-themed event will feature teaching by Jones, worship led by Regi Stone, crafts, skits and more.

“Women at their core are nurturers. Yet, sometimes we forget that we need to be nurtured as well,” Jones said. “We open the door for women to encounter the heart of God and the joy of even if for just a few hours, feeling like a kid again.”

For more information, visit www.reclaiminghearts.com.

And you’ll certainly want to mark your calendar for the 40th annual Bethlehem UMC fish fry. Grassland’s favorite summertime event will feature all-you-can-eat catfish, a free children’s game area (with admission), performances by 5 Points Swing and the Bethlehem Bluegrass Band.

The event is set for 4:30-8 p.m. July 18 on the shaded church grounds, at 2419 Bethlehem Loop Road in Franklin. Tickets are $10 in advance or $13 on the day of the event, $6 for ages 3-10 and free for ages 2 and younger. Hot dogs are available for children and a separate carryout serving area is provided.

For more information, contact the church at 794-6721 or www.bethlehemumc.com.

Angela Folds is humming summertime ditties at angela@creativedaycafe.com.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/local/williamson/columnist/2014/06/08/grassland-amid-summer-fun-grammar-takes-siesta/10025423/