A fire Sept. 27 at the Walnut Way Conervation Corp. closed the center, which has been the headquarters for the neighborhood nonprofit. Credit: Photo courtesy of Larry Adams

By of the

The fire at the headquarters of the Walnut Way Conservation Corp. closed the offices at N. 17th St. and W. North Ave. in Milwaukee, but it's also rallied the neighborhood and supporters of the multifaceted nonprofit to offer a helping hand.

In addition to words of comfort and financial donations, many have come forward with varied offers of assistance to the organization, which works with residents and a host of partners on health, education, housing, economic development and urban agriculture in the low-income Lindsay Heights neighborhood.

It's been more than a month since that Friday afternoon on Sept. 27 when a fire, believed to be electrical in origin, broke out on the second floor of the 21/2-story wood-frame house, according to Milwaukee Fire Department officials.

Sharon Adams, who with her husband, Larry, founded Walnut Way and completely renovated the turn-of-the-century building that was once a drug house, was the lone person in the building.

"I saw a little smoke, then a loud sound and high flames. I punched 911 and ran into the street" she said. "I was stunned because all these people were on a porch and young men were running to the house saying is anyone else in there."

The fire came at harvest time — a busy time for Walnut Way and its urban agricultural program, which maintains peach and pear orchards, bees for honey production, and crops of vegetables to sell at the nearby Fondy Farmers Market and neighborhood corner stores. The peaches had been sold, but the pears were at their peak, Larry Adams said.

The day after that, many people came by to offer support, including Joe and Jennifer Bartolotta, who have worked with Walnut Way.

"They came and brought bagels, coffee and warm hearts," Larry Adams said. "They walked around the orchard and saw how many pears we had and wanted to help."

So the Bartolottas had their staff at Bacchus Restaurant create a delicious gourmet dessert using 75 pounds of freshly picked pears from the Walnut Way orchard to serve at the upscale restaurant.

During October the restaurant menu offered a baked pear and almond tart for $10. All proceeds from the dessert will benefit the rebuilding efforts, Joe Bartolotta said.

"It was a great cause, and we were delighted to help out," he said.

Jennifer Bartolotta said, "You would have thought I gave them a million bucks. It was a small thing for us to do, but to the extent we can use our brand to raise awareness for the extraordinary work they're doing, it's a privilege."

Fire officials estimated the damage to the center at $43,341 to the property and more than $8,000 to its contents. But the damage is still being assessed and the nonprofit is in negotiations with its insurance company, Larry Adams said.

The fire knocked out the communications system — computers, emails and phones — at the center that serves as the hub of activity.

There were questions about whether the annual Harvest Day street festival would be held Oct. 4, the week after the fire, Sharon Adams said. In spite of early rain, the festival went on and about 300 attended.

Through it all, the work has continued, Larry Adams said.

"We're resilient," he said last week. "And there has been so much kindness and grace from neighbors, staff, the Fire Department and others. It confirms for us that if you have a great mission and you do good work, others see it and respond."

Sharon Adams said, "It's been a call to grow deeper. We're more determined and rooted than ever."

Word quickly spread about the fire, and help started arriving.

■Susan Lloyd, executive director of the Zilber Family Foundation, who directs the $50 million, 10-year Zilber Neighborhood Initiative that Walnut Way runs in the Lindsay Heights neighborhood, came the next day.

■The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Zilber School of Public Health offered a suite of offices where Sharon Adams and some of her staff could do business.

■ The chairman of the Walnut Way board, Rigii Njoroge, an IT expert, helped get the communications systems up and running.

■ The Urban Ecology Center opened space for some of the agency's program.

■ Boston Store, UWM and UW-Madison have called with offers of help.

The tours of Walnut Way and the Lindsay Heights neighborhood, including an international group from the United Kingdom, have continued. Staff also has proceeded with writing grants to keep the organization and its work moving forward.

"In the midst of the disruption, that's when you find out what type of organization you have," Larry Adams said. "When you have to improvise to overcome, that's when you find out what you're made of. I'm proud of the resilience of the staff and the organization."

Some of the staff have been working out of a building around the corner on FondduLac Ave. that Larry Adams refurbished to house the construction and landscape offices.

The rest of the staff will move there this week, and it will serve as Walnut Way's temporary offices.

In the meantime, the organization will accelerate its plans to build an innovation and wellness center at 1615 W. North Ave. that will eventually serve as headquarters, Sharon Adams said.

But the Walnut Way Center at 17th and North will be repaired and reopened because it represents 100 years of neighborhood history, she said.

"We want that history to be ongoing," she said.

To donate to the Walnut Way Conservation Corp., go to www.walnutway.org/.