What other people are saying about financial reform.

New York's Times Square shows news ticker about Lehman Bros. failing on Sept. 15, 2008. (Photo: Mary Altaffer, AP, 2008)

Paul Krugman, The New York Times: "The Dodd-Frank reform bill has, if anything, received even worse press than Obamacare, derided by the right as anti-business and by the left as hopelessly inadequate. And like Obamacare, it's certainly not the reform you would have devised in the absence of political constraints. But also like Obamacare, financial reform is working a lot better than anyone listening to the news media would imagine. ... Did reform go far enough? No. In particular, while banks are being forced to hold more capital, a key force for stability, they really should be holding much more. But Wall Street and its allies wouldn't be screaming so loudly, and spending so much money in an effort to gut the law, if it weren't an important step in the right direction. For all its limitations, financial reform is a success story."

OUR VIEW: Financial reform gets mixed grades

Republican staff, House Committee on Financial Services: "The 2008 financial crisis presented Congress, the regulators and the financial markets with an opportunity to break decisively with the past — to do things better, to be smarter, to learn from our mistakes. But by resorting to the same failed strategies and misplaced confidence in the powers of regulation and regulators that led to the financial crisis in the first place, the Dodd-Frank Act squandered that opportunity. Instead, the Dodd-Frank Act further entrenched the problem of 'too big too fail' by giving regulators even greater control over our financial system and a virtually unlimited pot of taxpayer money to bail out financial institutions when regulation inevitably fails. So long as the Dodd-Frank Act remains our response to the financial crisis, the 'next time' will be no different."

Nicole Gelinas, Los Angeles Times: "Between 1980 and 2008, mortgage debt alone quadrupled after inflation (the population rose only 31%). Other consumer debt, auto loans and credit-card borrowing and the like nearly tripled. Who gave Americans the cheap credit? The big banks. They would not have done so if their investors thought they'd be out of luck when reality bit. And when reality did bite, Washington pushed it back. Federal Reserve intervention as well as President Obama's decision to keep Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have pushed mortgage rates down to record lows, buoying house prices. It's not just mortgages. Since 2009, the going interest rate for a four-year car loan has fallen from 6.7% to 4.5%. The average credit-card rate has fallen from 13.4% to 11.8%. People are tempted. After falling since 2008 — back to 2004 levels — total debt has started to creep back up over the last year and a half. And everyone thinks that's a good thing, as auto and retail sales, too, are up. We don't like our too-big-to-fail banks, but we like the easy money they provide."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/VgF74T