Greatland, a provider of W-2 and 1099 products for businesses, has acquired Irvine, Calif.-based NewportWave, a company specializing in W-2 and 1099 software and support.

With nearly 25 years in business, NewportWave built its reputation by making electronic filing easier and more manageable for banks and small to mid-size businesses.

“NewportWave’s current products and customer base provide the Greatland team with a solid platform and the potential to grow relationships with existing customers,” said Robert Nault, Greatland CEO. “We look forward to helping small to mid-size businesses ease the stress associated with year-end reporting by introducing them to Greatland’s Yearli software.”

The NewportWave brand was acquired by Greatland, and within the year, NewportWave’s customers will be transitioned to the desktop version of Greatland’s Yearli software. Yearli offers the most complete federal, state and recipient W-2 and 1099 reporting platform for small to mid-size businesses and professional accountants on the market.

“I’m proud of NewportWave’s growth and am very confident that Greatland, one of the most trusted names for small to mid-sized business, will be able to offer our clients the same quality and service they have come to expect,” said John Hines, Newport Wave CEO. “NewportWave and Greatland have very similar visions on how to make tax reporting easier, which has made the transition seamless, allowing Greatland to provide even more value to our current customers.”

Yearli is a comprehensive W-2 and 1099 reporting software and online filing platform, available for businesses nationwide, and is designed to help businesses generate, file, and deliver all related forms. Yearli is compatible with all software and online filing platforms and has an optional data import, making setup easy. To learn more, visit newportwave.greatland.com.

Greatland also offers customers comprehensive Affordable Care Act (ACA) reporting capabilities to help businesses with the law’s mandatory requirements. Whether companies are looking for paper forms or e-file solutions, these tools will help guide them through the filing process. Greatland is able to assist businesses and insurance companies file Form 1095-B and Form 1095-C along with required 1094 transmittal forms, required for ACA reporting to the IRS and will provide copies to employees, with three filing options: paper forms, online filing or desktop software. To learn more about Greatland’s ACA reporting services and tools, visit: aca.greatland.com.