The federal government this week released extensive data on reimbursements to more than 880,000 health-care providers under the Medicare Part B program.

The datasets break down $77 billion in 2012 reimbursements by provider — including individual doctors and organizations such as ambulance services — and by procedure.

The Associated Press reported:

The raw data would be tricky for most patients to navigate, but Medicare expects consumer groups to create user-friendly tools for the public to look up doctors by name. [...] The data also will be used by analysts who study cost. High-volume physicians might be very good at their trade, for example, but some of those procedures could be medically unnecessary.

The searchable database above includes figures for Massachusetts health-care providers, and shows total 2012 Medicare reimbursements (a future database we'll create will break those totals down by procedure).

To get started, search either by provider / organization name, or by total amount.

The search tool will accept partial entries for the name field — so, you can search for last name only if you are unsure of a first name. Use ALL CAPS when typing the name.

If you're searching by amount, use the drop-down menu to select "Less than or equal to", "Greater than", "Less than", or "Equal to". Then, enter the amount in the field that reads, "Enter a number".

If your search returns multiple rows, click column headers to sort the data or use the "Adjust range slider" to set new maximum or minimum reimbursement totals.

Finally: Searching the database causes the page to reload, so please scroll back down to see the results. Searches may take a few moments, depending on your connection speed.

SEARCH THE DATABASE Text search is case sensitive. Leave fields blank to see the entire database (may cause longer load times). Provider / Organization Name includes Total Medicare Payment Amount 2012 ='>Greater than or equal to Less than or equal to Greater than Less than Equals Powered by freeDive Explore your results Instructions: Use the filter(s) below to customize your search results. Use the tool above to perform a new search. Click on a column label to resort the table. Fetching data... Thank you for waiting. Searches with a large number of results may take longer to load.

Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services