Donald Trump: Cheapest billionaire I know

Recently I received a forwarded "chain" email claiming that the rates for certain taxes we pay were slated to skyrocket come January as a result of the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare.

Something seemed fishy, so I ran it through a couple of fact-checking services, and, surely enough, it was a lie. PolitiFact had given the verbatim email their "Pants on Fire" label more than two years ago, when it first surfaced.

When I pointed this out to the man who forwarded it to me, he said he suspected as much but did not like to bother with fact checking.

He recalled being bored to death in his college history classes because of their preoccupation with minute details, but he said he enjoyed his political science classes because his teacher encouraged him and his classmates to "exchange ideas" without restrictions.

His explanation was both candid and interesting, and I could relate. It's similar to the difference between the fun of brainstorming for an op-ed column and going wherever the creative process takes you, as opposed to chiseling an essay, festooned with footnotes, that document the thesis but bog down the flow.

And while it's fine for acquaintances and Facebook friends to talk politics without a "works cited" page, it is never harmless for politicians to do the same. We have lately seen many of them revel in rhetorical flourishes in their campaign speeches, whose substance often does not hold up when examined for accuracy.

Likewise, commentators on Fox News and MSNBC have been guilty of political science-fiction. A 2012 Pew Research study, after all, found that people who watched both programs were less informed of the facts than people who watched no news at all.

Which leads to the following important question — is exchanging ideas in the media, without attending to the facts, a good thing?

Thousands of supporters of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump apparently think so. Trump is among our best examples of a candidate voicing ideas and feelings without careful regard for the facts.

For example, Trump's statement that Mexico was "sending people that have lots of problems" to this country — that they are rapists, drug runners and criminals of one kind or another — turns out to be a nonfactual generalization.

The American Immigration Council (AIC) reports that dozens of studies have shown that "immigrants are less likely to commit crimes or be behind bars than the native-born, and high rates of immigration are not associated with higher rates of crime."

The AIC's findings were accentuated by the Immigration Policy Center, which reported that the appreciably lower crime rate among the foreign born "holds true especially for the Mexicans, Salvadorans and Guatemalans who make up the bulk of the undocumented population."

Nonetheless, Trump pointed to heinous isolated examples of Mexican immigrants who have perpetrated crimes as an argument to build a bigger wall along the border and get tougher on immigration.

But describing a horrible example or two in order to indict an entire nation or race is fallacious, divisive, statistically negligent and, most significantly, manipulative.

Yes, Trump knows that such strategy can be appealing to his targeted audience. Racial stereotyping always feels like an easy answer — "look at this horrible rapist who is Mexican. We must keep Mexicans out of our country."

This resonates for voters who are too busy, too overworked or too tired to research the facts, or even to think independently. Instead, it's reassuring for them to hear someone like Trump confirm and validate their uncertainties and fears.

It's easier to succumb to Trump's demagoguery than to go through the arduous task of researching an issue and making an informed decision.

Giving in to Trumpism is a weakness that is understandable. When even an open-minded person, for example, either has, or has heard of, a negative experience involving a single person with green skin, he subsequently experiences a feeling of mistrust toward all other people with green skin.

He may know it's absurd. He may know it's illogical. But there is something else inside human beings, some hard-to-resist inclination from the Stone Age, that makes them willing to embrace rumors, suspicions and lies that are about someone not in their tribe.

Human beings look for answers that are immediately available to them. And when they are frustrated or desperate, they reach for whatever is closest. Trump is offering an array of answers that are close, that are easy but that are also lies.

Conversely, it's hard and time-consuming to learn the facts. It can even be drudgery.

But doing the opposite is irresponsible.

Doing what Trump does is more than just wrong. His abuse of the truth and exploitation of the fears and hatred of the populace make the billionaire Trump look pretty darned cheap.

David McGrath, a former resident of Evergreen Park and Oak Forest, is an emeritus professor of English at the College of DuPage. mcgrathd@dupage.edu