This is why the state needs an independent Natural Resources Board with real authority over the Department of Natural Resources, not an advisory body as Gov. Scott Walker proposed in his budget earlier this year. Republicans in the state Legislature were wise to reject the governor's proposal, and future legislators should do the same if the idea resurfaces.

On Wednesday, the board tabled the controversial pending sale of frontage on a northern Wisconsin lake to a major political donor of Republican Gov. Scott Walker, saying that it will take up the sale next February after further review. No improprieties had surfaced regarding the deal and the sale price, though on the low side, was within the appraisal range for the land. But enough questions were raised to warrant a delay and additional review.

Board Chairman Preston Cole of Milwaukee said the board early next year expects to review thousands of acres the Department of Natural Resources intends to sell because of a directive from the Legislature, the Journal Sentinel reported last week. But Cole added that the board wants to examine the Vilas County sale, which was being sold separately from those other properties, in a more comprehensive fashion.

"This one sticks out in a lot of ways," Cole said. "We just want to make sure that when we go through this process that it is done clearly and openly."

And that's exactly what the board should be doing, and what a purely advisory body would be unable to do.

The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported Sept. 20 that the DNR planned to sell the 1.75-acre lakefront parcel on Rest Lake in Vilas County to business executive Elizabeth Uihlein, who owns an adjacent 11-unit condominium complex that does not have access to the lake. The agreement called for the DNR to sell Uihlein 765 feet of lake frontage in the Town of Manitowish Waters.

The price, $275,000, was on the lower end of two independent appraisals that ranged from $238,000 to $384,000. The price of $275,000 is $359 per foot of lake frontage.

The sale has its critics, as the Journal Sentinel noted last week: "Selling prime shoreland on a northern Wisconsin lake is a terrible precedent," George Meyer, who is executive director of the Wisconsin Wildlife Federation, told reporter Lee Bergquist.

Meyer, who headed up the DNR from 1993 to 2001, also told Bergquist he was troubled officials got to this stage of a deal with Uihlein — hiring appraisers and negotiating a sale — without getting public input. "It appears to be some kind of special treatment," Meyer said.

Bill Broydrick, speaking for Uihlein, disputed the assertion. "It is completely and totally unrelated to her support of Governor Walker," he said in a statement. Uihlein and her husband, Richard, have donated nearly $3 million to Walker in recent years.

All that is well and good, and the proposed separate sale may be entirely proper. But protecting shoreline is part of the DNR's responsibility. And land sales that alter that protection deserve particular scrutiny. Count us glad that the Natural Resources Board is still there to do that.