Nancy Soper (left) needs a liver transplant. Her daughter, Tiffany Stanek, is trying to find a hospital that will accept Soper’s new insurance. Provided

The Affordable Care Act should have solved Nancy Soper’s medical mess.

A few years ago, the 55-year-old Beaufort woman’s pre-existing condition would have basically disqualified her from purchasing private health insurance on the individual market. Soper has cirrhosis of the liver, commonly caused by alcoholism.

“She went home the night that she was diagnosed and dumped all alcohol down the drain and hasn’t touched it since,” said Soper’s daughter, Tiffany Stanek. “Eight percent of her liver is working. She won’t be able to survive without a new liver.”

The 2010 federal health care law prohibits insurance companies from denying coverage to sick customers. That’s great news for Soper — except she recently learned from the Medical University of South Carolina that she won’t have the right kind of insurance come Jan. 1. She’s been waiting for a liver transplant at MUSC for nearly two years, but she can’t find a policy that will cover the cost of the operation or any other services at the hospital next year.

MUSC says it won’t kick anyone off the transplant list, but Soper’s story reinforces a few of Obamacare’s oft-cited shortcomings: Patients face narrow provider networks as insurance companies find new ways to save money and millions of low-income adults, such as Soper, still don’t qualify for Medicaid in conservative states like South Carolina.

“I can’t believe that (MUSC) won’t take me after a year and half,” Soper said. “I worked so hard to get where I’m at and now I have to start all over again.”

Consumers’ Choice closure

Soper is currently insured by Consumers’ Choice Health Plan, an insurance cooperative set up in 2012 with an $87.8 million federal loan. It was designed to offer health insurance shoppers in South Carolina more options and competitive prices on the federal marketplace.

Since 2014, Consumers’ Choice has been the only insurance carrier on HealthCare.gov that includes MUSC in its network of preferred providers.

In late October, though, the South Carolina cooperative announced it would not sell 2016 plans, forcing some 67,000 Consumers’ Choice customers to find coverage through another insurer. In 2015, a dozen of these insurance cooperatives, all of them facing grim financial forecasts, closed their doors across the country.

Most Consumers’ Choice customers already have selected alternate coverage. In fact, S.C. Department of Insurance Director Ray Farmer said Thursday that more than 62 percent of those 67,000 patients have purchased a policy through another company.

There are dozens of Obamacare plans, most of them sold by BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina and its subsidiary Blue Choice, that they can purchase through the federal health insurance marketplace.

The problem for Soper is that none of these plans cover her liver transplant at MUSC — the only hospital in South Carolina that even performs this procedure.

“We were told about it on Dec. 7,” her daughter said.

Other options

The government’s public insurance plans would pay for Soper’s transplant at MUSC, but she doesn’t qualify for one of those policies. She’s a decade too young for Medicare and her family’s total income — only $24,000 a year — is still too high for her to receive Medicaid, according to South Carolina’s eligibility rules.

Soper may have qualified for Medicaid if South Carolina Republicans changed their minds about expanding eligibility for the government’s low-income health insurance program under the Affordable Care Act. But Medicaid expansion was made optional by the U.S. Supreme Court in 2012, and for now, this state and 19 others have opted out. Gov. Nikki Haley has often said that South Carolina can’t afford to add more people to the Medicaid roll, even if the federal government covers most of the cost.

But paying cash for the liver transplant is out of the question, too. In 2014, the average billed charge for a liver transplant in the United States was $739,100.

Stanek, who manages her mother’s medical affairs, said the transplant department at MUSC told them they should find a hospital in Jacksonville, Fla., or Atlanta that will accept her mother’s new BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina insurance plan.

“We have family (in Atlanta) fortunately,” she said. “The trip is going to be exhausting.”

Stanek estimates, based on her mother’s position on the transplant list, that Soper would have qualified for a transplant at MUSC in mid-2016. Now they don’t know how long it will take.

“It puts her kind of back on the bottom,” she said. “She’s fighting really hard to stay alive.”

Narrow networks

MUSC spokeswoman Heather Woolwine said that fewer than 16 patients waiting for liver or kidney transplants at the hospital are insured through Consumers’ Choice. She said none of them will be removed from the list and MUSC will work with them to figure out their options.

She said the hospital assumes most of these patients, like Soper, will select one of the BlueCross BlueShield plans. MUSC is negotiating with the insurance company to “develop a transition-of-care plan for our patients who choose the BCBS exchange plan.”

“We continue to wait on (BlueCross BlueShield) for answers on how to best move forward for patients selecting their plan,” Woolwine said.

Patti Embry-Tautenhan, a spokeswoman for BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina, said the insurance company approached MUSC about participating in its provider network when it designed plans for the federal marketplace. MUSC declined, she said.

Medical University Hospital CEO Pat Cawley told the hospital’s Board of Trustees last week that MUSC did not participate in the BlueCross BlueShield network because the proposed reimbursement rates offered by the insurance company were “lower than Medicaid.”

Embry-Tautenhan said BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina reached agreements with other local hospitals.

“In addition, we offer our members access to some of the Southeast’s premiere transplant facilities,” she said, including Carolina’s Medical Center in Charlotte and Duke University Hospital in Durham, N.C.

Narrower provider networks have become commonplace in the insurance industry, she said.

“Narrower networks are a national trend and have been common in other parts of the country for some time,” she said. “They are viewed as a way to keep costs down and, therefore, increase affordability for members.”

Finding a way

For MUSC, the Consumers’ Choice closure created “an administrative nightmare,” Cawley told the Board of Trustees earlier this month.

Farmer said challenges like these normally arise when an insurance company leaves the market.

“I understand that Consumers’ Choice and MUSC and any other potential providers are looking at these (patients) on a case-by-case basis,” Farmer said. “Everyone is going to have work through that and this is going to be part of it.”

Stanek said she cried for two days when MUSC told her to find another hospital for her mother’s transplant.

“It took me an entire day to tell my mom. And for the first time in three years I cried in front of her because I felt so helpless for her,” she said. “And she said, ‘It’s OK. You will find a way. You always do.’ ”

Reach Lauren Sausser at 843-937-5598.