By Des Bieler

Bicycles can be good for commuting. They can also be good for communing with nature. On a bicycle built for two, whether you commute or commune, you had better be good at communicating.

This point was driven home to me as I spoke to tandem cycling enthusiasts. They’re the people who ride those funny-looking bikes with the two seats, and if these folks had a lot to say, it might be because they have well-honed communication skills.

One way to look at tandem cycling is as one long trust exercise. The trust comes from the person in the back, known in tandem parlance as the stoker. If you’re the stoker, as one person said, “you don’t have any control over braking, steering or shifting a bike,” which was an issue for her, a self-described “Type A personality,” to overcome.

Another person told me that being in the back “can be scary, it requires letting go, it requires trusting the person in front with your life.”

The person in front is known as the captain. This person doesn’t have to preface everything with “This is your captain speaking,” but the captain had better do a lot of speaking, or else the stoker is in for some unpleasant surprises.

I was introduced to these unpleasant surprises by Larry Black, who runs Mount Airy Bicycles in Mount Airy, Maryland. I arrived in Mount Airy with my wife, ready to try tandem biking for the first time. Because I have far more experience cycling than she does, there was no doubt that I would be the captain. But before we went anywhere, Black took me on what he calls a “stoker empathy lesson,” literally giving me a back-row seat for all the things that can ruin a stoker’s day.

There were several no-nos: wiggling the bike; giving an incorrect turn signal; pedaling quickly, then going into “leg freeze”; a sudden stop; and hitting a pothole without warning.

That last one was the most commonly cited reason for communication. Something about the design of a tandem provides a bigger jolt to the back seat when the bike hits a bump.

Captains should also announce gear shifts and braking.

I found this out on my test ride. After Black had shown us the proper way to get going (captain gets on first, then holds the bike steady as the stoker mounts, then the stoker positions the two right pedals so that both drive down on them), we took a few laps around the parking lot. Right away I realized that I had to be a lot faster in calling out bumps.

When we started to go uphill, I did my usual cyclist move of ramping up my pedaling. Unfortunately, I had not informed my wife, and she lost her footing. She did find some choice words on the subject.

I soon started to get the hang of verbalizing my intentions, and as we began to coordinate our movements better, the sailing got smoother.

If tandem cycling sounds like an elaborate, aerobic compatibility test, well, it kind of is. There is certainly truth to this saying: “Wherever your relationship is going, your tandem will get you there faster.”