Just because Wes Welker might play in the Broncos’ season opener doesn’t mean there isn’t concern that concussions are placing the star receiver’s career on borrowed time.

For proof, there was Peyton Manning drawing the first taunting penalty of his 17-year NFL career.

Welker, a 5-foot-9, 185-pound slot receiver in his 11th NFL season, was concussed late in the first half Saturday night when, after making a catch across the middle, he was blasted in the head by Houston Texans strong safety D.J. Swearinger.

Swearinger received a 15-yard unnecessary roughness penalty and on the next play, Manning threw a touchdown pass to Emmanuel Sanders. As most Broncos celebrated with Sanders, Manning — mindful of the two concussions Welker suffered late last season that forced him to miss the final three games — ran directly to Swearinger in the end zone and gave him the what-for.

“He was mad about the hit I made on Welker,” Swearinger said.

Welker did not practice Monday and he probably will be out the rest of this week. There is hope within the team that he will pass all concussion tests and be cleared a couple of days before the Broncos’ season opener Sept. 7 against Indianapolis.

For most of Welker’s career, the numbers attached to his player bio had to do with catches. In the six-year span from 2007-12 with the New England Patriots, Welker averaged an astonishing 112 receptions.

Since becoming a free agent and signing with the Broncos before last season, Welker has picked up a new number: three. As in three concussions dating to Nov. 17 of last year.

He also had 73 catches and 10 touchdowns in only 13 games last season.

The position he plays probably doesn’t help. Slot receivers work the middle of the field, between the hashes.

“You have to avoid linebackers, you have to avoid safeties, you have to sit down in the zone — and that’s where the big hits can come from,” said Sanders, who played slot with Pittsburgh but is an outside receiver with the Broncos. “Whereas on the outside, they’ll come, but they’re not going to come as much as in the slot.”

In Welker’s favor, the NFL is taking head injuries far more seriously than it did five years ago.

“There are independent doctors now that are in charge,” Broncos coach John Fox said. “There’s a protocol both on the sideline and in the locker room. After the diagnosis of a concussion, there is a protocol on the amount of exercise. The list goes on. There’s no doubt: It’s heightened now as opposed to 10 years ago.”

Welker walked into the locker room under his own power Saturday, and unlike the concussions he received last season, the Swearinger forearm was absorbed by a more padded, snug “concussion helmet.”

Still, Fox was careful not to describe Welker’s concussion as “mild.”

Asked about Welker’s spirits Monday, Fox said: “Very good. I talked to him this morning, he’s feeling good. Again, he’s going through the protocol now, and he’ll be out there when he’s deemed healthy.”

There is no uniform timetable involved in the NFL concussion protocol. Each case is treated individually. Running back C.J. Anderson suffered a concussion in the Broncos’ first preseason game and was back in a week. Welker sat out four weeks, counting a playoff bye, after his second concussion last season.

The concussion protocol begins with cognitive tests, and then cardio exercise is gradually worked in. Then the player is given light strength exercises. Then there’s cardio mixed with strength exercises.

Ultimately, a doctor independent of the Broncos and the NFL decides whether a player is cleared from all concussion symptoms.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis