Raffles at Moose and Elks lodges and even at the weekly church social might yield a couple of hundred bucks, but raffles at professional sporting events can be much more lucrative, and the crowd much more eager to participate.

The Tampa Bay Buccaneers this year joined several other NFL teams by implementing a 50/50 raffle with its captive audiences during home games. Half the take collected during each game goes to the Buccaneers Care Foundation to benefit young people and military veterans in the region.

The other half goes to one lucky fan.

With 40,000 to 50,000 football freaks crammed into Raymond James Stadium on any given game day, that fortuitous fan could pocket tens of thousands of dollars.

The team says it’s a way to raise more money for worthy causes and keeps the loyal fan base amused.

“The 50/50 Raffle concept has been gaining popularity across the country in recent years and we view it as an opportunity to help raise additional funds while adding to the in-stadium fan experience,” said Bucs Chief Operating Officer Brian Ford in a prepared statement. “The funds which are generated each home game during the 2014 season will add to the significant resources we have already dedicated to Bay area schools, students and military support.”

The first game’s jackpot totaled just over $23,000. The second game’s total, which had the advantage of a lengthy rain delay in the first half that gave plenty of opportunity for game-goers to buy raffle tickets, amounted to nearly $46,000, said Bucs spokesman Nelson Luis.

“The program just started with our season opener two weeks ago,” he said, “but we have already seen it gain traction as evidenced by the large increase in proceeds and prize money from week one to week two.”

Reaping half of those proceeds was the Buccaneers Care Foundation, which “is heavily focused on children and students,” Luis said, including support programs established in 21 Hillsborough County schools. The foundation also supports military appreciation programs and projects, he said.

While new at Raymond James Stadium, 50/50 raffles in sports arenas are not new elsewhere.

“It’s huge in Canada,” said Tampa Bay Lightning spokesman Bill Wickett, whose organization also offers 50/50 raffle tickets during home games at the Amalie Arena.

“I think hockey brought it from Canada to the States,” he said. “Last season, we offered it every game.”

One fan takes half; the other half goes to a Lightning charity.

“We did it a long time ago,” he said, before Jeff Vinik bought the team in 2010, “but it wasn’t successful. It was like selling 50/50 tickets at a high school football game. You signed your name to the back and gave your phone number.”

Now the process is electronic, like dispensing lottery tickets, and raffle amounts are updated in real time. People can see how much they stand to win, he said, and that fuels the ticket-buying frenzy.

“We’ve done raffles that took in more than $30,000,” Wickett said.

He said the 50/50 raffle during the 2013-14 season raised $450,000 for more than 60 charities.

In Canada, the practice is offered at various sports venues, and it appears Canadian fans are much more willing to take a chance.

During the 2013 Grey Cup, Canada’s professional football league’s Super Bowl, more than $500,000 was collected from about 50,000 fans and an Ottawa man went home $257,087 richer, according to Pointbreak5050, the company hired by several sports teams in Canada to conduct their 50/50 raffles.

The take was a record jackpot for a 50/50 raffle, eclipsing the previous mark by nearly $200,000.

“The Grey Cup got crazy numbers,” Wickett said.

Closer to home, the Jacksonville Jaguars also hold a 50/50 raffle during home games, which benefits the Jaguars Foundation. Games there only have averaged just under $7,000 a game, though.

The Tampa Bay Rays are on the bandwagon as well, offering 50/50 raffles at each of their 81 home games at Tropicana Field.

Rays spokesman Rick Vaughn said proceeds go to the nonprofit Ted Williams Museum and the Rays Baseball Foundation.

Not everybody is happy with the trend.

“It’s interesting with pro sports, they always are touting that gambling shouldn’t take place,” said Brian Kongsvik, help-line director with the Florida Council on Compulsive Gambling. “You hear it all the time about pro athletes gambling, how bad that is.

“This,” he said of the 50/50 raffle trend, “sends a mixed message about that.”

Sports teams are becoming a part of a trend toward gaming normalcy, and Kongsvik noted that Florida’s big-time college football teams and pro teams have become partners with the Florida Lottery. Five drawings between October and December offer as prizes tickets to games, team gear, season tickets for the next season and a flight and tickets to an away game. Little by little, big-time sports is tipping its hat to legal gambling.

Though legal, it’s still gambling, Kongsvik said, no different than the lottery, slot machines, blackjack and craps.

“There’s chance involved,’’ he said. “Any time people put something down on an uncertain outcome, it’s gambling.”

Two percent of the general population are compulsive gamblers and 3 to 5 percent have a betting problem, he said.

“So 7 percent — that’s 3,500 in a stadium of 50,000 — have some kind of gambling issue,” he said, “and that doesn’t include those at risk of developing a problem.”

Kongsvik said the football fan population may have more bettors than the general population, with many participating in fantasy football leagues or plunking down money in weekly office pools.

“For individuals in recovery, those who have a gambling issue or those who have a propensity to develop a gambling addiction, the raffles could be a problem,’’ he said. “The whole atmosphere is pretty ripe for somebody with a problem to stumble.”

He said his group raises official objections if gambling gambits are against the law, but not when they are legal, like these raffles.

“If it was illegal we would speak out against it,” Kongsvik said. “If it’s legal, we are just here to increase awareness, to let people know about it. We are a neutral organization.”

The teams that offer raffles have toed the legal line, he said, and everything about the growing raffle trend appears legitimate.

Florida statutes say raffles are legal if offered by a tax-exempt, charitable organization; raffles at the sports games typically are conducted by the nonprofit foundations formed by the teams. The Jaguars have the Jaguar Foundation and the Miami Dolphins have the Miami Dolphin Foundation and the Tampa Bay Rays have the Rays Baseball Foundation.

The Buccaneers Care Foundation recently placed advertisements for raffle vendors, or as the ad says, “high-energy, motivated sellers to join our 50/50 raffle sales team for the 2014 season.”

“Candidates must be willing to work nights, weekends and holidays if necessary,” the ad says, and“must be able to walk up and down numerous steps and long distances in parking lot and stadium grounds.”

The Bucs began offering the raffle without approval from the stadium’s owner, the Tampa Sports Authority. But the team really didn’t need permission, said Bobby Silvest, spokesman for the authority.

“All I can tell you is that I know they are doing it,” he said. The Buccaneers did not clear the raffle idea with the authority because, well, they were not required to.

“They are the tenant,” Silvest said, “and they do their own programming there.”

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760