Sanjita Pradhan (Photo: Special to the Register)

Sanjita Pradhan got a call from a Des Moines bus driver who had had a passenger riding continuously since 10 a.m. It was then 4 p.m., but the woman didn't know where to get off, didn't speak English, and only knew she lived near a Hy-Vee. Luckily Pradhan, who works for the state's Office of Asian and Pacific Islander Affairs, was able to speak to her in Nepali. And having moved Nepali refugees into a building near a Hy-Vee, she knew where that was.

It was the sort of situation that might arise for a small, non-English-speaking minority population in a midsize Midwestern city. Had it been New York or California, someone who spoke the language could eventually have gotten on and helped. But in Des Moines' ethnically and linguistically diverse Asian community, where some ride buses and others drive BMWs, that's less likely.

Pradhan, who never had such problems herself, was thinking about them when she applied to be on the President's Advisory Commission on Asian American and Pacific Islanders (AAPIs). The 19-member national advisory group, which includes business leaders, health professionals and community activists, had no representation from Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas or Missouri. Because the Asian numbers are comparatively small in this region, they are easily overlooked. But the needs here can be greatest.

Pradhan didn't have big-name credentials, deep pockets or major White House contacts. But she knew from working with Asian refugees some of their extraordinary challenges and needs. She told an interviewer she couldn't bring what "high-profile" commission members do, "but I will bring the refugees' experiences."

Last month the White House Initiative on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, co-chaired by Surgeon General Vivek Murthy and Education Secretary Arne Duncan, hosted an inaugural summit to discuss administration policies and programs on Asians. Pradhan was introduced as one of three new members of the president's commission.

Asians are only 2.2 percent of Iowa's population, but the state's fastest growing ethnic group, reflecting a nationwide trend. In Iowa their population grew 50 percent between 2000 and 2010, and another 10 percent by 2013. The biggest growth is in refugees, followed by high-skilled IT professionals brought in on temporary H-1B visas.

Iowa Asians have a median household income of nearly $60,000, compared with the $52,000 median household income of Iowans in general. But almost 11 percent of Asian households make under $10,000. Although more than half of Asians age 25 and over have a bachelor's degree or higher in 2013 — the highest proportion of any group in the state — there are refugees who never got a formal education and are not literate even in their native languages.

That makes for not just linguistic and communication problems, as my colleague Lee Rood has been documenting in a compelling series. It also creates fertile territory for cultural misunderstandings. Unfamiliar with U.S. practices, refugees have found themselves running afoul of Child Protective Services, suffering workplace injuries or encountering harassment in school, with painful consequences.

Newly arrived refugees get only 90 days of help with housing, state subsidies and other basics and then limited employment support for two years. Pradhan calls language access the greatest priority. Federal civil rights law requires that any organization receiving federal funding provide translation services. But "the largest number of complaints I get are about clinics and hospitals telling patients 'Don't come without an interpreter.' " It's a problem even for some Tai Dam and Laotians who arrived 30 years ago but no longer qualify for help.

Though English as a Second Language classes are now being offered closer to where community members live or gather, funding remains a problem. The Iowa Legislature this session rejected two bills, one for English language instruction and one for court interpreters.

Not only are new refugees, in Pradhan's words, "just thrown into these systems" unprepared, but local populations are also unprepared for them. That has led to conflicts in schools, including recently in Marshalltown, between the native and Burmese populations. There are 23,000 Asians in Iowa schools or colleges. While many thrive, some have spoken of being taunted for looking or smelling different. Refugees who fled their native countries or lived transitionally in camps often have experienced trauma. Yet Asians and Pacific Islanders are the least likely ethnic group to use mental health services.

These weren't the sorts of facts Pradhan expected to learn when she arrived here from Nepal in 2006 with her husband and baby on a diversity visa, awarded on a lottery basis. She worked for a year at the Principal Financial Group. But the "dream job" still presented culture clashes, making Pradhan wonder, "I have an English language education, I have money and I still feel challenged, so how are these refugees going to make it?"

She began volunteering with Lutheran Services in Iowa (LSI), helping connect refugees with jobs, later moving to Catholic Charities as director of their refugee program. She calls her work in the field both the toughest and most rewarding. For three years she was virtually on call around the clock. Her 2-year-old son barely recognized her. "He called my husband Mama," she said.

Today, as executive officer of the state's Asian affairs office, she maintains close ties with nonprofit organizations working with Asians. San Wong, director of the state division, said it will help to have her giving input into federal rule-making. "We want to make sure she feels empowered to bring forth the kinds of things we need our federal government to be aware of," Wong said.

Pradhan's first move on being named to the presidential commission was to write to Iowa's various Asian community members promising to be their voice with the government. That is progress; they badly need one.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Mn02Z6