VINELAND — For years, Cumberland County has been ranked the most unhealthy county in the state.

But the Cumberland Cape Atlantic YMCA is steadfast on changing that.

Recently, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services awarded the Vineland-based YMCA a $450,000 grant, as part of a national initiative aimed at improving community health.

"It's a dream come true," said Lisa Scheetz, chief operating officer for the city's YMCA. "This is one of the biggest grants our organization has ever received."

The CCA YMCA will lead a core group of governmental and nongovernmental agencies and use the funds to address disease control and prevention, obesity, diabetes, preventing tobacco use, heart disease and strokes. The money will only go toward addressing health concerns in Vineland.

However, Scheetz said using the grant in Vineland is a great starting point in hopefully getting Cumberland County out of last place in the state's health ranking.

"Cumberland County has been ranked the unhealthiest county for some time now," she said. "And 40 percent of county residents live in Vineland. So we felt it was a good starting point."

She added that the CCA YMCA has a long-term goal of addressing health issues in municipalities throughout the county.

Scheetz said among the areas the funding will address include: increasing accessibility to quality foods, promoting areas for children to play and exercise, working within the school district to educate children in healthy eating as well as the harms of tobacco.

"We have to look at where we live, where supermarkets are located, where people are purchasing food at," she said. "We often hear from people that they want to go out and purchase healthy food, but that there are no places to go (in close proximity)."

She noted that the funding will yield more personnel that has not been available in the past due to a lack of resources.

"This funding will bring the manpower and boots on the ground we need," she said.

Like members going to various corner stores and supermarkets and educating the store owners on easy and cost-effective ways to obtain healthy foods.

Funded in part by the Affordable Care Act, 193 awards totaling nearly $212 million (first-year funding) will go to regions throughout the country, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC) website.

New Jersey received two grants, totaling roughly $1.1 million with a focus on populations hardest hit by chronic diseases, according to a news release from HHS. The CDC will administer the grants.

---

Spencer Kent may be reached at skent@southjerseymedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @SpencerMKent. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook.