LORAIN — In a 7-4 vote, City Council’s ordinance to establish compensation, benefits and terms of employment for all elected officials of the city was recommended for a second reading.

The purpose of the ordinance is to eliminate insurance benefits for Council members and the Council president, which would save the city $108,000 per year in the general fund.

Mayor Chase Ritenauer explained serving on Council is considered a part-time position within the city, yet all members receive full-time benefits that are in “excess of what the Affordable Care Act requires.”

“It costs about $108,000 a year, plus paid-out claims since we are self-insured,” Ritenauer said.

He added the city is not required to pay part-time Council members’ health insurance; and now, if passed, the ordinance would change the policy in an effort to not only save money, but jobs too.

“We have to cut costs, and choosing not to cut costs in areas where we are offering a benefit that is more than what the ACA requires and more than many city councils in the area receive, will yield to other cuts.”

In other words, if Council refuses to cut its own benefits, sacrifices will have to be made elsewhere in the budget, and most likely, employees will be laid off, the mayor said.

Fire Chief Tim Browns fears his department will be the first hit if Council members reject cutting their own benefit.

“The hit will fall to the Fire Department, and I will be forced to cut staff,” Brown said.

Ritenauer understands his frustration.

“The Police and Fire departments make up 60 percent of the general fund,” Ritenauer said. “However, the Police Department has levy monies to support it, but the Fire Department is completely funded by the general fund.”

The four Council members opposing the ordinance were Brian Gates, D-1st Ward; Dennis Flores, D-2nd Ward; Tim Howard, D-3rd Ward; and Eddie Edwards, D-5th-Ward.

Since Council didn’t adopt the ordinance Monday night, it was forced into a second reading. It takes three readings for an ordinance to go into effect, but with the year ending and Monday’s meeting being the last scheduled of 2015, an emergency meeting may be called to vote on the ordinance.

In other action

An ordinance approving the request to rezone approximately 54 acres adjacent to 4104 Kolbe Road from residential 1-A to residential Planned Unit Development was rejected by an 8-2 vote. Councilman Daniel Given abstained from voting due to his direct involvement with the proposal. Council at large members Joseph Koziura and Frank DeTillio supported the project.

Flooding, sanitary sewer and traffic concerns were raised at a public hearing in November when representatives from Perpetual Development LLC approached Council with a $40 million, 151-home housing development proposal for the acreage. The number of homes was changed to 110, but despite the reduction, Council still rejected the proposal.

If passed, homes would have been sold for about $200,000 to $300,000 with 100 percent tax abatements for the first 10 years and 75 percent for the next five years.

Councilman Josh Thornsberry, I-8th Ward, said there were not enough answers given to Council’s questions in November regarding the project.

Thornsberry said despite Council rejecting the project, he expects the developer to return with a new set of plans, and hopefully answers to flooding, sanitary sewer and traffic concerns.

“Homes are OK, but (ideas) look better on paper, and we need answers,” Thornsberry said.