As predicted, the premium that drivers must pay for "pure" gasoline has shot up in Tulsa during the past few weeks.

So-called E0 fuel, or gasoline with no ethanol, had been selling for a premium of about 12 cents to 15 cents a gallon over the more common E10, which has 10 percent ethanol. But a change in how gasoline is supplied locally at the wholesale level has caused that spread to more than double at many of the retailers that carry it.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

Last month, I wrote a column quoting local fuel sellers as saying the hike probably was on the way. Chuck Mai, a spokesman for travel club AAA-Oklahoma, forecast E0's premium would rise to about 25 cents, which turned out to be pretty accurate.

QuikTrip, which offers E0 at four of its Tulsa-area stores, was selling the pure fuel for about 27 cents more than E10 on Friday. The latter was $2.88 a gallon.

Some other outlets around town were pricing E0 even higher, with $3.29 observed at one location.

The increase may cause some people to reconsider their choice of fuel.

Many E0 fans believe pure gas results in better performance, less engine wear and higher mileage. The first two contentions are debatable, especially for those with newer cars, but tests have shown that E0 often does produce more miles per gallon.

"When the spread was less than 15 cents a gallon, we used to suggest that consumers were better off with E0, since the higher mileage — about a 5 percent increase — offset the increase in price," Mai said.

"Now, though, with spreads of 25 cents or more, people will spend less overall if they buy E10."

Mike Thornbrugh, a spokesman for QuikTrip Corp., said his company is watching the situation. So far, he said, there hasn't been a dramatic change in the amount of E0 that QuikTrip sells, despite the price increase.

"It's always been a niche market," he said.

The spread between E0 and E10 could increase even more if wholesale prices rise and the baseline E10 fuel goes back over $3.00, he said.

Mai said he has noticed a few gas stations statewide that formerly were E0-only have added E10 recently, possibly to offer consumers another price point.

Retailers say the increase in the spread locally is the result of a change in the kind of fuel brought into this market by a major pipeline. Previously, the system transported 87-octane pure gasoline. In mid-September, however, it switched to bringing in "suboctane," or 83/84 octane gas.

The lower-octane gas allows buyers to more easily add 10 percent ethanol to create a blend. If the marketer wants 100 percent pure gasoline, though, it now has to mix the "suboctane" with 91-grade premium.

The change was made because of customer demand, since E10 dominates the market and sellers are under pressure from the government to increase the amount of biofuels offered. Ethanol, which is made from corn, is a biofuel.

So, will the rising extra expense of E0 kill off pure gasoline in the Tulsa area? Mai doesn't think so.

"E0 still is the best fuel for vehicles made before 1985, which includes many classic cars," he said.

And there's another, possibly even bigger, reason that E0 will remain available at a limited number of pumps.