On June 9, President Barack Obama spoke before the Catholic Health Association and said that his first job out of college taught him that “every human being, made in the image of God, deserves to live in dignity.” According to CNS News, he also said that “all children…ought to have the opportunity to achieve their God-given potential.”

Here’s more from his speech :

“My first job in Chicago–when I moved after college to work as a community organizer–my first job was funded by the Campaign for Human Development, an anti-poverty initiative of the Catholic Church,” said Obama in his talk to the Catholic Hospital Association. “And my first office was at Holy Rosary Church on the South Side of Chicago, across from Palmer Park.” It was in the context of this work, Obama explained, that he saw “that every human being, made in the image of God, deserves to live in dignity.” “There were times where I felt like quitting, where I wondered if the path I’d chosen was too hard,” said Obama. “But despite these challenges, I saw how kindness and compassion and faith can change the arc of people’s lives,” he said. “And I saw the power of faith–a shared belief that every human being, made in the image of God, deserves to live in dignity; that all children, no matter who they are or where they come from or how much money they were born into, ought to have the opportunity to achieve their God-given potential; that we are all called, in the words of His Holiness Pope Francis, ‘to satisfy the demands of justice, fairness, and respect for every human being.’”

Obama’s speech is literally mind blowing, considering his radical support for abortion-on-demand in America and around the world. As LifeNews previously reported, in 2009, Obama started his presidency with a bang by giving China, one of the worst countries in the world for sex-trafficking, millions of dollar to fund their brutal one-child policy. Then he promised the American people that his health care policy, Obamacare, would not fund abortion. However, four years later, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report that showed that Obamacare plans cover abortion and receive taxpayer subsides.

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

Of course, Obama has also rallied behind Planned Parenthood, the largest abortion business in America. In 2013, Marjorie Dannenfeiser, the president of the pro-life Susan B. Anthony List, said the following about Obama’s support for Planned Parenthood: “There is no industry that President Obama is more willing to protect than the abortion industry and particularly Planned Parenthood, the nation’s biggest abortion provider, which in a single year performed more than 333,000 abortions. The president has defended federal funding for Planned Parenthood to the point of being willing to shut down the government over the continuing resolution battle, and in return they spent a record amount to reelect him in November.”

Additionally, in 2013, he praised the abortion giant and said he wanted God to bless them. He said, “As long as we’ve got to fight to make sure women have access to quality, affordable health care, and as long as we’ve got to fight to protect a woman’s right to make her own choices about her own health, I want you to know that you’ve also got a president who’s going to be right there with you, fighting every step of the way. Thank you, Planned Parenthood. God bless you.”

Most recently, President Obama has showed his extreme abortion views by threatening to veto the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, which would protect babies after 20-weeks from abortion based on the concept that they can feel pain. In January, the Obama administration said in a press release: “The Administration strongly opposes H.R. 36, which would unacceptably restrict women’s health and reproductive rights and is an assault on a woman’s right to choose. Women should be able to make their own choices about their bodies and their health care, and Government should not inject itself into decisions best made between a woman and her doctor.”