Updated at 9 p.m. : Revised to include information on flooding rescue efforts.

By CLAIRE Z. CARDONA and KRISTEN TAKETA

Staff Writers

Almost an inch of rain fell Sunday, topping off a cold and wet weekend in North Texas and leading to more high-water rescue calls.

Between midnight and 7:15 p.m. Sunday, 0.86 inches fell at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, said meteorologist Steve Fano with the National Weather Service.

The rain brought the monthly total to 9.84 inches and the yearly to 58.76 inches. D/FW shattered both the 1991 annual rainfall record of 53.54 inches and the 97-year-old monthly record of 7.94 inches on Friday.

“That’s a big record,” Fano said.

The weekend was also about 20 degrees colder than the average temperature of 61 degrees, KXAS-TV (NBC5) meteorologist Remeisha Shade said.

Sunday’s high was 44 degrees.

“We may briefly get warmer ahead of a major storm system, but as far as several days of 70s or 80s, that’s over with,” Shade said.

The storm system has been blamed for eight deaths across the state and prompted several high-water rescues around North Texas.

From Thanksgiving morning through 8 p.m. Sunday, Dallas Fire-Rescue responded to 38 water rescue calls, though only one required a swift water rescue, and 27 investigation calls regarding possible vehicles in high water, department spokesman Jason Evans said.

Dallas Fire-Rescue also responded to 446 motor vehicle accident calls, he said.

Dallas County Fire & Rescue officials rescued three people and a dog from waist-high water about 9:30 a.m. Sunday in Seagoville, and four other families in the area voluntarily evacuated their homes, sheriff’s department spokeswoman Melinda Urbina said.

About 3 p.m., Urbina said two teenagers who drove into knee-deep water had to be rescued from the roof of their vehicle near Combine, 25 miles southeast of Seagoville. Dallas County firefighters and two Combine Fire Department responders got the teens out of the water where the current was between 15 and 20 mph, Urbina said.

The teenagers were not injured, and a barricade was placed in the area, she said.

River waters also lapped at the foundations of homes in the Horseshoe Bend community in Parker County. Joel Kertok, the emergency management spokesman for the county west of Fort Worth, said the river there crested and had begun to recede Sunday as the rain diminished.

“We have some water that came right up to the homes,” he said. “We were close.”

The search for a 76-year-old woman who was swept away by high waters on Friday remained halted Sunday because of high water levels and dangerous currents, Fort Worth Fire Department spokesman Kyle Clay said.

Zenola Jenkins of Burleson was dragged away with the current Friday. Tarrant County Sheriff’s Deputy Krystal Salazar and a bystander were also caught up in the high water while attempting to rescue Jenkins, Clay said.

Salazar was found clinging to a tree limb a couple of hours later, and the bystander was also found safe.

Cool temperatures are in the forecast for the rest of the week, with some cloudy weather Monday and Tuesday and a slight chance for drizzle Monday morning. Highs are expected in the low- to mid-50s with lows in the mid- to upper 30s.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.