The grocery store can be difficult to navigate these days.

From every direction, labels tout “natural,” “non-GMO” and “organic” qualities to attract customers.

Kate Cairns, a Rutgers-Camden childhood studies professor, studies the link between people, particularly women, and food, and spoke of the stress related to trying to understand labels.

“I think the availability of expert food knowledge is often framed as a source of empowerment for the consumer … but we found in our research this actually places immense pressure on the individual consumer,” Cairns said.

Not all labels are created alike, according to Qian Jia, a Rowan professor and the coordinator of the Rowan nutrition program. Some have to do with food safety, some are more a matter of personal preference.

Jia broke down the meanings one by one.

For starters, “natural doesn’t mean organic,” she said.

Slapping the word “natural” on a product may be good marketing but the definition of the term, when it comes to food products, is unclear. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has no official definition, but generally accepts products as natural that contain no added color, artificial flavors or synthetic substances.

Organic, while not regulated by the FDA, is regulated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and has to do with how the food is grown or raised, Jia said.

“For myself, I purchase organic fruit, organic meat for my kids,” she said. She worries about taxing their young livers and kidneys with the task of removing chemicals from food.

Studies of organic food have found no nutritional benefit to organic over non-organic, in terms of vitamins and minerals, though a 2014 analysis published in the British Journal of Nutrition reported higher levels of antioxidants in organic plants. The real benefit of organic food is less about nutrients, said Rutgers-Camden professor Charlotte Markey, and more about reduced exposure to pesticides.

While organic food generally means that no pesticides or chemicals were used, Markey said, the exact meaning can vary from place to place.

New Jersey adheres to the USDA standards when it comes to certified organic food. Certain natural pesticides are permitted under these standards, with a complete list of allowable and non-allowable substances easily available online for consumers seeking transparency.

Transparency is the main reason Campbell came out in favor of labeling for genetically modified organisms last summer. While many consumers have embraced non-GMO foods, and individual states are working on legislation regarding labeling on foods with GMOs, Campbell felt there should be federal legislation for GMOs.

“We manufacture in several locations across the country,” said Mark Alexander, the president of the Americas simple meals and beverages division of Campbell. To keep up with the required GMO labeling standards in each and every state where they distribute, he said, “It would be extremely difficult, if not impossible.”

The company believes GMOs are safe, Alexander said. “If they weren’t safe, we wouldn’t have them in our products.”

The FDA backs up the safety of GMOs, and notes that genetically engineered (GE) plants are required to meet the same safety criteria as non-GE plants.

Mostly, Alexander said, their customers just want to know what it in the food they buy.

“What we find is consumers would generally prefer to have more information rather than less.”

Campbell created a guide, whatsinmyfood.com, to explain each ingredient in their products to their customers. In America, the site says, “approximately 90 percent of all canola, corn, soybean and sugar beet crops are grown from genetically modified seeds.” These are common ingredients, making it tough to avoid GMOs.

“The food system in this country decided to accept GMO technology a number of decades ago,” Alexander said. “It’s ingrained in our overall food system. What we have found is the more we can inform consumers on this topic, the more they understand.”

For those who don’t want GMOs in their food, Alexander said, they have the organic Campbell products, which are non-GMO by definition. Organic is non-GMO, but non-GMO crops are not always organic.

And organic, non-GMO and natural foods are not always healthy by default.

“The only labels that really are completely legitimate are the required labels,” Markey said. “Any other label is really a form of advertising more than anything else.”

Those required labels are the nutrition facts and the ingredients list. And the nutrition facts matter, Jia said.

“A bag of chips made from a natural or organic potato, doesn’t mean it’s healthier than the chips made from a regular potato.”

What you want to look at, Jia said, is the portion size, the amount of fat and, in particular, saturated and trans fats. The sodium level, especially in processed food, is also important, particularly for those with high blood pressure or heart disease.

In animal products, she added, it is important to consider the use of antibiotics or hormones.

Other labels can also be unclear. For instance, “cage-free” eggs mean the chickens producing those eggs weren’t in a cage, Jia said, but it doesn’t tell you where they were, or how crowded those conditions were.

“Lowfat” is “a relative term,” she said. It means the product may have less fat than the conventional version of the product, but not in comparison with other foods.

Low-sodium foods are good for you, Jia said, but only if there is naturally less sodium. Check the ingredients list, just in case. “Sometimes they use potassium chloride and that’s worse,” Jia said.

Gluten-free options are a popular choice these days, and not just for those with celiac disease, a gluten intolerance. Gluten is a protein found in wheat, rye and barley, Jia said, and the term “gluten-free” does have FDA standards, because gluten is considered an allergen.

Choosing gluten-free options could help you avoid starchy food, Jia said, but it is not necessarily healthier. Likewise, sugar-free could still cause blood sugar to rise, as those items may have substituted other carbohydrates for sugar.

Whole grains are important in any food product.

“Anytime they have the whole grain label it means they have fiber,” Jia said. “It will slow down the digestibility of the food.”

When special labels lead to higher prices, that can also affect the actions of the customer.

“The notion that we would all be able to make the most nutritious choice ignores the fact that only affluent consumers have those choices,” Cairns said. Further complicating the matter, her research has shown that while there is societal pressure to care about what is in your food, caring too much also carries a stigma.

“You can be seen as elitist and too controlling,” she said.

It takes work to be an informed food shopper, Cairns said, not just looking at labels, but researching what those labels mean online.

Think about why you want to take certain labels into consideration, Markey recommended. “There’s a variety of reasons why we label food. We want people to make good food choices and they can’t unless they know what is in what they are eating.”

For more information

To learn about food safety and food labeling guidelines, visit usda.gov and fda.gov.

Learn about Campbell’s ingredients at whatsinmyfood.com and the GMO announcement is available at campbellsoupcompany.com.

Find out more about Kate Cairn’s research in her book “Food and Femininity,” available at bloomsbury.com/us/food-and-femininity-9780857855565/

Read or Share this story: http://tnsne.ws/1SkIKAe