Latham released a statement Thursday morning, saying with Senator Ted Cruz and Governor John Kaisch bowing out, there is no need to any Republican to not fall in line. (SOURCE: WAFF Staff)

Alabama Republican Party Chairman Terry Latham says it’s time for Republicans to put in-fighting aside and unify behind Donald Trump.

Latham released a statement Thursday morning, saying with Senator Ted Cruz and Governor John Kaisch bowing out, there is no need for any Republican to not fall in line.

“Republicans across America will come together to support and work for our presumptive nominee, Donald Trump,” Latham’s statement read.

He went on to say that stopping Hillary Clinton and undoing President Obama’s policies were the top priority.

“With a current United States Supreme Court vacancy, no economic policy being implemented, foreign policy in disarray, illegal immigration running amuck, the monstrous disaster and collapsing of Obamacare, this is our opportunity. America needs us now more than ever."

Alabama Republican Party Chairman Terry Lathan's full statement is listed below

Today, we have a new focus in our mission to take back the White House. With the campaign suspensions of Senator Ted Cruz and Governor John Kasich, Republicans across America will come together to support and work for our presumptive nominee, Donald Trump."



"Our presidential primary has showcased some of our finest and most talented patriots who said, 'I will volunteer to serve our country.' The Republican voters of America have broken records in every state and are still speaking out. This is not an accident- it's a message."



"In Alabama, we had a record setting primary with 860,000 voters on March 1. The Democrats saw 397,000."



"We are determined to take our nation back from the liberal policies that Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton promote. Supported by an engaged electorate that has the world's attention, we will join together as one Party, with one mission: defeat the progressive liberal agenda."



"With a Republican president and Congress, the veto pen's ink will be dry. The dismantling of Obamacare will begin."



"With a current United States Supreme Court vacancy, no economic policy being implemented, foreign policy in disarray, illegal immigration running amuck, the monstrous disaster and collapsing of Obamacare, this is our opportunity. America needs us now more than ever."



"Alabama Republicans are ready to stand shoulder to shoulder with the citizens across our great nation to reverse the irresponsibility of liberalism and implement conservative policies. These include: less government, lower taxes, an economic path featuring strong capitalism and free markets, the world's finest and strongest military with peace through strength and protection of the unborn."



"It's time to make America great again. It's time to pray for healing and end the divisiveness in our nation.

It's time to stop the economic and social erosion of our country.

It's time to remember our founding fathers who left us the gift of freedom that is worth our fight.

It's time to focus on taking our nation back."



"To quote RNC Chairman Reince Priebus, 'Unity makes the impossible possible.'

Our unity will be seen worldwide in Cleveland this summer at our national convention, but more importantly, on November 8, 2016 as we meet at the polls and stop Hillary Clinton."



"America is worth this battle."

Copyright 2016 WAFF. All rights reserved.

Report an Error | Submit a Tip to WAFF 48