Timothy Jost

October 13, 2015

Implementing Health Reform. On October 9, 2015 the House of Representatives Budget Committee approved budget reconciliation legislation intended to repeal key provisions of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). As is well known, budget reconciliation is an expedited process that Congress can use to address the revenues, expenditures, or budget deficit of the United States. It offers a number of procedural advantages in the legislative process, the most important of which is that a budget reconciliation bill need only pass the Senate by a simple majority vote and cannot be filibustered.

Of course, a budget reconciliation bill must be signed by the President to become law, and a bill repealing significant provisions of the ACA will be vetoed by President Obama. The budget reconciliation process, however, provides a path for congressional Republicans to finally get a vote from the Senate on partial ACA repeal, force Democrats to vote on unpopular ACA provisions, and get a partial repeal bill to the President’s desk as the 2016 elections are heating up.

The reconciliation process begins with the adoption by Congress of budget legislation authorizing the use of reconciliation and giving reconciliation instruction to House and Senate committees. Congress adopted such legislation in early May. The 2016 Budget Bill instructed the House Committees on Education and Workforce, Ways and Means, and Energy and Commerce and the Senate Committees on Finance and Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions to each come up with reconciliation recommendations that would reduce the budget deficit by $1 billion for the years 2016 to 2025.

House And Senate Reconciliation Recommendations

The House Ways and Means Committee made the most ambitious recommendations, calling for the repeal of the individual and employer mandates, the Cadillac high cost employer-sponsored health coverage excise tax, and the Medicare Independent Payment Advisory Board. The Energy and Commerce Committee recommended repeal of the ACA’s Prevention and Public Health Fund (which funds public health and community prevention initiatives), the prohibition of the expenditure of Medicaid funds for Planned Parenthood for one year, and the transfer of funds that would otherwise have been paid to Planned Parenthood to provide extra funding for Community Health Centers.

The Education and Workforce Committee recommended repeal of the ACA provision requiring large employers with more than 200 full-time employees to automatically enroll their employees in a health plan offered by the employer subject to the employee opting out — a provision that has yet to be implemented. The House Budget Committee adopted all recommendations.

The proposed legislation is as significant for what it does not propose to do as for what it does propose. It would leave unchanged the provisions of the ACA that establish the marketplaces and provide for premium tax credits and cost-sharing reduction payments to help moderate-income Americans purchase care through the marketplaces. (The House claims in its lawsuit against the administration that the court must intervene its dispute because Congress is powerless to affect the administration’s expenditure of funds for the cost-sharing reduction payments, yet the House does not address this issue at all in the budget reconciliation litigation).

The proposed legislation would also leave unchanged the Medicaid expansions and provisions that limit the growth in provider and Medicare Advantage payments, frequent targets for Republican criticism. Indeed, the reconciliation legislation avoids explicitly taking away coverage or assistance from any who have benefited from the ACA.

Effect On Health Insurance Coverage And Costs

This is not to say, however, that the amendments would not have an effect on health insurance coverage. The CBO projects that the repeal of the individual and employer mandates would reduce the number of individuals with health insurance coverage by 14 to 15 million in most years, about 20 percent of whom would be children.

About 3 to 4 million fewer people would have employer-based coverage, about 7 million fewer people would enroll in coverage through the individual health insurance market, and about 4 million fewer people would have Medicaid or CHIP coverage. The legislation would leave 41 million individuals uninsured.

Premiums in the individual market would likely increase by 20 percent over premium increases otherwise expected. The repeal of the auto-enrollment requirement could result in an additional 750,000 individuals foregoing employer coverage. Finally, CBO estimates that 5 to 25 percent of those currently served by Planned Parenthood would lose access to the women’s services they were receiving.

The CBO projects that the repeal provisions contained in the House budget reconciliation proposals would reduce the budget deficit over the 2016 to 2025 period by a total of $78.9 billion. The vast majority of the savings come from repeal of the individual mandate, which would reduce expenditures for premium tax credits, cost-sharing reduction payments, and Medicaid as individuals who would otherwise claim these forms of assistance would instead choose to remain uninsured.

On the other hand, reductions in expenditures from the repeal of the individual and employer mandate are expected to amount to $256.9 billion over the 2016 to 2025 period. Of course, uninsured individuals would impose higher costs on health care providers through uncompensated care costs and on society as their health deteriorated, but those costs are largely off budget. The repeal provisions would also result in substantial revenue losses, including the loss of revenues from the individual and employer responsibility mandate taxes (costing $109.8 billion), medical device tax ($23.9 billion), and Cadillac plan excise tax ($109.3 billion).

The budget reconciliation package is likely to pass the House, where Republicans hold a heavy voting majority, although it will face solid opposition from Democrats and may face some opposition from Republican members who still favor a total repeal. Its prospects in the Senate are at least a little less clear.

It appears that the Senate Committees will not in fact draft their own separate reconciliation legislation but that the Senate will instead take up the House package. Reconciliation in the Senate is subject to arcane procedures, the most important of which are those imposed by the Byrd rule.

Points Of Order

While the Senate can pass reconciliation legislation, unlike most other forms of legislation, by simple majority vote without the danger of a filibuster, provisions of reconciliation legislation are subject to points of order that may be raised by members if the legislation does not meet certain requirements. If the Senate parliamentarian upholds a point of order challenge, the challenge can only be waived by a 60 vote majority. Such a waiver is unlikely to happen in the current Senate. Debate of a reconciliation bill in the Senate is limited to 20 hours and although amendments can be offered, they must be germane to the bill.

Under the Byrd rule, points of order can be raised under the Byrd amendment challenging provisions to reconciliation legislation that are “extraneous.” Extraneous provisions are defined to include those that:

Do not produce a change in outlays or revenues,

Are not in compliance with the instructions to the committee,

Are outside the jurisdiction of the committee

Produce a change in outlays or revenues that are merely incidental to the nonbudgetary components of the provision,

Would increase the deficit for a fiscal year beyond the “budget window” covered by the reconciliation legislation unless other provisions recommended by the same committee fully offset those costs, or

Recommends changes in Social Security.

In addition, FY 2016 budget legislation is subject to a point of order if it would cause a net increase in the on-budget deficit in excess of $5 billion in any of the four 10-year periods: 2026-2035, 2036-2045, 2046-2055, and 2056-2065.

All of the provisions in the House reconciliation legislation are scored by the CBO to affect revenue or expenditures within the legislation’s 10-year budget window. It seems at least arguable, however, that the $295 million savings accomplished by defunding Planned Parenthood is incidental to the real purpose of the defunding provision.

Also, the CBO projects that the adoption of the Ways and Means Committee recommendations—in particular the repeal of the Independent Payment Advisory Board—would increase budget deficits by at least $5 billion in each of the four consecutive 10-year budget periods beginning in 2026, which would seem to make those provisions subject to challenge both under the Byrd rule and the FY 2016 budget point of order. Finally, the CBO projects that repeal of the employer auto-enrollment provision would increase direct spending by at least $5 billion in at least one of those 10-year periods.

It is likely that the House will pass a reconciliation bill in the near future and that the Senate will pass a similar bill sometime this fall. It is certain that that bill will be vetoed by the President. Any significant change in the ACA will likely have to wait until after the 2016 election.