TAMPA — Colorado’s Nathan MacKinnon and Tampa Bay’s Jonathan Drouin were linemates with the Memorial Cup champion Halifax Mooseheads of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League, and ended up going first and third overall, respectively, in the 2013 NHL draft.

Tonight they’ll face each other as NHL opponents for the first time, and it comes after they had dinner together on Friday night to talk over old times — and new times, with Drouin now in his rookie year after the Lightning decided to leave him with the Mooseheads last season.

“We went to a sushi place,” MacKinnon said after the Avalanche morning skate in the recently renamed Amalie Arena. “I’m not sure what it was called, but it was good, though. . . I knew he was paying since we were in Tampa. I got him in Denver (where the Avs and Lightning meet Feb. 22). I’m sure he’ll rack it up when we get to Denver.”

MacKinnon said of the game, “He plays left (wing) and I play right, so I’m sure we’ll get a cool picture of us lined up for a faceoff together at some point in the game. It’s going to be fun. It’s going to be a cool memory … We talked a lot about playing against each other, playing with each other in the NHL, and we get to do that at the age of 19, so it’s happened very quick and pretty young, but we’re both very excited (for) tonight.”

“It’s going to be weird, a little bit,” Drouin said a little earlier, after the Lightning skate. “We’re good friends off the ice, but it should be a fun thing. I’m sure he’s not going to give me a lot of space out there and I want to do the same.”

In 2012-13, Drouin had 41 goals and 64 assists in 49 games and then 12 goals in 17 playoff games with the Mooseheads. MacKinnon had 32 goals and 43 assists in 44 games, then 11 goals and 22 assists in the postseason.

So how did they so instantly develop a chemistry as linemates at Halifax?

“I don’t know, it just clicked,” MacKinnon said. “I think we just complement each other. We’re different players. he kind of slows the game down to attack and I guess they way we meshed was almost perfect, we were almost always in sync on and off the ice. We like the same things off the ice and we get along really well, and on the ice I think it translates.”

Drouin has 2 goals and 16 assists in 35 games for the Lightning, after recovering from a thumb injury that kept him out of much of training camp and then the first five games of the season.

Drouin said of MacKinnon’s strength: “His skating. He dominated skating in junior and he still does it here. He’s got a step on NHL players already and he’s 19. His skating’s got to be the biggest part and he’s a smart player to play with too. He’s got a lot of things to his game, and he’s a good guy too.”

MacKinnon was the chauffeur for his linemate a lot of the time in Halifax, MacKinnon’s hometown.

“I’d say some days were good, some days were bad,” he said of MacKinnon’s driving. “We were 16 when he got his license and I wasn’t too sure. My mom was like, ‘Make sure he’s safe.’ I said, ‘He’s getting there.'”

Said MacKinnon: “Any time he wanted to go anywhere, he would just text me, ‘I want to go to the mall’ or whatever. I thought it was just school and the rink, but it turned into everything.”

Halifax defeated the Quebec Remparts — coached by Patrick Roy — in the 2013 QMJHL final, coming back from a 3-0 deficit in the series.

“Scoring the OT winner at the Colisee, a big rink, with 15,000 people, is a special moment for me, for Nathan and the team,” Drouin said.

“I will remember that playoff for a long time,” said Roy. “We were up 3-0 in the series and then they took charge. Actually, Drouin scored the winning goal in Game 7 in overtime. They both played really well together. Drouin’s a great passer, he sees the ice really well, moves the puck really well and Nate has a lot of speed, and I thought that was a good mix for both of them.”

While MacKinnon was having a Calder Trophy season with the Avalanche a year ago, Drouin was tearing it up with the Mooseheads. He wasn’s happy when the Lightning sent him back to Halifax for the extra year of seasoning, but he concedes it probably worked out for the best.

“Looking back, I feel more ready,” he said. “It was better for my development and I matured a little bit too.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei