PA-13: Arkoosh Announces Long List of Local Endorsements

Written by Nick Field, Contributing Writer

If the financial reports didn’t convince you, Val Arkoosh has just released a list of Montgomery County Democrats that have endorsed her to prove that she is a serious contender in the four-way race for PA-13.

The first-time candidate and physician announced the endorsement of over 30 current and former Democratic officers who are backing her in her quest for the Democratic nomination.

“I support Val for her dedication to service in our community,” said Colleen Alexander, former chair of the Montgomery County Democratic Committee and committee person for Cathedral Village. “The job is never over for Val. Even after a huge success like the Affordable Care Act, I still see her working hard to improve the lives of others. This is the kind of attitude and devotion that will get results for us in Congress.”

“I’m honored to receive the support of these Democratic leaders across Montgomery County and I thank them for taking a bold stand in this race,” Arkoosh. said “This is a campaign to genuinely change the way we approach the critical issues of our time, and my team and I are working around the clock to deliver that message to each voter. This strategy is resonating across the district and I look forward to working with my supporters toward a victory in May.”

Other candidates in the Democratic primary for the 13th district are State Rep. Brendan Boyle, State Sen. Daylin Leach and former Congresswoman Marjorie Margolies.

The following is the complete list of current and former Montgomery County party officials that the Arkoosh campaign released:

1. Colleen Alexander – Former Montgomery County Democratic Committee Chair

2. Peter Amuso – Former Springfield Township Democratic Committee Chair

3. Adina Birnbaum – Springfield Township Democratic Committee Co-Chair

4. Wendy Blutstein – Cheltenham Democratic Committee

5. Ken Bradley – Former Springfield Township Board of Commissioners President and Former Springfield Township Treasurer

6. Olivia Brady – Former Area 11 Chair, Norristown Council-at-Large

7. Michael Brint – Cheltenham Democratic Committee

8. Penny Cutler – Former Area 9 Chair

9. Bonny Davis – Springfield Township Treasurer

10. Beth Drezner – Former Springfield Township Commissioner

11. Bill England – Cheltenham School Board Director

12. David Floyd – Abington Rockledge Democratic Committee Treasurer

13. Louis Freimiller – Cheltenham Democratic Committee

14. Jeff Harbison – Springfield Township Commissioner and former Springfield Township Board of Commissioners President

15. Linda M. Hee – Abington Rockledge Democratic Committee and Former Chair of Montgomery County Women’s Leadership Initiative

16. Joan Johnston-Stern – Former Cheltenham Democratic Committee Chair

17. Michael Kolodner – Former Springfield Township Democratic Committee Chair

18. Suzan Leonard – North Penn School Board Director and State Rep Candidate

19. Marsha Levell – Abington Rockledge Democratic Committee

20. Steve McCarter – State Representative for 154th State House District

21. Ken Mirsky – Cheltenham Democratic Committee

22. Napoleon Nelson – Cheltenham School Board Director

23. Daphne Oliver – Cheltenham Democratic Committee Co-Chair

24. Betsy Parziale – Upper Dublin Democrats Co-Chair

25. Alison Peirce – Former Springfield Township Commissioner

26. Jane Roberts – Former Springfield Township Commissioner

27. Roy Roberts – Springfield Democratic Committee

28. Robert Rosenberger – Lansdale Democratic Committee and Former Lansdale Borough Councilman

29. Baird Standish – Springfield Township Commissioner and former Springfield Township Board of Commissioners President

30. Tom Warms – Former Springfield Township Democratic Committee Chair

31. Ann Thornburg Weiss – Montgomery County Clerk of Courts and Former Upper Dublin Township Commissioner

32. Thomas Wieckowski, Ph.D. – Cheltenham Democratic Committee

33. Pete Wilson – Springfield Township Commissioner

March 5th, 2014 | Posted in Congress, Front Page Stories, Top Stories | 5 Comments