Carlyle Group’s David Rubenstein at the National Archives in Washington, in December 2013. Associated Press/Molly Riley

Carlyle Group David Rubenstein predicts the private equity industry may soon go through a consolidation phase that could strengthen the largest players in the field.

Speaking at the UBS Best of Americas 2014 Conference in London on Thursday, Mr. Rubenstein, Carlyle’s co-chief executive, said a large amount of assets are concentrated among the top players in other asset management businesses, but not in private equity.

Citing data from consulting firm McKinsey & Co., he said the top five managers in the exchange-traded funds business together accounted for 76% of the ETF assets managed globally. The same goes for large-cap domestic equities and U.S. taxable fixed income, where the five largest players commanded a collective 60% and 50% share of their respective markets.

“If the trends in ETFs and large-cap domestic equity are to happen in this industry as well, firms like Carlyle are likely to get a higher share of the assets under management,” he said.

Currently, the five biggest buyout firms manage 9% of funds allocated to private equity, according to the McKinsey data.

“That’s a small percentage,” Mr. Rubenstein said. “I do think consolidation will occur and the top seven or three or four firms will dramatically increase their assets under management as people are familiar with their brands and will give them money.”

For Carlyle, the consolidation will probably play out by the firm acquiring peers that will fill in gaps, or “niches,” in its product offerings, rather than through mergers with its competitors, according to Mr. Rubenstein.

“We aren’t likely to buy people who compete with us as we already have a pretty good business in those areas,” he said.

Mr. Rubenstein said the Washington, D.C., firm will likely buy firms whose founders are approaching retirement age and aren’t going to scale up their firms or bring them to the public market.

Write to Amy Or at amy.or@wsj.com