I DON'T envy Kathleen Sebelius (pictured), the Health and Human Services Secretary, or her deputies at the Centres for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Setting up the health exchanges was always going to be a complex task. Hostile governors and an apoplectic House made it harder. But many of the decisions made before and after October 1st, when healthcare.gov launched, are downright strange.

Yes, contractors are culpable, too. On October 24th executives from CGI Federal and QSSI, part of UnitedHealth, sat despondent before the House Energy and Commerce Committee. However the main impression from the four-hour hearing was one of disorganisation, and for that health officials, not contractors, are to blame.

Health officials were supposed to oversee how different pieces of healthcare.gov worked together (or didn’t, as it turned out). Health officials were supposed to ensure the system was tested in time. In the run-up to October 1st, officials insisted that everything was working fine. That makes them either incompetent, naive or liars.

Bloomberg Government reports that one-third of the funds for the exchange’s big contractors were awarded in the six months before October 1st. That’s unusually late. The contractors told Congress that healthcare.gov was not fully tested until late September, just days before the October 1st deadline. They also confirmed that health officials made a last-minute, fateful decision to force shoppers to create accounts before being shown insurance prices. That choice ensnared visitors to healthcare.gov in an endless, buggy registration process.

Health officials’ more recent decisions have been equally strange. On October 25th CMS held a conference call to tell reporters that they had compiled a “punching list” of problems with healthcare.gov. The idea is to knock them out, one by one. The government has hired QSSI to act as a “general contractor” overseeing the site’s fixes. The punching list includes fixes to 834s, the garbled enrolment forms sent to insurers. But other than that, CMS would not say which glitches are on its list. Why the secrecy?

It also refused to disclose who, other than QSSI, is working to fix the problems. A spokeswoman for CMS told reporters that the identity of the site’s fixers should be protected, so they can get the job done as quickly as possible. That’s very strange logic.

The mess is a nightmare for the White House. More important, it may become a nightmare for patients. CMS has set a fix-it target of late November. By then, apparently, the site’s bugs will be gone for the “vast majority” of visitors to healthcare.gov. CMS stresses that open enrolment lasts until the end of March. But shoppers must buy insurance by December 15th if they are to have coverage that begins in January. As Bob Laszewski reminded me, many of those already on the individual market (nearly 20m people) have policies that expire at the end of this year. These individuals, as well as millions of uninsured patients, would rather have coverage sooner rather than later.

(Photo credit: AFP)