The Broncos never did reach out to discuss a contract with Julius Thomas this offseason.

The tight end is working out contract details with the Jacksonville Jaguars, according to an NFL source. The deal is not done, according to the source. Then again, no free agent can sign with another team until 2 p.m. Tuesday.

It appears the most formidable names in Broncos free agency this season will be players leaving Dove Valley.

Thomas, who caught 24 touchdown passes the previous two seasons, is in talks with the Jaguars, who have more than $64 million in salary cap room

Left guard Orlando Franklin has reportedly drawn serious interest from the rival San Diego Chargers ($26.3 million in cap space) and coach Mike McCoy, who was Franklin’s offensive coordinator in Denver from 2011-12, and the Philadelphia Eagles ($43.7 million in cap space).

The Denver Post’s Troy Renck reported that defensive tackle Terrance “Pot Roast” Knighton is generating serious interest from multiple teams, with Washington ($24.5 million in cap room) the most aggressive pursuer.

The Oakland Raiders ($59.6 million), now coached by former Broncos defensive coordinator Jack Del Rio; the Chicago Bears ($28.6 million), now coached by former Broncos’ head coach John Fox and defensive line coach Jay Rodgers; and the Indianapolis Colts ($38.1 million) have expressed interest in Knighton.

The Broncos have not made a move to re-sign Knighton and, as of Friday, had not been in contact with Franklin’s agent.

All of those teams in pursuit of Broncos free agents have significantly more cap room than Denver’s $19.5 million.

There is a good chance the Broncos may not sign a player on Day 1 of free agency Tuesday.

Meanwhile, the Broncos are monitoring the market for safety Rahim Moore. He is drawing solid interest from multiple teams. He is considered the second-best safety in the free-agent market, behind only New England’s Devin McCourty, who is in hot demand. It could be that once McCourty reaches an agreement, teams losing out on him will turn to Moore.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis