Brooke’s Note: The TD Ameritrade conference may have changed the course of world history. With Chris Christie in a world of political hurt and Rand Paul looking very Dan Quayle, Mitt Romney would by far be his party’s best chance to beat Hillary. What he lacks is confidence, belief and desire. Then there’s his usual confusion over whether he believes he should say what he believes or what he believes that Rush Limbaugh wants him to say. Lisa reports that he seems to have found a better version of himself that is less lost in this house of mirrors and that he was vastly buoyed by finding an audience of smart people who like him.

In the financial advisory business, it is a source of ongoing embarrassment just how homogeneously masculine-, lily-white-, SUV driving- and two-kids-at-private-school-affluent its people are.

But for Mitt Romney, not so much.

When the former presidential stepped on stage at the TD Ameritrade Institutional conference last week before a crowd, mostly white and male in gender, his face lit up and the heavy-weather side of his personality dissipated. See: The odd case of Mitt Romney’s TD Ameritrade conference keynote and how it turned out for all concerned.

Though he is most famous for losing a presidential race and has done little in its aftermath, Romney remains perhaps the most respected and electable Republican in America. With that, the crowd was curious to see if Romney would run again, whether he had changed since his defeat and whether his views, known for their malleability, had changed again.

Most notable to the crowd was the folksy, self-deprecating style that was largely absent during his campaigns of yore where he showed disdain for candidates from his own party and from competitive ones.

Change in climate

But beneath the new velvet gloves were the same sharp barbs and unstinting criticism of the policies of the current administration. Romney delivered a laundry list of what’s wrong in the United States under the present administration to 3,000 attendees at the TD Ameritrade national conference in Orlando on Thursday. Most of his views were straight out of the GOP hymnal but the 2012 Republican presidential had some surprises in store.

Employing a laid-back style, Romney delivered attacks on the Obama administration’s handling of poverty, education and overburdening businesses to a decidedly sympathetic audience of RIAs. See: The odd case of Mitt Romney’s TD Ameritrade conference keynote and how it turned out for all concerned.

Romney said he is now passionate about climate change, an issue that candidate Romney was reluctant to address head-on, and, if pressed, didn’t seem to think was such a big deal. He still suggests that it is more the responsibility of Democrats and people outside the United States. Romney, who is known for owning large gas-guzzling powerboats, fleets of big cars and SUVs and keeping big houses well heated all over the United States, did not detail how he might reduce his own carbon footprint. Nor did he suggest how global warming can be addressed without placing restrictions on some businesses.

Shifting views

“It is a Democrat issue but I think it’s an issue for both parties,” he said. “If you think global warming is just in America, it’s not just America. There needs to be a global understanding and a real global effort. There’s no global effort whatsoever.”

This contrasts with his 2008 attack on Sen. John McCain for favoring a cap- and-trade program, and telling Fox News that the “McCain-Lieberman [climate change bill] would depress the economy.” In the New York Times, he said that McCain’s “views [on climate change] are outside the mainstream of Republican conservative thought.”

Previous to those outbursts, during his time as Massachusetts’s governor, the ever-complex Romney was a proponent of addressing climate change — and even proposed programs for addressing it.

Outspent and mischaracterized

Romney employed the same down-to-earth demeanor that was highlighted in “Mitt,” the recently released documentary chronicling his unsuccessful bids for the White House, but he was serious and straightforward when talking about problems at home and abroad. See: A Phoenix RIA has a $100-million client relationship riding on Romney.

“I look at the challenges we face and when I look across the world, we’ve made almost no progress whatsoever in these challenges,” he said.

In a candid moment, Romney said he’d have had a better chance of becoming president if he had courted Hispanic voters more ardently.

“I think the president overspent me in the Spanish media 10 to 1,” he said. “Their advertisements in Spanish media focused on two things: They made me sound like I was going to be punitive and they also said that if you’re low income and Hispanic you’ll get free insurance worth $5,000 to $10,000 and if Mitt Romney gets elected, he’ll take it away.”

Romney declined to discuss his platform talking point related to immigration during his 2012 run — self-deportation. Nor did he discuss whether he still believes that Arizona’s “papers-please” act should serve as a national model. Under that law, police officers and other state officials need demand immigration and naturalization papers from anyone who looks like an illegal alien.

Handicapping 2016

Even though Romney is riding a wave of popularity (a recent poll of New Hampshire’s prospective voters has him leading Republican possibles by 25 points) thanks to the documentary and his speaking tour, he insisted that he’s not running for office in 2016 .

And Romney professed himself enthusiastic about the current Republican crop of undeclared candidates. “I think the field of possible presidential nominees is getting larger. I think we’ll surprise the nation and I think the Republican candidate will win.”

Along with practically everyone else in the country, he suspects Hillary Clinton will be the Democratic nominee.

“People will have had eight years of Democratic leadership and will want a change,” Romney said.

Playing to his audience of financial advisors, thought to come down by and large on the conservative side of the political spectrum, Romney said: “I wish we could take the vote here and call it done.” See: A newly emboldened Obama may yet win on financial services reform.

Deficit cripples enterprise

Outside of politics, it’s no surprise that a main concern of Romney’s is the overwhelming U.S. deficit of $3.5 trillion, which he says shows no signs of improvement.

“As a good Republican, I’ll start off with debt. You ask me what’s being done and the answer is virtually nothing. The last several administrations haven’t been able to do anything and now we’ve got Obamacare,” he said.

“My own view over the last several years is that the burden placed on American businesses have made us less competitive than we ought to be in the quality of our products and costs of our products.”

Romney declined to say what areas of government he would be willing to cut but made it clear that he has ideas for how to spend more, saying funding of the military should be a priority for the United States. “You’ll hear that America spends 10 times more than anyone else, but what they forget to tell you of course, is the cost of a soldier in the U.S. is $100,000 with the benefits and it might only be $5,000 in another country. I think you need strong military to prevent wars and not to fight them. But the world is a dangerous place.” See: RIAs see mostly silver linings in the wake of Supreme Court’s decision on Obamacare.

Education deficit

One area in which he infers a willingness to cut pay for more troops is in the pay of schoolteachers. Romney said the system needs a complete overhaul and leaders that don’t pander to the teacher’s union.

“How can America lead the world if our kids aren’t leading the world. I’m happy to see a number of Democrats that realize the teachers’ union should not be the voice for children in America. The teachers’ union plays an important role supporting teachers, but shouldn’t be setting the education voice.”

Advantage GOP

Though Romney granted that the president has a lot to contend with, he expressed scant sympathy for Obama and said the shortcomings of his policies could work to the GOP’s advantage in 2016.

“The president is in a deep trough. There’s economic stagnation and Obamacare has had an extremely faulty [roll-out]. The breach of his promise that most people will be able to keep their doctor … has really shaken people’s confidence in him. I think the promises broken by Obama care will continue to haunt him into 2016.” See: A $3.4-billion DFA RIA sends his social media presence sky high with a 'Yep, I Built That’ strategy.

Looking back on the 2012 race, Romney reflected: “I came away feeling that I was extraordinarily blessed to run for president. I became convinced that America was facing extraordinary challenges and we weren’t dealing with them. I was convinced if we could deal with them properly America could continue to lead the world.”