Blue-White Game What: UNH’s final intrasquad scrimmage before the Sept. 3 opener at San Jose State



When: Today, 12:30 p.m.



Where: Cowell Stadium, Durham



Admission: Free





A little position-shuffling among the big guys up front has a couple of players in new-for-this-year spots for the University of New Hampshire football team: The bottom line is three of the five starters from a year ago are back to lead the offensive line.Juniors Tad McNeely, 6-fooot-2 and 290 pounds, and Alexander Morrill, 6-foot-2 and 303, have started most of UNH’s games the last two seasons, and senior Austin Heter, started all but one game last year.“I can talk to Tad and Morrill like they’re seniors because they’ve played 25-30 games now in two years and they’ve been to the playoffs, they’ve been all over the place,” said offensive line coach Alex Miller. “There’s not a new scenario in practice or a game that they’re not used to. Same with Heter. Playing last year was huge for him. Now he’s in there this year and he’s working on refining things, not battling for a starting job. He’s a starter and he’s looking to take that next step in the echelon of the conference.”Morrill, of Lebanon, is in his customary home at left guard.The graduation of left tackle Rob Bowman and center Mike Coccia, who is in camp with the Philadelphia Eagles, led to position swaps on the line. Heter has moved from right tackle to left tackle and McNeely moved over a spot from right guard to center.Junior Andrew Lauderdale, 6-foot-7 and 275 pounds, had already transitioned over from tight end and is projected to be the starter at right tackle. He is a Trinity of Manchester grad.“Lauderdale is doing a good job,” Miller said. “He’s been on such a steep climb since coming over from tight end. He just keeps getting better ... He’s already an aggressive kid. I don’t ever have to tell him to hit somebody. He’s always doing that. It’s refining pass pro (protection) and stuff like that that takes a little more finesse. That’s probably the hardest transition to go from tight end to O-line, the pass pro part of it. But every day he gets better.”Senior George Kallas and junior Curtis Nealer have been battling for the starting job at right guard. Kallas started three games and Nealer a couple last season.McNeely is not new to the center spot. He started the last eight games of his redshirt freshman season there after Coccia’s 2013 season ended with shoulder surgery. He was back at guard last season.“It’s great that he played center two years ago,” Miller said. “Now we move him back to center and there’s no learning curve. He’s already made calls. He’s already done this. It’s a great thing for me as coach to have someone to lean on. He’s a good player.”Morrill calls McNeely the leader of the group.“Tad’s had the most experience and has played a lot of football,” Morrill said. “He knows what he’s doing. For me, I look up to Tad and I think he’s the leader of the offensive line.”McNeely and Morrill have their similarities and their differences.“Tad has exceptional flexibility,” Miller said. “He’s also very intelligent. He and Morrill both are intelligent guys and that helps early. When you can figure out the playbook early, you can focus on your technique. When you’re younger and you’re worried about which way you’re going, you’re not always focusing on your technique.”Morrill’s strength at the start was his, well, strength.“Morrill, we just call him a big old bear,” Miller said. “He’s a strong human being. He looks like a refrigerator, or ice chest. He’s a strong kid. He’s got good flexibility. Tad’s probably a little more athletic and Morrill’s probably a little bit stronger. Where Tad’s gotten little stronger the last couple of years, Morrill’s gotten a little more flexible, which has made him a better player. He’s better at pass protection because of that. You had two different guys early on. One was really strong. One was super athletic and flexible and now they’ve both kind of meshed together over the last couple of years and it’s been good for us.”Miller looks to McNeely, Morrill and Heter, along with Kallas and Nealer, to help bring the younger guys — players such as Will McInerny, Jake Kennedy, Dayne Herron and Mike Zaloga — along.“Those are the kids that in a couple of years will be really, really good players for us,” Miller said. “I think we’ve got a good mix right now. The young kids are doing some things. They’re the ones who are not only going to be critical to our depth, but critical to our future as well.”The future is now, too, with the Wildcats opening the season at San Jose State, an FBS opponent, on Thursday, Sept. 3 at 10 p.m. Eastern time.Last year’s offensive line helped the Wildcats boost their output by more than five points a game from the season before and allowed opponents to sack UNH quarterbacks just 27 times in 14 games, the third best number in the Colonial Athletic Association. The unit did its share in helping UNH to a 12-2 record, an 11th straight appearance in the FCS tournament and second consecutive trip to the semifinals.