Health care (Photo: NEWS CENTER)

LEWISTON, Maine (NEWS CENTER) -- Health insurance regulators in both Maine and New Hampshire are working together to monitor a Lewiston-based health insurance co-op that serves tens of thousands of customers in both states.

Community Health Options was the only insurance co-op in the country to make a profit under the Affordable Care Act in 2014 -- only to rack up big losses the following year. A proposal to allow the state to seek temporary control over the insurer was rejected by the federal health officials.

Community Health Options has a little more than 84,000 members in both Maine and New Hampshire. After a promising first year in business, the company posted a loss of $31 million in 2015. That's why Maine Bureau of Insurance wanted take over the company temporarily to make sure it's on solid financial ground.

The state said it planned to trim the company's losses by terminating 17-thousand individual policies -- about 20 percent of the co-op's members. Last month the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -- which oversees the Affordable Care Act turned down the proposal saying it would have violated a provision that guarantees that ACA health care policies will be renewed.

Kevin Lewis, the CEO of Community Health Options says higher-than-expected enrollment and claims drove up costs. He also says the company has put 43 million in reserves to cover any potential losses this year. It stopped enrolling new customers in December and cut 11 million dollars in administrative costs.

'We simply didn't know how 2015 was going to close out was one piece and we have been hard at work making improvements, really stretching the premium dollar maximizing efficiencies reducing administrative costs,' said Lewis.

'The first two months of the year have been better that what was planned which is great but our plan is to monitor them monthly and be transparent of our assessment of them and post it on our website,' said Eric Cioppa the Superintendent of the Maine Bureau of Insurance.

Lewis says the company could raise premiums when it opens up individual enrollment. The state in the meantime says it's going post monthly updates of the company's performance on it's website.

If you would like more information you can go to www.maine.gov/insurance.

Copyright 2016 WCSH