The United States should be a land of opportunity in which every child born into poverty has a fair chance to succeed in life. Yet a major study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association provides insight into why there is a growing gap between a person's income and life expectancy. Even with these findings, the report can guide how future health care policies address these inequalities.

The study has four major conclusions. First, income predicts longer life. That richer people live longer, healthier lives has probably been true since the beginning of time. This study shows that, for men, the difference between the richest and poorest Americans is outrageous, nearly 15 years in life expectancy. The gap is over 10 years for women.

Second, and more worrisome, the gap between the rich and the poor in health and longevity is growing. Since 2001, the life expectancy of the richest 5 percent of the population has increased nearly three years, while for the poorest 5 percent, it has grown barely at all.

[READ: Your Health Depends On Your Race]

Third, health insurance and Medicare spending do not influence how long people live, whether rich or poor. This is not that surprising. Health insurance is about financial protection; that is, preventing people who are sick or injured from experiencing serious economic losses. Most health insurance payments go toward "sick" care and are not terribly effective at prolonging life. It's much more effective to prevent a health problem from arising, but our sick-care system is not focused on keeping people healthy.

Take lung cancer. Following diagnosis, surgery, radiation and chemotherapy drugs typically add a few months of life. It's an expensive but not a particularly effective way to increase life span. However, public health measures to prevent people from ever smoking and therefore getting lung cancer – increasing cigarette taxes, prohibiting indoor smoking and advertising bans – are much more effective at life prolongation, but aren't covered by health insurance.

Finally, geography matters. Unlike the rich, where poor people live has a big impact on how long they live. In New York or San Jose, California, poor people live on average nearly 82 years, while in Las Vegas or Indianapolis, it is under 78 years. Why this matters goes back to public health measures. As the authors of the study write, "The differences in life expectancy across areas were highly correlated with health behaviors (smoking, obesity and exercise)."

[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

This study suggests a powerful bipartisan bargain to reduce inequality in health and longevity in making Medicare more efficient. It is well known that there is great variation in Medicare spending, totally unrelated to the quality of care. That's why the Affordable Care Act included the authority to test and expand reforms to the Medicare payment and delivery system.

Imagine we embrace a Republican goal – reduce Medicare spending – and embrace a Democratic goal – invest the Medicare savings in public health and early childhood interventions.

This bargain would accelerate reforms to Medicare – taking on special interests such as insurance companies, hospitals and drug companies – and reduce Medicare spending on high-income people who can afford to pay. Not only would this make the Medicare program more efficient, but it would also free up resources for investment.

[READ: Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton Miss the Same Health Care Mark As LBJ]

This bargain would then invest in preventive interventions proven to make a health difference, such as reducing smoking. One such intervention is the nurse home-visiting program, which sends nurses to visit poor pregnant women during their pregnancy and after childbirth, helping them stay healthy prenatally and become better parents to their children. It also links them with social services and other supports. The results are overwhelmingly positive. Most importantly, they make the mothers and children healthier – thereby reducing longer term health care costs.