Please enable Javascript to watch this video

When it comes to winter snowfalls, this light year continues to be great news for downtown Davenport businesses.

"It really hasn`t affected people coming down here today. The streets are clear and you can park just about anywhere. We`ve had a pretty steady flow of foot traffic," The Full Kit's Mitch Dettman said.

The snow, and snow removal, hasn't been an issue for Dettman at the Full Kit on N. Main Street. Just around the corner at the Central Grocery on W. 3rd Street, it's more of the same.

"We`ve always had a good thing going for downtown. They come pick it up, and then they take it," The Central Grocery's Ramadan Farraj said.

Some businesses have seen some issues pop up this year, even with the light snow fall. In front of the Source Book Store, Dan Pekios says the streets get plowed, but the parking spaces can be a different story.

"If we get 4 or 5 inches, they pile all that snow up into the parking lanes. It`s a real mess. People park on top of it, they get stuck on top of it. They leave their cars there all night and the City can`t get around to cleaning it up," The Source Book Store's Dan Pekios said.

Pekios says the snow used to be plowed toward the center of the road, opening up the parking spaces. He says having those spots filled with snow is an issue with safety and can impact the business' bottom line.

"Now, every store front is filled up, so parking is a lot more critical now," Pekios said.

One of the big things these business owners would like to see is enforcement of the parking rules. Towing more often could define the rules quicker.

"Well, I noticed they stopped towing cars. If there`s cars there, they just leave it there and give it a ticket," Farraj said.

"They can only do so much. If people are parked on the street today, how are they supposed to get the snow out?" Dettman said.

During snow emergencies in Davenport, you cannot park in the snow routes, or you will be ticketed or towed. The parking ramps in Downtown Davenport are free during snow emergencies.