The healthcare industry is poised to revolutionize the quality of patient care, population health outcomes, and skyrocketing medical costs – known as the Triple Aim of Healthcare. In order to better address care coordination, transition between settings, and quality reporting, it is vital for the industry to implement effective health information exchange platforms.

However, there have been certain obstacles that have kept health insurers from participating and engaging with health information exchange systems. The Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association (JAMIA) published a study in which researchers attempted to determine strategies that could better address factors that block payer participation in health information exchange collaborations.

The researchers held interviews with top executives at 17 large payer organizations including Medicaid managed care plans and state Blues plans. The results show that payers have a certain outlook on what the most effective health information exchange platform should be, which diverges from the actual current approach to HIE systems throughout the country.

Health information exchange establishments mostly expected financial support from payers and either did not provide an option for data exchange to insurers or held their data support as less vital than that of healthcare providers.

“Despite widespread agreement on the value of HIE and substantial investment in HIE efforts over the past decade, broad-based electronic HIE is still not widespread. Payers are a critical stakeholder whose engagement and support can spur HIE development and full realization of potential HIE benefits to transform care delivery,” the researchers wrote in the published study.

During the payer interviews, some discussion revolved around how to develop effective policies in order to better engage health insurers with health information exchange organizations. Many felt that the HITECH Act could have gone farther in supporting HIE development, but the EHR Incentive Programs and meaningful use requirements assisted in spearheading EHR implementation – a vital part of health information exchange.

The payer community felt that Stage 1 and Stage 2 Meaningful Use regulations did not have strong enough stipulations to push forward data exchange and HIE efforts among healthcare providers.

“Nearly all respondents wanted the federal government to be more active in setting and enforcing interoperability standards in order to improve the quality and usability of data. This would generate value for all participating stakeholders using exchanged data,” the study stated. “Payers were cautiously optimistic regarding the effects of the Affordable Care Act on HIE development. Respondents acknowledged that ACOs and other value-based payment models promoted under the Affordable Care Act encourage providers as well as payers to think more about HIE for population health management, risk management, and outcomes monitoring. Most respondents felt that the momentum from the Affordable Care Act was driving HIE forward.”

Both EHR interoperability and health information exchange will play a major role in the coming decades as the healthcare industry continues to reform and develop more effective patient care strategies.