PRINCEVILLE — One way or another, this will be Bob Anderson’s final season as boys basketball head coach of the Williamsfield Bombers.

Williamsfield and ROWVA will join forces as a basketball co-op next season.

With his team off for the holidays, Anderson was in attendance at the Princeville tournament on Saturday.

“We ended up having enough kids to field a junior varsity team, but we weren’t sure that was going to be the case right before the season,” Anderson said. “If you’re having trouble fielding a JV team then you might be only a year or two away from having trouble fielding a varsity team.”

Williamsfield this season has 95 students, and ROWVA just more than 200.

The new team — without a moniker — will play home games next season at both Williamsfield and in Oneida, and compete in the Inter-County and Lincoln Trail conferences.

The new team also does not yet have a coach, but has at least one obvious candidate.

“We’re still in this season and I haven’t thought a whole lot about it yet,” Anderson said. “It’s going to be a young co-op. Maybe they’ll want a young coach.”

Anderson is 67, with a career mark of 601-413 in 36 seasons, all at Williamsfield.

Jason Lydic is head coach at ROWVA.

Williamsfield and ROWVA also will form a co-op this spring in baseball, softball and track and field. Those schools and Galva will continue as co-op partners in football.

BACK IN THE DAY: Princeville on Saturday night recognized its 1984-85 team that advanced to the Class A state finals in Champaign, and finished 28-3 after a quarterfinal loss to Providence St. Mel.

Garth Yess was a junior and led the Princes in scoring that season, under coach Jim Yauornik. Other team members included Chris Delbridge, now the baseball head coach at Princeville.

IN AND OUT: The 2014 Princeville tournament is the first in more than 30 years without Dan Sullivan in attendance. The former Princes coach, athletics director and recently-retired teacher is a first-year assistant with Mike Reynolds and Galesburg, part of the Taylorville tournament. Former Sullivan assistant Jeff Kratzer is in his sixth season as coach. … Marv McAdams was interim coach for North Fulton in its loss to Henry. Wildcats head coach Brad Shaeffer is expected back for Monday’s consolation semifinal against Lowpoint-Washburn.

Lonnie Schwindenhammer can be reached at 686-3214 or lschwindenhammer @ pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @Schwinlo