WALPOLE — A town resident has filed a petition challenging the selectmen’s plan to sell the Hooper Golf Course land.

Stephen J. Varone, who has lived in Walpole for 25 years, filed a petition in 8th Circuit Court Probate Division in Keene on Jan. 15, asking the court to amend the selectmen’s proposal, and to change the way such transactions are handled.

Varone said the selectmen’s plan to put a conservation easement on the land will decrease its value.

In August, selectmen approved a plan recommended by the Hooper Study Committee, which formed in 2011 to research options for the land. Selectmen serve as trustees of the Hooper Trust, which supervises a variety of nature-based educational programs. The trust is also responsible for the land.

The N.H. Attorney General’s Charitable Trust Unit, which oversees trusts in the state, has said for years the Hooper Trust wasn’t maximizing the value of the approximately 150 acres of land by leasing it to the golf club. The trust’s duties include getting the highest possible value out of the land, as set forth in the requirements of the trust formed in 1926.

The town’s plan is to work with the Monadnock Conservancy of Keene to put a conservation easement on the land before selling it to a private buyer at its assessed value of $1,188,000.

But Varone says selectmen are going about the sale all wrong, and claims they’re hurting the Hooper Trust by not selling the land for the top possible dollar.

“The problem is their appraisal is based on existing use as a golf course, which is probably not highest and best use,” he said Tuesday in a telephone interview.

Varone said his children have benefited over the years from the educational programs offered at the Frederick H. Hooper Institute, which offers agricultural, forestry, botany, soils and environmental science programs, following the wishes expressed in the will of George L. Hooper. Hooper died in 1916 and willed his mansion and the farmland surrounding it on Prospect Hill to the town for those purposes.

The institute also awards grants and scholarships to Walpole students in those fields, and Varone said he worries that selectmen’s actions may jeopardize the future of those programs.

“The Hooper Institute provides educational vocational services to supplement public schools,” he said. “Selling the property for less than it could be sold for is only going to hinder that, (because) you have less cash, and you can’t offer as many scholarships.

“That’s my interest, to make sure the educational programs continue.”

Putting a conservation easement on it before selling it will only encumber the property “in a manner that is almost certain to diminish its value because either they themselves do not wish the property put to an alternate lawful use or they believe to be acting on behalf of their constituency ... perhaps both,” Varone said in his petition.

In its petition seeking permission from the court to sell the land, selectmen said they believe that “given the Hoopers’ intentions in donating this real estate, that it was important to attempt to (ensure) that the real estate continued to be left open, with no further development.”

But Varone said in his petition that he believes the statement is false, and that the Hooper will says that if the town “wishes to relinquish the property, the real estate hereby conveyed shall be sold by the town of Walpole upon the best terms which can be obtained.

“The only true way to meet their fiduciary obligation to the trust is to sell the property without restriction to the highest bidder using a marketing effort designed to produce such an outcome,” he said. “The buyer of course is free to encumber the property after purchase if they so wish.”

Varone also claims that selectmen have mismanaged the property for years, including renting the property “for less than the value of the real estate taxes that should have been paid, had they adhered to (state law) ... no responsible fiduciary would ever do so.”

For the town’s part, there seems to be some confusion over the tax issue. In the town’s petition to sell the property, selectmen say that they at one of the public hearings on the topic, “a citizen questioned why the (Hooper Golf) Club was not paying real estate taxes to the town ... this added another layer of complexity to the situation.”

In his petition, Varone criticized selectmen for “granting the lessee a $500,000 tax exemption to reduce the tax burden. They also paid the taxes that were assessed from the lease payments rather than assessing them to the lessee, thus lowering the income to the trust.”

Varone’s petition also asks the court to remove the selectmen as trustees of the Hooper Trust, and to instead appoint “a special trustee ... to be a disinterested party (non-resident) who will act solely in the best interest of the trust. The selectmen are simply under too much political pressure to act objectively and without bias.”

Varone said Tuesday selectmen are “more concerned with the outcome of the (sale of) the property than what’s best for the trust, and that’s why court should take it out of their hands. The property is zoned rural/agricultural, so it’s not like it’s going to end up being a Walmart.”

Selectmen Chairwoman Jamie J. Teague declined to comment on the matter, except to say that the town’s attorney, Jeremy Hockensmith, would be filing a response to Varone’s petition in the near future. Hockensmith also declined to speak about the petition.