ALEXANDRIA, VA – Team Running Strong is Olympic Gold Medalist Billy Mills’s charity marathon team in the Marine Corps Marathon. Each year, both Native and non-Native members of Team Running Strong come together from across the country to run or walk 26.2 miles for the future of American Indian youth.

This year, in honor of Mills 50th Anniversary of winning Olympic Gold in the Tokyo games, Team Running Strong MCM has 50 available runner slots on it. Registration for the team opens March 1, 2014.

Team Running Strong is a proud charity partner in the 39th Marine Corps Marathon in Washington, D.C. on October 26, 2014. A spot on Team Running Strong offers a guaranteed spot in the 39th Marine Corps Marathon™, which sold out in record time of 2 hours and 27 minutes last year. Also, all participants take part in an ceremony and reception held at the National Museum of the American Indian with teammates, friends, family and Billy Mills.

RELATED Running Strong Provides 8,000 Native Kids with Back-to-School Supplies

Leading up to the event, all participants receive training and fundraising support, including their own personal webpages, advice from the Running Strong staff, and training tips from our own in-house Olympic Gold Medalist, Billy Mills.

Team Running Strong offers a chance to participate in the only charity team in the 39th Marine Corps Marathon benefiting American Indian children and families.

All MCM charity partners have a fundraising commitment of $722—722 was Billy’s Olympic number.

With the funds they raise, members of Team Running Strong help feed hungry Menominee children with healthy food on weekends, support youth opportunity on Cheyenne River, plant children’s gardens on Pine Ridge, save the Euchee language in Oklahoma and so much more.

RELATED Olympian Billy Mills to Receive the NCAA Theodore Roosevelt Award

Registration closes July 31, 2014. Runners who register before May 1 receive a 10% discount on registration. We only have 50 slots so register early!

For more information about Running Strong, visit IndianYouth.org.

**From a press release