South Carolina senior quarterback Connor Shaw celebrates after scoring a touchdown during Wednesday’s win over Wisconsin. Credit: JOE PETRO

SHARE Postgame videos Interviews following Wisconsin's 34-24 loss to South Carolina. Loading... Video Loading...

By of the

Orlando, Fla. — In the 1998 Outback Bowl, Georgia quarterback Mike Bobo dissected an overmatched Wisconsin defense by completing 26 of 28 passes for 267 yards and a touchdown to lead the Bulldogs to an easy victory.

The 2014 Capital One Bowl was the domain of another talented Southeastern Conference quarterback and once more UW's defense played the role of victim.

The quarterback who reigned over the bowl game and UW's defense:

South Carolina senior Connor Shaw.

"I've had a lot of good ones, and Connor is right there amongst the best," South Carolina coach Steve Spurrier said after his team's 34-24 victory Wednesday. "No question about it.

"Connor can take care of the ball and make plays when the game's on the line. And the game was on the line a whole bunch of plays today."

Let us count the ways:

■ Shaw attempted 25 passes and completed 22, for a completion rate of 88%.

■ He passed for 312 yards, breaking the 300-yard mark for the first time in 13 games this season.

■ He threw touchdown passes of 39, 22 and 3 yards.

■ He caught a 9-yard touchdown pass, from wide receiver Bruce Ellington, on a trick play.

■ He scored on 1-yard sneak for the clinching touchdown with 5 minutes 48 seconds left to cap a nine-play, 88-yard drive.

■ He rushed for 47 yards.

■ He converted three third-down plays with passes, one for a touchdown, and converted two fourth-down chances, one with a 3-yard run on fourth and 1 and another with a 22-yard pass on fourth and 7.

"We knew that coming in," UW coach Gary Andersen said when asked about Shaw's skills. "I saw it on tape. I heard about him from afar. He lived up to his billing."

UW defensive coordinator Dave Aranda came after Shaw with multiple fronts and blitzes.

The Badgers sacked Shaw just once, for 8 yards. Even on those plays it appeared UW's blitz surprised Shaw, he was able to use his feet and moxie to elude trouble.

"His ability to understand pressure," Andersen said, "even when we got him tricked, running free hitters at him. He's hard to get on the ground. He makes good decisions. He breaks out of pressures."

Consider how he converted a third-and-5 play on the Gamecocks' second touchdown drive.

Shaw scrambled to his right but kept his eyes down the field. Safety Tanner McEvoy, covering tailback Mike Davis in the right flat, eventually had to come up and challenge Shaw.

Shaw lofted the ball over the 6-foot-6 McEvoy and hit Davis for a 7-yard gain to the 41. Shaw capped the drive with a 9-yard touchdown catch.

"You kind of walk a fine line between being aggressive, getting after the quarterback, and containing him," UW senior linebacker Chris Borland said. "Our plan was to be aggressive. And at times we didn't get the pressure we should have and at times he was able to extend plays. That's very frustrating.

"We didn't play well enough to win today. I've got to give him a lot of credit. He's a great player."

Shaw finished 27-5 as a starter and led the Gamecocks to marks of 11-2 and bowl victories in each of the last three seasons.

In taking apart UW's defense in his final game, he left a legacy that will be difficult for any of his successors to top.

"It hit me a little bit after the game in the locker room," Shaw said of playing in his final college game, "but I'm sure it'll hit me more once this all ends and just the hype ends.

"But like I said, I'm just proud of our team and we're establishing a winning tradition around here."