Politics

‘We Are Going To Hold The Senate’ – DNC Chief

Democratic National Committee leader Rep. Debbie Wasserman-Schultz said Sunday that the Senate will be under the control of Democrats, adding that U.S. President Barack Obama's involvement in the GOP campaign is a failure.



Like Us on Facebook

During an interview with the Fox News Sunday, the Florida lawmaker said the Democrats "will hold the Senate." In addition, she said that voters will not be voting for the president because "he is not on the ballot," she said.



Wasserman-Schultz's statement came following the president's remarks last week that while he was not on the ballot, his policies are.



Ever since the 2014 campaign period began, GOP candidates have tried to tie their Democratic counterparts to several Obama policies, which have been criticized by the voters, such as the ObamaCare and the conservative political group's targeting of the IRS.



Several Senate races, including the one in Kentucky, have focused on tying Obama to Democratic candidates, where Alison Lundergan Grimes was put on the spot by Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell because of her support for ObamaCare and stricter regulations in the coal industry.



According to the Florida representative, the GOP is trying to drag the president in the race to detach themselves "from their own terrible record."



Her remarks came after a recent poll which revealed that Republicans have at least 60 percent chance of reclaiming the Senate. In addition, a Washington poll also stated that the GOP has a 93 percent chance of taking the upper chamber.



The Republican Party would need six seats to take control of the Senate.



The DNC leader added that the Senate will be under the control of the Democrats because the GOP have opposed efforts to wage increase and took health care away from Americans. According to her, voters should ask: "Who has your back?"



Meanwhile, Republican National Committee leader Reince Priebus told his Democratic counterpart that the president is leading America to the wrong path with the Democrats' aid.



Priebus added that he didn't know who's back the president has, "but it's not the American people's."



©2016 Chinatopix All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission