At 6:15 a.m. Tuesday, three Eaglecrest High School students shook off their nerves and prepared to join the ranks of the nation’s political and business elite at the Clinton Global Initiative America.

Led by their teacher, juniors Myduyen Nguyen, Christian Sunblade and Taylor Walker set off from Centennial to soak in the meeting and bring what they learn back to their classmates in the AVID program, which helps guide students from traditionally under-represented communities toward college.

Selected from dozens of AVID students at their school, Nguyen, Sunblade and Walker got the chance to see what success looks like through interviews with conference attendees.

That kind of exposure is a key element of AVID — Advancement-Via-Individual-Determination — which centers around exposing young people to success stories, like those of conference attendees, and is linked to the PBS series “Roadtrip Nation.”

The AVID program, deployed in schools in 45 states and abroad, parallels the universal education themes presented at the conference Tuesday by Chelsea and Hillary Clinton, who pushed for reform.

The students all hope to become first-generation college graduates.

“My hope is they are going to bring this back to 65 other AVID students (at Eaglecrest),” teacher Kristen Olander said.

The students already have met with representatives from Google, Microsoft and AT&T.

“It just kind of gives me new ideas,” Sunblade said, sitting in a bright green “Roadtrip Nation” recreational vehicle parked outside the conference.

The students said they were hoping to shake former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s hand before the end of the conference and excitedly spoke about sitting near former President Bill Clinton during a press conference Tuesday.

“They kept telling us it’s trial and error,” Nguyen said of the advice they got from CGI America attendees. “In the end, you’ll still be able to find the path you want to walk through.”

Jesse Paul: 303-954-1733, jpaul@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jesseapaul