Story highlights Jeb Bush talked gun rights in Miami on Tuesday

He said the federal government shouldn't make any new gun laws

Miami (CNN) Jeb Bush, speaking to a room full of high school students, said Tuesday that society needs to get better at identifying and helping people with mental health issues. He also argued that new gun laws aren't the right solution to address gun violence.

Asked if he believed in gun control, the Republican presidential candidate cast himself as a staunch defender of the Second Amendment and said he thinks Washington should stay out of the business of creating national laws.

6 photos: Who's running for president? 6 photos: Who's running for president? Ted Cruz, Donald Trump, John Kasich, Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, Hide Caption 1 of 6 6 photos: Who's running for president?



"So, ladies and gentlemen, I am officially running for president of the United States, and we are going to make our country great again," Trump told the crowd at his announcement. Businessman Donald Trump announced June 16 at his Trump Tower in New York City that he is seeking the Republican presidential nomination. This ends more than two decades of flirting with the idea of running for the White House."So, ladies and gentlemen, I am officially running for president of the United States, and we are going to make our country great again," Trump told the crowd at his announcement. Hide Caption 2 of 6 6 photos: Who's running for president?



"These are all of our stories," Cruz told the audience at Liberty University in Virginia. "These are who we are as Americans. And yet for so many Americans, the promise of America seems more and more distant." Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas has made a name for himself in the Senate, solidifying his brand as a conservative firebrand willing to take on the GOP's establishment. He announced he was seeking the Republican presidential nomination in a speech on March 23."These are all of our stories," Cruz told the audience at Liberty University in Virginia. "These are who we are as Americans. And yet for so many Americans, the promise of America seems more and more distant." Hide Caption 3 of 6 6 photos: Who's running for president? Ohio Gov. John Kasich joined the Republican field July 21 as he formally announced his White House bid.



"I am here to ask you for your prayers, for your support ... because I have decided to run for president of the United States," Kasich told his kickoff rally at the Ohio State University. Hide Caption 4 of 6 6 photos: Who's running for president?



"Everyday Americans need a champion, and I want to be that champion -- so you can do more than just get by -- you can get ahead. And stay ahead," she said in her announcement video. "Because when families are strong, America is strong. So I'm hitting the road to earn your vote, because it's your time. And I hope you'll join me on this journey." Hillary Clinton launched her presidential bid on April 12 through a video message on social media. The former first lady, senator and secretary of state is considered the front-runner among possible Democratic candidates."Everyday Americans need a champion, and I want to be that champion -- so you can do more than just get by -- you can get ahead. And stay ahead," she said in her announcement video. "Because when families are strong, America is strong. So I'm hitting the road to earn your vote, because it's your time. And I hope you'll join me on this journey." Hide Caption 5 of 6 6 photos: Who's running for president?



"This great nation and its government belong to all of the people and not to a handful of billionaires, their super PACs and their lobbyists," Sanders said at a rally in Vermont on May 26. Sen. Bernie Sanders , an independent from Vermont who caucuses with Democrats, announced his run in an email to supporters on April 30. He has said the United States needs a "political revolution" of working-class Americans to take back control of the government from billionaires."This great nation and its government belong to all of the people and not to a handful of billionaires, their super PACs and their lobbyists," Sanders said at a rally in Vermont on May 26. Hide Caption 6 of 6

"The federal government shouldn't be involved in gun laws because the country's very different," he said at La Progresiva Presbyterian School in Miami. "You go to a rural area, where guns are part of the culture, (and) to impose laws from Washington that are going to work in New York City, or work in a rural area, makes no sense."

His comments come less than a week after two journalists were shot and killed by a former colleague near Roanoke, Virginia, and Democrats were quick to pounce on his answer. The Democratic National Committee labeled his statement that the "federal government shouldn't be involved in gun laws" as "extreme" on Twitter.

Bush saying the federal government shouldn't be involved in gun laws is so extreme we need to show you the video: pic.twitter.com/HoVII4MwOG — The Democrats (@TheDemocrats) September 1, 2015

Hillary Clinton's campaign also jumped on the remark. Their Twitter account, The Briefing, tweeted a video going after Bush, posing what would happen if current federal laws, like background checks, were repealed.

When @JebBush says the federal government "shouldn't be involved in gun laws," what exactly does that mean? Watch: https://t.co/u1hTCwmDoP — The Briefing (@TheBriefing2016) September 2, 2015

Read More