Judy Wagner and her son, Steve Wagner, listen as Ann Ague, a docent at the Milner Schwarz home, explains the features of the parlor on Sunday. The Loveland Historical Society leases the home from the city of Loveland and cares for it. The group is hosting two more tours in September. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: Milner Schwarz House and Gardens tours. When: 10 a.m.-1 p.m. Sundays, Sept. 6 and Sept. 20. Where: 710 S. Railroad Ave. by Fairgrounds Park, Loveland. Cost: No cost. More info: Find out more about the historical home, said to be the oldest brick home in Loveland.

The Loveland Historical Society members have been renovating the Milner Schwarz home that sits on property next to Fairgrounds Park since 2010.

Volunteers have repaired flooring and walls and ceiling.

The society has landscaped and had volunteers help with outdoor gardens and a miniature railroad set.

And this year, the members set up several tours to allow visitors to walk through the rooms of the historic home, which was built in 1873 and is said to be the oldest brick home in Loveland.

"What we've done with it, the work we've put into it, we just love doing that," said Sharon Perry with the Loveland Historical Society.

The home, 710 S. Railroad Ave., is open to tours every other Sunday until Sept. 20 alongside the farmers market at Fairgrounds Park.

The home is owned by the city and leased by the Loveland Historical Society.

"The city wanted to make a parking lot here so the historical society and historical preservation; we kicked and screamed a made a fuss," said Ann Ague, one of the docents stationed in the parlor of the home.

Advertisement

Perry said that she was very pleased that Fern Milner Wolaver visited the home two weeks ago and brought some things that her father, Joseph, had owned. Wolaver is now over 90. Her father was born on the Milner property.

"I was thrilled to death," Perry said. "She brought us some things that belonged to her dad."

The home now boasts several family photos of the Milners, including a granddaughter, Emily Milner, that shows her senior class portrait. Another photo is a group of the first graduating class in 1894 from Loveland High School — Emily and four others.

Many items have been donated to the Loveland Historical Society for the Milner Schwarz home, like old journals and magazines from the late 1800s. (Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"(Fern) had never been to the house," Perry said, explaining that the home was used by a caretaker of the old fairgrounds when Fern lived in the area.

Perry added that members of the Schwarz family from Minnesota visited the home about a month ago. One of them talked about how her father, Gus, proposed to her mother, Irene, at the top of the stairs in the home.

"That was probably in the 1920s," Perry said.

In the parlor, Ague explained that most of the furnishings in the home have been donated. Only a few have been purchased.

Old copies of "The Ladies' Home Journal" and "Montgomery Ward and Co." catalogs rest on a coffee table and scalloped shelves hold ancient booties and boots for little feet.

Ague said that volunteers scraped through many layers of paint and wallpaper to get to the plaster of the house — which was a mixture of horsehair and plaster to keep cracks from forming. And that the mint green on some of the door jambs was the original color of the inside of some cabooses. So the society theorizes that the family bartered their beef for paint from the railroad that started coming through in 1887.

"And Sarah Milner, our first school teacher, there are articles that she lived in the house, but she didn't," Ague said. "She and her husband homesteaded (elsewhere)."

Another docent, Judy Balice, added that the fairgrounds caretaker installed electricity in the home. The Historical Society removed the electricity and added-on bathroom, and placed a nonactive outhouse behind the house, to return the home to its original look.

Balice said that the Wedgewood china gracing the tables in the dining area is over 100 years old and was donated by Chuck Thornburg, who family has a history in Loveland.

For details about the home, call 970-290-0169 or visit the home on two more Sundays in September.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.