We can't save the whole world

Bronx: My sympathies are with the people who are trying to escape the brutalities that are happening in the Middle East (“Human tragedy,” Sept. 3). I cannot imagine living under such chaos. However, no one can expect the other countries of the world to absorb the great numbers of people fleeing.

It is time that the people of the Middle East say, “Enough.” It is time they learned to face the danger, pick up arms and put themselves on the front lines to fight their oppressors.

Almost every country has had to fight for its freedom at some point in time — many times, in some countries. No one can expect others to lay down their lives for them or take care of them forever.

We have seen the U.S. spend money and lives attempting to train fighters, only to have those trainees turn and run in battle or just give up. We cannot do this forever, nor can any other nation.

We as a nation have given so much to others, including our life’s blood, and have many times been slapped in the face in return.

I believe that “God helps those who help themselves.” It is time for these refugees to stand up and help themselves by bearing arms and fighting back. Anna Maria McCorry

Traveling men

Albany: In “Blaz not invited on Andy Trip to P.R.” (Sept. 1) it was suggested that the governor not inviting the mayor to Puerto Rico was a “snub.” The trip was conceived as part of show of solidarity to learn about Puerto Rico’s health-care crisis amidst its economic challenges, and offer any support New York can provide here at home. The group that we assembled speaks to the purpose of the trip. It included health-care experts and elected officials of Puerto Rican descent who have fought tirelessly in New York and Washington to raise awareness of the health-care crisis. The governor of Puerto Rico did not determine who travels with us, nor does the mayor’s absence on the trip speak to any larger conspiracy. The simple truth is that the mayor has his trips and the governor has his; the two have never traveled together, and that is perfectly okay. Rich Azzopardi, senior deputy communications director, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo

Sit still and be quiet

Glen Head, L.I.: Once again, “progressive” educational think tanks are examining NYC’s failing school system. They spout the usual causes for dismal performance: poverty, income disparity, hunger, inexperienced teachers, lack of funding and, now, the newest cause, segregation. It would be refreshing to hear one of these experts comment on the main cause of failing schools: a lack of discipline. If students are are not taught by their parents how to behave properly in school, they will never achieve any type of academic success. Robert Kralick

Just say no thank you

Manhattan: Another undercover video reveals the dark side of animal agriculture (“Chicken farm loses business of McDonald’s and Tyson,” Aug. 28). Although normal industry practices involve a great deal of cruelty, the callous infliction of gratuitous pain on defenseless, innocent creatures is one of the best reasons to move toward reducing or eliminating meat, eggs and dairy from our diets. Jacqueline Raven

The end is near

Richmond Hill: The other morning, I was reading fellow Voicers griping about our city: our schools, subways, the homeless, racial issues, unions, politicians, the cost of living, the way we treat animals and even those two dodo birds, Kim and Kanye. I came to the only conclusion: We are not civilized any more. Michael J. Zvirblis

Beyond a reasonable doubt

Franklin Square, L.I.: Voicer Amelia Schiavone questions why the 42 accusers of Bill Cosby didn’t come forward sooner. Going back 35 or 40 years, Cosby was at the height of his career, probably the most trusted father figure in the entertainment world. His victims felt they would never be believed. Would Schiavone think differently if it were 142 accusers? Rob Mitchell

Just deserts

Clearwater, Fla.: Re “Clerk in cooler” (Sept. 4): Go to jail. Go directly to jail. Do not pass go. Do not collect $200. Hooray for our side! If Kentucky county clerk Kim Davis had complied by issuing same-sex marriage licenses, all would have been well. Let this case set a precedent: This is what happens when folks defy the U.S. Supreme Court. JoAnn Lee Frank

Heads and hearts

Bronx: To Voicer Mike Byrnes: The military dress code is a rule designated by the Pentagon, not a law enacted by the Supreme Court. Kim Davis is a government employee, and the law states that homosexual couples can get marriage licenses. Lisa Gonfiantini

Conscience uncoupling

Manhattan: I cannot understand why, under the Obamacare “conscience clause,” an employer is free to refuse to cover a whole range of female medical services, while a county clerk cannot refuse to issue gay marriage licenses without going to jail. Do we or do we not have separation of church and state in the U.S.? Suzy Sandor

Voice of compassion

Brooklyn: Voicer Elaine Sloan, you are truly a wonderful person and I stand in awe of your resourcefulness and compassion! May all your dreams come true. Thank you for sharing the story of you, Nikki, Skeet and Jessie. Kelly Starr

Old-fashioned police work

Bronx: The purpose of stop-question-and-frisk is evident in the case of Joel McCray (“Mugger may be Central Park menace,” Aug. 25). While patrolling in Central Park one night in February 1995, I observed an older male walking on an unlit trail with several male teenagers fanned out behind him. They were obviously up to no good — and it had nothing to do with the color of their skin. Their behavior, silence and formation told me they had committed or were going to commit a crime. That is the premise of the stop-question-and-frisk procedure. I followed McCray and the teens to a train station. When I descended the stairs, McCray and the teens were already coming back up. They were nervous and stated that they had just gotten off the train. At the bottom of the stairs were two smiling transit cops whose presence had obviously foiled their plans for jumping the turnstile. Another officer had found a robbery victim who positively identified McCray and the teens. I arrested them for robbery. If the anti-police movement had been in charge then, I would not have been allowed to stop McCray. Since when do the rights of the perpetrators trump the rights of victims? Sgt. Tara Burns, NYPD retired

Blue lives matter

Warrenville, S.C.: Being a second-generation law enforcement officer, now long retired, it cuts me to the bone to see lawmen around the country being slaughtered like sheep. It is time to take action against the fringe of the Black Lives Matter movement and anyone else who call for the deaths of officers. A federal law must be enacted creating an automatic death penalty for killing a cop. This would show that our country has the backs of those who lay their lives on the line to protect us. Gregory J. Topliff

Wrong woman for the job

Brooklyn: To those people who will vote for Hillary Clinton because she is a woman, I paraphrase Dr. Martin Luther King: It is not the color of a person’s skin (or, in this case, a person’s gender) that counts. It is the content of their character. Clinton’s character is full of deceit and duplicity; therefore she cannot be trusted to hold the most important office in the world. Chuck Eckstein

Our feverish planet

Oak Creek, Wisc.: President Obama tours Alaska and warns of climate effects such as melting glaciers and rising sea levels. Still, Congress refuses to act. Meanwhile, as climate scientist Bill Collins has said, “We’re running an uncontrolled experiment on the only home we have.” Terry Hansen

Falling flat

Bronx: Re “Judge pricks Goodell’s balls” (front page, Sept. 4): Come on, guys. You can do better than that. Are you actually paying someone to create your headlines, or are you letting your high school summer interns do it? Not funny, not creative and pretty offensive. David Rodriguez

The highest authority

Norwalk, Conn.: I would love to have Tom Brady lose his first four games. God would then have proven him guilty as hell! F. LaRusso