Doing it over, 'until it actually works'

Caleb Chatham, bottom right, works on the base of the team's robot project. Ashton Blustein, left, and Dillon Osborn, are helping out. The New Vista High School Robotics is the only Boulder Valley School District team that got invited to the BEST Regional Competition in Little Rock, Ark. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

With the New Vista robotics team headed to the regional BEST competition for the first time in several years, members are working daily afterschool to perfect their robot and presentation.

They're also showing off their robot and giving presentations at local schools, sharing the value of science, technology, engineering and math.

"I love it," said team captain Flip Keosheyan, a senior at New Vista. "It's a way to give back to New Vista."

New Vista's Robocalypse team took third in the area Rocky Mountain BEST competition in October, earning them a spot at regionals the first week of December in Fort Smith, Arkansas.

For the competition, the robot needs to gather "minerals" — objects like foil and wood — from a game field designed like a mine shaft. Students had six weeks before the first competition, or game day, to build a robot.

"They basically give you a slab of wood and a slab of plastic and motors and tell you to go build a robot," Flip said.

Senior Lena Ngassa, an exchange student from Germany, said the team is on its third robot, changing as they went to improve performance. The team also encountered setbacks, needing a better material for the wheel mount and a different design for the wheel itself.

"You have to redo your design over and over until it actually works," Lena said.

Advertisement

Along with building a robot, the competition requires building an 8-foot-by-8-foot exhibit booth, creating a marketing presentation, keeping an engineering notebook to document the process and doing community outreach.

While several robotics competitions are available to high school teams, Flip said, New Vista's team likes the BEST (Boosting Engineering Science and Technology) competition because materials to build the robot are provided.

As a small school, she said, there's not much funding for robotics.

The team uses a cramped former boys locker room as a workspace and has access only to basic tools, going to other district high schools to borrow more specialized tools.

The team was invited to attend the regional competition last year, but couldn't raise enough money. This year, they raised more than $2,600 through a crowdfunding campaign to cover transportation — they're going by bus — hotel rooms and food.

Flip added that New Vista is considering entering the "intense" FIRST robotics competition in the spring by partnering with another high school.

While some of the New Vista team members aspire to be engineers or programmers, others started without much technology experience. Still, team members said, everyone helps designing and building the robot.

Junior Dillon Osborn said he joined to use his artistic skills, including helping design the exhibit, and to hang out with friends.

Senior Caleb Chatham said he joined because he wants to go into engineering and likes building, but soon realized it's more than just robotics.

"The competition requires so many different things," he said. "There's a lot of manual labor and art and public speaking."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa