Jerry Burgess (Photo: Chad Greene / ChadCRG Images)

Community Health Alliance, a Knoxville-based health insurance cooperative, is looking to increase monthly premiums by double digits in 2016 for those who enroll in plans on the federally run exchange as the newly established company tries to find an equilibrium.

The co-op's plans — ranging from $68.22 to $1,062.05 per month — were the least expensive while they were available for purchase on the exchange.

The co-op is asking the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance for an average 32.6 percent increase for 2016 plans. The minimum a plan will increase is 16.2 percent, while the maximum increase is 65.2 percent.

Most members pay less than the monthly premium because they qualify for a tax credit to offset a portion of the cost. In 2016 the average plan cost, before tax credits, could be $349.19 monthly.

"You can expect price increases for this fall. Our increase is double digit, it's pretty large," said Jerry Burgess, CEO of Community Health Alliance. "Everybody is getting more accurate in projecting their cost and all payers are getting more accurate in pricing their product. There won't be such a high variation."

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee is asking for an 36.3 percent average increase; Cigna a 0.4 percent average increase; and Humana a 15.8 percent average increase.

Enrollment in Community Health Alliance's individual plans for 2015 quickly outstripped its 2014 membership. The co-op saw such a rush on its plans early in the year that it pulled its plans from the marketplace on Jan. 15.

It had 2,287 members — with 186 on individual plans — at the end of 2014, while it reported having 35,761 covered lives, or people enrolled in individual plans, as of May 15, according to its rate request. Roughly 231,440 Tennesseans enrolled in coverage on the federally run exchange for 2015, up from 151,000 in 2014.

The federally run marketplace, approaching its third open enrollment season, has been an uncertain place for insurers to sell plans. Premiums are priced on claim history associated with a group of people and the risk associated with that collection. Some members will have higher costs while others will have lower costs.

However, the insurance companies did not know who or how many people would be buying plans.

The companies didn't know how frequently they would go to the doctor, what services they need or if they have chronic disease.

In 2014 Community Health Alliance spent $4.48 million on hospital and medical benefits, according to its first quarter financial statement.

In the first quarter of 2015, it spent $27.1 million, with another $4.7 million on prescription drugs.

"So far this year — we're not even halfway through the year — the experience, and it's not just our experience but nationally, the experience is this population has more risk and more cost than average," Burgess said. "A lot of it is pent-up demand. ... These are hard-working Americans who have jobs — who happened to be self-employed or work in a job that doesn't offer health insurance. That's not their fault."

Community Health Alliance, which had a net loss of $22 million at the end of 2014, is not the only insurer contending with costs associated with a population it couldn't predict.

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, which insured the lion's share of the marketplace last year, lost $141 million on individual plans in 2014. It had $471 million in claims for people with individual plans. Insurers of all sizes across the country have similar stories.

'Not outgrow our capital'

The losses at co-ops are jolting because the companies are new and small. A New York co-op was largest in 2014 with 139,683 members, while an Oregon co-op had 1,279 members, according to a Standard and Poor's report.

Twenty-three co-ops were established under the Affordable Care Act to bring more options, and competition, into the health insurance marketplace. One, CoOportunity in Iowa, has been liquidated because it couldn't support its growth.

The co-ops received startup loans from the federal government with the ability to draw additional money under a reserve, or solvency, program. CHA received $18 million in startup funding and has drawn down, in phases, the remainder of its $73.3 million loan. Burgess said the additionally drawn money is in a bank account as reserves for the company's policies.

"(Co-ops) are still smaller in scale. They are suffering from having a lot of startup costs, administrative costs," said Deep Banerjee, an analyst with Standard and Poor's. "Even the bigger Blues had elevated loss in this line of divisions, but the difference is they have more diversified lines of business."

Burgess said the Iowa co-op is an outlier.

"They outgrew their capital, and think about what we did, we had a freeze. We did that so we would not outgrow our capital," said Burgess. "I think what we're doing in Tennessee is very much sustainable."

Community Health Alliance has tapped its government lending and is looking for outside financing via a public-private partnership, Burgess said, noting other co-ops are in similar scenarios.

He is optimistic that the third open enrollment will go smoother. Consumers will see less variation in price as companies figure out the pricing models.

But a smoother enrollment season is barring upheaval from a U.S. Supreme Court case that challenges whether tax credits are available on both federally run and state-run exchanges. A ruling for the plaintiff in King vs. Burwell could leave more than 200,000 Tennesseans without tax credits applied to their monthly premiums.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

What insurers want for 2016

•BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee: 36.3 percent average increase.

Range of increase per plan is 19.5 percent to 59.5 percent.

•Cigna 0.4 percent average increase.

Range in plan costs goes from a reduction of 14.5 percent to an increase of 30 percent.

• Community Health Alliance: 32.6 percent average increase.

Range of increase per plan is 16.2 percent to 65.2 percent.

•Humana 15.8 percent average increase.

Range of increase per plan is 4.3 percent to 21.2 percent.

Community Health Alliance premiums

2015 premiums range from $68.22 to $1,062.05 per month, with an average premium of $269.38 before a tax credit.

2016 premiums could range from $92.51 to $1,160.80 per month, with an average premium of $349.19 before a tax credit.

How are premiums determined?

Many insurance consumers — be it health, car or home — are often unsure about why their premium can rise even if they think they were inexpensive insurees.

Insurance companies determine premiums on a pool of people and the risk associated with that collection. Some members will have higher costs while others have lower costs.

That was evident in the aftermath of the 2010 flood when some policyholders saw higher premiums even though they had no claims. The claims against the bucket of money were higher than expected so premiums had to be adjusted.

Health insurance is similar. Premiums are essentially paid into a pool of money that is used to pay claims. More-than-expected claims tax that pool. Inversely, fewer claims mean money is not being used as expected.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Hiqz5V