Corbis

By Ed Silverman

Cash may be king, but should a cash payment be used as a litmus test for whether a patent settlement between drug makers deserves antitrust scrutiny?

A recent federal court ruling suggests the answer may be “yes.” In writing about one such deal between GlaxoSmithKline and Teva Pharmaceuticals, U.S. District Court Judge Williams Walls opined that, since there was no monetary payment involved as part of their patent settlement, there was no reason to be concerned that the arrangement was anticompetitive.

“While there may be instances in which a settlement without a monetary payment provision would raise antitrust concerns, this is not one,” Walls wrote in dismissing a challenge to a patent dispute over Glaxo’s Lamictal medication, which is used to treat epilepsy and bipolar disorder. Teva had sought to make a generic, prompting Glaxo to file a patent infringement lawsuit.

To make the lawsuit disappear, Glaxo didn’t make a cash payment to Teva, but did agree to allow Teva to sell generic chewable and tablet forms of Lamictal before the patent expired. Significantly, Glaxo also agreed not to sell its own so-called authorized generic version, the sort of move that the U.S. Federal Trade Commission argued also has substantial value.

The decision underscores the extent to which patent settlements are likely to undergo sustained scrutiny following a U.S. Supreme Court ruling last year that drug makers can face lawsuits over so-called pay-to-delay settlements, because such deals should not necessarily be assumed to be illegal.

In these arrangements, a brand-name drug maker reaches a settlement to a generic rival in exchange for ending patent litigation and launching a copycat medicine at a future date.

Also known as reverse settlements, these emerged as an unintended consequence of the Hatch-Waxman Act that was designed to accelerate access to lower-cost generics. The FTC has long contended, however, some of these deals are anticompetitive, because generic drug makers are given incentives to file lawsuits against brand-name rivals but then settle for a quick profit, or something of value, rather than challenge a patent in court.

In reaching his decision, however, Walls concluded that the Supreme Court ruling applies only to reverse settlements that involve money. Although two “other district courts have found that [the Supreme Court ruling] applies to nonmonetary patent settlements, this court finds their readings… unpersuasive,” he wrote in referring to separate rulings last fall concerning patent settlements for the Lipitor cholesterol pill and the Nexium acid reflux pill. In both cases, money changed hands.

The differing findings suggest that more patent deals may be subject to antitrust review, according to Robert Liebenluft, a partner at the Hogan & Lovells law firm, who specializes in antitrust matters and was formerly assistant director for health care in the FTC Bureau of Competition. “This is just one case,” he says. “But it is an important issue. And we now have split decisions.

“If the arrangement is much broader than [cash], it opens the door to look at the underlying economics of the deal, and it may be hard to value some of those things… I think you could end up subjecting a lot more settlements to wide-ranging reviews and raise more things to dispute, and potentially more litigation.”

Adds Scott Hemphill, a professor at Columbia Law School who specializes in antitrust issues and intellectual property: “The district court’s opinion is pretty surprising. The idea that cash counts as payment but anything else – gold bullion, land – would not, just because the Supreme Court said ‘cash,’ is contrary to the thrust of the opinion and defies common sense.

“In terms of enforcement priorities, I would expect the FTC to pursue noncash payments just as readily as cash payments. After all, they are functionally the same thing. And as settlements have moved to more sophisticated forms of payment for delay, it’s important that the FTC keep pace with that development.”

In short, the definition of reverse payment is now up for debate. And that means drug makers may have to be more careful than ever before in structuring settlements.