What could you accomplish with $68 to your name? If you were Henry or Clement Studebaker, you would create an empire that would last more than 115 years.

On Feb. 16, 1852, with that small startup capital, the two Studebaker brothers opened H & C Studebaker, a blacksmith shop, in South Bend. It was located on what is now the corner of Michigan Street and Jefferson Boulevard.

Originally from Pinetown, Pa., young Clement learned the blacksmithing trade in the shop of his father, a German immigrant. Henry and Clement’s company started out small, with the brothers shoeing horses and making metal parts for wagons.

The 1850s were the peak of the California Gold Rush, and in 1853, younger brother J. M. Studebaker went west in search of his fortune. While he didn’t find any gold, John did save up a good amount through his skill as a wagon maker. When he returned to South Bend five years later, he bought out Henry’s share of the company and used his savings to expand the business.

Another brother, Peter Studebaker, worked as a merchant in Goshen, and by 1860, he had opened the company’s first “showroom.” Jacob, the final Studebaker brother, joined the family business shortly after, and in 1868, Studebaker Brothers Manufacturing Co. was formed.

Emerging from humble beginnings, the company became the world’s largest manufacturer of farm wagons and horse-drawn buggies. It didn’t stop there, though, becoming the only carriage company to transition successfully to the automobile business.

The earliest Studebaker automobiles were electric, debuting in 1902. The company’s first gasoline model was available in 1904. For almost a decade, the company continued to manufacture horse-drawn carriages as well as electric- and gasoline-powered automobiles.

In 1911, the Studebaker Corp., as it was then known, stopped building electric cars, and in 1920, production of horse-drawn vehicles also ceased. Iconic cars such as the Champion, Gold Hawk and Avanti rolled off the assembly line until Studebaker ceased U.S. production in 1963.

To learn more about the Studebaker company or family, visit the Studebaker National Museum.

If you would like to donate photographs of South Bend’s automotive history or will allow a digital copy of your image to be made, contact The History Museum at 574-235-9664 or the Studebaker National Museum at 574-235-9714.