This March 1, 2014 file photo shows part of the website for HealthCare.gov in Washington. (AP Photo/Jon Elswick)

Republicans have always had a problem where rhetoric meets reality on the Affordable Care Act. In the abstract, the law has never been overwhelmingly popular, but many of the things the law actually does — like preventing insurance companies from denying coverage because of pre-existing conditions — are extremely popular.

And so, if Republicans actually succeed in reversing the law’s progress in a meaningful way — as they might with the King v. Burwell lawsuit that could take coverage from millions of people — they may realize, like the dog that caught the car, that this wasn’t such a hot idea after all, and they might not know what to do about it.

There’s a new poll out from the Kaiser Family Foundation that not only highlights this problem; it also suggests where GOP efforts are going to be concentrated if the Supreme Court does them a favor and rules against them in King.

The survey looks at people who are in the non-group market, meaning the health insurance they have isn’t through their employer or through a government program like Medicare or Medicaid. Most of them got insurance through an ACA exchange.

Guess what? They’re pretty happy.

This is yet another conservative prediction about the ACA that failed to come true. Conservatives said that, like everything else about Obamacare, the exchanges would be a failure. But according to the KFF poll, a majority of people said they had the right amount of choices among different plans and shopping was easy. A full 74 percent rate their coverage as good or excellent. And most are satisfied with just about everything about their coverage:

That isn’t to say people don’t have concerns. In particular, those with high-deductible plans aren’t thrilled about what they have to pay out of pocket, though it’s worth noting that high-deductible plans are precisely what conservatives have been advocating for years (they call it “skin in the game,” meaning that if people were spending more of their own money, they’d shop around more for medical services and the magic of the market would bring down costs). And there are quite a few people in this poll who say they disapprove of “Obamacare,” which is much like the way most Americans say their kids’ school is great but the American education system is a mess. A politician can rail against the thing people say they dislike, but he’d better not take away their benefits.

The political implications of these results are clear: We can now add people who got their insurance through the exchanges as another constituency, in addition to those on Medicare and those who have employer-based coverage, whose coverage you cannot mess with unless you want to reap a huge backlash.

This is the problem of King v. Burwell, which is why every smart Republican is now probably praying the Supreme Court comes to their rescue and shoots the lawsuit down. Let’s assume for the moment that happens. Where does it leave Republicans? They can’t do anything that would seriously change or threaten coverage for people who get insurance through an employer (43 percent of American adults, according to Gallup). They can’t touch Medicare, much as they’d like to. And now they’ll realize they have to be very careful about those who get their coverage through the exchanges, because those people like what they have. So who’s left? Why poor people, of course.

The Affordable Care Act is facing another challenge at the Supreme Court in King v. Burwell, which deals with subsidies for health insurance. The case could cut out a major provision of Obamacare, causing the law to unravel. Here's what you need to know about the case. (Julie Percha/The Washington Post)

It isn’t that Medicaid patients aren’t happy with their coverage, because they are: Surveys show high levels of satisfaction with the program. But the people who are on it are poor, which means they have little political power. So Republicans may feel quite free not only to try to prevent them from getting coverage in the first place (by continuing to fight against the ACA’s expansion of Medicaid), but even by trying to curtail, modify, or cut off coverage for those who already have it — something they don’t dare when it comes to those other groups.

If you’re wondering where Republicans are going to focus their efforts on health care in the future — their real efforts, not just abstract rhetoric or bills offered to show they have a “plan” but which everyone knows will never become law — that’s where you should look.