Cooking for 34 people sure isn’t easy. But Ann Romney, wife of 2012 Republican Presidential nominee Mitt Romney, makes it both simple and delicious, and is serving up her favorite recipes in her new book.

Ann Romney is making the rounds promoting the new cookbook, “The Romney Family Table: Sharing Home-Cooked Recipes & Favorite Traditions.” The former First Lady of Massachusetts shared with Red Alert her motivation for crafting the book and discussed how cooking has helped bring her family together.

“Putting this book together has been such a joy because it has allowed me to collaborate with the whole family,” Ann Romney told Red Alert Politics in an email. “My sons and daughters-in-law helped collect family recipes and pictures and the grandkids helped taste-test! The result is truly a work of love.”

“The Romney Family Table” features more than 125 recipes, some that were passed on from generation to generation and other favorites matriarch Ann Romney makes for her five sons.

When the entire Romney family — all 34 of them — gathers each summer at Lake Winnipesaukee in New Hampshire, Mitt and Ann take care of breakfast for the grandchildren. One of their favorite meals, Ann Romney said, is daughter-in-law Jen’s sweet pork burritos.

“Everyone loves them,” she said, “even the picky eaters.”

And when it comes time for Ann Romney to cook for Mitt, she knows just the way to his heart.

“Mitt’s Meatloaf Cakes,” she said of cooking for her husband on a special occasion. “I make it for him every year on his birthday.”

All proceeds for the book will be donated to the Center for Neurologic Diseases at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, Mass., where Ann Romney was treated for multiple sclerosis. And “The Romney Family Table” gave Ann Romney the opportunity to not only help a cause that is near and dear to her heart, but collaborate with the whole family.

“Traditions and cooking spark conversations about family history, create new family memories and are the glue that binds families together,” she said. “When I make my grandmother’s pancakes, it brings memories of the time we spent together perfecting this recipe. As I make the recipe with my grandchildren, I tell them about their great-grandmother, sharing funny stories and memories of her.

“Hopefully, one day, my grandchildren will carry on this tradition and share stories about Mitt and me with their children, building a lasting legacy.”

“The Romney Family Table” is Ann Romney’s first foray into book-writing. But it’s not her last.

“I think I have one more book in me, but am not quite ready to reveal the topic,” she said. “It will be very different from ‘The Romney Family Table.'”