BALTIMORE — Kirk Cousins filled in capably for injured quarterback Robert Griffin III, throwing for 190 yards and a fluke touchdown, as the Washington Redskins beat the Baltimore Ravens, 31-13, on Saturday night.

With Griffin sidelined by a concussion, Cousins went 20-for-27 for 190 yards with an interception to help the Redskins take a 14-13 halftime lead. His second touchdown pass of the preseason happened after intended receiver Andre Roberts deflected a pass that was plucked out of the air and carried into the end zone by Jamison Crowder.

Colt McCoy started the third quarter with Washington’s second-team offense and produced touchdowns on his first two drives, although both scores came against the Ravens‘ reserves and the last march covered only 20 yards following an interception.

McCoy completed 10 of 12 passes for 95 yards and two touchdowns, both to Rashad Ross.

Griffin’s availability for the Sept. 13 opener against Miami is uncertain.

Tempers flared late in the first quarter after Redskins inside linebacker Keenan Robinson slammed Ravens wide receiver Kamar Aiken to the turf, headfirst, following a 13-yard completion. Several players began shoving each other — most notably Ravens wide receiver Steve Smith and Redskins cornerback Chris Culliver, both of whom were ejected.

Baltimore coach John Harbaugh ran across the field toward the scrum, and before turning back he yelled at Redskins coach Jay Gruden.

After reaching the Baltimore sideline, Smith bowed in the direction of the officiating crew. The 36-year-old is retiring after this season, and he might not have been so cordial had this been a regular-season game. In this case, however, Smith had no problem walking away after catching four passes for 95 yards and a touchdown.

The Ravens (1-2) started quickly, using a 63-yard pass from Joe Flacco to Smith to go up 7-0 with less than two minutes elapsed.

Washington’s first series was a stark contrast. On its fifth play, Cousins was intercepted by Terrell Suggs on a screen pass, setting up a field goal for a 10-point cushion.

The margin reached 13 points before Crowder made his touchdown catch, and the Redskins went ahead when Cousins directed an eight-play, 83-yard drive that produced a touchdown with 32 seconds left in the half.

Asa Jackson took the ensuing kickoff 103 yards before being tackled on the Redskins‘ 2-yard line by Justin Rogers. The Ravens failed to score.

Flacco played into the second quarter. He finished 8-for-13 for 137 yards and a touchdown in what was likely his final tuneup before the regular-season opener on the road against the Denver Broncos.