Physical therapist Cass Reich begins a balance class at Sterling House Senior Living Center, with, from left: Evelyn "Copie" Copenhaver, Bernadette Hubersberger, Jeannie Strader, Herdis Berquist and Dorothy Venrick. ( Jeannie Lancaster / For the Reporter-Herald )

Cass Reich slips in a CD, and the music of Glenn Miller's "Moonlight Serenade" fills the room. The nine women standing and holding onto the chairs in front of them are ready to go.

"You have improved so much since our first day," says Reich, a semi-retired physical therapist who leads the balance class at Sterling House Senior Living Center. "Let's get moving."

"Are you up to it," one resident calls out to Reich, laughing.

"I'm 88 and squeezing the heck out of it," announces Evelyn "Copie" Copenhaver.

The group's humor reverberates around the room, yet they each know that their focus is an important one.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "roughly more than one-third of adults ages 65 years and older fall each year. Among older adults, falls are the leading cause of injury-related deaths."

Difficulties with balance can be the result of several things. Vestibular problems in the balance system of the inner ear can result in dizziness and vertigo, which disrupt balance. Vision problems, neuropathy and other disorders may affect an individual's balance.

Balance is dependent on good muscle strength and joint mobility.

"Inside your muscles and tendons you have tiny mechanisms called muscle spindles and golgi tendon organs," shares Reich. "When we don't put a spring in our step, those go to sleep. But they can be reactivated. You can wake them up."

Advertisement

Through a series of simple exercises, Reich encourages participants to literally put a spring in their step by adding a simple bounce at the end of each movement. In one, an individual steps forward with one foot and does a little "bounce" on that foot. Then the person rests back on the other foot and again adds a little "bounce." Another movement goes from side to side, with a bounce on each side.

"Be sure to have something solid to hold on to," cautions Reich. "Just do a small bounce, when you first try. The bounce can be difficult."

"I'm so grateful for this class, because you never know when you're going to fall," said Dorothy Venrick.

"I've fallen," shares Herdes Berquist, who at 104 is the oldest member of the class. She fully participates with the others.

Copenhaver remembers one particular fall. "The next thing I knew is I was looking at the grass."

"When we get older, we get afraid of falling," Reich says. "We shorten our steps, but when you do that, you're at more risk of falling."

As the class moves to a hip to hip movement, Reich calls out to Zadonna Sharp, "I want to see the best wiggle that you've got." Sharp tilts her hip to the left and then to the right, sporting a mischievous grin. A round of applause follows.

While this is a group that focuses on the serious work of balance, it is also a group that has a lot of fun. "I tell everyone, I met my husband in an alley," says Copenhaver, "a bowling alley." The group has heard this joke before, but laughter still rings through the room.

There are many benefits to good balance and balance training, according to eldergym.com.

Strength: Create improved torso and leg strength to increase you stability.

Safety: Increase your ability to rise from a chair, walk and exercise.

Mobility: Achieve a lasting ability to get around more easily.

Activities: Enjoy those tennis lessons or bike riding again.

Social: Get out and enjoy your friends and family.

When Reich's granddaughter recently asked her a question, she realized she too had work to do. "She asked me if I could still skip," says Reich. "I tried, and I couldn't. I was shocked. So every time I came to an open space, I worked on it. It's a daily thing — practice.

She encourages people to take short breaks throughout the day. "If you're watching television, when a commercial comes on, do a few of the exercises."

The importance of remaining active and continuing to work on balance is not lost on the group of women, "Things have changed dramatically," said Jeannie Strader. "Things that were once simple to do are now complicated."

"Falls and fall-related injuries, such as hip fracture, can have a serious impact on an older person's life," notes the National Institutes of Health.

"You want to stay as healthy as you can," says centenarian Berquist.

It looks like true wisdom may indeed come with age, as one resident calls out, "Shake it, but don't break it."