Sioux Falls, SD

The Sioux Falls Storm are an Indoor Football League Dynasty. They have won four straight IFLL titles, and eight of the last 10. After winning the conference title last night, they will host the United Bowl in two weeks.

With the leagues strongest offense and stingiest defense, the Sioux Falls Storm have put together 50 straight home victories, and now five consecutive trips to the IFL title game.

"Well it's an expectation. It what the guys - when we come in right away - it's the only goal that we have. So we accomplished getting there, now hopefully we can bring home another title," Storm Head Coach Kurtiss Riggs said.

On July 11th, the storm will take on the Nebraska Danger in the United Bowl, marking the third straight year the two teams will match up. Last year, the Storm knocked off the Danger 63-46.

"We know them and they know us, but it's going to be about who comes out and executes. We'll have a good two weeks of preparation for them, and I'll definitely pick up my play as well and we will be ready to go," Storm Quarterback Lorenzo Brown said.

Offensively, the Danger will look to quarterback Jameel Sewell and running back Waymon James. The duo are one-two in the I-F-L in rushing, and Sewell is second in the league with a combined 58 touchdown this season.

"They are impressive. They are very good. We will try to find a way to compete with Sewell, I voted for him for league MVP, I think he's the best player in the league. Then you put a great running back, like what they have with James, and they are a dynamic dup. We will try to figure out something to slow them down," Riggs said.

Equally important will be the play of Storm quarterback Lorenzo Brown. The signal-caller is following in the footsteps of two Hall-of-Fame quarterbacks, and hopes that he can lead Sioux Falls to an IFL title, while beginning his own storm legacy.

"Great quarterbacks have been here - Terrence Bryant and Chris Dixon - and I just hope to cement my own legacy. It's been a fun ride, but you can't take nothing for granite. Learning from those two, especially during my time playing with Chris and now having Terrence here in my back pocket, I learned a lot. I feel like I'm still growing, and I haven't reached my potential yet. I'm growing every week and learning from my mistakes. You'll see the best of me in the championship game coming up," Brown said.

Earlier this year, the Storm knocked off the Danger 57-40.

Professional {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.