Need to catch up on Empire? Tune into TV ONE. The network recently announced an Empire binge-a-thon on May 14. TV ONE will air 17 back-to-back episodes beginning at 9 a.m. on Saturday. “EMPIRE is one of those cultural phenomena that seem to come along very rarely in television’s history,” said Brad Siegel, TV One’s President, in a statement. “It’s a game changer. We are so excited to give fans the opportunity to indulge in all the FABULOUSNESS of every episode of this season on one day. We expect a lot of EMPIRE fans will not be leaving their homes during this Saturday’s binge-a-thon.” In conjunction with the binge-a-thon, the network will share the biggest fan moments on television and on social media as part of their “TV One is The Ultimate Fan” campaign.

Federal Judge Rules in Favor of Republicans in Obamacare Spending Challenge

President Obama and his administration took a major blow on Thursday after a federal judge ruled that the administration’s choice to fund a part of the Obamacare law was conducted unlawfully. The decision was a major triumph for House Republicans. U.S. District Court Judge Rosemary Collyer decided the “reimbursements paid to issuers of qualified health plans for the cost-sharing reductions mandated” should be stopped until Congress finds “an appropriation for such payments.” The case was focused on Section 1401 and Section 1402 under the law. Section 1401 gives tax credits so that individuals can afford insurance, and 1402 lowers the cost of deductibles and co-pays. “Such appropriations are an integral part of our constitutional checks and balances, insofar as they tie the Executive Branch to the Legislative Branch via purse strings,” said Judge Collyer. President Obama’s administration stated, “Sections 1401 and 1402 are economically and programmatically integrated. A contrary reading of the amended appropriations statute, they contend, would yield absurd economic, fiscal, and healthcare-policy results.” Read more.

Michael Jordan Isn’t a Fan of His Crying Meme

A meme of NBA legend Michael Jordan crying has been circulating around the web, and although his reps say Jordan thinks it’s funny, his former teammate Charles Oakley has another story. “We think it’s funny,” said Michael Jordan’s rep in a statement. “Everyone seems to be having fun with it.” Oakley begged to differ. “Nah, he don’t like it,” he said. “It is what it is. One of the greatest players of all players, or all-time … people like seeing that. They keep doing it.” Read more.

Lupita Nyong’o May Join the Cast of “Black Panther”

Actress Lupita Nyong’o may be joining Chadwick Boseman on the cast of Marvel’s Black Panther. “We take great pride and pressure on when we bring any of our characters to the big screen,” Marvel Studios chief Kevin Feige said in a statement. “Black Panther especially because of his history his importance in the Marvel universe, because of his importance within our country and around the world. Now the fact that we have Ryan Coogler behind the camera is unbelievably exciting for us and puts our mind at ease.” Nyong’o is currently working on Star Wars: Episode VIII. Black Panther is slated to be released on Feb. 16, 2018. Read more.

PHOTO CREDIT: Getty

Also On News One: