Former U.S. Congressman and current gubernatorial candidate Asa Hutchinson was the special guest speaker at the September 9, meeting of the Southeast Arkansas TEA Party. Mr. Hutchinson began his presentation by complementing the TEA Party. “I have been the Chairman of the Arkansas Republican Party and helped build the party in the state,” he said. “When we have another party that comes along that is citizen driven and that supports fewer taxes, smaller government and the Constitution; you know it will help politics in general. The TEA Party helps get good, conservative candidates elected.”

Hutchinson told the group that he was born and raised on a small farm in a small town of about 1000 people. He learned to do chores and farm work, but he also learned to take responsibility for his actions and faith in God. He learned that it is important to give back to the community; and one way to do that is through politics where a person can help to make things better for his town, state or country.

In 1980, Mr. Hutchinson was appointed to the position of U.S. Attorney by President Ronald Reagan. He was also President Reagan’s City Coordinator in Bentonville. Mr. Hutchinson said that one fact about which he is particularly proud is that in November 1980, he was privileged to add his name to a full-page ad in the newspaper along with other well-known Arkansans like Sam Walton who were supporting Ronald Reagan for President versus Jimmy Carter.

Being elected to the U.S. House of Representatives and being asked by President George W. Bush to serve as head of the DEA are among Mr. Hutchinson’s many political accomplishments. One month after becoming the head of the DEA, when the tragedy of the attack of 9/11 occurred, President Bush asked Asa to be the undersecretary of Homeland Security under Secretary Tom Ridge. “That was a tough job,” said Hutchinson, “but it was a privilege to be with the President when he was briefed by the CIA and having the President turn to me and say, ‘Asa, what are we doing about that?’” Further, Hutchinson stated, “that was an extraordinary time in history, but it was the hardest year of my life.”

Going back to his reasons for liking the TEA Party, Mr. Hutchinson said that he admires the TEA Party’s support for lower taxes and their loyalty to the Constitution. He told the audience that he was proud of the fact that when he entered Congress, there was a huge deficit; but he had the chance to help balance the budget by voting for lower taxes. Because of the lower taxes, the private economy grew and a balanced budget followed. “I want to do the same for Arkansas. I want to spur growth in the economy and bring jobs to South Arkansas. The private economy needs to grow,” he stated. “The economies of our neighboring states with lower or no state income taxes are growing faster than that of Arkansas because of our 7% state income tax. This holds us back, and we lose opportunities to attract industry and jobs. I want to gradually decrease our state income tax to grow the economy of Arkansas.”

Asa explained some differences between his views and the views of gubernatorial candidate Mike Ross. “I was opposed to Obamacare at the time that Mike Ross voted it out of committee so it could be voted on by Congress,” said Hutchinson. “I urged the Governor and others in the Arkansas Legislature to oppose Obamacare. Mike Ross has also said that lowering income taxes in Arkansas can’t be done because it would cause such things as releasing criminals from prisons which would endanger people in Arkansas. But ‘can’t be done’ won’t get anything done,” stated Mr. Hutchinson.

Asa said that after the tragic shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, when President Obama’s solution to school violence was gun control, Hutchinson was asked by the NRA to lead a movement to enhance safety and security in our schools. “The answer is not gun control and suppression of our Second Amendment rights, it is to have resources in place like armed security officers or trained and armed personnel in schools to protect children. We need a common sense approach to protection and firearms at schools, and the methods of security should be left up to the individual school districts,” stated Mr. Hutchinson.

On the topic of education, Hutchinson said that we need common sense conservative views of education in Arkansas. He said that he believes in freedom of choice when it comes to education. He and his wife of 40 years, Susan, have not only tried home schooling and private schools, but also public schools for their children. “The reason we tried it all was because every child had different needs,” he said. He told the group that the national government needs to stay out of education in Arkansas, and that he would say no to any money if it meant the federal government would have control of our schools. He said that our education system not only needs a college path for students, but we also need a technical or work path for those students who wish to learn a trade. They need courses in high school that will enable them to follow that path.

As for the Common Core Curriculum, Mr. Hutchinson said if elected governor, He would closely examine the standards to be sure they are working correctly for the students in Arkansas.

Mr. Hutchinson is a strong proponent for border security, protecting Arkansas from the overreach of the federal government and for being a strong defender of the laws of Arkansas. He is also dedicated to bringing industry and jobs to Arkansas through lower taxes and tort reform. Finally, Mr. Hutchinson said that he can and will be a strong advocate for Arkansas with agencies such as the EPA, Homeland Security and others. “I have been engaged in many security issues, and I can be a good spokesman for Arkansas,” he said.