Taylor Swift performs onstage during iHeartRadio Jingle Ball 2014. Getty Images

Another day, another media company unveiling a plan to offer creative services to brands. It’s a trend that threatens to squeeze ad agencies that normally dream up campaigns for advertisers.

iHeartMedia Inc., the radio giant which last year changed its name from Clear Channel, will on Tuesday announce a new branded content studio. The program, called “iHeartMedia Soundboard,” will offer to marketers the kind of opportunities they have come to expect in other sectors of the media industry — partnerships with publishers to fashion ads that blend alongside editorial work.

Companies from BuzzFeed to The Wall Street Journal to the New York Times have set up walled-off studios that create articles marked as “sponsored” on behalf of brands.

Condé Nast took things a step further last week when it announced a new program that will enlist its editors to work directly on branded content, breaking down the traditional barrier between the business and editorial operations inside media companies.

Of course, radio is an entirely different medium from Web publishing. Branded audio is a newer form.

“Branded content has become a big growth area for brands,” said Gayle Troberman, chief marketing officer at iHeartMedia. “They want to tell richer stories, be connected to content. They don’t want to interrupt.”

Ms. Troberman says iHeartMedia — whose businesses include traditional terrestrial radio, a digital radio service and big-ticket live events — plans to work with marketers to create interview-based shows and both short and long-form “narrative” pieces.

iHeartMedia anticipates the early offering will consist mostly of short audio clips that tease full episodes available online or in an app.

The company plans to make available stars like Jared Leto, Ryan Seacrest and Steve Harvey. iHeartMedia hasn’t signed up any brands yet, though it plans to dedicate a “small core creative team” to focus solely on the new studio. The company says it will initially focus on signing on its largest advertising clients.

Other media companies in the radio space also offer creative services. Streaming music company Pandora Inc. now has just over 60 employees in its creative division and has worked with Toyota and its ad agency Saatchi & Saatchi, for example, to make “Toyota Sessions,” a custom station on Pandora that features behind-the-scenes artist interviews.

By offering an in-house service, Pandora says it can deliver fast results to brands by “balancing the creative output with what we can possibly achieve technically,” said Tony Calzaretta, vice president of design and creative at Pandora.

Both iHeartMedia and Pandora say they are comfortable working alongside traditional agencies when thinking up branded content.

Brands’ willingness to work directly with media companies has stoked fears in the agency world for some time now. Three, the thought goes, may be a crowd.

“Is it a threat to an agency that iHeart would be a resource for clients and that a client could go directly to iHeart instead of the agency? I’m sure that’s a risk,” said Matt Seiler, chief executive of media buyer IPG Mediabrands. “But I’ve always believed that each of us has to be the very best at what we do because there’s always been competition.”

iHeartMedia’s announcement comes as some brands take another look at audio thanks in part to successful podcasts like “Serial,” a “This American Life” murder mystery spin-off that quickly inspired cult-like obsession online. MailChimp, the email marketing company that advertised during the show with a strange pre-roll message, became something of a character itself during the Internet’s ongoing fascination with the program.

Mr. Seiler said radio has indeed become a more attractive place for advertising, largely because it’s a place to grab prized live audiences.

“The genius of radio is that it’s about the here and now,” Mr. Seiler said. “You can’t skip past radio.”