An opportunity exists to better understand healthcare utilization patterns by low-income workers, which may contribute significantly to employer healthcare cost trend and lost workforce productivity.

Bruce W. Sherman, MD; Wendy D. Lynch, PhD; and Carol Addy, MD, MMSc

Am J Manag Care. 2016;22(4):286-290

The rising cost of health insurance is well documented and familiar to business owners. Over the past 10 years, health insurance premiums for employer-sponsored health insurance have increased almost 70%. For family coverage, the average annual premium is now almost $17,000, of which the typical employee will pay more than $4800. Additionally, deductible amounts have increased such that a majority of workers in small firms have deductibles over $1000, and often much higher.1



The shared responsibility provision of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) allows employers to charge individual employees a health insurance premium of up to 9.5% of wages, without penalty for single coverage, along with a 2016 deductible maximum of $6850. For families, the amounts are substantially higher, with employers permitted to charge dependents the full premium costs with a deductible maximum of $13,700. With these amounts deemed “affordable” in accordance with the healthcare law, employees who opt out of compliant employer-provided coverage are ineligible for insurance subsidies in the public health insurance exchanges.2



As a result, and in the face of the individual mandate, low-income earners working for employers with compliant ACA benefits offerings likely derive the greatest potential value from employer-provided plans, in contrast to public exchange options.3 With the Social Security Administration’s announcement that the 2014 median wage was $28,851, and that 51.4% of wage earners had a net compensation less than $30,000,4 this low-earning subpopulation deserves closer scrutiny. The intent of this article is to review available data regarding the healthcare utilization behaviors of low-income workers receiving employer-provided health insurance, and to discuss implications and potential solutions.



Measures of Socioeconomic Status in Employed Populations



Disparities in healthcare access and utilization have long been a focus for health policy researchers seeking to identify and address demographic or environment-related factors contributing to poor health status.5,6 The relative merits and limitations of specific indicators of socioeconomic status (SES), including income, wealth, education, occupation, and residence zip code, have been previously reviewed.7,8 What has emerged is a common understanding that health literacy and care compliance gaps exist across all income groups, but appear most pronounced among individuals with low SES.5,6,9,10 Commendably, such efforts have yielded a substantial knowledge base regarding SES, as well as the role of race and ethnicity in healthcare utilization. In many cases, these findings have informed the successful implementation of community health improvement initiatives.



To our knowledge, detailed evaluation of healthcare disparities among low-income earners in commercially insured populations has not been reported. However, in broad-based epidemiologic studies including uninsured, and government- and privately insured individuals, those with low SES exhibit substantial disparities in care.5,6 In the absence of explicit data regarding similar studies among commercially insured populations, findings from these and other healthcare disparities research efforts directly addressing low-income individuals10-12 can help to inform hypotheses for further investigation among individuals with employer-provided health insurance.



In our experience, few employers or health plans have examined utilization patterns based on SES, and population-level claims experience is typically reported. As a readily available measure of SES, despite its limitations,7 employee wage information is a readily available and relevant data field that can be considered for inclusion in most third-party data warehouses as part of claims-based employer reporting. Accordingly, whether wage, income, or other proxy measures for SES are utilized, most employers have an opportunity to better understand the potential impact of SES to inform workforce health management strategy development.



Population Health Profile of Low-Income Workers and Healthcare Utilization



There are likely many reasons for variability in healthcare utilization among low-income earners. At a foundational level, recent increases in cost-sharing associated with high-deductible plan options have substantially increased out-of-pocket healthcare expenditures for employees and their family members. Low-income earners are perhaps at greatest risk, with concerns associated with medically related financial stress or bankruptcy,13 as well as underinsurance due to prioritization of wages to address basic needs.14 Care avoidance, as a result of cost concerns, appears most pronounced in this subpopulation (as shown in Figure 1 15).



Sufficient concern regarding differences in healthcare utilization exhibited by individuals with low SES has prompted the National Quality Forum to reevaluate their risk-adjustment approach to quality metrics.16 In support, and based on national survey data, low-income earners are more likely to use the emergency department as a substitute for primary care (as shown in Figure 2 10). Further, low-income individuals are also more likely to experience potentially preventable hospitalizations,5,17 perhaps as a result of their increased potential for delayed or forgone care due to cost.15,18,19 This is further compounded by the preponderance of existing evidence indicating that low-income earners may have greater need for care given a higher prevalence of unhealthy behaviors5,20 and chronic conditions, particularly obesity, type 2 diabetes, and hypertension.5,21



Low-income workers may also have inflexible work schedules, limiting access to physicians during scheduled work time. Additionally, they may be constrained in their access to healthcare due to employer pay policies, which may not compensate for time away from work. As a result, workers may feel financially motivated to remain at work, seeking care in off-hours when primary care offices are closed.



Business Case for Optimizing Health Benefits Options for Low-Income Workers



For many employers, low-income earners are part of a high-turnover workforce segment that is a low priority during benefits planning.22 Perceptions of low cost-of-hire, readily available replacement workers, negligible training expenses, and low ongoing costs of employment—along with the seeming inevitability of turnover—have prompted some employers to understandably implement a cost-minimization strategy during benefits planning. In some industries, economic and other business concerns may justify this approach. However, employers in other industries may appreciate that richer employee benefits may enhance employee satisfaction, ultimately leading to greater retention22 and improved customer satisfaction as a result of more engaged employees.23



Additionally, individuals with chronic conditions may experience disease-specific productivity loss (absence and presenteeism) due to their illnesses.24 Reduced medication adherence and use of healthcare services have also been shown to lower workforce performance and increase absenteeism25; furthermore, stress due to personal financial concerns may contribute to reduced worker productivity.26 When combined, these considerations may substantially increase the employer impact beyond healthcare costs alone, and serve to highlight the need to optimize the design of health benefits plans.



Low-Income Workers, Benefit Design Selection, and Consumer Engagement



Although the majority of employers have incorporated healthcare consumerism tools and resources, including decision support,27 as part of an overall benefits strategy, knowledge of value-based benefits is more limited among low-income earners.28 This subgroup spends less time in the benefits selection process, which may adversely impact informed benefits enrollment.13 As such, low-income earners generally gravitate toward lower-premium benefit options, likely as a means to preserve income for daily living expenses.14



We are unaware of any published studies assessing either the use or effectiveness of these offerings for low-income workers. Given the health literacy and consumer engagement29 gaps in this subpopulation, evaluation of the use of these services among low-income workers is warranted.



Problem-Solving: Employer Health Benefits Approaches to Low-Income Workers





PDF is available on the last page.