Colorado Aromatics founder and owner Cindy Jones picks Calendula blossoms on her farm north of Longmont last week. That's just one of the herbs that she grows in her garden for use in her cosmetics. ( Lewis Geyer / TIMES-CALL )

Fans of all-natural cosmetics will soon be able to go into a store to buy Cindy Jones' products, called Colorado Aromatics, rather than pick them up at the Boulder County Farmers Market, buy them online or have to track them down at one of the stores where they're currently sold.

Jones has leased space at 340 Lashley, Unit 220, in Longmont, and expects to have her first storefront open sometime next month.

"We're just doing manufacturing (at the present)," Jones said. "I wanted to get manufacturing set up first."

Jones has a Ph. D. in biochemistry and she's also an herbalist, and her 10-year-old company specializes in cosmetics blended using ingredients particularly beneficial in high desert environment that is the Colorado Front Range.

"The business grew out of a hobby," Jones said. "I liked to tinker and do-it-yourself kind of thing."

The business took a serious turn seven years ago when she and her family moved to a farm north of Longmont. That's where she's able to grow all of the herbs that go into her products.

"This is my herb hut," she said, walking a guest into a dark, tarp-covered space where herbs were hanging and laying on bread trays to dry out.

Once dry they go into one of the two distillers Jones has on hand. Herbs are put into a large stainless steel container similar to a milk can with a pipe sticking out the top. A propane heater is fired up and mixture begins steaming.

Advertisement

"The steam rises through the column and that's what's carrying all the aromatic qualities of the herbs," Jones said. "You cool it and it turns back into water."

She has a huge garden — more than one, actually — where lavender, cucumber, mint, rose, lemon balm, tulsi (a type of basil) and many more varieties grow. Out of these come her various lotions, sprays, creams and massage oils.

"Raspberry leaf is very high in tenins, so that has a tightening effect," Jones explained, holding up a bottle of her Razz Tightening Serum.

Meadow Mist Face cleanser is one of the products made by Colorado Aromatics. Owner Cindy Jones will soon be opening a storefront at 340 Lashley St., Unit 220, in Longmont. (Lewis Geyer / TIMES-CALL)

Moving to Boulder County has been a great fit for her personally and professionally, she said. Revenue at Sagescript Institute, which is the parent company of Colorado Aromatics, has grown about 20 per cent each of the past three years.

"Basically we were just looking for something (when we decided to leave Lakewood) and it's hard to find farm property. ... So it was by chance that we landed just north of Longmont and I'm really glad. I really like Longmont," Jones said.

She calls Sagescript an "institute" because she uses that arm of the business to provide consulting services, Jones said.

Ace Hardware in Longmont was the first store to begin carrying her products. Since then she's added McGuckin's in Boulder, along with the Boulder Bookstore and Lucky's Markets, and a gift shop in Estes Park. She's trying to get her product into more stores, she said, and moving into a larger manufacturing space will allow her increase production. And, of course, she'll have her own storefront for the first time, where she plans to host events based around her products, once she gets it up and running.

Her main goal, she said, is spreading the gospel of the farm-to-skin movement.

"Especially in Boulder County, I think people are very aware of the farm-to-table movement," Jones said. "I want to make people aware that farms are more important than just for food."

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com