Photo

Readers discuss promoting gender equality at work and home.

To the Editor:

“Page by Page, Men Are Stepping Into the Circle” (Sunday Styles, Nov. 3) offers a number of reasons that men are delving into Sheryl Sandberg’s groundbreaking book, “Lean In.” Clearly, men are central to women’s success in securing a fair share of leadership positions, both in welcoming them to the table at work and clearing off the table at home after dinner. Enlightened men are good, but is that enough?

The United States doesn’t even appear in the top 20 countries ranked for gender equality in the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap report for 2013.

Most of the inequity has to do with motherhood. Most mothers work for money outside the home, even when they have very young children. But for those without paid parental leave or paid sick days, or the ability to even ask for an alternative schedule without fear of retaliation, their ability to progress economically is severely compromised.

We can’t wait until the male gatekeepers get comfortable hiring and promoting women in accord with their talents and merits. Practical changes to the infrastructure of the American workplace are called for.

It’s time to expand the Family and Medical Leave Act to cover more people and provide partial wage replacement. It’s time to pass a federal paid sick days program so workers can get well or care for sick family members without losing their jobs. It’s time for a child care policy that allows all kids access to quality, affordable child care. And it’s time for Congress to pass the Pregnant Workers’ Fairness Act, to outlaw workplace discrimination against pregnant women and ensure reasonable accommodations.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Legislation that acknowledges that working people and family caregivers are one and the same will benefit both the operation of our households and the resiliency of our economy. Women have come as far as they can on their own.

VALERIE A. YOUNG

Advocacy Coordinator, National Association of Mothers’ Centers

Washington, Nov. 18, 2013

Readers React

Ms. Young ends by saying, “Women have come as far as they can on their own.” That is not true. The glass ceiling that holds women back in the workplace extends into the home, where it is held in place by motherly gatekeeping that in turn holds men back from being seen as fully capable parents. While we would be offended if female workers were routinely portrayed as bumbling in the media, inept male parenting is standard comedic fare. Until men are seen as fully capable parents, women will be perceived as having the primary role in the home.

Even though I am a father of four, I regularly experience overt parental discrimination. A recent example was when I was calling to make flight arrangements for my family. When I requested an “infant in lap” designation for our toddler, I was told by the airline representative that “babies generally do better with their mothers.”

Until women break the glass ceiling that they have created in the home, they will continue to experience a glass ceiling in the workplace.

MARK SHUMATE

Roswell, Ga., Nov. 20, 2013

Ms. Young is absolutely correct — legislative solutions like paid sick days, paid family leave, affordable child care and stronger protections against pregnancy discrimination are critically needed to help mothers, and all caregivers, succeed in the workplace and earn what they deserve.

The middle- and low-income workers we hear from every day — who all too often face impossible choices between caring for a new child or sick family member or losing their jobs — need the law on their side. They often don’t have the benefit of excellent corporate policies and access to flexibility, a privilege disproportionately granted to professional workers.

And while supportive spouses, and enlightened male colleagues, are of course a move in the right direction, they’re insufficient to address many mothers’ real needs.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

There are two different conversations going on, and the “lean in” discussion, which resonates with a narrow set of workers, is dominating the discussion. It would be wonderful if Sheryl Sandberg’s lean-in circles could encourage enlightened business leaders, both male and female, not only to use their platform to advance women in corporate leadership, but also to help the vast majority of American mothers in today’s work force be able to succeed and adequately care for their families, by supporting better laws and policies for all workers.

DINA BAKST

Co-founder, A Better Balance

New York, Nov. 21, 2013

Expecting the same compensation without the same sacrifice isn’t an American value. Why is parenthood a special, protected class when it comes to work-life balance?

If I take a year off to care for aging parents, I don’t expect the same promotional opportunity as a colleague who works 70 hours a week. If I decline to travel for my job so I can attend my kid’s soccer game, I don’t expect the same bonus as a road warrior who spends 80 nights a year in a hotel to call on customers.

Free choice is America’s greatest value — and we each have the freedom to find our own balance among family, hobbies, continuing education and career.

Top executive roles involve great personal sacrifice. We need to accept that success is not measured only by the salary a person earns or the number of people reporting to him or her. The choice to be an individual contributor or a low-level manager at work so we can spend time with family or play in a band is the greatest expression of individualism and American values.