A woman was covered with colored powder at a temple at Nandgaon village in India on Monday. Adnan Abidi/Reuters …

A family member of a passenger from the missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 waited for news at Lido Hotel on Monday. Lintao Zhang/Getty Images …

A man cleaned a glass plate in front of the lower Parliament house in Berlin on Monday. Wolfgang Kumm/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

China's Haitao Du competed during the Men's Cross Country 20 km Classic Standing at the XI Paralympic Olympic games near Sochi on Monday. Kirilll Kudryavtse/Agence France-Presse /Getty Images …

A woman walked by a poster in the Crimean port city of Sevastopol on Monday. Crimea's parliament, dominated by ethnic Russians, voted to join Russia last week and set a referendum for March 16, escalating the crisis. The poster reads, 'On 16 March, we are choosing' and 'or' (bottom). Baz Ratner/Reuters …

A man used a 3D camera at a meeting during the 12th National People's Congress in Beijing on Monday. Wang Zhao/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

An elderly man looked through photographs in Sendai, Japan, on Monday, which were repaired after being washed away by the earthquake and tsunami that struck nearly three years ago. Yuriko Nakao/Getty Images …

Rescue workers searched the debris of an exploded apartment house in Itzehoe, Germany, on Monday. Axel Heimken/dpa/Zuma Press …

Rugby league players converge during a NRL match between the St George Illawarra Dragons and the Wests Tigers in Sydney on Sunday. Mark Nolan/Getty Images …

Pakistani children walked through a dust storm on the banks of the Ravi River on Monday. Arif Ali/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

A farmer ploughed the field in southwest China's Yunnan Province on Friday. Yang Zongyou/Xinhua/Zuma Press …

A crowd of orthodox Jewish men gathered in Manhattan on Sunday to protest against a proposed law in Israel that would draft all citizens, including those that are strictly religious, into required military service. Andrew Kelly/European Pressphoto Agency …

A mother holding her child cried on Sunday after a fire burned at least 50 homes in a slum in Kathmandu, Nepal. Narendra Shrestha/European Pressphoto Agency …

Protesters in Juba shouted slogans during a rally on Monday organized against foreign intervention and to show support for South Sudan President Salva Kiir. Andrei Pungovschi/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …