Caramel coloring to give soda its brown look known to contain carcinogen

The soft drinks you and your children may be consuming every day may have a cancer-causing agent. With this information, the old tag-line ""The pause . that refreshes" takes on an ominous, new meaning.

Coke came in at a negligible cancer level at one can of Coke. That said, we found other manufacturers - like Pepsi - really quite a lot higher than Coke. Malta Goya, which is a Hispanic soft drink, was actually at 300 or more micrograms per 12-ounce serving. Highlights By Catholic Online (NEWS CONSORTIUM) Catholic Online (www.catholic.org) 1/24/2014 (2 years ago) Published in Health Keywords: Cola, carcinogens, 4-methylimidazole, 4-MEI

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - According to Consumer Reports, some soft drinks contain a possible cancer-causing chemical. According to researchers, caramel coloring in many soft drinks, which gives them their brown color, may contain a possible human carcinogen.



The harmful chemical in question is called 4-methylimidazole, or 4-MEI. "It was in fact . definitely causes cancer in animal studies. The International Agency for Research on Cancer has also classified 4-MEI as a possible human carcinogen," Dr. Urvashi Rangan said.



A beautiful way to remember "Footprints" -- go here!



The chemical 4-MEI is a byproduct when caramel color is manufactured. However, the chemical is not in all caramel coloring and amounts vary widely in caramel-colored drinks, even when the same brands were tested just a few months apart.



"Coke came in at a negligible cancer level at one can of Coke. That said, we found other manufacturers - like Pepsi - really quite a lot higher than Coke," Dr. Rangan said.



"Malta Goya, which is a Hispanic soft drink, was actually at 300 or more micrograms per 12-ounce serving."



The caramel coloring is strictly cosmetic, without any of it contributing to taste. So California recently required warning labels on any food or beverages containing more than 29 micrograms of 4-MEI. There are no such federal requirements as of yet, so the only way the consumer is to avoid 4-MEI is to look for caramel coloring on the label.



Pepsi responded to the Consumer Reports study this week, saying the average amount of diet soda consumed by people is just 100 milliliters. For that reason the company believes that Pepsi One does not require cancer-risk warning labels.



One hundred milliliters is less than a third of a can of soda. A full can does exceed the California limit.



Don't be overly confident if you shop at a natural food store for overpriced items. Drinks labeled "natural" also contained caramel coloring. So make sure to read the ingredients.



Pope Francis calls for your 'prayer and action'...





---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.