William Whalen, a research fellow at the Hoover Institution, has been a media consultant and political strategist to several Republican campaigns. He is on Twitter and Facebook.

Regardless of what fate has in store for President Obama’s Supreme Court pick, Republicans have been handed a gift: a chance to reinvigorate the party’s conservative base in an election year.

While the G.O.P. has controlled one or both chambers of Congress for 18 of the past 22 years, it’s failed to tip Washington’s balance of power in its favor – as was the case when President Bill Clinton bent conservatives’ way in the aftermath of his first midterm drubbing.

Promises both grand (repealing Obamacare) and petty (defunding N.P.R.) have gone unmet. Despite two rejections of Obama’s policies in two nonpresidential elections, it’s Hill Republicans who seem the beta males in this relationship. The conservative base has noticed and it’s dismayed – so much so that even Donald Trump seems a compelling option.

Refusing to give Obama a third Supreme Court appointment doesn’t redefine Washington's landscape. In less than a year, we’ll have both a new president and Congress. But it does provide a reminder to a party’s jaded grassroots that winning an election has its benefits: filling the federal bench, or in this case denying the loyal opposition the opportunity to do the same.

If indeed Senate Republicans have decided that any Obama pick is dead on arrival, then the smart move would be to hold no Judiciary Committee hearings.

What happens in November? If Republicans are smart, they’ll have successfully exported the debate from Washington – straight to those select few states that will decide both the presidency and control of the Senate come November.

• In Colorado, where voting for gun-control measures led to the recall of two Democratic state senators, talk about how Scalia’s successor could have an impact on future Second Amendment cases.

• In Ohio and Pennsylvania and the Republican-led states that fought the president’s Clean Power Plan all the way to the Supreme Court, ask if a reconfigured court would deliver the same 5-4 verdict against the Obama administration.

Yes, denying Obama his choice is scorched-earth politics. And doing so will spawn an outcry from the news media and the Democratic establishment. But there’s more at stake than the principle of fighting fire with fire. With an election on the horizon and Republicans in dire need of a motivated base, it’s worth the stretch.



Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.