Buy Photo U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, speaks at a campaign stop in Lenox, Iowa on Saturday, Nov. 28, 2015. (Photo: Matthew Patane/The Register)Buy Photo

LENOX, Ia. — Fellow Republican presidential candidates are not looking to save the country but only ease its pain, U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz said Saturday.

“There are a lot of good people who are running for president as Republicans, people that I like and respect, but I think an awful lot of the folks on that (debate) stage are running essentially to manage the decline of this country, that they view the direction as unchangeable and they’ll make it as not-painful as possible as we continue to lose this country,” said Cruz, a Texas Republican.

Speaking to a small crowd here, Cruz specifically mentioned his fight against the Affordable Care Act, the federal health care law also known as Obamacare.

“It’s striking how many of the Republican presidential candidates, you go back and watch their opening speech, don’t even mention the word Obamacare,” Cruz said. “I promise you if you’re not willing to campaign on repealing Obamacare, you ain’t going to do it when you get to the White House.”

Cruz did not mention any of his fellow Republicans by name.

The White House hopeful was in the middle of an eight-stop swing through Iowa on Saturday, one he plans to continue with stops Sunday and Monday.

Laying out his plan should he make it to the Oval Office — notably repealing Obamacare and establishing a flat tax — one audience member asked Cruz how he would get Congress on his side.

Cruz’s answer: a mandate from voters.

“If we come out of 2016 with a mandate from the people where you change the incentives and it becomes politically more risky for members of Congress to do the wrong thing than it is to do the right thing, that is the only way you get major change,” Cruz said.

Cruz’s answer struck a chord with Linda Bauer, a 68-year-old farmer from Lenox. Bauser said both Cruz and neurosurgeon Ben Carson are her top two so far this cycle.

“They’re thoughtful and they’ve thought things through. They understand the Constitution, both of them do,” Bauer said.

Since Iowa U.S. Rep. Steve King endorsed Cruz, however, Bauer said she’s leaning toward the Texan.

About the event

SETTING: Restaurants in Creston and Lenox; a pizza place in Mount Ayr.

AUDIENCE: Between 70 and 80 in Creston; about 25 in Lenox; about 10 in Mount Ayr.

REACTION: Cruz received multiple rounds of applause in Creston; the crowd in Lenox was attentive and offered a round of applause upon his entrance. Cruz met with those in Mount Ayr as they sat down to eat.

WHAT'S NEXT: Cruz has several stops in Iowa Sunday and Monday, including attending a church service in Des Moines.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Hw6JuR