He may not be making the biggest waves in the race for the 2016 GOP presidential nomination, but Florida Republican Sen. Marco Rubio also isn't shying away from taking on some of what might be charitably described as the more sensitive issues.

"If you think about it, we are at the water's edge of the argument that mainstream Christian teaching is hate speech," Rubio said in a recent interview with CBN News. "Today we've reached the point in our society where if you do not support same-sex marriage you are labeled a homophobe and a hater."

The evidence, as far as the debate in the media-centric cultural mainstream, would seem to back him up. In most cases the defenders of same-sex marriage are portrayed favorably while those who oppose it for reasons steeped in their personal religious beliefs are held up to ridicule and worse.



[READ: Most Americans Think Gay Marriage Is Inevitable]

Asking and answering the question "what's the next step?", Rubio went on to say that "the next step is to argue that the teaching of mainstream Christianity, the catechism of the Catholic Church is hate speech and there's a real and present danger."

It's not a position that is likely to win him a lot of support among millennials – who consistently and decisively favor the legalization of same-sex marriage in just about every survey that can be found – but it is an important point nonetheless. Still, for every young voter that position may alienate, his willingness to even talk about the subject in such strong terms will attract the attention of married voters who attend church at least once per week (the classic definition of a religious voter) and, in particular, Catholics.

In for a penny, in for a pound, Rubio went much further with his argument than most of his pre-presidential brethren seem willing to do. "The family is the original cell of society," Rubio also said in the interview. "It is the first and most important government. It is the first church. The family is the singular most important institution in society. It existed before government. It existed before laws."



[READ: Pope Francis Says Science and Faith Aren't at Odds]