Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton accused then-Sen. Barack Obama’s 2008 presidential campaign of “sexism” Tuesday during an interview with ABC’s “Good Morning America.”

“Beginning the process of working with then-Senator Obama after I ended my campaign, we had an awkward but necessary meeting to clear the air on a couple of issues, and one of them was the sexism that, unfortunately, was present in that ’08 campaign,” Clinton told host Robin Roberts.

The former Secretary of State has been making the rounds to promote her new book, “Hard Choices.” In an excerpt from the book, Clinton recalled a request from the Obama campaign asking her to issue a “dismissive statement” about former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin, who had been selected to be Republican presidential nominee John McCain’s running mate.

“I was not going to attack Palin just for being a woman appealing for support from other women … so I said no,” the 2016 hopeful wrote.

After the excerpt was released, Palin took to her Twitter account to slam President Obama for firing “the 1st shot in the real ‘war on women.'”

Look who fired the 1st shot in the real "war on women". Hint: it wasn't the GOP. See this excerpt from Hillary's book pic.twitter.com/kKBShf9vHj — Sarah Palin (@SarahPalinUSA) June 9, 2014

Clinton addressed the 2008 Republican vice presidential nominee’s comment during her interview with Roberts.

“That very first day, the Obama campaign said, ‘Well, we want you to go out there and criticize her.’ And I said, ‘For what? For being a woman? No, let’s wait until we know where she stands. I don’t know anything about her. Do you know anything about her?'” Clinton told Roberts.

The Obama White House has fielded accusations of sexism in the past. Christina Romer, former chair of the Council of Economic Advisers, said she felt “like a piece of meat” and was ignored during her tenure at the White House. Additionally, former White House Communications Director Anita Dunn said the West Wing was “a genuinely hostile workplace to women.”