Water works

Water is a way of life in this area. Even the very name applied to our region — Hampton Roads — is taken from the confluence of the Elizabeth, James and Nansemond Rivers into the Chesapeake Bay on its way to the Atlantic.

So it is only fitting that an exceptional marine science lab would be located here. As the Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS) celebrates its 75th anniversary this year, it is worth noting its important role in the region over the decades.

The lab was established in 1940 as a small outpost with a humble mission to address issues related to local fisheries. But as the small staff of aquatic biologists began doing their research and educational work, it became apparent that such expertise could be put to increasingly significant work.

Today VIMS, located at Gloucester Point on the York River, has more than 450 staff members and students. It has studied pollution, promoted conservation and performed critical work aimed at maintaining the fish, crab and oyster population that is such a big part of our region's heritage and economy.

If you swim or boat in the Hampton Roads area, if you catch or sell or eat locally produced seafood, if you enjoy our local waters in any way, you can give a little thanks to the folks at VIMS. And wish them a happy anniversary.

Health education

In this day and age, anything related to health, medicine and doctors can get confusing in a hurry. Throw insurance into the mix — before or after the Affordable Care Act — and it gets worse. Even if your original complaint was indigestion, you'd come away with a headache.

So it's so very beneficial that Bon Secours Mary Immaculate Hospital in Newport News is offering a free health education and literacy program that is designed to simplify the process of seeking and receiving treatment.

The eight-week program will cover such topics as appointments and medications, how to describe specific symptoms and complete medical forms, and what questions to ask doctors. To many patients, these subjects might seem too simple to even require explanation — but anyone who works in health care could give an in-depth seminar on the many ways these things get fouled up, and the amount of time and money that gets wasted trying to fix them.

And it's not just about time and money. It's about health. The information in these programs will help ensure that people get the right medication and that they know how to take it properly. Again, something that seems simple but often isn't.

This type of program, offered to the public free of charge, is a tremendous service to the community.

Editing Ebony

A proud salute, journalists to journalist, to Hampton University graduate Kierna Mayo, who took over this summer as vice president and editor in chief of Ebony magazine.

This is obviously a major task and a high-profile title for a local woman. Ebony, which focuses on African-American culture, has been published continuously since 1940 and maintains a monthly circulation of more than 1.2 million readers.

Current events make it clear that issues involving race are still front and center in the national dialogue. In a recent interview with the Daily Press, Ms. Mayo made it clear that she wants Ebony to consistently provide provocative and thought-provoking material that will be a part of that discussion.

Good to see such impressive and relevant work being done by folks who took their education at our local universities.

Roses and thorns

Each week, the Daily Press Editorial Board offers a list of area citizens or institutions deserving of "roses" or "thorns."

This week's roses go to:

• Kecoughtan and HU grad Tory Smart, who will follow in his father's footsteps as the university's band director. If you have ever seen the HU marching band, pep band or concert band perform, you know the kind of talented and creative musicians he will be working with.

• Everyone who has worked on the future USS John F. Kennedy, which will have its keel-laying ceremony on Saturday at Newport News Shipbuilding. It's a big milestone in the long process of constructing a Ford-class aircraft carrier.

This week's thorns go to:

• The 14-year-old boy from James City County who went for a 2 a.m. "joy ride" that ended with some very reckless driving and a crash as he tried to elude police. Oh, yes, and he had two girls, ages 13 and 9, riding with him. He is lucky no one was hurt or killed.