Read Part Three

Republicans in Archuleta County — like Republicans most anywhere — have a healthy fear of Big Government and Big Taxes. I’ve often found myself in the political trenches alongside this or that Archuleta County Republican activist, campaigning against the latest crazy government scheme for increasing the tax burden on our local citizens for the latest highly questionable bureaucratic adventure.

I consider it fortuitous that Colorado law demands voter approval for any new tax, or tax increase. Here in Archuleta County — during the past 20 years that I’ve being living here — the voters have been generally successful in restraining government waste, via the ballot box.

I was introduced to some of the details of this year’s monster tax increase proposal — Amendment 69, AKA ColoradoCare — by Mary Ann Smith, one of the more active members of the Archuleta County Republican Women’s club. During a half hour interview, which I summarized in a previous Daily Post article, Ms. Smith outlined many of the reasons why she is campaigning against this tax proposal. She offered a number of logical and thoughtful arguments for opposing Amendment 69 — the proposed amendment to the Colorado Constitution that would create a new tax-funded agency here in Colorado to replace Obamacare and the health insurance racket. (Medicare and VA medical services would remain under the control of the federal government.)

This rather radical proposal was petitioned onto next November’s ballot by a vigorous signature-gathering effort conducted last year. I believe that event, in and of itself, hints at a possible route to political progress in America.

During our interview, Ms. Smith mentioned recreational marijuana, which Colorado voters legalized in 2012 through a similar citizens initiative process.

“People are so focused on the Presidential election, like they were four years ago when marijuana was legalized — and they see something that has the name ‘ColoradoCares’… and we all care about our neighbors, we care about our families … and when you see the name ‘ColoradoCares’ you first think ‘warm and fuzzy…’

“… It’s not sweet. It’s depressing. And you better be ready, and you better be talking to your neighbor, because everybody says, ‘There’s no way [ColoradoCare] will pass.’ And when somebody tells me there’s no way this will pass, it concerns me greatly, because everybody said there was no way marijuana would be legalized.”

I assume Ms. Smith was here using the word “everybody” to mean “all the Republicans in my social circle.” In fact, recreational marijuana was legalized by a fairly decent margin in Colorado, and by a higher voter percentage in Archuleta County than in Colorado as a whole.

I also gathered, from her tone and context, that Ms. Smith would have preferred to see marijuana remain illegal in Colorado. Which is to say, she would have preferred to have left the marijuana trade in the hands of the same vast criminal network that controls marijuana distribution in other states.

Life is a big trade-off. The legalization of marijuana in Colorado has, and will, create problems. Many of those problems are a direct result of marijuana remaining illegal in surrounding states, but some are the problems inherent in any drug-related business. Witness, for example, the epidemic of addiction here in America that has resulted from the legal access to opioid painkillers like Oxycodone.

From a 2013 article in The Week written by reporter Jon Terbush:

The number of fatal prescription painkiller overdoses among women has risen fivefold since 1999, according to a report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released Tuesday. Calling it an “under-recognized and growing problem,” the CDC urged health-care providers to exercise more caution when doling out prescription medications, and suggested that states and the federal government could curtail the alarming rise by better educating people about the dangers of prescription drugs. “Mothers, wives, sisters, and daughters are dying at rates that we have never seen before,” said Dr. Thomas Frieden, director of the CDC.

The article shared this graphic:

The number of women killed by legal prescription drugs now equals the total from all illegal drugs shown in the chart.

Do we have a problem here? A very deadly problem?

Please note that the frighteningly prominent curve at the top of above chart shows only the women who have actually died as a result of doctor-prescribed, entirely legal opioid drugs. We must assume that the curve showing the number of addicted women who are living with a destructive addiction to these legal pharmaceutical drugs is following a similar upward trajectory.

Like marijuana, opium poppies, are reasonably easy to grow. But the trade in the drugs extracted from the opium plant is shared by an international criminal network and by the pharmaceutical industry. It appears that the products distributed by the American pharmaceutical industry — with the blessing of Washington DC politicians — kill more than twice as many people as the heroin distributed by the criminals.

Everyone — and I mean “everyone” — pretty clearly recognizes that our politicians in Washington DC are, and always have been, largely under the influence of highly-paid corporate lobbyists representing America’s financial, pharmaceutical, military and industrial interests. We, as voters, have little hope of influencing our “representatives” in Congress, or in the White House. We can put them there, but we can’t easily influence them once they get there.

To a lesser degree, we have the same problem with our legislators in Denver. We can elect them, and then we can sit back and watch them run amuck.

But there’s hope.

Here in the Republic of Colorado, our Constitution allows any group of concerned citizens to place an initiative on the November ballot — assuming that these concerned citizens have the time and energy to gather 100,000 signatures.

That’s what happened in 2011. Concerned citizens submitted over 100,000 signatures to place Amendment 64 — the proposed legalization of marijuana possession and sales — on the 2012 ballot.

Our legislators in Washington DC and Denver would never have legalized marijuana in Colorado. Not in a million years. They were too afraid of the political backlash, and too much under the influence of Big Pharma with its obscene profit margins.

So we made the decision, for ourselves.

Read Part Four…