Topics: 2014 elections, BuzzFeed, Crossroads GPS, Editor's Picks, george will, healthcare, Healthcare Reform, Karl Rove, Kimberley Strassel, midterm elections, Midterms, Monica Wehby, National Review, Obamacare, The Right, Politics News

Earlier this week, Buzzfeed’s Andrew Kaczynski reported out the fairly bizarre story of Oregon Republican Senate candidate Monica Wehby and the health plan that she plagiarized from Crossroads GPS. Her candidacy has long been a favorite of conservative pundits who convinced themselves that Wehby, a pediatric neurosurgeon running in a state that had an especially rough experience with the Affordable Care Act rollout, was ideally positioned to campaign hard on health policy and take down Democratic incumbent Jeff Merkley.

The Wehby campaign’s attempts to brush off the Buzzfeed story were inept and made the situation worse. At first they denied everything. “The suggestion that a pediatric neurosurgeon needs to copy a health care plan from American Crossroads is absurd,” a spokesman told Kaczynski, throwing in this gloriously passive-aggressive kicker: “Dr. Wehby is too busy performing brain surgery on sick children to respond, sorry.”

Then came the inevitable reckoning: the campaign pulled the plan from the website and copped to the plagiarism, blaming it all on Wehby’s former campaign manager, Charlie Pearce, who denies everything. Now Kaczynski is reporting that Wehby also plagiarized portions of her economic plan from Sen. Rob Portman. You could say all this would hurt Wehby’s chances at victory, but things didn’t look good for her to begin with. Nearly every public poll of the Oregon Senate race has given Merkley a double-digit lead. A Koch-funded outside spending group recently abandoned its plans to air anti-Merkley attack ads in October. Whatever chance at victory she might have has all but vanished.

What makes this whole strange scenario even funnier is that while Wehby promoted herself as a staunch Obamacare opponent, conservatives actually hated Wehby’s health plan and had deep suspicions about her on health care in general. During the Republican primary, she was attacked by her Tea Party challenger for having said nice things about a health plan proposed by Oregon’s other Democratic senator, Ron Wyden. And for all her talk of “repealing” Obamacare, she also wanted to keep the parts of it that polled well and would often talk about “fixing” the law, as opposed to doing away with it altogether.