Buy Photo No alcohol signs posted at the Falling Rock Park in La Grange in June 2012. (Photo: Aaron Borton / Special to The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

A jury awarded a $10.5 million verdict to a widow of a man killed in 2012 by a drunken driver in a negligence lawsuit against a popular summer swimming and diving spot in Oldham County.

Charley Klosterman was hit on his motorcycle in June 2012 by Nicholas Snoddy, who had spent hours drinking alcohol at the Falling Rock Park, an old rock quarry in La Grange, before he eventually took to the road.

Oldham Circuit Court jurors found that Joe Clark, who owns the quarry, acted negligently by allowing Snoddy to drink alcohol on his land and failing to stop him from driving under the influence. They awarded Klosterman's wife and his estate approximately $3.02 million in actual damages -- including lost wages and medical costs her husband's mental and physical pain -- $5,000,000 for her "loss of the love and affection of Charley" and $2.5 million in punitive damages.

"There’s never going to be a winner in a case like this, but at least in this case, her husband's death has meaning," said plaintiff's attorney Nick Naiser.

He said he hopes the verdict triggers the closure of the business, preventing any future drunken driving situations.

"The jury recognized letting people drink and party without any supervision and then letting them drive off in their cars is not a responsible thing to do," Naiser said.

County law enforcement said in summer 2012 they were heightening efforts to crack down on swimmers drinking at the site amid complaints from neighbors and numerous citations for drunken driving and public intoxication, The Courier-Journal previously reported.

Reached late Friday afternoon, Clark said he could not believe the jury's verdict. He said he or his staff searches every car that enters the property for alcohol and there is signage posted warning customers no alcohol is allowed.

Clark previously told The Courier-Journal he didn't remember Snoddy being drunk the day of the collision and he would not have allowed people to drive away if they were obviously intoxicated.

"It didn’t have anything to do me," Clark said of the 2012 death. "We can only ask people not to drink. We can only do so much."

Clark, who opened the business in the late '90s, said he does not plan to pay the millions of dollars. His attorney, Mark Gaston, declined any comment, saying he has not yet spoken with Clark about the verdict.

"That one property is the only thing I’ve got to show for a lifetime of really hard work," Clark said. "I wanted to share what I had."

Reporter Matthew Glowicki can be reached at (502) 582-4989 or mglowicki@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1S2YOWo