Dr. Aaron Shirley was a pioneering physician in Mississippi. (Photo: University of Mississippi Medical Center)

Sad to hear the news that Dr. Aaron Shirley, Mississippi's pioneering physician, died.

He is among the more fascinating people I've interviewed in my career as a reporter.

His latest project involved utilizing community health advocates to help ensure Mississippians receive the low-cost, preventive health care they desperately needed. The MacArthur "genius" grant winner pioneered the national model for school-based clinics to provide health and counseling services.

"Over the past 15 years, millions of dollars have been poured into the Mississippi Delta to correct things and make things better," he told me last year.

In spite of such spending, "there has been no improvement in health status," he said. "What we've been doing is not working."

He started a pilot program in Humphreys, Leflore and Yazoo counties in which these certified community health workers operate "health houses" in communities and serve as health care intermediaries.

For instance, he said if a doctor suspects a diabetic patient is failing to follow orders, a worker visits the patient in his or her home.

A test of the program worked with more than 1,000 patients and helped reduce hospital readmissions at Central Mississippi Medical Center from 26 percent in 2010 to less than 10 percent so far this year.

Reducing readmissions is an increasing need under the Affordable Care Act, which fines hospitals that allow readmissions to surpass 1 percent.

Dr. Rick deShazo, professor of medicine and pediatrics for the University of Mississippi Medical Center, told me that Mississippi must switch from its current model of disease treatment to one of disease prevention.

"Out in the rural areas, doctors and nurse practitioners are seeing up to 100 people a day, putting out fires," he said. "Nobody is doing any preventive medicine."

UMMC has joined forces with the United Methodist Church, training both medical students and Methodist members to work as community health advocates across Mississippi, conducting health screenings for hypertension, diabetes and body mass.

There's no way to turn out enough physicians and nurses to make up for the medical provider shortage in the state, "but there's not a shortage of churches," said Michael Jones, director of UMC's Community Health Advocate Training Program. "There are more United Methodist churches than there are post offices."

Since 2011, UMMC has trained 1,100 community health advocates.

"It matters not what happens when someone goes to the doctor, but what goes on at home," Jones said. "It's all about educating people."

Obesity leads to Type 2 diabetes, which is highly preventable, he said.

In Mississippi, 12 percent of the population is diabetic, and another 36 percent are pre-diabetic, he said. "Almost half the population is diabetic or pre-diabetic."

Across the state, 10 Methodist churches are now operating as health centers, including the John Wesley United Methodist Church's Health Education Center headquarters in Durant, which opened in March.

"We have health stations where people can take their blood pressure," said Pastor Detra Bishop. "We teach people in the communities to do health screenings."

The Rev. Mark Jones has long preached to his parishioners at Revels Memorial United Methodist Church in Greenville about healthy eating and exercise.

Last May, the church sponsored a health fair — only for the minister to find out his blood sugar was high.

"I had no idea my sugar was like that," said the 50-year-old preacher. "The doctor told me it doesn't matter how much I exercise."

Some parishioners discovered the same thing, and they have all begun to eat healthier, substituting fresh fruit for cakes, cookies and other sweets.

Shirley told me he believed community health workers can help catch diseases that have gone unnoticed and untreated, such as hypertension, which "is a silent disease because you don't feel any pain. You have no symptoms."

Over time, hypertension devastates the body, he said. "Once the kidneys fail, he's classified as disabled, and now he's eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. The cost for coverage that would have prevented the kidneys from failing is a fraction to what it costs to maintain a person on dialysis."

Annual cost for a single patient on dialysis? More than $80,000.

DeShazo said half of those with hypertension or diabetes are going untreated now in Mississippi. "If you can get your arms around them before they're symptomatic," he said, "you can change the whole history of these diseases."

To contact Jerry Mitchell, email jmitchell@jackson.gannett.com or call (601) 961-7064. He is @jmitchellnews on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1rs4Abm