Just before health reform became law in 2010, the Congressional Budget Office and the Joint Committee on Taxation estimated that the Affordable Care Act would reduce budget deficits. This week, CBO Director Douglas Elmendorf wrote that, four years later, “the agencies have no reason to think that their initial assessment that the ACA would reduce budget deficits was incorrect.”

My Center on Budget and Policy Priorities colleague Paul Van de Water provided a convenient guide to CBO’s original cost estimate here, and all the law’s essential features remain in place. The measures that subsidize the expansion of health coverage are budget costs. Those costs are more than offset, however, by budget savings in Medicare, Medicaid and other programs, as well as revenues from taxes and fees. The resulting deficit reduction will be modest over the first 10 years, CBO projects, but larger in the ensuing decade.

The health care law sought to ensure that all Americans have access to affordable health care. It includes important and popular reforms that prevent insurance companies from denying coverage to people with pre-existing conditions, charging higher premiums based on a person’s health status or gender, or placing annual or lifetime caps on covered benefits. In return, it requires everyone to obtain health insurance as long as it’s affordable or pay a penalty. This so-called “individual mandate” is critical to achieving these popular reforms. You can’t have one without the other.

[MORE: Cartoons on Obamacare]

Under the law, most people will continue to receive health insurance from their employers, Medicare or Medicaid. The rest can obtain health insurance through the marketplaces (or exchanges) that launched in every state this year. To ensure affordability, the law provides substantial subsidies for people with incomes up to $88,000 for a family of four who purchase their health insurance through the marketplaces.

The other major component of Affordable Care Act costs is the expansion of Medicaid eligibility to nearly all low-income adults with the federal government assuming almost all the costs. While the Supreme Court upheld all of the law’s provisions, it disallowed the large penalty that it would have imposed on states that did not institute the expansion. With no penalty and a deep political divide over health reform, 24 states are not expanding in 2014. While that may hold down federal budget costs, it’s a shortsighted decision by those states that creates a coverage gap for many people of modest means.

The health care law’s cost-saving provisions include reductions in Medicare Advantage overpayments and in certain payments to doctors, hospitals, and drug manufacturers, as well as increases in Medicare premiums for the affluent. Revenue increases include a higher Medicare tax on high-income people and health industry fees, including a tax on medical device manufacturers.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on the Economy]

Critics of the health care law often cherry-pick their objections and ignore the interdependence of the its different components. Thus, they object to the unpopular individual mandate, but want to preserve the popular reforms to health insurer practices — forgetting that even conservatives once recognized that such a mandate is a necessary feature of any health plan that relies on private insurers. Similarly, critics who simply want to eliminate cuts in Medicare Advantage or repeal the medical device tax conveniently ignore the consequences for budget deficits.

Like any large piece of legislation, the Affordable Care Act can be improved. But its designers did grapple seriously with the challenges of making affordable health care available to all Americans in a fiscally responsible way.

Do its critics have an alternative that does the same?