Motorists are advised to heed all closure barricades, and in all other cases, to Turn Around, Don't Drown (Source: WAFF)

Union Hill Cemetery Rd. in Hackleburg, one of several roads reported damaged by heavy rainfall and flooding Friday. (Source: WAFF)

Heavy rains on Christmas Day and again Monday have caused widespread flooding, which in turn have affected many roadways across the Tennessee Valley.

The following is the latest road closure information into our newsroom from our reporters and local emergency officials. We endeavor to remove roads from this list once we've been notified they have reopened.

Remember, if you encounter water over a roadway, with or without a barricade, Turn Around, Don't Drown.

Madison County

Old Highway 431 between Easter Bypass and Cherry Tree Road is closed,

Eastern Bypass between Old Cove Place and McMullen Cove Road is closed and has barricades.

Caldwell Lane between 431 and Park Hampton Drive is closed and has barricades.

The right-hand lane on Franklin Street Northbound from St. Claire is flooded and has a barricade, the left-hand lane is passable.

right-hand left-hand The right-hand lane of Lowe Avenue East of Madison Street Westbound is flooded and has a barricade, the left lane is passable.

Swancott at Rabbit Lane is impassable.

Martin Road west of Zierdt Road is impassable.

Co. Line Road area of Boeing Circle is impassable.

Hobbs Island Road and Hill Road are closed between Vann Drive and Old Highway 31.

Ditto Landing entrance gate is closed. Officers continue to monitor Hobbs Island Road for other issues.

Franklin County

Muscle Shoals - Markate Road near River Road

A sinkhole has been reported on Lovett Lane, but it is on a private drive.

Phil Campbell PD: College Road from Dan Street to NWSCC Entrance is closed until further notice due to instability.

Jackson County

Due to several reports of flooding and hazardous conditions, the Jackson County Emergency Management advises that water is over the roadways on many county roads. Jackson County EMA is asking residents to stay off roads in particular roads with water crossing over.

Highway 117 from 1 mile north of Stevenson to the TN state line is closed.

Lauderdale County

Flooding affecting Turner Lindsey Road in Rogersville

Flooding reported at creek crossings on County Roads 534 and 156.

Union Hollow Road and County Road 105 both closed at Panther Creek.

County Road 298 at Butler Creek is closed.

Holding until Sunday, barricades will come down hopefully Monday.

Lauderdale County Road 96 - closed at the creek

Mitchell Blvd Overpass (City of Florence

County Road 298 at Little Butler Creek

County Road 502 at Second Creek

County Road 130 at Little Blue Water Creek

County Road 92/Turner Lindsay Road at First Creek

County Road 136 and County Road 534

Limestone County

Shaw Road at Brownsferry and Nuclear Plant Road is still closed

Holt Springer East End between Hardy and Gordon Road is still closed.

Avoid Browns Ferry/Walden area in Madison due to flooding, police are on scene public works has been notified

Shaw Road closed south of Paradise Shores Road

Patton and Telstar are flooded in Huntsville

815 Giles blocked due to flooding in Huntsville

Monte Sano and Panorama blocked due to flooding

Old Highway 20 Bridge between Mooresville Road and Greenbrier Road

Jones Road Bridge between Nick Davis and Pepper Road

Levert Avenue at the creek is closed due to flooding.

Morgan County

Decatur - Red Bank Road

Marshall County

Albertville Martling Gap and Martling Rd. flooded 3400 Rose Rd. flooded Red Barn Rd. off Hwy 205 flooded Martling Gap Rd. closed Irvin Patterson Rd. closed Claude Hill Rd. closed Ross Rains Rd. closed Tick Duckett Rd. closed Johnson Rd. closed Bell Orr Rd. closed Half Section Line Rd. between Edmonson St. and Gethsemene Rd.

Arab Glendale Rd. at Eddy Scant City Rd. side, closed Halston Rd. north of Eddy Scant City Rd., closed Scant City Rd. between Dodd and Haden closed Friendship Rd. and Haynes closed 600 Scant City Rd. flooded Eddy Church Rd NE and Maple Hill Rd NE flooded 3861 Mat Morrow Rd. flooded Aldridge Gap Rd. flooded City Park Dr NE flooded Apollo Rd. near Atlas Ln and Short Creek washed out Fenton Dr. off Ruth Rd. washed out 1871 Marth Ln NE flooded Bluff View, closed Feemster Gap Road, closed

Boaz 614 Darnell St. flooded

Grant 6555 Swearengin Rd., culvert washed out Ervin Patterson Rd. flooded 1701 Anderson Ridge Rd. flooded 7718 Simpson Point Rd. flooded Butler Mill Road Snead Road Whitaker Dr. flooded 760 Word Mountain Rd. flooded 1718 Cardessa Ln., Hwy 79, flooded Shady Side Rd. washed out

Guntersville 254 Satellite Dr. closed Hwy 227 before state park closed due to mudslide 2000 Wyeth Rock Rd. flooded 836 Blout Ave flooded 71 Henry Hill Rd. flooded 90 Kelley Dr. flooded Hwy 431 and Cross St. flooded 2701 Wyeth Dr. flooded Cox Gap Rd. flooded Hwy 79 and Convict Rd. flooded Fry Gap Road between Rock Hill Road and Warrenton

Horton 482 Plunkett Dr. flooded Concord Rd. at Southerland Dr. flooded Spears Rd. at Southerland flooded Smith Dr. at Nixon Chapel Rd. flooded Old Oneonta Rd. flooded 200 Whitten Rd. flooded 5000 Nixon Chapel Rd. flooded

Union Grove Mt. Olive Church Rd. flooded

Grant-Paint Rock River Butler Mill Road, closed Snead Road, closed Cathedral Caverns Hwy at Babe Wright Road Mill Road closed

Douglas-Boaz Plunkett off Hwy 168, pipe washed out. closed Concord Road off Hwy 75

NIxon Chapel Area Smith Drive at Nixon Chapel Road Pleasant Hill Road, dirt portion, Bride washed out

Hebron area Ashley Drive closed Shelby Drive closed Merrell Mtn. Road closed Old New Hope Hwy closed



Lawrence County

Main Street and Sims has flooded and is impassable.

County Rd 214 and Hwy 33 at the bridge is flooded.

Portions of County Road 298 has flooded over

Old Moulton Road East of the city is impassable.

County Road 26 impassable at the bridge.

County Road 640 and County Road 328 is washed out.

County Road 236 completely flooded

317 between 24 and 460 is under water.

Parts of County Road 54 and 24 is impassable.

DeKalb County:

Danny Haymon Memorial Bridge on Pendergrass Avenue in Powell is closed indefinitely due to damage.

Cullman County

Bridge at County Road 1508 and 1509 washed out

Bridge at County Road 1568 washed out

Bridge on County road 1518 is barricaded because of the road before the bridge is washed out.

Click here for more Cullman County information from our sister station, WBRC.

Gadsden-Etowah County EMA reported a landslide on Hwy 431 south of Rockledge Road just after 6 p.m. Monday.

ALDOT Advisories

ALDOT is consistently updating their online database of state road and highway conditions; click here for a mobile-friendly version.

In Cherokee County, ALDOT has shut down Alabama 68 westbound between mileposts 27 and 28 due to wet roads and a shoulder slide at Leesburg/Sand Rock. Eastbound lanes remain open. The detour for westbound traffic is south on 411 to north on 431 to north on I-59 to Exit 205 at Alabama 68. A timetable for repairs has not been established.

Flash flooding subsided in many areas of North Alabama in the overnight hours Saturday, however swollen rivers and streams continue to be the primary concern.

Officials in Athens and Limestone County declared a state of emergency following ongoing flooding.

Residential flooding was widespread Friday, according to Madison County EMA officials. In Gurley, a man helped carry his 86-year-old neighbor out of him home as the water rose.

A family we spoke with Friday night contended with nearly a foot of water entering their home.

Saturday, the focus continued on the task of surveying, repairing and reopening damaged roadways.

Flooded and eroded roads continue to be reported by emergency management agencies as crews monitor conditions throughout the day. Officials in Madison County said many storm drains along Highway 431 are backed up, causing standing water to spill over onto roadways.

Governor Robert Bentley issued a State of Emergency for all Alabama counties as a result of the excessive rain that has fallen over the past couple of days and continues to fall.

“Many parts of Alabama have experienced excessive rainfall and flooding is a major concern,” Governor Robert Bentley said in a statement issued Friday. “By issuing a State of Emergency, I have directed all state agencies to take necessary actions to be prepared to respond to the anticipated flooding across Alabama. We will actively monitor the flooding, and are prepared to respond to any requests for assistance,” said Gov. Bentley.

By issuing a SOE, I've directed state agencies to take necessary actions to be prepared to respond to the anticipated flooding across AL. — Gov. Robert Bentley (@GovernorBentley) December 25, 2015

EMAs in multiple counties hope you will continue to advise the Turn Around, Don't Drown rule. If you encounter water over the road, you should turn around immediately - even a small amount of running water can sweep a vehicle off the road.

If you encounter a road barricaded by closure signs - even if it appears there is no water visible on the road, it is against the law to ignore the warning and drive around. You may not be aware of further dangers ahead and could put yourself in a potentially life-threatening situation.

High waters left two women and a young child stranded Friday. Crews responded to Rock Creek Boulevard off Old Railroad Bed Road in Harvest to rescue the three. Rescuers waded through the water with rafts to reach them and bring them to safety. Once on higher ground, they were greeted with a hug by a worried family member.

In Marshall County, officials have dealt with road erosion and mudslides. Near the state park, a mudslide Friday prompted road crews to send a backhoe to clear portions of Highway 227.

Click here to see more photos of 2015 Christmas Flooding in the Tennessee Valley

@waff48 nasty flooding just north of Arab pic.twitter.com/U4lX9ipeZ6 — That one kid Aaron (@aaron_hollaway) December 25, 2015

Alabama Emergency Management Agency (AEMA) personnel are in contact with the impacted counties and will be assessing the damage over the next several days. Roads and bridges in many places have washed out and are impassable. Motorists are advised to stop and turn around if they encounter flooded roads. It is dangerous to drive through flood waters.

“AEMA encourages residents to continue to monitor rains and be prepared to take action from fast rising water in flood prone areas. We will work with local officials to make sure the needs of our citizens are being met and assess the affected areas for damage,” Alabama EMA Director Art Faulkner said.

Even after rains subside, rivers and streams will likely continue to rise. EMA officials urge you to stay weather aware into the overnight and early morning hours.

Contact your local EMA office with any local safety concerns you may have.

Severe weather has affected other parts of Alabama; officials in Birmingham are examining potential tornado damage. In Coffee County, a man and a 5-year-old child were swept away and drowned when their vehicle was overtaken by floodwaters.

Copyright 2015 WAFF. All rights reserved.