People that have been active throughout their lives can’t lift their arm over their head, comb the back of their head or brush their teeth because their shoulder is not functioning normally

John Gallucci Jr. is the president of JAG Physical Therapy (Photo: ~File Photo) Story Highlights Freezing stage is when motion of the shoulder becomes painful and limited

Frozen stage is when you can’t move your shoulder at all and the pain the pain becomes overbearing

Thawing stage, you can start to increase the range of motion of the shoulder, pain starts to subside

As we grow older, especially over the age of 40, we are seeing more and more patients coming to the office with a diagnosis of “frozen shoulder” or adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder. People that have been active throughout their entire lives now all of the sudden can’t lift their arm over their head or comb the back of their head or even brush their teeth because their shoulder is not functioning normally.

What does frozen shoulder really mean? There are three phases and symptoms that we call frozen shoulder:

1. The freezing stage

2. The frozen stage

3. The thawing stage

These easy concepts created by medical professionals help to describe the stages of the pain and function of frozen shoulder. The freezing stage is when motion of the shoulder becomes painful and limited. The frozen stage is when you can’t move your shoulder at all and the pain becomes overbearing. The pain is felt when moving your shoulder in any direction doing any type of activity of daily living. The thawing stage is when you are able to start to increase the range of motion of the shoulder, and the pain starts to subside.

Many people have ideas and many medical professionals have rationales on why people suffer from frozen shoulder. It is more commonly seen among people who are over the age of 40, and more so in females than males. As we look at the bones, ligaments and tendons of our shoulder, they are incased in connective tissue called a capsule. This capsule thickens and causes the restriction of the shoulder ligaments and muscles to move normally.

Why does this happen?

There are many rationales and ideas that we have determined. We have seen people with different ailments such as diabetes, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, over/underactive thyroid and cardiovascular disease — all of which are systemic diseases that enhance the risk of people suffering from a frozen shoulder.

However, we also see many other people that have suffered from shoulder injuries such as a rotator cuff injury, a labrum injury or are recovering from surgery or a broken arm. People must understand that when these symptoms start to appear it is very important to visit a doctor and go to physical therapy as quick as possible.

There is no easy solution to frozen shoulder; however, physical therapy can get you moving and help you regain your range of motion in your shoulder. The beginning of your therapy care can be painful as the therapist works to increase your shoulder’s range of motion and to stretch out the capsule that has thickened. It is important that you regain your full range of motion before any strengthening activities, because as you strengthen the shoulder it can cause more thickness and more tightness.

By the time you get to the fourth or fifth week of physical therapy, the pain begins to reduce. This is the result of the motion in your shoulder increasing and therefore your activities of daily living — combing hair, brushing teeth, putting on shirt, driving a car — become less painful. Usually most patients with frozen shoulder will have to go through an eight- to 12-week program of physical therapy. Usually the best way to decrease pain is by icing the shoulder at least four to five times a day for 15 minutes each time.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1MiVyTm