Sioux Falls, SD

The story was updated to reflect new information from police on Wednesday. Officers report the woman now says the incident didn't take place downtown and she knows the suspect.

News of a reported rape in downtown Sioux Falls had people talking about safety in the area Tuesday evening.

"I'm stunned, I'm horrified, and I think for it to happen so close to the police station is kind of mind boggling," Susan Grace said.

"That makes me a bit nervous now that I know that," Brittanie Leonard said.

Grace found herself walking around downtown trying to get some answers.

"Actually, I had some friends out this weekend, and I used to work at 6th and Main for several years, and many times over the weekend we'd be working late at night," Grace said.

This incident is one that is starting to change her mind about the safety of downtown overall.

"There's a lot of officers that are patrolling this area. I think there's a lot of questionable activity already going on. This part of Sioux Falls, you look at maybe a little bit differently," Grace said.

Brittanie Leonard likes walking downtown, but knows as the sun goes down, her feeling of safety disappears.

"If I'm walking at night, I don't; not if I'm by myself. I have to have somebody with me," Leonard said.

The reported rape over the weekend is of no surprise to some people walking around downtown. In fact, the dangers of downtown Sioux Falls have been apparent for some time.

"We always get harassed and stuff like that by people all the time," Tina Richardson said.

Richardson's feeling about downtown Sioux Falls has changed over time.

"We used to come downtown and walk our dogs around here all the time around this time at night or later, but not anymore," Richardson said.

Because of her experiences downtown, what was reported over the weekend comes as no surprise.

"It doesn't shock me at all that it happened by the police station because they're getting braver and braver. It's really sad," Richardson said.

Police say that random crimes do not happen very often, but if you want to feel safer, they suggest not walking alone at night, stay in well-lit areas and be aware of your surroundings.

News

Crime {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:

The story was updated to reflect new information from police on Wednesday. Officers report the woman now says the incident didn't take place downtown and she knows the suspect.