More options: Share, Mark as favorite

Health plans are seeking double digit rate increases for their 2017 Obamacare plans, marking the third consecutive year that prices will rise in the exchanges.

This week, health plans in New York proposed a 17.3% average rate hike. It’s in line with similar requests made in other states. Michigan reports an average proposed rate increase of 25%, Oregon 20%, Virginia 18% and Maine 17%.

There are many structural flaws plaguing the way that the Affordable Care Act tilts the rules in favor of costlier and less efficient markets. There are plenty of gratuitous steps taken by regulators, who interpreted the prescriptive law in ways that made it even costlier.

But perhaps no regulatory tradeoff was more damaging than the political tension between boosting enrollment and making the market for ACA health plans more self-sustaining and price-competitive. At every turn, regulators favored enrollment gains over sound management. That has come at a big cost in how the plans are now priced.

The policy mistakes have compounded Obamacare’s woes. Fixing them will require more than regulatory tweaking. It will compel the Obama team to adopt a new political ethic when it comes to the tension between access, affordability and the obligations they’re willing to place on consumers. The Obama team can tilt the rules to let people flow in and out of the Obamacare exchanges at will. But this gaming will drive up costs for everyone.

Regulators created a litany of special exemptions to try and coax more people to enroll in Obamacare. There were so many “Special Enrollment Periods” that for practical purposes, most people could enroll at any time. It’s now clear that many people waited until they got sick before purchasing coverage. Worse still, it set the wrong expectations–that consumers could migrate in and out of Obamacare at their discretion, and health insurance wasn’t something that they needed to hold onto. These loopholes undermined the inducements needed to coax people to buy and maintain coverage. The result is an insurance pool that’s costlier than was projected. Premiums are rising as one consequence.

Obamacare was always predicated on getting enough younger and healthier people to overpay for the coverage in order to cross-subsidize the incongruously low rates set for older (and on average costlier) beneficiaries. But by setting rules that distorted the pool of people entering the exchanges still further, the Obama team busted these economic concessions.

In one analysis, which evaluated data from the 2014 insurance enrollment season, claim costs for individuals that enrolled in Special Enrollment Periods were 10% higher than those that enrolled during the standard open enrollment period, and per-member per-month (PMPM) claim costs for SEP enrollees were 24% higher on average during the first three months of enrollment than for open enrollment period (OEP) enrollees.

In the same analysis, in 2015, the difference in PMPM claim costs increased to 41% for the first three months of enrollment. Moreover, SEP enrollees were found to be 40% more likely, on average, to lapse coverage than those that enroll during the OEP.

The scope of the SEPs in the current exchanges (more than 30 unique occurrences) far exceeds what’s available under employer-sponsored health plans and Medicare and presumably what are required to address special circumstances. Other policies to enable or at least overlook deliberate gaming exacerbated the impact of the overly loose SEPs.

For example, consumers are able to select a year of Obamacare coverage, and stop paying premiums after 10 months. They can get the last two months free since insurers must continue coverage for two months after consumers withhold premiums. The rub is that people who embrace this tactic are eligible to select a new Obamacare plan the following year, without penalty. So they can keep buying a year of coverage and pay for only ten months.

Consumers face legitimate hardships, and federal programs like Obamacare need to err on the side of offering people relief from rules that can put individuals at peril. But the Obamacare concessions weren’t born just of benevolence. They were a deliberate policy to coax higher early enrollments, even if many people ended up lapsing coverage anyway.

CMS has taken steps in recent months to tighten rules around when consumers must enroll in coverage and close exemptions that let many people enroll “off-cycle.” As I stated recently in testimony I delivered before Congress on the topic, clear enrollment periods, with reasonable penalties for those who pursue coverage outside these windows (coupled to effective verification for those who request a special enrollment period) are an essential part of a well-functioning risk pool. Carefully defined enrollment windows can also form a key element of rules that use incentives to encourage people to enter the insurance market and stay continuously insured, rather than relying on penalties to enable these same outcomes.

With clear enrollment periods, policymakers can use a requirement for continuous coverage as a way to ensure that people who get in–and stay in–the insurance market, can’t be dropped from coverage, or face re-rating that would see their premiums rise when they get sick. This is a key element of market-based proposals to replace the ACA’s regulatory framework. Of course, any such policy needs to be coupled to subsidies that help people afford premiums when they confront periods of legitimate hardship.

Right now, the lack of tightly defined enrollment periods and verification requirements for those who enter the market off-cycle largely forecloses the ability to use a requirement for continuous coverage as a way to create incentives for people to maintain coverage.

It also undermines the Obamacare exchanges.

Those in charge of implementing the ACA traded the short-term political gain of slightly higher enrollment trends for the long-term stability of the program and its risk pools. The big premium spikes for 2017 are an economic reckoning of this shortsightedness.