Topics: Dylan Farrow, Sexual abuse, Woody Allen, Life News

I have long been ambivalent about Woody Allen. Given his oeuvre, I’m supposed to recognize his talent as a filmmaker. Given how revered Allen is in certain circles, I’ve tried to recognize this talent. I’ve tried to believe we can simply work under the delusion that there are two Woody Allens—the brilliant filmmaker and the sexual predator who married his ex-partner’s daughter and has been accused of sexually abusing his own daughter, Dylan Farrow. I have tried, as others have, to compartmentalize art and humanity. I have tried, and it shames me, to believe that certain transgressions can be overlooked in the face of great art.

We are in the midst of awards season and Woody Allen is being feted, once again, for his latest movie, “Blue Jasmine.” At the Golden Globes, Hollywood’s willful denial of Woody Allen’s tainted history was on full and repulsive display. Allen received the Cecil B. DeMille award for lifetime achievement and Diane Keaton, his one-time muse, his Annie Hall, was there to accept on his behalf. Allen, under the guise of reclusiveness, did not face his adoring public. It is interesting, for lack of a better word, that in her speech on Allen’s behalf, Keaton said, “Woody’s women can’t be compartmentalized.”

At that same ceremony, Cate Blanchett received a best actress Golden Globe for her role in “Blue Jasmine.” She gushed about Allen’s talent and her gratitude for his call. She did not compartmentalize. She chose art over humanity. Hollywood has long done this where Allen is concerned. The allegations that have followed him for more than 20 years are either dismissed or ignored.

Dylan Farrow has now written an eloquent open letter, which New York Times columnist Nicholas Kristof posted on his blog. Kristof also devoted his Sunday column to Farrow’s letter and her allegations against Allen. Kristof writes, “Allen’s defenders correctly note that he denies the allegations, has never been convicted and should be presumed innocent.” It’s an odd sort of statement to include from someone who is purportedly supportive of Farrow. Like many public intellectuals, Kristof is demonstrating the appropriate amount of concern while also acknowledging some semblance of reasonable doubt. He wants it both ways.

There will be a lot of forthcoming conversation from “public intellectuals” about Allen, Farrow, the allegations and how we should feel about all of this. There will be a lot of people claiming to know what we cannot possibly know.

This conversation has, in fact, already begun. For the Washington Monthly, Kathleen Geier commends Dylan Farrow’s bravery but also acknowledges that she is not likely to boycott Woody Allen despite “Dylan Farrow’s powerful testimony.” Geier, too, wants it both ways. Her article makes bizarre reference to Kanye West and includes a comment that it was so much easier to condemn R. Kelly than Woody Allen. The entire piece is difficult to parse and demonstrates the challenge of public intellectuals awkwardly grappling with certain topics.