A copy of the Sydney Morning Herald on 10 October 1972.

Mod: This is the final comments of the week - in this case, comments of the fortnight - column. We are investigating the possibility of both reader- and moderator-rated comments on our articles in future. As always our emphasis is on engagement. If you have suggestions about how we can improve our commenting world please comment below.

In this final column I thought it apt to include some comments that show the supportive and civil side of online interaction, which every mod tries to encourage. Thanks to all of you for your support. Keep reading. Keep thinking. Keep commenting.

Kim Williams calls News Corp leaks a festival of vengeance

Wyn

Advertisement

My four-year-old daughter asked me the other day, "Dad, what's a 'newspaper'?"

Facebook wages war on click-bait

Shane

Come on now, Lisa [Visentin]! You missed the obvious opportunity to give this article a better headline.

Alternative headlines, which I will allow you to steal:

Facebook saw click-bait as a problem. You won't believe what they did next.

This pesky trend has Mark Zuckerberg seething.

This is the change to your newsfeed that you simply won't believe.

Bill Shorten says Tony Abbott 'unfit to govern' after entitlements leaks

Lizzie

I thought the age of entitlement was over.

Jopaca

The entitlement may exist, but the justification doesn't.

Plane rude: When is it OK to recline your seat?

jofek

[…] The airlines reduced and reduced and reduced our space. And we fight with each other as if it is our fault.

Are we seeing the death of the two-party system?

Couldn't Resist

[…] while I like the idea of direct democracy in principle, in some ways we already have it with opinion polling and it's not a pretty sight. I'm just not sure as a people we are ready to make tough policy decisions, possibly at one's own expense, for the good of society as a whole.

Nothing can justify The Bachelor Australia

Sister Wife, Dirty Pie Truck Street

[…] you're just watching it the wrong way. It's even more entertaining to hate-watch the show when you play The Bachelor Drinking Game! Here are the rules.

A sip every time someone says the words:

"I can see a future with you", "here for the right reasons" and "finding love".

A slug every time:

The bachelor appears without a shirt, staring into the horizon, [and] looking wistful.

A bachelorette threatens to not accept a rose, and then accepts a rose.

Library book dumping signals a new dark age

Pando

There's so much to say about this topic one could write a book. […]

Cabin bag crackdown: Jetstar to introduce cabin baggage officers to stop oversize carry-on bags

Ilk

About time! The last time I flew, about three weeks ago, boarding, and I assume actual take-off, was delayed simply because a man in the front of the plane could not fit his bag into the overhead compartment. Everyone ended up bottlenecked behind him, waiting while he pushed and prodded his bag and a bunch of people tried to help him. In the end he had to have his bag go through the formal check-in procedure. And yet everyone thinks babies are annoying.

Is it OK to steal at work?

gof, CheCity

I chew my pens and the boss says she doesn't want them on or near her desk. So I am forced to take them home - I am forced to commit a heinous crime by my employer. Take me away, lock me up and throw away the key. But please let me keep my chewed-up pen.

My Muslim religion has problems that need fixing

Mike of Ulster

If someone claims they do this or that - on behalf of this religion or that - it is an attack on the good name of the religious institution, its teachings, and its followers.

In Northern Ireland's civil war in the 1970s it took the leaders of the two main churches a while to cotton on to this. But after a while they got their act together, and it worked.

Whenever terrorists - nasty men who hold grudges and seek excuses - did something obscene, religious leaders promptly issued statements condemning the terror[ist] act. The media broadcast them. This told the community, time and time again, that [despite] whatever the terrorists claimed, the religion shunned them.

If you're a religious leader, having to do this is not a pleasant duty. But the religious people [back] then did it - and it helped.

Mod: Below - except for our comment of the week - are interactions between commenters. You'll also see some correspondence between commenters and your humble mod. Should there be more?

Settling for second best in love

mimi

I am one of those people who can't settle for second best, and I tried many times. I also don't want to be second best. But hell, I have been single for 11 years now. We all need a human being next to us. [But] I am not going to settle for second best. Am I going to be alone forever[?] :(....

Really? [Reply to Mimi]

I'd say it's quite possible. I think I might be too. But you might change. I might change. People do and should, after all. It's a natural progression to evolve one's way of thinking over time. The best thing is to stay true to yourself, and there's no harm in people who feel alone spending time with one another, just as friends.

Mimi [reply to Really?]

Ow thank you, you made my day. :)

Politics: why would you do it to yourself?

Howe Synnott [reply to Matt]

G'day Matt. I hope it has been a good day so far. Thanks, S de B [Sam de Brito]; I reckon it is as simple as discovering that the job just doesn't turn out like you thought it would - prior to signing on:

"Sure, sure - I have seen what happens to those other politicians, but it is going to be different with me."

"I won't be like everyone else. I will really make a difference. I will appeal to people."

Then, like everyone else, you get mugged by reality. However, this is no reason for despair or nihilism - it's just the way life is. Get on with it.

Piped Piper [reply to Howe Synnott]

@Howe. Love your contribution as always. Pre-election politicians remind me of the courting process between potential partners and the night after. Shiny teeth, warm personalities, straight ties and glossy how-to-vote cards all disappear as soon as Antony Green announces the winner.

Imagine if Tony Abbott had been accused of rape ...

Flanders

Moderator, I am about to throw my iPad at the wall. Perhaps the commenting guidelines rule out vowels because I am mystified beyond belief. [Mod: this article was legally sensitive and an extraordinarily high proportion of comments had to be rejected. However, I'm not saying that was the case for Flanders.]

Flanders

Mod, thank you for posting my whiny comment [above]. Threats to destroy my iPad have now abated, and said iPad will not be pressing charges against me.

Graeme

Three on-topic and non-abusive comments submitted by me so far with not even ONE published. Is that you doing the moderating, Amanda [Vanstone]? If so, are you not keeping up or just not coping with valid criticism of such a ridiculous piece? I'm guessing this will be comment number four relegated to the "delete" files as well!

Mod

Hi Graeme, I can assure you that Amanda Vanstone is not moderating these comments. Another mod and I are moderating. Many comments have had to be rejected - not saying this applies in any way to any of your comments - for inaccurately representing the legal findings in relation to Bill Shorten and also to Tony Abbott. In the case of Abbott he was charged with indecent assault but the charges, he said, were "dismissed": see "Abbott: I was charged with indecent assault" by Michelle Grattan, July 18, 2004. Regards, Rob Ashton.

Graeme

@Libnet. Read my previous post and the reply from moderators. Their explanation however does not apply to my comments, which to date is now six not posted and are what you would describe as "leftist"! Believe me, there is no leftist bias by the moderators!

Why we need the Middle East to help fight Islamic State

Ross, MALLABULA [reply to Flanders]

Hi Flanders,

Thanks for your response.

I say shame on the ALP. I don't know whether we should intervene and I am sure that Abbott doesn't either. What is very instructive is that neither the ALP nor the LNP want debate to be heard.

Flanders [reply to Ross]

Ross, whether I agree with you or not, I always appreciate your polite postings. You are a good dude.

Australia is on the right side of history on gender justice

Screen

Good luck with that. Our government hasn't shown positive leadership in any area where empowering the vulnerable is an issue - they're more inclined to accuse them of "leaning", of sucking the life energy out of the good people (let's call them "lifters"). But they are very supportive of the rights of the lifty sorts of people.

Maybe you could sneak it under the LNP radar by asking them to support equality for men.

Shane [reply to Screen]

Did you have your "Auto-LNP-outrage" switched on, Screen? Did you read the article?

Ms Mlambo-Ngcuka praised the role of the Australian government. She's the executive director of UN Women, so I'm guessing she has a pretty decent insight into Australia's contribution towards genuine gender equality where it is needed most (such as the PNG example given).

Now obviously that's involved a few governments in succession, but I think she'd be aware that we changed governments a year or so ago, and if we'd taken any significant backward step, she'd probably know it, wouldn't you think?

For crying out loud. This column is fantastic. It has hit the nail on the head about where we stand and some initiatives that can get us where we need to go. It's a positive, optimistic column. Why drag it down with fishbowl politics?

Australia does tremendous things internationally, regardless of who is in office, which doesn't make the front page because they have bipartisan support so they're not going to sell papers.

Please, please leave the auto-outrage at the door for issues as important as this, and please articulate the only thought worth articulating after reading this column: "That's fantastic. Now, what more can we do?"

Screen

Hi Shane,

I'm inclined to agree with you about the auto-outrage, and I'm sorry my comment was posted first. However, I still think it's a legitimate comment, if not exactly helpful!

Mod: If there was a humility award of the week then Screen would win it. Or should that be the open-mindedness award?

Mod: Finally, our comment of the week. Well played, ltl.

Jane Caro stands by Q&A comment 'marriage was prostitution'

ltl

[…] Ms Caro was talking in a historical context and she is quite right that marriage included conjugal rights for the husband. [Until relatively recently] it was not possible for a husband to rape his wife.

Laws changed and for the better. But the idea that a husband could rape his wife was considered a dangerous idea long before that.