By Jen Samuel

Children learn that “E” is for “elephant,” not for “extinction.”

In 2013, more than 35,000 wild elephants were killed in Africa for ivory products, and millions of dollars from the trade directly funded the activities of an al-Qaeda affiliate and other terrorist organizations. New Jersey can help change that by closing its own domestic trade loopholes.

This month, the New Jersey Legislature approved S2012, sponsored by Sen. Raymond Lesniak, and A3128, sponsored by Assemblyman Raj Mukherji, with widespread support from both Republicans and Democrats, to ban domestic ivory and rhino horn sales. The bill still needs Gov. Christie’s signature to become law.

Actress Meryl Streep, a New Jersey native, has urged the governor to sign the elephant ivory and rhinoceros horn ban “without delay,” calling the trade one of “horrific cruelty.”

The bipartisan legislation bans ivory and rhino horn sales, yet people can go on owning the ivory they already possess. Musicians can continue to use instruments with ivory if desired. People can still inherit family heirlooms such as teapots with ivory handles. However, it is my hope that, one day, all people will recognize that ivory belongs to the elephants only.

The world looks to the United States as a nation dedicated to the principles of democracy – and we must be a country that acts for the good of humanity. That means placing value on elephants as living, intelligent, sentient beings instead of exploiting them as a commodity for ivory products that feed our vanity.

To do so, we must first close the loopholes in our ivory market at home. The legal market for ivory fuels the illegal market. Wildlife traffickers turn a $19 billion profit and use the legal commercial ivory to push illegal products under the guise of “antique,” “mammoth,” “bone” and even “jewelry.”

Seventy percent of African ivory is smuggled into China to be carved into ornaments and trinkets – but the United States stands as the second-largest ivory consumer. Furthermore, as law enforcement officials testified in New York City before a state Assembly hearing on wildlife trafficking, once elephant tusks are carved in China, the ivory products not consumed by the mainland are smuggled to America.

New Jersey is a hub for illegal ivory. It is smuggled through the Newark Airport and Elizabeth seaport, which comprise one of the world’s largest transit hubs, to push illegal tusks into the markets of New York City, the No. 1 consumer of ivory in America.

One of the most famous pianists in the world has expressed his support for elephants. “There are other materials which can be substituted for piano keys. But magnificent creatures like these can never be replaced. Music must never be used as an excuse to destroy an endangered species,” Billy Joel explained. “Music should be a celebration of life – not an instrument of death. ”

The ivory trade funds seven known African terrorist groups, from Janjaweed and the Lord’s Resistance Army to the al-Qaeda affiliate al-Shabaab. Ivory supplies these groups with $1 billion in annual revenue from the black market to buy weapons.

This international trade cycle is breeding lawlessness in Africa and causing a humanitarian crisis. New Jersey has the power to make a difference, since New Jersey’s ports are being used as a transit hub for this illicit activity.

As Republican U.S. Sen. Rob Portman from Ohio wrote, “Stopping the ivory trade has become not only a matter of conservation, but one of national security and international stability.”

We respectfully implore Gov. Christie to close down this bloody market once and for all for national security, future generations, the biodiversity of the planet, global stability, and yes, for the very survival of the symbol of the Republican Party, the elephant.

With a wild elephant killed every 15 minutes for its tusks – and even adolescents with tiny tusks are being slain – the death rate of elephants is exceeding their birth rate.

The blood ivory trade results in the killing of thousands if not millions of people, leaving behind orphans and widows, by enabling terrorists to continue to murder, pillage, rape and steal. The people who kill elephants destabilize Africa and threaten American security.

These extreme and active groups in Africa would like nothing more than to hurt Americans. And the ivory trade is giving them the ammunition to do so. Ivory has become a conflict resource. The only way to save the elephants from extinction is to close down the trade.

The New York Legislature has passed a similar bill, which Gov. Cuomo has pledged to sign into law. If both governors sign their respective bills, the ivory trade on the Eastern seaboard will effectively be shut down.

We must go further than we have gone before, despite the pushback from those who are unable to recognize that their love for ivory trinkets in no way justifies the extinction of elephant species.

Let’s act now to ensure all future New Jerseyans grow up in a world where elephants – and our humanity – still thrive.

Jen Samuel is president of Elephants DC. She formerly served as managing editor of The Register-News and Windsor-Heights Herald in Princeton. For more, visit elephantsDC.org.

On mobile or desktop:

• Like Times of Trenton on Facebook

• Follow @TimesofTrenton on Twitter