Two days before Christmas, tragedy once again struck Mississippi as a dangerous storm system worked its way across the Southeast. The storms produced numerous tornadoes with 2 of those resulting in fatalities, that being the Jones County Tornado and the Columbia Tornado. With just days before Christmas, many homes and businesses were destroyed, but the fighting spirit within each resident was still alive. The pieces are slowly being picked backed up after that dreadful day, with help coming from near and far. Many organizations and volunteers spent their Christmas day helping others in need, in what they say is the true Christmas spirit. But with lives lost too soon, and damage as far as the eye can see, one would hope that relief is on the way.

Now, though, another weather system poses a threat to not only Columbia, but for many who live in Mississippi and Alabama. Plenty of moisture has been surging into the atmosphere ahead of a slow moving cold front. That, in association with the moisture, will create flooding problems across the Southeast in the realm of 2 to 4" with locally heavier spots.

So what would you do if a flood were to occur such as the one experienced earlier in the year during April? The American Red Cross lists many safety tips to follow that include the likes of listen to area radio and television stations for reports, be prepared to evacuate at a moment's notice, head for higher ground, and the most important, stay away from flood waters. Those who live in the South can say they've braved many storms, from the Storm of the Century in 1993, April 2011, the Louisville Tornado, and even floods. It could be argued that while we live in one of the most active tornado areas, most commonly known as Dixie Alley, we suffer, but we stick together and rebuild. Taking you back to Columbia, where that devastating EF-3 Tornado took the lives of 2 people and destroyed numerous homes and businesses. While all might seem lost, there is hope with each passing day and each lending hand.