Buy Photo Former state Sen. Andy Womack talks about his support for Insure Tennessee during a nonpartisan forum at Olive Branch Church. (Photo: Tom Beckwith / DNJ)Buy Photo

MURFREESBORO — Backers of Gov. Bill Haslam's proposed Insure Tennessee say the state should accept $1.77 billion in expanded Medicaid to help 280,000 residents obtain affordable health care.

"We have a moral obligation to provide affordable health care for the people of this state, especially when there's no direct state cost for now," Murfreesboro resident Beverly Leonard said Tuesday night after attending a nonpartisan community forum about the Republican governor's Insure Tennessee proposal at Olive Branch Church on Minerva Drive. "It just seems like we are leaving a lot of money on the table, and our tax dollars are being spent in other states."

Leonard was among the 100-plus people in attendance to learn more about a plan that would use federal funding authorized by the Affordable Care Act signed into law by Democratic President Barack Obama.

Haslam was unable to persuade the GOP-controlled Tennessee Assembly to accept the Insure Tennessee plan earlier this year from Republican lawmakers who said they opposed Obamacare and worried about either having to raise taxes to pay for the expanded government service or cut people from the coverage.

None of the six members of Rutherford County's all-Republican delegation in the state legislature showed up at the Tuesday forum after being invited, but state Sen. Jim Tracy of Shelbyville and state Rep. Dawn White of Murfreesboro reported that they had previous commitments, said Mary Falls, an event organizer.

Other elected officials attended, including Murfreesboro City Councilman Ron Washington, County Board of Education member Aaron Holladay and County Commissioners Phil Dodd, Joe Gourley and Charlie Baum, an economics professor at Middle Tennessee State University who served as one of the event presenters.

When it comes to Holladay, he said he opposes Obamacare but still wanted to hear the presentation about Insure Tennessee.

"We need to learn more about it," said Holladay, a La Vergne resident who plans to run in the Republican primary in August against state Rep. Mike Sparks of Smyrna. "That's what being an engaged representative is about."

Sparks and Tracy earlier this year attended an information meeting about Insure Tennessee with the Republican governor held at Primary Care & Hope Clinic in Murfreesboro before the two lawmakers joined the other four Rutherford delegation members in announcing their opposition to the proposal.

The presenters estimated that Insure Tennessee could help 24,000 veterans among the 280,000 eligible residents obtain affordable health care, and this includes Courtney Lewis of Nashville.

"I'm hoping that it passes," said Lewis, a mother of three who served in the Army before 9/11. "If it does, I'll be the first one to apply for it for myself and my family."

As president of Professional and Business Women of Music City, Lewis traveled to the Murfreesboro event hoping to learn more about Insure Tennessee so she can share information with her organization. The owner of See Media Group LLC, Lewis also volunteered to record video of the meeting that she hopes to share with many others about helping more people obtain affordable health insurance.

"A lot of my small-business owner friends fall in that gap," Lewis said. "It really affects the small businesses. I hope this passes. You don't know what will happen in the future. I want to be covered 100 percent of the time and not part of the time."

Lewis and other audience members listened to presenters including Karen Springer, the president and chief executive officer of Saint Thomas Health, which includes the Saint Thomas Rutherford Hospital in Murfreesboro.

An estimated 12 percent of Rutherford County residents are without health insurance, and that number would drop to about 9 percent if Insure Tennessee became law, Springer said.

Buy Photo Charlie Baum, a Rutherford County Commission member and an economics professor at Middle Tennessee State University, talks about Gov. Bill Haslam's Insure Tennessee proposal during a community forum at Olive Branch Church in Murfreesboro. (Photo: Tom Beckwith / DNJ)

"All persons should have access to insurance," Springer said.

Springer noted how the Tennessee Hospital Association has agreed to cover the state's cut for the expanded Medicaid funding for Insure Tennessee. Federal funding started out at 100 percent for the expanded Medicaid and is supposed to be phased down to 90 percent by 2022, she said.

The $1.77 billion in annual federal funding is expected to create an estimated 15,000 jobs, according to Haslam's administration. Without the funding, the state is in danger of 40 rural area hospitals closing and losing 20,000 existing jobs.

If rural hospitals close, that means patients from those communities lose time needed for treatment while commuting to a hospital elsewhere, Springer said.

Baum, the MTSU economics professor, reminded audience members how the state did face a challenge in paying for TennCare costs that went from $2.6 billion when it started as a managed-care approach in 1994 to $8.5 billion by 2005 before former Democratic Gov. Phil Bredesen cut many from the rolls.

Insure Tennessee should reduce the chances of rural hospitals closing and increase labor productivity because workers with health care would be less likely to be out sick, Baum said.

Baum also mentioned how people worry that some employers might provide less in health care benefits in hopes of workers gaining more in government subsidies.

Opponents also mention the national debt rising from $18.5 trillion, Baum added. To be in the same position of facing potential bankruptcy like Greece has, the nation would have to see its national debt climb to about $28.8 trillion, and current trends suggest that could happen by the mid-2020s, Baum said.

Among the Insure Tennessee supporters who spoke is former state Rep. Andy Womack of Murfreesboro.

Womack told the audience how he's been treated for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma after being exposed to Agent Orange while serving in the military during the Vietnam War and knows five veterans who died after exposure.

"I fought to give access to health care for all Americans," said Womack, who supported the TennCare law proposed by former Democratic Gov. Ned Ray McWherter.

The audience also heard presenter Lee Moss, the president of Franklin Synergy Bank in Murfreesboro, tout how Insure Tennessee includes incentives for people to make better choices when it comes to their health.

Tennessee needs to do a better job of educating people on their health, such as reducing the state's high rate of smokers, Moss said.

"We have to deal with our lifestyle choices," said Moss, who serves on the Saint Thomas Health Board and is a past chairman of the Saint Thomas Rutherford Hospital Board.

Reach Scott Broden at 615-278-5158 and on Twitter @ScottBroden.

Contacting lawmakers

State Sen. Bill Ketron of Murfreesboro: 615-741-6853 (sen.bill.ketron@capitol.tn.gov)

State Sen. Jim Tracy of Shelbyville: 615-741-1066 (sen.jim.tracy@capitol.tn.gov)

State Rep. Mike Sparks of Smyrna: 615-741-6829 (rep.mike.sparks@capitol.tn.gov)

State Rep. Rick Womick of Rockvale: 615-741-2804 (rep.rick.womick@capitol.tn.gov)

State Rep. Dawn White of Murfreesboro: 615-741-6849 (rep.dawn.white@capitol.tn.gov)

State Rep. Bryan Terry of Murfreesboro: 615-741-2180 (rep.bryan.terry@capitol.tn.gov)

Read or Share this story: http://on.dnj.com/1iSXitl