Intrauterine devices (IUDs) are highly effective, long-lasting, and reversible forms of birth control, but were often overlooked because of their massive upfront costs. However, now that the Affordable Care Act offers no co-pay contraception, IUDs are quickly becoming the one of most popular choices out there. But are they for everyone? Here are 12 things you need to know about IUDs:

1. There's more than one kind. All IUDs are small, T-shaped devices that a doctor inserts through the cervix and into a woman's uterus. Each has a small string that hangs from the frame and out of the uterus, which a physician uses to remove the device once the IUD expires or the woman chooses to have it removed. IUDs come in a number of brands, all with different effects. Some — like ParaGard — are non-hormonal. These have copper coils on their frame that kill sperm by causing a chemical change in the fluid in the uterus. Others — like Mirena or Sklya — release progestin to prevent pregnancy by stopping ovulation and thickening cervical mucus to prevent fertilization. Depending on the type you use, an IUD is effective against pregnancy immediately and remains so anywhere from three to 10 years, but can also be removed at any point during that period.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

2. They are one of the most effective contraceptives out there. Thanks to low user error, IUDs are about as risk-free as you can get when it comes to unplanned pregnancies. You can't forget to use it like you can with a pill, you don't run out like you might with pills and spermicides, and it is immediately effective, unlike hormonal contraceptive methods like implants or hormonal shots. Short of permanent sterilization, it's as dependable of a method of birth control as you can get. The copper IUD can also be used as a form of emergency contraception if inserted within a few days of unprotected sex.

Most Popular

3. But they don't prevent STIs. If you are with a new partner or your partner has an untreated sexually transmitted infection (STI), you are going to want to use a condom too. IUDs, like the birth control pill, emergency contraception, implants, and other non-barrier methods, will not prevent an infection from passing from partner to partner.

4. They are very expensive upfront. Condoms can cost anywhere from 25 cents to a dollar apiece. A month of birth control pills can be $10 to $40, depending on where you get them and what type you buy. An IUD plus insertion can be up to $1,000 out of pocket, although it's a cost that won't need to be replicated since, depending on the type, it can last up to a decade. Luckily, thanks to the Affordable Care Act, many insurers are now covering IUDs under no copay birth control options, reducing that cost to just an office visit or nothing at all. Be forewarned, though — some insurance plans are covering purchase and insertion, but not the doctor's visit to have the device removed. Be sure to check with your insurance to see what costs an IUD will require from start to finish.

5. Even teens can use them. The American Academy of Pediatrics released a statement in September 2014 saying, "Long-acting reversible contraception (LARC), which include progestin implants and intrauterine devices (IUDs), should be considered first-line choices for adolescents." In Colorado, a trial program to have teens use IUDs or hormonal implants resulted in a 40 percent drop in the teen pregnancy rate over four years. Unlike birth control pills, IUDs and other LARC have become the contraceptive of choice due to the elimination of any sort of potential to use it wrong, and since most teens have no intention of getting pregnant within the next decade, it becomes the most cost-effective form, too.

6. They don't cause abortions. Conservatives in some areas, such as Saline County, Kansas, have been opposing IUD programs, claiming the devices cause abortions, and that was one of the major claims in Hobby Lobby's Supreme Court case against allowing insurance to cover all forms of contraception too. In actuality, there isn't any proof that the claim is true. IUDs in almost all cases stop sperm from getting to the egg to fertilize it, either by killing the sperm itself or making the cervical mucus too thick for sperm to swim through to get to the egg.

But, yes, there is a very small chance that a fertilized egg may not implant occasionally, explains Boing Boing science reporter Maggie Koerth-Baker. "If you go by the scientific definition, where pregnancy begins at implantation, then IUDs definitely don't work by causing abortions. If your religious beliefs lead you to think pregnancy begins at fertilization, well, the data suggests that, sometimes, rarely, IUDs used as birth control might abort a fertilized egg," writes Koerth-Baker. "In that way, everybody's right. But the science — what we know about IUDs from evidence — suggests that the primary mechanism is to prevent fertilization, not to prevent implantation."

7. You may lose your period. Depending on the type of IUD, monthly periods could dwindle or become nonexistent. "The good news about the Mirena? Once you get through the first six months, your periods usually stop altogether or are regular, light, short and not painful," writes Bedsider, an online birth control reference website. "If not having a period every month would make you sick to your stomach worrying that you're pregnant, you might prefer a ParaGard."

8. Or you may have worse ones. The other side of the IUD? Breakthrough bleeding (bleeding in between periods), heavy menstrual bleeding during your periods, or more. ParaGard is non-hormonal, but it also tends to come with heavier menstrual periods as a side effect, something every patient should weigh before making a choice.