Education in the U.S. has lost its foothold ever since its number one ranking back in the 80s. More and more industrialized countries are slowly moving up the rankings, and according to Edudemic, South Korea and Japan rank number one and two in education. The United States doesn't come in until number 13, and within the United States, Mississippi ranks number 50.

"Every year we see ourselves falling on the global scale," Meridian Public School District Superintendent Dr. Alvin Taylor stated. "So reform is needed and of course there needs to be accountability. I'm all for accountability, so i do understand that, there just needs to be a balance. I believe that educators should still play a significant role in where education goes."

Dr. Taylor says in other industrialized countries, educators are the driving force behind education, and here in America it's our political leaders. Members of the Mississippi Legislature recently passed a new law in hopes of improving our reading comprehension.

"It's called the Mississippi Based Promotion Literacy Act," Dr. Taylor said. "With this law it states that all 3rd graders across the state, in the spring semester have to take a literacy test. They have to pass that test in order to be promoted to the 4th grade."

According to the act, any student who doesn't pass the test, which looks at reading comprehension, regardless of grades, will be held back.

"Fortunately if a 3rd grader doesn't pass a test for the first time, they do get three retest opportunities before the next school year starts," Dr. Taylor said.

Dr. Taylors says superintendents within the state were told to enforce the law, but they don't understand it. Parents have voiced concerns over the law, and Dr. Taylor says now the Meridian Public School District is just working on getting students to read more.

According to the MPSD there are 503 3rd Graders within the school district and their plans are to have all of those students pass the state test when they take it in April.