Disgraced former pitchman will be sentenced for sex crimes and child pornography charges in November

Jared Fogle, the disgraced former Subway spokesman who agreed to plead guilty to child pornography and sex-crime charges in August, isn’t scheduled to be sentenced until Nov. 19, but he’s already paying for his crimes financially.

Fogle has paid out $1 million in restitution to his victims so far, in the form of $100,000 checks to 10 of his victims over the past several weeks, the Associated Press reports. He still has to pay out a total of $400,000 to his remaining four victims.

In exchange for the checks, the victims signed a form stating that they had received the payments, and that the money is intended to benefit each particular victim. The restitution is earmarked for counseling, medical care and other needs of the victims.

Also Read: Subway's Jared Fogle Investigation Reveals 2011 Complaint About Disgraced Spokesman

Fogle, who became a pitchman for the sandwich chain after losing more than 200 pounds partly by consuming Subway fare, was charged with having sex with two minor girls, as well as failing to tell authorities that Russell Taylor, the former executive director of the Jared Foundation, had allegedly secretly filmed 12 other minors.

While Fogle’s sentence remains to be seen, Fogle has agreed to a sentence of no less than five years in prison, while the government will not seek a sentence longer than 12 and a half years.

Indiana Pizzeria Scandal: 11 Other Fast-Food Controversies to Chew On (Photos) Indiana-based pizzeria Memories Pizza found itself at the center of controversy this week, when it was announced that the company would not cater same-sex weddings following the passage of Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The company can at least take comfort in the knowledge that it's not alone. Here are 11 other food-related scandals that left some people choking on outrage.

DiGiorno Pizza Serves a Slice of Outrage A case of social media marketing gone wrong. DiGiorno was forced to issue an apology when it tweeted the hashtag #WhyIStayed, coupled with the message "You had pizza." A seemingly innocent tweet, until they company found out that the hashtag was actually launched in response to domestic violence, after video surfaced of football player Ray Rice punching out then-fiance Janay Palmer.

Starbucks' 'Race Together' Program The ubiquitous coffee chain's effort to spark a dialogue about race relations in America was met with widespread criticism, probably because most of the company's customers are just trying to get their caffeine fix and go without a lecture from their baristas.

SpaghettiOs' Pearl Harbor Flap Uh-oh, SpaghettiOs, indeed. In 2013, Campbell Soup, the company behind the circular pasta treat, issued a mea culpa after the SpaghettiOs Twitter account tweeted an image of a cartoon SpaghettiO holding an American flag with the message, "Take a moment to remember #PearlHarbor with us" on Dec. 7. Not surprisingly, the crass marketing ploy bombed with the public.

Chick-fil-A's Anti-Gay Boss How about a side order of homophobia with your chicken sandwich? Chick-fil-A stepped into a big pile of controversy when its president Dan Cathy piped up on the subject of gay marriage, stating that "we’re inviting God’s judgment on our nation when we shake our fist at him and say we know better than you as to what constitutes a marriage." Some people boycotted; others, unable to avoid the restaurant chain's tasty fare, swallowed their pride along with the chicken.

Papa John's Obamacare Scare Enjoy your pizza hot, tasty and cheap? Papa John's CEO John Schnatter had some bad news for you in 2012, when he declared that the the passage of Obamacare would raise the cost of a Papa John's pizza by 11 to 14 cents. Sure, and if you find yourself shorted on your breadstick order, go ahead and blame Obama for that too.

Entenmann's Casey Anthony Twitter Goof Sweets-maker Entenmann's hit a sour note when it tweeted the message, "Who's #notguilty about eating all the tasty treats they want?!" Unfortunately, the company was found guilty of using a hashtag associated with the controversial not-guilty verdict of Casey Anthony, who had been accused of murdering her two-year-old daughter. Oops.

Domino's Delivers ... Anti-Choice Support? Domino's Pizza founder Thomas Monaghan's donations to pro-life groups such as the controversial Operation Rescue have left a bad taste in some consumers' mouths.

The Pizza Underground A pizza-themed Velvet Underground tribute band? That includes former child star Macaulay Culkin? Seriously -- that's cheesy.

Krispy Kreme's Klan Kontroversy A British franchisee of the donut company raised eyebrows in February when it launched a "KKK Wednesday" promotion, apparently unaware that "KKK" is a widely known abbreviation for white supremacy group the Ku Klux Klan.

Kentucky Fried Controversy Not everybody needs a little KFC -- least of all PETA, which has targeted the fried-chicken chain for allegedly abusing chickens before serving them up to customers.

Starbucks' 9/11 Gaffe Americans were a tad on edge following the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Unfortunately, some of that national unease landed on Starbucks, whose poster for its "Collapse Into Cool" campaign evoked traumatic memories for some. Previous ; Next 1 of 12 When questionably nutritious eats meet questionably tasteful corporate action Indiana-based pizzeria Memories Pizza found itself at the center of controversy this week, when it was announced that the company would not cater same-sex weddings following the passage of Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The company can at least take comfort in the knowledge that it's not alone. Here are 11 other food-related scandals that left some people choking on outrage.