Have you ever heard of SERMO? No? Well SERMO is the largest online physician community in the world. Over 300,000 US physicians use the network, which was developed by doctors in Boston and acquired by WorldOne Interactive in 2012. The site allows physicians to share notes, talk about difficult to understand diseases, and to help each other diagnose health problems.

On Thursday, a project from two of SERMO’s founding physicians, Dr. Daniel Palestrant and Dr. Adam Sharp, called par8o (pronounced par-eight-oh), announced that it has raised $10.5 million in Series A funding to help organize the mess that is the current state of healthcare.

Founded in 2012, Newton-based par8o’s name is a sly reference to Vilfred Pareto. He was an Italian economist and sociologist who promoted the idea of income equality and is the namesake of the Pareto principle, also known as the 80/20 rule, which theorizes that in business, 80 percent of the effect come from 20 percent of the causes (i.e. doctors might spend 80 percent of their time dealing with 20 percent of their patients, in terms of tracking their health status and unravelling their healthcare information).

As the company explains it, par8o is in line with the idea of Pareto Optimization, a powerful economic principle that succeeds because it is well-suited to the complex, multiconstituency nature of health care.

Palestrant explained that par8o’s roots stem back to just before SERMO was acquired by WorldOne, the company was invited to meet with the senior leadership of Johnson & Johnson which was at the time a customer of SERMO. “They were very forward looking at the time, and they were trying to figure out where health care was going, and they wanted to do something truly innovative,” he said.

As so happened, the team that eventually became par8o had already been working on building a technology that could match “the right patient to the right resource at the right time.”

“We had been reading the tea leaves that as the Affordable Care Act went from legislation to implementation, the key challenge that we would face as an industry, and as a country, would be how to do more with less,” Palestrant said. “How to take more people into a health care system and both improve quality and lower costs.”

After the discussion with Johnson & Johnson, the group received a $2 million grant to start the health care-focused project. After the WorldOne acquisition, Palestrant and Sharp traded in their equity in SERMO and, in Palestrant’s words, “doubled down on par8o.”

The company’s online platform is a way for physicians to navigate the current quagmire that is the relationship between providers, patients, and the health care industry. Specifically, par8o is a cloud-based tool that allows doctors to more efficiently check patient’s insurance plans, the resources available in their specific health care network, and a patient’s clinical indication. Through the platform, physicians can make sure that patients can get to the next step in their care, without putting their faith in the patient and their health care system being able to work through their care plans on their own. Palestrant calls par8o “health care’s operating system,” which creates a cohesive network between patients, payers, and providers in the different parts of the health care system.

Currently, par8o has a less than 50 employees, but plans to build out its team. It already has established partnerships with MGM Resorts, the Harvard Medical School affiliated hospitals in Boston, and those that are part of the Mount Sinai Health System in New York.

The new funding comes from Atlas Venture, Founder Collective, CHV Capital, Allscripts and other investors.

Atlas Venture (or Formerly Known as Atlas) partner Jeff Fagnan said of the company, “Daniel and Adam are mission-based, committed to improving the patient experience and ensuring greater transparency. Par8o’s first offering around cloud based referral management is a multibillion-dollar market today in a space that has lacked automation and sound business judgement.”

For his part, Palestrant is upbeat about more than just the new funding, saying that he is grateful not only for the company’s investors, but also the Boston tech community and its support. “I am so appreciative of this startup ecosystem that we have here and that we are a part of,” he said. “At the end of the day, a health care operating system is pretty cool, better quality care and lower costs. We are finding that it is resonating.”