How can all those 1960s ranch homes in central Sarasota get the 21st-century nudge they need to accommodate baby boomer retirees' desire to age in place?

Tracy Lux, a longtime Sarasota real estate marketing consultant and housing advocate, has a idea she's been floating locally. She wants to pull together community resources to rehab one of those old-time tract homes to become a display model for universal design.

Universal design is an architects' term that simply means making a building useful for everyone, from children to elders, and including people with disabilities. It features ramps and wide doorways and grab bars, but also a lot of subtle rethinking of ways to pull drawers and move through rooms that end up benefiting the most able-bodied among us.

Lux — who likes to talk about how she retrofitted her own home with universal design just in time to benefit after a harrowing fall on an icy driveway — says she had this "brainstorm" when she remembered a successful 1999 project she had a hand in: a demonstration Habitat for Humanity house built in the parking lot of Sarasota High School with donated materials and student sweat equity.

A universal design model home, she says, could combine the same principles of education and philanthropy — and commerce.

"This could be an economic driver to show people what they can do with aging housing stock," she says. "All we need is a good central location, close to transportation, shopping and health care. Everybody I've talked to likes the idea of showing people how they can age in place."

Lux stresses that the venture is "in the formative stages," but she picked up some good ideas at a recent workshop on elder housing sponsored by the state Department of Elder Affairs. Among them: asking a bank to donate a house in foreclosure, partnering with a "big-box store" to showcase universal design fixtures, or offering the finished home to a wounded veteran to qualify for federal grant money.

Ideally, she'd like to get the project going in time for a public reveal next winter.

"This town is crazy for home tours," she notes. "We could open it up for six weeks during the high season."

Lux invites anyone with ideas or interest in the model home project to email her: TracyLux@ tracemarketing.com

IT'S A WILD WORLD

A lovely 90-year-old who lives near the south bridge to Siesta Key called me recently to talk about her sister with Alzheimer's disease. We did that, and then she happened to mention very casually that she'd recently been "robbed."

She gave me permission to tell her story, which illustrates how much older residents should stay on their guard against a peculiar kind of stranger danger that lurks in Southwest Florida, especially around this time of year.

"Monday a couple of weeks ago," she told me, "it was just beautiful and I thought I'd back the car out of the garage and vacuum it."

While she was doing this, a pickup truck pulled up and a man got out and told her he was there to cut down a tree. She is known around her 36-unit complex, she says, for being persnickety about the landscaping, so she assumed the property manager had sent him to talk to her.

"So I just sauntered around the house with him," she says, "to take a look at this tree."

It only took a few minutes, she says — enough time for the man's accomplice to enter her house and take all of her "costume jewelry, and a couple of diamond rings."

Sheriff's deputies told her that she had fallen for a fairly common trick. Like most older people in this situtation, she blames herself for being too trusting — and too obvious.

"Why in the world would I keep those rings in the lingerie drawer?" she asks herself now. "They know where to look."