McCarthy and Scalise envision a more strategic leadership structure. | John Shinkle/POLITICO Parallel paths: McCarthy and Scalise

Their parallel rise began in the late 1990s, when Kevin McCarthy, the national chairman of the Young Republicans, became good pals with Steve Scalise, a local leader in Louisiana.

It continued in 2008 when McCarthy, now a congressman, flew to Louisiana for Scalise’s swearing-in to the state Senate. Scalise treated him to a tour of the state Capitol, and later that year, McCarthy was the biggest national figure to endorse Scalise for Congress — and cut him a check. Eric Cantor followed suit — at McCarthy’s behest.

Story Continued Below

Cantor is now on his way out of Congress, and this duo — their political fortunes still twinned — face a shared challenge: reshaping a House Republican leadership that has at times seemed beset by divisions and distant from the rank and file. McCarthy, of California, will become House majority leader on July 31, and Scalise, of Louisiana, will be the majority whip — a leadership shakeup resulting from Cantor’s shocking primary loss last month.

( QUIZ: How well do you know Kevin McCarthy?)

In separate interviews last week, the pair laid out a fresh direction for the House GOP that includes an agenda that’s less leadership driven and more inclusive of members’ desires. They envision a more strategic leadership structure, complete with a team focused on long-term legislative planning. No more shoehorning ideas into a bill and hoping the votes will follow.

“My style is very collective,” McCarthy said, speaking in his Capitol office. “[I] like to have a lot of input from others. I like committees to do their work. Empowering committees. I like accountability in the process.”

He added: “You always win the argument before you win the vote. Sometimes we try to win the vote before we’ve won the argument.”

A collaborative leadership team will be a boon. Leaderships are often composed of a mesh of unbridled — and sometimes competing — ambition. Early in this House GOP majority, Cantor and Speaker John Boehner spent months privately — and even sometimes publicly — feuding. But Boehner has known McCarthy since the Californian was a staff aide on the House Administration Committee. There is a sense that the tough dynamics within the leadership, and between leaders and the rank and file, have fallen away.

( PHOTOS: Steve Scalise’s career)

But the relationships of the new leadership team will still be tested — and soon.

A supplemental spending bill to combat the influx of migrants on the Texas border has already drawn criticism from some conservatives. Putting together a deal and passing it through the House will test one of the central elements of Scalise’s candidacy for majority whip: his ability to bring conservatives into the fold.

Other issues — a renewal of government-backed terrorism insurance and reauthorizing the Export-Import Bank — will test how McCarthy handles one of the party’s most ideologically stringent chairmen: Texas Rep. Jeb Hensarling of the Financial Services Committee. The business community is furious that the House hasn’t yet acted on either issue.

Meanwhile, government funding needs to be reauthorized before Sept. 30, or else the government will again shut down.

Fissures within leadership are sure to emerge — particularly over what to do with Obamacare.

After years of lobbing sharp criticism at the law, McCarthy refused to commit to a vote on the party’s own prescription for health care reforms. Conservatives have pressed for a vote on legislation before Election Day, but chairmen have resisted, worried about protecting their turf.

“We have a lot of health care bills out there,” McCarthy said. “You also have to look to the committee process, what’s been through, what’s not. It’s all part of the discussion.”

Scalise, meanwhile, has built his brand around pushing a health care replacement bill through the House.

He said he will “continue to advocate for the things I’ve felt are the right approaches for our party to be successful at winning the debate and changing the policy.”