(Photo: Andy Marlette/Pensacola News Journal)

Plastic bags

Re: “Plastic bag restrictions overdue in Florida,” April 13, Jennifer Christiansen.

I agree in theory that plastic bags, as well as other materials, can have an effect on our ecosystem, but I question the reliability of Christiansen’s statement, “gigantic garbage patches in our oceans. The plastic bags block sunlight from reaching the deeper areas of the ocean”. I assume that she is referring that plastic bags are all over the oceans.

In between my duty in the U.S. Navy, as well as taking a number of cruises in most of the oceans and seas of the world, I wonder where she is getting such a radical determination of “gigantic garbage patches.” Of two notable areas where I noticed garbage was in the harbors of Hong Kong and Bangkok where there were houseboats. No where on the open seas and oceans did I see garbage as she describes other than small patches of seaweed.

Your concern is plastic shopping bags, what about the plastic bags that are used for our newspapers?

- Art Avischious, south Fort Myers

Moving moment

Sitting at river’s edge at 3 Fishermen Seafood Restaurant recently, I saw a speck in the water that moved. It was a very small duck.

What unfolded over the next 15 minutes was one of the most tender, mature, wise events that epitomized the essence of Mother’s Day to me.

Earlier I had heard some kids at sailing club at pier off US 41 Park harassing 2 chicks while the ducks’ mother was trying to direct kids away from her 2 chicks.

One chick raced into the water and started swimming toward Best Western Motel dock near 3 Fishermen in front, on the river.

To our utter amazement, we saw the mother duck scooting her other chick, not into the water, but down the concrete walkway toward 3 Fishermen.

Mother Duck kept her other chick on the edge of the walkway while she called out to her chick in the water.

The chick in the water saw its mom and as they all came together at wall’s edge, right in front by our view from the restaurant, the mom pushed the land chick into the water and she then jumped in.

All 3 swam further away from the kids to safety. That’s what mom’s do!

- Fr. Robert Browning, Fort Myers

Did you mean Obama?

This letter is in response to one submitted by Walt Massey, “Trump supporters,” May 6. It’s amazing how accurately he described our present President Barack Obama! He fits every one of those descriptions. I can understand why he is so baffled trying to compare Trump with Obama!

- Anthony Edwards, Cape Coral

Great job team

Last weekend, the GPS Florida Knights U16 boys and the U15 girls teams, under the coaching of Danny Fahey, beat their competition in both the round of 16 as well as the round of 8 to advance to the final four in State Cup. This is a phenomenal feat, but more impressive as a first year team for the girls. Speaks volume for the club and the only coach in the state to be moving forward with two teams. The girls semifinals begin the weekend of May 21 against the No. 1 team in the nation. Let’s show some support for our hometown teams!

- Mellanie Hayden, Fort Myers

Angel in disguise

Recently, I read an article by Sarah Owen regarding the 40th anniversary of the Southwest Florida Community Foundation (Community Foundation marks 40th anniversary, May 2). Often I drive by a single wide trailer on Laurel Lane in Suncoast. I was a volunteer for Meals on Wheels when Owen was the director. I was taking a meal to this trailer and found the client was very sad. I asked what the problem was and he said he was about to be evicted. I called Sarah and she replied, tell the man not to worry, we will contact the owner and pay his next month’s rent. This was such a great Christmas gift to him.

On another occasion, I called in about a man that was very tired from taking care of his ailing wife 24/7. Sarah said to tell him we will have a person spell him twice a week and also arrange for house cleaning. Sarah’s word was the gospel of love for others needs. I attended the funeral of another client and Sarah was there; she considered him her friend. I really do not know what her current job as the CEO of Community Foundation involves, but I am sure it is in great hands with Sarah Owen. After over 20 years of doing street ministry, I have met few people with the love and concern for others that Sarah Owen has.

- Fred Matthews, North Fort Myers

Another health care option

I read with some interest the article Dr. Morton Travel recently wrote in you commentary section (April 21, Single-payer system is best option for health care). For the past 41 years, I have been involved in the life and health business. For most of those years I was against the Single Payer system, but most recently have changed my mind. A system similar to Medicare for all Americans could be possible without hurting the insurance industry. Insurance companies could provide supplemental coverage similar to the Medicare supplements to the under 65 market. The issue Dr. Tavel did not address is how to pay for it. This needs to be done with a national sales tax or a Value Added Tax applied to all purchases. A payroll tax as Bernie Sanders proposes is not the answer. Under this system all could be covered because all will be paying. Obamacare is on the edge of destruction. Who ever ends up in the White House will certainly have a difficult task ahead.

- Robert H. Whitlock, Fort Myers

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1Tb3kn9