Slow Tax Refunds Weigh on Economy

I am worried about the pace of tax refunds. Last week, I wrote about that computer glitch at the IRS that led to a shutdown of its popular E-File service. That interrupted not only filings and payments, but refunds as well.

My attention was flagged when I saw a rapid and unprecedented $40 billion negative swing in government spending that happened literally overnight. I look at the data every day in the daily Treasury statement, so I see these things happening on almost a real-time basis.

Swings of that magnitude are rare, as most of the big line items of spending are non-discretionary, so they go out automatically, no matter what. Even cuts require some congressional action such as passage of a bill that the president then has to sign, so it's not like they happen immediately.

When I heard the IRS had fixed the problem, I expected the refund flows to get back up to where they should be. February is the biggest month of the year for these flows, adding more than $100 billion to regular monthly spending. Lots of people and firms depend on these flows, too.

Then I noticed the flows had not really come back up. We are still $25 billion below last year. That loss knocks total spending back to the pace of last year, which is not bad considering it was the highest in six years, but we've seen recently that it's only been enough to keep the economy from a total stall.

There have been a lot of headwinds, from the energy sector's collapsing capex to the strong dollar and the toll that has taken on corporate profits and net exports.

The other day, I was speaking to a tax accountant who told me the reason for the slow refunds was not related to the computer glitch, but rather to the fact that Obamacare has created a lot more paperwork in the filing process. He said I should look at the February-May period as one "unit" and that eventually flows will "even out" and be up to the level where they should be.

The problem is, given how weak the economy is and how terrible sentiment is, and let's not forget the stock market correction and all the other drags on the economy, we may not be able to wait until May for things to "even out."

Whereas I was bullish on the economy before based on the fiscal data I was seeing, I have to say first-quarter GDP is now likely to be negative. I am not sure if that means we are headed for a recession (by standard definition, recession is two negative quarters in a row), but we are almost certain to have a negative first quarter and it all depends on how quickly the flows return before we can determine whether that extends further out.

On a positive note, the contraction is not likely to be that severe because, luckily, loan growth is still fairly strong and the dollar has come down from its highs, and this should help pare the trade deficit. However, a negative quarter is certain to raise the anxiety level, causing people to pull in that much more. That being said, it could develop its own head of steam.