Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders, a senator from Vermont, speaks during a rally at the TD Conference Center on Friday, August 21, 2015 in Greenville. (Photo: Katie McLean)

GREENVILLE, S.C. — Nearly 3,000 people answered Bernie Sanders’ call for “political revolution” in Greenville on Friday, greeting the Democratic presidential candidate with repeated loud cheers and sign waving as he railed against “the billionaire class” at the TD Convention Center.

The senator from Vermont drew crowds ten times as big during appearances in major West Coast markets.

Still, his first stop in Greenville was one of the best attended presidential campaign events in the Upstate this election cycle, Democrat or Republican.

The silver-haired populist pointed in the air and waved his hands as he belted out the message of class struggle that has made him the closest rival so far to Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton.

“The American people are sick and tired of establishment economics. They are sick and tired of establishment politics. And they are sick and tired of establishment media,” Sanders declared to cheers.

He called for raising the minimum wage and a single-payer health care system and decried “super PACS funded by billionaires and millionaires” and South Carolina’s decision not to expand Medicaid under the terms of the Affordable Care Act.

The people “understand in their gut that corporate greed is destroying our country,” Sanders said.

The Greenville speech was the kickoff for a two-day swing through South Carolina by Sanders, his first visit to the Palmetto State since April.

Symone Sanders, a campaign spokeswoman who is not related to the candidate, said the campaign counted 2,800 attendees at the Greenville rally.

Not all of them were from South Carolina, however, judging from the Georgia and North Carolina license plates in the convention center parking lot.

Clinton filled a smaller venue as well as a spillover room and turned some people away during a campaign stop in Greenville in July.

It remains to be seen how much support Sanders will draw from black voters, a hugely important constituency for South Carolina’s Democratic presidential preference primary Feb. 27.

Non-whites accounted for more than half the voters in the 2008 primary — when Barack Obama beat Clinton — but most of the faces at the TD Convention Center on Friday were white.

A national Gallup survey released earlier this month gave Clinton an 80% favorability rating with black voters, compared with 23% for Sanders.

Clinton has championed issues deemed important to black voters — such as criminal justice reform and voting rights — during three visits to South Carolina since she announced her candidacy in April.

One African American at the Greenville rally, however, said she will vote for Sanders and doesn’t think he’ll have any trouble appealing to blacks in South Carolina.

Rosemary Wallace, a 53-year-old medical marijuana activist from Rock Hill, said Sanders is “talking common sense, and that’s all we want to hear.”

“It’s not a whole bunch of talk and rhetoric. He’s got a plan laid out,” she said.

As for Clinton, Wallace volunteered that a lot of voters will be turned off by the scandal over her use of a private email server during her time as secretary of state and whether she mishandled classified information.

If Clinton is president, Wallace asked, “What else is she going to withhold? She withheld those emails the whole time. If she had nothing to hide, she should have let them go.”

Another African-American at the rally, Joshua Hollington, a 22-year-old student at Winthrop University from Charleston, said he hasn’t decided who will get his vote.

Hollington said he’s considering Sanders, though he “might be a little too left.”

Clinton “has a lot of good views,” too, he said, adding, “If she can get out of this scandal, she might have a good shot.”

Barbara Gill, a 71-year-old retiree from Greenville, said she’d already decided to vote for Sanders.

“I think he’s about the only one aside from Donald Trump who can’t be bought, and Donald Trump is not an option for me,” said Gill.

Gill said she is “normally a Hillary fan, but I’m liking her less and less. I think she’s part of the Wall Street crowd.”

If Vice President Joe Biden enters the race, Gill said, “That would give me something to think about.”

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1EaSqKk