The health law prohibits the I.R.S. from imposing criminal fines or putting liens on the property of people who ignore the insurance mandate, but it does allow the agency to collect the penalty by reducing future refunds.

“It will still be on their books,” said Courtenay Murphy, a tax preparer in Gunnison, Colo.

H & R Block also found that as of Feb. 24, just over half of its clients with subsidized marketplace coverage had to repay a portion of their subsidy because their 2014 income turned out to be higher than what they estimated when they applied for coverage.

Kathy Pickering, executive director of the Tax Institute at H & R Block, said these clients had owed back $530 on average, decreasing their tax refund by an average of 17 percent.

“That’s pretty significant,” she said. “It shows how difficult it is for someone to estimate their income on a looking-forward basis.”

At Just Harvest, a nonprofit group that offers free tax preparation for lower-income people in Pittsburgh, many clients count on their annual refund to cover heating and other basic expenses or to pay down debt.

And while President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law five years ago this month, many people still have only a vague understanding of the penalty for not having insurance.

Photo

“Many of them know that there’s something bad that happens when they don’t have health insurance, but they’re not quite ready for it,” said Samuel Mudrak, a volunteer tax preparer. “They’re coming in expecting to get the same refund that they got last year.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That was the case for Mark Taylor of Carroll, Iowa, who was surprised to owe a $95 fine with his taxes because his wife, Barbara, remained uninsured last year. Other members of his family were fined, too, he said, and some were irate.

“I’ve got a cousin, he called me up and said, ‘How bad did you get socked?’ ” Mr. Taylor, 52, said. “We think it’s ridiculous.”

Nonetheless, in Mr. Taylor’s case, the penalty worked as a nudge: After doing his taxes, he hustled to buy coverage for his wife in order to avoid a much bigger penalty — at least $325 — at tax time next year.

Others threatened with a penalty have discovered they did not owe one. Josephine Kennedy, for instance, had worked a series of low-paying jobs in 2014 and had gone without health insurance, despite the new Affordable Care Act requirement that most Americans get coverage.

“I don’t understand where all of this is coming from,” Ms. Kennedy, 51, said, shaking her head as she waited for a tax preparer at Just Harvest in Pittsburgh to tell how big a penalty she would owe.

But Ms. Kennedy, now a housekeeper at a private business club, ended up owing no penalty. With an income of $12,563, she would have qualified for Medicaid if Pennsylvania had expanded the program, an option allowed by the Affordable Care Act, last year. Since it did not, she got an exemption from the penalty.

The state has now expanded Medicaid, and Ms. Kennedy said she would apply even though she preferred the free clinic she had gone to for years. If she remains uninsured, she will most likely be subject to the penalty for 2015, which will grow to $325 per adult or 2 percent of household income, whichever is larger.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I still don’t see the point of forcing someone to get insurance,” Ms. Kennedy said. “But I’m happy I got this taken care of for now.”

People who learn they have to pay back part of their subsidy after underestimating their 2014 income on their insurance application are equally perplexed. Many saw their circumstances change during the year — getting a job or a raise as the economy improved, for example. But if they failed to report an income change, they will owe the I.R.S.

Mr. Ciesielski, who is on disability, said he would think twice about taking on acting jobs this year to avoid the same predicament when he files his 2015 taxes.

“It’s kind of hard to guess” what his income will be, he said.

As if taxpayers were not confused enough, the federal marketplace sent out forms containing inaccurate data to 820,000 people with subsidized insurance policies in January. Marketplace officials said Friday that they had mailed corrected forms to all but 80,000 of the affected taxpayers, who need them for calculating whether they received an appropriate subsidy.

Those who filed their taxes before the mistake was caught — about 50,000 people, the Obama administration has said — do not have to refile, but they could lose subsidy money they are owed.

Laurel Dickenson of Duluth, Ga., is among those people. She was surprised to learn while doing her taxes that she owed back $600 of her insurance subsidy. Now she is waiting for a corrected form and hoping that she may in fact owe less, even though she got a job after becoming insured last spring and did not report her income change.

“I guess I shouldn’t have been surprised,” said Ms. Dickenson, 57, who recently became unemployed again. “But this is complicated, and it’s affecting people’s lives.”