Brookings, SD

Northern Iowa quarterback Aaron Bailey rushed 23 times for 169 yards and what proved to be the decisive touchdown as the 22nd-ranked Panthers prevailed over sixth-ranked South Dakota State, 10-7, before a Hobo Day crowd of 16,042 at Coughlin-Alumni Stadium.



UNI improved to 3-4 overall and 1-3 in the Missouri Valley Football Conference. The Jackrabbits dropped to 5-2 overall and 2-2 in league play.



The game was a defensive battle throughout and remained scoreless until late in the first half, when Michael Schmadeke connected on a 24-yard field goal. Schmadeke’s kick capped an 11-play, 92-yard drive that started at the UNI 2-yard line and included a 41-yard run by Bailey.



SDSU put together its longest drive of the game on its second possession of the third quarter. Backup quarterback Taryn Christion completed a pass for 41 yards to Jake Wieneke on third down and later threw a 6-yard touchdown pass to Connor Landberg that gave the Jackrabbits a 7-3 lead following the extra point by Jay Carlson.



UNI responded on its next possession, taking advantage of a Jackrabbit penalty and picking up the remaining 64 yards of the five-play, 79-yard drive on the ground. Bailey scampered up the middle for the final 35 yards for the touchdown with 6 minutes and four seconds remaining in the third quarter.



The Jackrabbits stopped UNI short of a first down on fourth-and-2 from the SDSU 22 midway through the fourth quarter and were on their way to either tying the game or taking the lead. Helped by a pair of Panther penalties and two passes from Christion to Wieneke that totaled 31 yards, SDSU was faced with fourth-and-1 from the UNI 10 with under two minutes to play.



Rather than opting to attempt a field goal that would likely have forced overtime, the Jackrabbits decided to go for it and were stuffed on a rushing attempt by Kyle Paris as Panther rover Tim Kilfoy tackled Paris for a loss.



UNI’s defense recorded 12 tackles for loss, including five sacks. Karter Schult tallied four tackles for loss, including three sacks, while Brett McMakin registered 10 stops.



Bailey and the Panthers then ran out the clock, with Bailey sealing the win with a 17-yard run for a first down.



UNI held a 336-259 advantage in total offense, including a 223-95 edge on the ground. Tyvis Smith added 54 yards on 12 carries. Bailey completed 8-of-17 passes for 113 yards, with Charles Brown notching three catches for 29 yards.



For the Jackrabbits, Christion was the leading ground-gainer, carrying 16 times for 61 yards, while completing 15-of-20 passes for 156 yards. Paris added 12 carries for 30 yards and Wieneke led the receiving corps with four catches for 85 yards.



Zach Lujan returned to the Jackrabbit starting lineup at quarterback after missing the last two games due to injury, but ran only two offensive series. Lujan completed 1-of-5 passes for eight yards.



Jesse Bobbit shared game-high honors with 10 tackles for the Jackrabbits. T.J. Lally was credited with eight stops.



SDSU returns to action Oct. 31 at Missouri State. Kickoff is slated for 2 p.m.



NOTES: Northern Iowa leads the all-time series, 29-19-2 … SDSU dropped to 59-38-5 in its 102 Hobo Day games, including a 31-23 mark at Coughlin-Alumni Stadium … the Jackrabbits fell for the third consecutive year on Hobo Day, with all three games decided by three points … Je Ryan Butler set a Jackrabbit career record with 66 punt returns, breaking the mark of 63 previously held by Paul Aanonson from 2004-07 … Bobbit recorded double figures in tackles for the fourth time this season … SDSU committed eight penalties for 75 yards, while UNI was flagged seven times for 66 yards … the Jackrabbits were 5 of 14 on third-down attempts, compared to 3 of 12 by UNI … the attendance of 16,042 was the fifth-largest crowd in Coughlin-Alumni Stadium history and the second largest for a Hobo Day, trailing the crowd of 16,193 for the 1985 Hobo Day game against South Dakota



Jason Hove

Assistant AD-Sports Information

South Dakota State University



College {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Material may not be redistributed.