Nothing compares to the atrocious horror of the Holocaust, the systematic annihilation of 6 million Jews by the Nazi killing machine.

Not abortion.

Not gun control.

And — brace yourself Mr. Fancy Pants, Tom Perkins — certainly not the way wealthy Americans are being treated these days.

Perkins, a billionaire West Coast venture capitalist, is the latest honcho to stick his foot in his mouth by drawing a crude analogy to the Holocaust.

“Writing from the epicenter of progressive thought, San Francisco, I would call attention to the parallels of fascist Nazi Germany to its war on its ‘one percent,’ namely its Jews, to the progressive war on the American one percent, namely the ‘rich,’” Perkins wrote in a letter last week to the editor of The Wall Street Journal.

Say what?

Make no mistake. There is a steady, if not mounting, tension in our nation between the haves and have nots. You sense it in the ongoing tussle over the Affordable Care Act. You hear it in the vociferous minimum-wage debates that crop up every few years.

I feel it every time I ask my billionaire buddies for a few bucks.

Moreover, the Occupy movement — the global protests against social and economic inequality that hit Wall Street in the fall of 2011 — hints at the “rising tide of hatred of the successful one percent,” as Perkins pointed out in his letter.

Yes, there’s something afoot. Call it class warfare, if you will — a demonization of the rich by the poor and, at times, of the poor by the rich. Coded language — “welfare queen,” for instance — has been polluting political discourse in this country for years.

But no matter how you size up the Rich Man, Poor Man strife, the class conflict pales in comparison to the Holocaust.

It’s ridiculous — not to mention downright offensive to Holocaust survivors — to even try to link the two.

“We have Holocaust survivors alive today who went through horrible experiences — enslaved labor, torture, losing some or all of their family,” said Roberta Clark, regional community director for the North Texas and Oklahoma office of the Anti-Defamation League.

“We believe the persecution of Jews should never be trivialized. These sorts of analogies are of great concern to us.”

As well they should be.

Dr. Sara Abosch, senior director of education for the Dallas Holocaust Museum Center for Education and Tolerance, said such sensational analogies reflect a shallow understanding of history and human suffering.

“It’s not just a cheapening of language, it’s a cheapening of culture,” she said. “It means we really don’t understand our own society … if we can make these comparisons.”

Abosch said she was just as taken aback when she heard people likening gun-control laws under the current White House administration “to Nazi-era attempts to deprive Jews of guns.”

“There’s no historical context for it,” she said. “They’re just fallacious.”

The Holocaust may catch the worst of it. Even abortions have been compared to the mass slaughter of Jews; there’s a documentary film advancing the analogy.

But slavery, that other unspeakable system of brutality, is often invoked for dramatic effect, too.

Who can forget Ben Carson, the retired neurosurgeon, proclaiming back in October that the Affordable Care Act is “the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery”?

Unless I’ve missed it, Carson has yet to back down from that remark, unlike Perkins, who fell on his sword for comparing a disdain for the rich to the destruction of Jewish lives and property.

Such hyperbole, like broken glass, is strewn everywhere, diminishing the unspeakable damage caused by slavery and the Holocaust.

“It’s offensive and shows a lack of depth of knowledge,” said Abosch. “I’m a staunch conservative, but I’m also an academic and an intellectual. … And you have to consider the consequence of what you say as much as the consequences of what you do.

“Words have consequences. Words matter.”

James Ragland writes on race and culture, education, social services and public health. Follow him on Twitter at @jamesragland61 and on Facebook at facebook.com/JamesRagland61.