Topics: Bernie Sanders, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Hillary Clinton, Thanksgiving, Elections News, Life News, Politics News

It’s Thanksgiving, which means turkey, being deluged with department store sales pitches, and service articles for liberals on how to get along with your right-wing relatives.

Those who are privileged enough to sit at a table full of fellow liberals, either because they celebrate with friends or because they are lucky to be spared the drunk Trump-loving uncle, don’t usually need such articles anyway.

That is, until this year. This year, liberals who dine with like-minded people might find that things are just as tense as if they had someone ranting about how the Syrian refugees are all terrorists over pumpkin pie. This year is marked by a fraught primary between Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders. It’s likely going to be even harder to avoid conflict between Team Clinton and Team Sanders than it is to avoid fighting with your right-wing relatives. After all, liberals and conservatives have practice agreeing to talk about football instead, but with your liberal peeps, talking about politics is a habit that will be hard to break.

With that in mind, here are some dos and don’ts to keep your Thanksgiving dinner sane and you friendships lasting after the primary.

For Sanders supporters

Do acknowledge that while Clinton is more centrist than Sanders, she is still quite clearly a liberal and falls to the left of both her husband and Barack Obama.

Don’t accuse Clinton supporters of only supporting her because she has a vagina. That just suggests that’s the only reason you’re voting against her.

Do accept that Clinton’s plan for reining in the big banks is thoughtful and more detailed than Sanders’s plan, even if you think it does not go far enough.

Don’t pretend that Clinton would have invaded Iraq just as surely as George W. Bush did, just because she voted for the war authorization. No one buys that, not for a minute.

Do acknowledge that whoever wins will be facing a Republican-dominated legislature that will make sweeping change nearly impossible for any Democrat sitting in the White House.

Don’t assume that people are unaware of what the term “democratic socialism” means and that they need lengthy lectures to rectify this assumed ignorance.

Do acknowledge that Wall Street donors are actually throwing their weight behind Republicans far more than Clinton this election season, even though they supported Obama over John McCain in 2008.

Don’t swear that if Clinton wins the nomination over Sanders, you refuse to vote for her in the general election. That just confirms that you’re less interested in economic justice than fluffing your own ego or that you panic at the thought of women in power.