“There’s still a lot of stuff that’s coming out,” Weinstein said. “People need to see it. It’s coming together. And for me, it’s really kind of relieving because … it’s stuff people should have been seeing for a long time. And I can finally it get out there. I just want people to think.”

Rich Weinstein, the private citizen uncovering the secrets behind the sneaky foundations of Obamacare that professionals can't or won't , warns that there is more to come. And it is not good.

“Rich, what is coming next?” Beck asked. “What is the one thing that you would say, ‘America, you need to know this’?” Weinstein said Americans need to know that even if they survived the first wave of the Obamacare rollout with their insurance intact, there are measures built into the legislation that won’t come into effect for ten or twenty years, and employer-based insurance will be next. “The Cadillac tax, people think is just for the high-end insurance plans,” he said. “But the way Dr. Gruber describes it on video, within a certain period of time, I don’t know if he said 10 or 20 years, it’s going to hit everybody, and it’s targeted at the employer sponsored insurance.” Weinstein said the coming wave of higher premiums and lost plans are structured in a way that you blame the “evil insurance companies,” in Gruber’s words, not the government that forced them to implement the policies. The administration and Gruber will deny that they are out to change employer-based health insurance, Weinstein asserted. But he also cautioned that you cannot rely on what they say in speeches — you must also listen to what they are saying at the universities, at economic forums, and among themselves. “It’s all out there,” he said.

Yes it is. David Steinberg of PJ Media links to Watchdog.org for yet another video – we're up to number 5 – of Gruber knocking those questioning his brilliance in government-mandated and sponsored health care insurance.

In the 2011 video shot by TrueNorthReports.com and sent to Watchdog.org on Thursday, Gruber appears before the Vermont House Health Care Committee to present recommendations for a universal, publicly financed health care program. The recommendations were part of the 2011 “Hsiao Report” submitted to the Legislature by economist William C. Hsiao and co-written by Gruber. As Gruber sits listening, the committee chair reads a comment from a Vermonter who expresses concern that the economist’s plan might lead to “ballooning costs, increased taxes and bureaucratic outrages,” among other things. After hearing the Vermonter’s worries, Gruber responds, “Was this written by my adolescent children by any chance?” The remark was met with uproarious laughter. Contrary to Gruber’s snarky insult, the comment was not written by an adolescent. “It was actually written by a former senior policy adviser in the White House who knew something about health care systems,” said John McClaughry, a two-term Vermont state senator and adviser to President Ronald Reagan in the 1980s. McClaughry, who wrote the comment in an op-ed weeks before the 2011 committee meeting, told Vermont Watchdog he did not know Gruber made the condescending insult. However, he was aware of other videos discovered this week in which Gruber boasted of writing deceptive policies to trick “stupid” American voters. “No one should trust this man. … Based on the rest of the stuff that’s come out on the videos, nobody can trust this guy. He has no use for transparency, he thinks people are stupid, and he’ll do anything to get this thing through and pocket his $400,000. That’s not in the interest of the people of Vermont,” McClaughry said.

Yep, "it's all out there." And it is up to us to stop condemning the professionals, the watchdogs for not finding it, but rather to go out there and find it ourselves, utilizing new technology, and publicize it wherever we can on all the social media. And then protest.

The MSM – "Democratic operatives with bylines" – aren't the news gatekeepers any longer. We are.