Topics: Editor's Picks, Hoarding, Life stories, Motherhood, New Mom Confessions, Parenting, Pregnancy, Real Families, Life News

“A new breast-shaped bottle with saliva-mixing technology!” rang out from my inbox. A scroll through the mommy blogs and baby-to-be newsletters revealed that we lived in the future: Sedan-sized strollers with GPS, cell phone chargers and headlights. Faux shearling booties specially constructed for not walking. Baby monitors with LED movement indicators, video streaming, temperature sensors, they even breastfeed for you. Not only are you excited to be a mom, they screamed, you are excited to do some serious shopping!

I wasn’t. At seven months pregnant I forced myself to enter my local Manhattan baby store, which was draped in electronic milking machines and fair-trade infant bikinis. The smiling saleslady – after recovering from her initial shock at how long I’d waited to order a crib – politely began to barrage me: Do you want the organic changing table? How about the multimedia crib entertainment system – “Twinkle Twinkle” and a light show!

“Let’s get the handcrafted African monkey finger puppets,” my husband Jon suggested, too excited.

“Stop!” I said. “I don’t want anything.”

Hormones, the saleslady said, rolling her heavily mascaraed eyes. But she was wrong. My dismay was not chemical. It was not about Jon’s spending money on artisanal toys, nor my Jewish parents’ superstition that if you even mention the unborn baby, let alone buy it a wardrobe, the pregnancy will result in immediate termination. Mine was the anxiety of a child-of-a-hoarder — who’d married another child-of-a-hoarder. Mine was the anxiety of stuff.

That night, I gestured to Jon over my enormous stomach at our neat home office, sparse and organized like the rest of our white-walled apartment, which was slated to become the nursery. “It’s taken me years to accumulate all this nothing!”

After 33 years, I’d finally made my dream home. Now, I panicked, it would be overfilled. Ruined. Again.

—-

The Montreal duplex where I grew up was lined with half-used Kleenex, newspapers, a Tetris puzzle of credenzas. My mother, born in Kirgizia on my grandparents’ flight from the Nazis, had a childhood of deprivation. She saved everything, causing chaos in which report cards and bat mitzvah checks were lost forever, leaving me in constant panic. She tried to connect, and give me what she’d lacked, but couldn’t find the right way, instead erecting physical and emotional barriers. Buried by her gifts – which included the full run of fake Cabbage Patch Kids – there was little room for me to grow. I feared closeness with others, felt relief when my 12-year-old crush dumped me (how could I ever bring him home?) and was too filled with shame to date. Mom’s mother also had cupboards bursting with cheap dresses. The women in my family clung to everything.

With all this home, I felt without one. Suffocating, I ran.

All I brought to college in the U.S. was my computer and clothes. Since no one would see my parents’ house, I posed as a sophisticated minimalist. Trying to make sparse seem chic, I purchased two blue wineglasses, but was nervous that my guests thought them tacky. I stopped inviting people. Attracted to white-walled galleries, I spent nomadic semesters doing museum internships in Europe and even Africa, parading with a mere backpack between hostels and couches. While I had no permanent brick walls around me, I built them inside. When my first boyfriend suggested moving in together, I fled.

In London, I sublet my first adult room in a decrepit flat above a pub. Never mind I lived with hard-house DJs and the street soot drenched my books, it was spacious, with big windows, and felt airy and empty – large enough for my secrets. I’d brought just one duffel bag. Less than college. I carefully purchased black wiry candlesticks and slick Ikea chairs. My books lined the windowsill; minimal cosmetics piled on open shelves. I wanted to see everything, to be in control. “Sweet digs,” friends noted. I hosted parties. Drunk, I feigned ease at sharing my space.

Nothing could make me leave that room – except love. At 26, I fell for Evan, an older academic who took the role of teacher. He taught me the difference between a garlic press and an egg slicer, since I knew nothing of sautéing, braising, even toasting. (I did not mention that my parents’ kitchen had grown into a repository for moldy cereal and obsolete fax machines.) He convinced me to abandon my immature share. I rented a one-bedroom miles away from his garden flat, in East London. It was both the size and consistency of a shoe box, and in a heroin-strewn enclave, but it was mine. I bought no throw pillows or posters, and tied back all drapes to form crisp geometric angles. Weeks later, Evan dumped me at an Indian restaurant. “You don’t have things that make me feel comfortable,” he complained. He confessed with delight that he’d fallen for a single mom who had matching plate sets. Despite my clean turf, I was still domestically inadequate. My attempts toward order and closeness left me alone and in a mess. I’d become so good at ridding myself of things, I’d gotten rid of my boyfriend. I couldn’t hold on to anything.

—-

I spent four years admitting my cluttered heritage to myself. I purchased a red shawl and rug, which I added as artistic touches to my quarters, gaining confidence in my ability to make a home. I invited in a new boyfriend and showed him how to make coffee like Evan taught me, as if sharing a wild sex trick. I began to learn that I wasn’t my mother, or her house. I’d left Montreal 12 years earlier. Finally, I’d built a foundation.