The Tour de France has an all-too-predictable way of laying waste to the best laid plans formed months in advance.

Boulder-based team Cannondale-Garmin knows this, but it doesn’t make the struggles the team has endured any easier. In a sport where stage wins and overall performance in the general classification at the Tour are barometers of success, Cannondale-Garmin is still looking to shoot par for the course.

Crashes, illness and poorly timed mechanical failures have all befallen their riders through 15 stages — with five more to go before the finale on the Champs-Élysées in Paris

“Just have to keep trying every day and hope the luck breaks our direction,” Cannondale-Garming manager Jonathan Vaughters told The Denver Post on Sunday.

After a spectacular ride in Stage 10 by Sky’s Chris Froome on the first day in the Pyrenees, Cannondale-Garmin was forced to alter strategy the second week toward focusing on stage wins and breakways. Co-leaders Andrew Talansky and Dan Martin both finished nearly 12 minutes back from Froome, ending any hope of them finishing in the top five of the general classification.

The strategy shift hasn’t produced any victories yet — just close calls and repeat servings of bad luck.

On Friday, Australian Nathan Haas — riding in his first Tour — aggressively attacked the breakway on a downhill, but was caught inside 15 kilometers from the finish.

“Great effort by Nathan. Super proud of him,” Vaughters said. “It almost worked out. We’ll keep searching for similar opportunities.”

On Saturday, Talansky and Ryder Hesjedal joined a 20-man breakaway in an attempt to set up Talansky for the Stage 14 win. But in the late parts of the stage, with the gap between the peloton and a depleted five-man break at 40 seconds, Talansky punctured a tube and didn’t have team support vehicles around to assist. Race day over.

On Sunday in Stage 15 to Valence, Hejedal — one of two riders left in a nine-rider breakaway — was caught with about 17 miles left in the stage. Ramunas Navardauskas finished sixth in a sprint finish, but Sebastian Langeveld dropped out of the race earlier in the stage with gastrointestinal illness, the team said, the second Cannondale-Garmin rider to withdraw from the Tour this year.

And as the riders draw ever closer to Paris, the chances of unseating Froome diminish. Nairo Quintana, the young Colombian rider known for his prowess in the mountains, is second 3 minutes, 10 seconds behind Froome, and American Tejay van Garderen is third, sitting 3:32 back.

“Quintana might have a shot if the weather went crazy or Froome got ill or crashed,” Vaughters said. “(Tejay) will be hard pressed to stay where he is, so I think he’s pretty focused on maintaining third.”

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com or twitter.com/danielpetty