LAKE FOREST, Ill. — The Chicago Bears and Pro Bowl receiver Brandon Marshall, who once played for the Broncos, agreed to a three-year contract extension through the 2017 season on Monday.

Marshall announced on Twitter that the extension is worth $30 million and that he’s donating $1 million to the “mental health community.” He signed the deal during an appearance on ABC’s “The View” talk show.

In 2011, Marshall disclosed that he had been diagnosed with borderline personality disorder. The 6-foot-4, 230-pound Marshall has a history of off-field problems, but the Bears have had no complaints.

In two seasons in Chicago, Marshall has been selected to the Pro Bowl twice and ranked second in the NFL during that time in receptions (218), fourth in receiving yards (2,803), fifth in touchdown receptions (23) and tied for second in 100-yard receiving games (13).

General manager Phil Emery did not indicate that an extension was imminent during an interview with WSCR-AM 670 Monday morning but had high praise for his star receiver.

“A great player,” he said. “Obviously a player we’d like to have here for the long term. He is healthy. He feels great.”

The extension for Marshall is just the latest move in a busy offseason for the Bears. Most of their energy has focused on overhauling a defense that ranked among the league’s worst after they missed the playoffs for the sixth time in seven years. They let Julius Peppers go and signed Jared Allen, replacing one accomplished pass rusher with another, and addressed every other area on that side.

But they haven’t ignored the offense, either. They locked in quarterback Jay Cutler with a seven-year contract after the season and now have his favorite target in the fold for four more years.

Marshall has basically set the standard for Chicago receivers since his arrival from Miami in a trade. His 118 receptions in 2012 and 100 last season are the top two totals in franchise history, and with the emergence of Alshon Jeffery (1,421 yards) last season, the Bears have one of the best receiving tandems in the league.

Marshall played in Denver from 2006-09.