CONCORD >> The Garnet Valley School Board and Garnet Valley Education Association have approved a five-year contract after 18 months of negotiations. The board voted Thursday night with unanimous support.

On June 3, the education association, which has a membership of 389, ratified the contract with a “healthy majority,” said association President Kathleen Petrini.

The contract is retroactive to July 1, 2014, ending June 30, 2019. The agreement includes a 3.8 percent average salary increase over the five years of the contract, aligning Garnet Valley closely with surrounding districts.

“We value the expertise and talents of our fine teachers and are glad we’ve been able to negotiate a contract that honors the great work they do,” said district Superintendent Dr. Marc Bertrando.

Advertisement

A starting teacher’s salary will increases from $45,100 to $47,600 by fall 2019. Teachers who are at the highest point in the pay scale (16 years of service and a master’s degree plus 30 credits) will see an increase from $94,400 to $100,150 by fall 2019.

The contract will be funded, in part, by taxpayer increases in alignment with Act 1 under the assumption of an index of about 1.9 percent annually. The district also anticipates revenue increases generated by new commercial development.

Contract terms call for teachers to have an increase in their healthcare premium, starting with an 8 percent contribution in the first year, and increasing to a 13 percent contribution by year five, as well as modifications in their prescription plan. The prescription plan changes require teachers to use CVS pharmacies and follow guidelines regarding generic drugs, allowing the district to see $850,000 in savings over the five years of the contract.

The contract also includes language that protects the district from incurring the 40 percent additional costs resulting from and Affordable Care Act provision expected to go into effect in 2018.

“The contract that was ultimately reached is in alignment with the fact finder’s report,” said board President Rosemary Fiumara, referring to the December document that was not approved. “We used it as a basis and negotiated some modifications that worked for each side.”

Non-economic changes include a five-minute earlier start time of 7:25 a.m. for middle and high school teachers, which will create a short transition time before students report at 7:30 a.m. In addition, teachers will work with administrators to develop online courses and create opportunities for students to participate in cyber education.

Fiumara said the contract addressed important priorities of the education association and had concessions on both sides.

“Now we can focus on students and education. We would like to acknowledge the tremendous support from the community, many of whom came out to meeting after meeting,” said Fiumara.

Petrini, on behalf of her membership, said they were pleased to have reached an agreement by the end of the year. She noted the teachers were also happy to enjoy the waning days of school with the students in various activities.

“We would be remiss if we didn’t say this contract would not have been possible without the support of parents and Garnet Valley community, and the commitment of the school board to work together to attain a fair agreement,” said Petrini.