By giving an absolute priority to full pension funding without specifying where the money will come from, the amendment asks the people of New Jersey to sign a blank check while wearing a blindfold. The people of New Jersey need a better solution. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

In “solving” a funding problem without specifying how to pay for the solution, the proposed constitutional amendment regarding public worker pensions in New Jersey puts the state and its citizens in a straightjacket of obligations they cannot afford.

There are four serious problems with the amendment. First, without benefit reforms, it will cost too much. In 2016, in a tight budget, the state’s combined pension and health benefits costs are $4.8 billion, or 14 percent of a $33.8 billion budget.

Taking the $5.8 billion 2026 pension payment projected in the amendment and assuming (with some degree of optimism) health benefits costs increase only 7 percent annually and state revenues increase 3 percent annually, by 2026 the proposed amendment would roughly double benefits funding’s share of the budget to 28 percent of a $45.4 billion budget. The state simply cannot afford to spend almost 30 cents of every tax dollar on employee benefits.

Second, because the amendment compels pension funding regardless of consequences, government services and functions will suffer. Spending for certain budget items (like debt service and primary education) is mandated in law or fact. Most of what the state does for its citizens, however, is, from a budgeting standpoint, discretionary. Adding pensions to the list of mandated expenses would squeeze essential services between the irresistible force of the new pension demands and the immovable object of existing mandates.

For example, if state revenues are $45.4 billion in 2026 and mandatory spending is 60 percent of the budget, or $27.2 billion (the actual figure is likely higher), mandating the $5.8 billion pension payment without reforms reducing the $6.9 billion health benefits cost would leave only $5.4 billion available for things like courts, prisons, law enforcement, public safety, Children’s and Family Services and state colleges. As it costs $8.7 billion to fund these functions today, an additional $3.3 billion would be needed that year merely to break even. The brunt of shortfalls in state revenue or investment returns on pension funds would also fall upon these “discretionary” items. Funding gaps of this magnitude cannot be closed by taxing just millionaires, but the amendment says nothing about who will be forced to pay how much.

The third problem is the amendment would effectively prevent comprehensive pension and health benefit reform. Conceding everything the employees could want in terms of pension security eliminates any incentive for them to come to the table. Furthermore, while the messaging of proponents has focused on its “make the payments” elements, the amendment would also prohibit any changes to the terms under which vested employees would earn pension benefits in the future. This would limit any future reforms to changes in the pensions of current non-vested employees (which take years to generate noticeable savings) and reductions in health benefits (which are limited by the floor the Affordable Care Act places on minimum benefit levels).

Reform efforts at the margins are doomed to fail. Chapter 78, while an important first step, fell short in part because it placed off limits even modest changes to vested employees’ right to earn future pension benefits and instead assumed the budget would grow enough to make up the difference. The amendment does the same.

Finally, in short-circuiting all existing budget safeguards intended to protect future taxpayers, the proposed amendment treads on uncharted, dangerous constitutional ground. The state Constitution’s existing mandated appropriations are all limited by funding source, dollar amount and/or period of time. In contrast, the proposed amendment specifies no funding source and sets no limit. Nationally, such unfettered constitutional protection for public employee pensions has usually been shunned because of the outsize risk involved. Only seven states have them, including Illinois, whose pension funding woes are among the country’s worst.

By giving an absolute priority to full pension funding without specifying where the money will come from, the amendment asks the people of New Jersey to sign a blank check while wearing a blindfold. The people of New Jersey need a better solution.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1lZbSCb