By Kevin Shivers

U.S. Senate Candidate Joe Sestak claimed in a recent commentary that the Affordable Care Act has been good for small businesses. He couldn't be more wrong.

Small business owners are very familiar with the impact Obamacare has had on their businesses, and are bracing for continued consequences in the future as the law is fully implemented. The law has added costs, restricted options, and increased compliance burdens for small business owners, whose number one problem for over 30 years has been the rising cost of health insurance.

Business owners with fewer than 50 employees were repeatedly told that Obamacare would not impact their businesses. Yet, according to the NFIB Research Foundation, 62 percent of small business owners experienced premium increases last year, compared to 8 percent of small business owners who experienced premium decreases.

The cost increases are driven by increased benefit requirements and new taxes and fees on health insurance products that small business owners purchase. These premium increases led to a 6 percent drop in the percentage of businesses offering health insurance to their employees (from 46 percent in 2013 to 40 percent in 2014), as business owner throw their hands up in the air over cost frustration.

Small businesses also have fewer options for providing assistance to their employees.

NFIB Research Foundation estimates 14 percent of small businesses that do not offer health insurance instead reimburse employees for the purchase of individual health insurance. A recent IRS regulation prohibits this reimbursement and imposes a $100/day/employee penalty, which would devastate a mom and pop shop that is trying to help their employees. Realizing the significant impact of this penalty, the IRS delayed enforcement until July 2015, but penalties are lurking right around the corner.

For those small businesses with 50 or more employees, the employer mandate is beginning implementation. While midsize businesses (50-99 employees) have a one year delay on the requirement to offer health insurance or pay penalties until 2016, they must still closely track employees' hours and offers of coverage for IRS reporting beginning next year. There is no relief from the employer reporting requirements that are time-consuming and costly to carry out.

Proponents of Obamacare tout the small business health insurance tax credit and the small business (SHOP) exchange marketplaces as benefits to small businesses. However, the temporary nature and many limitations of the credit and the technical problems of the SHOP exchange have failed to provide promised relief to small business owners. Only 170,000 businesses nationwide were able to initially claim the credit.

The costs of Obamacare are real and negatively impacting Pennsylvania small businesses now. The proposed benefits have underperformed.

Kevin Shivers is Executive Director of the National Federation of Independent Business/Pennsylvania which represents 15,000 small businesses in the state.