Kickstarter campaign raises funds for digital conversion, new screen

Kickstarter pledgers wait in line to receive their tickets to 'The Hunger Games: Catching Fire' for Skyline Theater's digital premier. ( Christy Steadman / Daily Record )

Skyline Theater fills with Kickstarter pledgers for the digital premier in November. (Christy Steadman / Daily Record)

Top 10 Stories of 2013 No. 10: Retail Marijuana Ordinances No. 9: Councilman Michael 'Colby' Katchmar Trial No. 8: Main Street Improvements No. 7: Blossom Festival, St. Thomas More Celebrates 75th Anniversary No. 6: Skyline Theater Goes Digital No. 5: Friday No. 4: Saturday No. 3: Monday No. 2: Tuesday No. 1: Wednesday

Cañon City movie buffs surely are happy to know the theater on Main Street is here to stay, digitized and with a new screen.

Late November, Skyline Theater, located at 606 Main St., made a digital conversion and purchased their new screen.

Skyline Theater is a family business, and the children of Kate Kelly-Voss, who died of breast cancer last year, "rallied together and decided as a family that we will do our best to save this theater and her legacy," said co-owner Karen Nothdurft on Kickstarter's website.

Co-owner Linda Epperson said the theater needed to digitize not only to stay open, but also so the theater could get the new movies that people want to see.

Before the conversion, the theater was showing 35-millimeter films. Epperson said 35-millimeter prints are hard to get for "a theater with one screen and town this size."

"Digital conversion is not a choice, it's mandatory," she said.

Advertisement

But the theater couldn't do it alone. The generosity and support of the community, through a funding website called Kickstarter, is what made it happen.

Skyline's first Kickstarter campaign was launched in late spring. The goal was to raise $65,000 in 30 days, which would cover the cost of the digital conversion and allow some of the money to go to repairs in the theater.

Epperson said the first Kickstarter campaign was "getting momentum," but then the Royal Gorge Fire happened in June and the theater did not make their goal.

"People were concerned about their homes," Epperson said. "It's understandable that donations stopped."

One stipulation with Kickstarter is that if the entire amount of the goal is not met within the designated time, the project receives none of the money, and the pledges are refunded to the donors.

Skyline Theater owners decided to take a second stab at it. They launched their second Kickstarter campaign Sept. 12 with the goal to raise $35,000 in 45 days — and it was a successful attempt.

"We just want to give a big thanks to the community for stepping up," Epperson said. "It secured the fact that we need a theater on Main Street, and we're here to stay."

Opening night was Nov. 21 with "The Hunger Games: Catching Fire."

With Kickstarter, companies are not allowed to ask for charity, so donations must receive a reward, Epperson said. Incentives, depending on the amount pledged, included movie passes, movie posters, concession combos, donor recognition, on-screen advertising and private viewing parties.

Epperson said more than $5,000 worth of movie tickets, not including the group passes, are "going out to the community" as the rewards from the pledges people made for the Kickstarter campaign.

"Every bit of it is what made it happen," Epperson said. "Every dollar counted."

For Kickstarter pledgers of $100 or more, Skyline Theater hosted a special digital premier night Nov. 30, complete with a red carpet, a deejay and complimentary hot cider and cookies.

"I see a lot of people I know, and a lot of people I don't know," said Nothdurft at the digital premier. "Without all of you, this would not have been possible. Thank you, Cañon City."