SHARE The Milwaukee Police Department's High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area's heroin task force also seized two handguns during a raid that recovered about 3,000 grams of heroin at two properties. Milwaukee Police Department

By of the

A 46-year-old Milwaukee man is facing multiple felony charges after an investigation by federal, state and local authorities turned up nearly 3,000 grams of heroin, two handguns and more than $30,000 in suspected drug money.

The street value of the heroin alone is in excess of $585,000, Milwaukee police said.

Brinkley Bridges has been charged with three counts of possession with intent to deliver a controlled substance and two counts of being a felon in possession of a firearm.

His bail was set at $20,000 and he is due in court Thursday for a preliminary hearing.

"These drugs have an adverse impact on families, businesses, and public spaces — particularly on the district's west side — where they work to interdict a customer base from outside the city," District Three Capt. Jason Smith said in a news release posted to the department's website.

"The district's field teams work closely with the community groups and businesses to identify suspicious activity and trafficking patterns," he added.

According to the criminal complaint charging Bridges:

The High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area's heroin task force received a no-knock search warrant on Jan. 28 for two properties associated with Bridges.

The search warrants were executed simultaneously the next day at locations in the 5200 block of N. 44th St. and the 2600 block of N. 60th St.

Bridges was arrested at the N. 60th St. property and had more than $1,800 on him at the time.

In the basement of that residence, officers and agents found about 2,900 grams of suspected heroin in various-sized packages, along with steel presses, digital scales, measuring cups and other drug paraphernalia.

A briefcase containing 421 grams of marijuana also was found in the basement. Cash totaling $30,810 was discovered in another briefcase and in a trash bag.

A Milwaukee police officer found a handgun in the top shelf of a china cabinet in a dining room.

In the N. 44th St. house, officers and agents found a gun in a jacket hanging near a side door.

They also found a digital scale, respirator mask and small plastic bags in the same area.

Bridges told authorities he took responsibility for everything that was found in those searches, the complaint says.