By JOHN MARSHALL

Merrill Mann had always been intrigued when she saw people on stand-up paddleboards tooling around on area lakes, so when she found a coupon for a rental, she decided to give it a try.

Now she’s hooked.

“I loved it the first time I tried it,” said Mann, who rides on lakes near her home in Avon, Colorado. “Anything with the outdoors, being on the water, it’s very serene yet you’re getting a workout. You’re exercising and out in the sun.”

Stand-up paddleboarding has exploded in popularity the past few years. A sort of combination between surfing and kayaking, it has become a hit on oceans, lakes and rivers across the U.S. and beyond.

According to a 2013 Outdoor Foundation recreation report, stand-up paddleboarding was the most popular outdoor activity for first-time participants, garnering 56 percent of the newbies among all outdoor activities last year.

The appeal is simple: It’s relatively easy, available to a range of ages and can be done just about anywhere there’s a body of water.

“I think the reason it’s blowing up so much is there’s no limitations,” said RJ Murray, co-owner of Three Brothers Boards in Daytona Beach. “As long as you have a body of water, it doesn’t matter where you are. People who lived away from the ocean and wanted to be in that environment never really had that option before paddleboarding.”

Stand-up paddleboarding is not new. The ancient Hawaiians were believed to use it as transportation between islands and for fishing, while fishermen from Asia to South America have used forms of stand-up paddleboarding while working their catch.

The recent rise in popularity started with surfers and carried on with tourists in beach towns who then took the idea back to where they live.

“When I first heard people wanted to do yoga classes on paddleboards, I was like, ‘You’ve got to be kidding me,’ ” said Murray, who started Three Brothers with his brother Justin in 2009. (A third brother, Jason, died earlier that year.) “People are getting really creative with it. I can’t imagine where it will be four years from now.”

The equipment certainly has changed.

Boards now are specifically designed for standup paddling, averaging 10 to 12 feet in length and contoured for easy balancing.

Set up with a board that’s the right size and calm water conditions, most first-timers only need about 10 minutes to feel comfortable and start paddling away. It gets a bit more difficult when there are waves or a current, but remains accessible to people from 7 to 77, according to Murray.