Staying Alive The struggles of a business trying to survive.

On Friday of last week, I collected insurance sign-up forms from my employees. After all of the work I have done — including figuring out how to compare insurance-plan prices, and finding a plan that offers my employees a wide range of options, and explaining the changes to my employees — the decisions are in.

And here’s what they chose: Of 17 employees, five declined coverage altogether. They are already insured through spouses or, in one case, parents.

My bookkeeper, who works part time but meets the definition of an employee, realized that it would be cheaper for her to get coverage individually through the exchange because her family qualifies for substantial subsidies. In the past, we had included her in our group, but I’m not required to offer part-timers insurance, so I changed our company policy to exclude her (with her complete agreement).

As a result, she can now buy on the exchange, and I don’t need to cover her. Coincidentally, she and her husband were the oldest people in our group — so taking her off our policies will bring a significant reduction in our costs.

The remaining 11 chose a wide range of plans: one took the gold HMO that was equivalent to our current coverage, two chose a gold HMO with tiered pricing, one took a silver HMO, and three took a bronze HMO. The most popular choice was a bronze PPO with a health savings account. Three employees took that option, and so did I. The company will make an initial contribution of $500 into those health savings accounts.

The net result? It depends on the point of comparison. Our total cost for 2013 was $108,856. Of that, the company paid $72,937 and employees paid $35,919.

If I had taken my agent’s first proposal (put everyone in a Gold HMO), the total cost for premiums would have been $135,738. Company share: $88,344. Employee share: $47,394.

The agent’s cheaper option (put everyone in a Silver HMO) would have resulted in a total cost of $114,895. Company share: $76,620. Employee share: $38,275.

Our actual choice (a range of plans, with one employee choosing to leave the group) produced a total premium cost of $87,194. Company share: $59,005. Employee share: $28,189.

One of my goals was to reduce the cost of our coverage to the company. And in that respect, all of the hard work paid off. The cost that the company will bear was reduced by $13,932, or 19 percent, over last year’s premiums, and it will be $29,339 cheaper, or 33 percent, than the cost I would have incurred had I simply accepted the quote that the agent dropped on my desk on Oct. 30.

That said, I have no illusions that I have saved any money for my employees on their total health care spending. I was able to offer them a range of choices that will allow them to save money on their monthly premiums, but I have also transferred some of the risk associated with providing health care from the company to the workers. No doubt some of them will end up paying more because of higher deductibles or co-pays and because, in the end, we are all subject to the vagaries of our health and the actual bill that the doctors hand us at the time of service. There is no way to know exactly how that will work out next year.

In part for that reason, I agonized for a good long while about which plan level to choose for me and my family. Ultimately, I picked the bronze PPO with a health savings account. And, one week later, I’m already seeing the down side to my decision.

My wife, who turned 50 in the spring, was supposed to have a colonoscopy this year. A few weeks ago, I nagged her to make the appointment as soon as possible, so that it would be covered under our existing plan. I had a colonoscopy in January and it cost me just $50 out of pocket. She was supposed to have it this week, but she caught a cold over the weekend. The hospital told her that they require people to wait at least three weeks after being sick before having a procedure. Her appointment was rescheduled for Jan. 27, which means I’m going to be paying for the procedure out of pocket. How much? Who knows?

If you have read all eight posts in this series, congratulations. You and I both know a heck of a lot more about health insurance than we did two months ago. I decided to devote so much time to investigating my choices both because my business is running well, which gave me the spare hours to work on issues like this, and because I knew that I would be able to share what I found with a wide audience.

I hope that you have learned something about the small group market, about the Affordable Care Act, and about what choices you can offer your own people. If you haven’t tried it yet, I encourage you to download my spreadsheet and use it to model your costs. And if you have anything to add to my account, please comment below.

Paul Downs founded Paul Downs Cabinetmakers in 1986. It is based outside Philadelphia.