Buy Photo More grassroot groups have sprung up in Louisville over the past few years, fueled in part by the growing use of social media and Louisville’s reputation as a compassionate city. These leaders who can attest to that include, from left, Wendy Manganaro, president of the board for Fed With Faith; Christen Herron, founder of The Forgotten Louisville; Nancy Bohannon, organizer of the Street Store; and Beth Thorpe, director of Louisville TimeBank. (Photo: Sam Upshaw Jr., The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

In a small kitchen at Beargrass Christian Church in St. Matthews, nearly a dozen Fed with Faith volunteers prepare to take 120 meals to homeless camps at underpasses, abandoned homes and wooded areas across Louisville.

Kim Proffitt, a volunteer and Louisville native, reheats sides of rice and mashed potatoes donated from local restaurants while organizers determine which camps the different teams are going to visit.

Proffitt joined the organization in January after seeing Facebook videos and stories of people who Fed with Faith had helped. Five months later, she was elected to the organization's board and champions the organization for encouraging interaction between the homeless and volunteers.

Fed with Faith is just one of a number of local grassroots organizations that have sprung up in the last few years, fueled in part by the growing use of social media and Louisville's reputation as a compassionate city.

Catherine McGeeney, director of development at Coalition for the Homeless, said these grassroots groups are also helping to fill the gaps left by some people who, for whatever reason, don't reach out to Louisville's large nonprofits for help.

"We know that we don't have enough resources for all of the people who cannot afford to make ends meet," she said. "I think what the community is doing is saying, 'I see these people in my neighborhood and they have a great need, and we as compassionate people have to find a way to respond.' "

The grassroots appeal

One reason volunteers help these organizations is the lack of barriers for providing services. Because funding comes directly from private donors and volunteers, there's little red tape.

Though many of these grassroots organizations serve the needs of Louisville's more than 7,000 homeless individuals, other organizations such as the Louisville TimeBank are more concerned with community building and small acts of compassion.

Social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter have been criticized for encouraging people to be self-centered and isolated, but these groups are turning that idea on its head by using social platforms to bring community members together to solve issues.

Many volunteers said they get an experience with small grassroots groups they didn't have before.

Local volunteer-based groups such as Fed with Faith, The Forgotten Louisville, The Street Store and My Dog Eats First encourage volunteers to have direct and personal interactions with the people they serve.

"I liked that we were getting out in the streets right in the nitty gritty," Proffitt said of Fed with Faith. "I wanted to see what I was doing in the kitchen affected people and not just be in the background."

Susan Miller is a volunteer with The Street Store, a pop-up store held twice annually to provide summer and winter clothing to Louisville's at-need. Miller said she felt organizations that allowed volunteers to be personal with clients offer a bit of dignity in tough situations.

"You've got volunteers interacting and making connections," Miler said of The Street Store. "It's about trying to make people feel respected and we're not 'you're lucky we are going to give this to you.' "

Story continues after the gallery

Social media eases connections

Louisville TimeBank uses a Facebook group to connect Louisville residents, with a focus on reciprocity. By treating time as a currency, members of the TimeBank help one another do everything from raking leaves and running errands to learning yoga.

The group also offers support to one another during times of emotional and physical need. TimeBank members also include organizers of other grassroots organizations, such as Nancy Bohannon who runs The Street Store.

Louisville TimeBank director Beth Thorpe said she believes these volunteer-based organizations can be more flexible than the nonprofit institutions because they exist almost solely online where word can spread quickly.

"People in the community with interests can easily find people with like interests on Facebook or Twitter and they can jump in on it," Thorpe said. "All I have to say is 'hey, I'm working on this thing, would you share it on your social media channels?' And they do and that's how we can get new people involved."

Recent survey data from Georgetown University's Center for Social Impact Communication suggests social media is becoming one of the most powerful mediums for charity and volunteer organizations. In an online survey of more than 2,000 American adults, more than half of the respondents who engaged with causes via social media were inspired to take further action by either sharing content online or volunteering offline.

The survey also suggests that storytelling is what grabs the attention of users the most, a tool Louisville-based groups have already discovered.

Success breeds growth

Through social media campaigns and sharing the success stories of shelter clients online, the Coalition for the Homeless has seen a 250 percent increase in the number of Facebook followers. Its social media campaign, #TakeAStandLou was particularly effective in getting the community behind affordable housing and local charities, director Catherine McGeeney said.

Organizations such as TimeBank promote success stories through its social media and online newsletter as well.

Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer's signing of the Compassionate Louisville resolution in November 2011 is another catalyst credited with facilitating the recent outgrowth of grassroots organizations.

Nina Harris of Wayside Christian Mission said the annual Give a Day Week and the public-private Partnership for a Compassionate Louisville has made volunteering a part of the community conversation.

Harris said there will always be more need in Louisville than there are resources, but empowering compassionate organizations big and small will help to close the gap in Louisville.

"I think Louisville has been a compassionate city for years, but now there is this focus on it that is bringing more and more people in," Harris said.

Reporter Roberto Roldan can be reached at (502) 582-4649. Follow him on twitter at @ByRobertoR

To get involved

Louisville TimeBank

Focus: Community building, reciprocity

Contact: Beth Thorpe, louisvilletimebank@gmail.com; www.LouisvilleTimeBank.org/

The Forgotten Louisville

Focus: Homeless outreach, hunger

Contact: Christen Bradshaw Herron, tinysteelers@gmail.com; www.theforgottenlouisville.org/

Fed with Faith

Focus: Homeless outreach, hunger

Contact: Jean Manganaro, jean@fedwithfaith.org; www.fedwithfaith.org/

Pedal Power Project

Focus: Bike donations for refugees

Contact: Beargrass Christian Church, (502) 896-1161; www.beargrass.org/pedal-power-project/

The Street Store

Focus: Pop-up clothing store for the homeless

Contact: Nancy Bohannon, Keepshining75@gmail.com; www.thestreetstore.com

My Dog Eats First

Focus: Serves at-need individuals with pets

Contact: Beth Green, (502) 694-2746; www.mydogeatsfirst.com/

Exit 0

Focus: Serves Southern Indiana homeless

Contact: (502) 541-2353; www.jesuscaresatexit0.org

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1SdvcpI