As far as I know, nobody on Fox made fun of Rush Limbaugh when he threatened to leave the country if the Affordable Care Act passed. But on today's Fox & Friends, threats, made by some black public figures to leave the country if Donald Trump is elected president, were met with derisive commentary and giggles.

The pump Trump segment was introduced by Fox & Friends' newest bubble headed bleached blonde female host, Ainsley Earhardt (who is very beloved by the Fox family and why, as a committed Southern Christian who is tired of protecting minority rights and who endorses "benign Christianity" in the public schools, wouldn't they?!). As the banner proclaimed that tomorrow's Super Tuesday primaries are "Super 'Trump'day," Earhardt described Trump's "dominant lead." After she played video of Marco Rubio insulting Trump, she asked her guests, Trump's two oldest sons, Eric and Donald Jr., if these attacks will work.

The boys defended their father. Eric Trump said that these types of attacks are "sad" and launched into a litany of praises for their father who will do "such an unbelievable job for this country, he's an amazing businessman, amazing negotiator" yadda, yadda, yadda. Donald Jr. said that this is a sign of "desperation." Earhardt provided the patented Fox validation: "A lot of people are saying that." When the discussion turned to a rebuttal of Ted Cruz's claim that Donald Trump is mob connected, Eric said it was "ridiculous." The pro-Trump infomerical continued with more praise for the awesomeness of Donald Trump. And then the race baiting began.

Earhardt commented that "a lot of celebrities don't believe in your dad." As the banner let us know about "Hollywood Haters, Celebrities Threaten to Move If Trump Becomes President," she played video of African-American celebrities reacting to Donald Trump: Whoopi Goldberg, on The View, saying that she disagrees with Trump's vision of America and "maybe it's time for me to move;" Rev. Al Sharpton joking that if Trump is the nominee he's "reserving his ticket to get out of here if he wins;" Demi Lovato, on The View, commenting that if Trump wins, she will move to Canada.

Rather than address the reasons why people, specifically minorities, are fearful of Trump, Earhardt asked if Trump "will miss them if they leave." Donald Jr, responded "not at all, I'll buy them their airfare." As Earhardt was laughing hysterically, Eric said that he would "chip in" and "this is the greatest endorsement ever." Donald Jr agreed that "those are endorsements for Trump" and asserted that he "loves that, it's a good an endorsement as I could possibly get."

Yowza. Not only was this a pro-Trump campaign commercial but it managed to incorporate Fox's patented disdain for librul Hollywood. And coupled with those themes, it also was a not so subtle racist dog-whistle aimed at its (and Trump's) racist fan base - hey, if you're not white and you don't like Trump, get the f**k out of the country and we can make America great once you're gone.

Meanwhile, Earhardt said nothing about the Trump/David Duke situation which, according to conservative MSNBC host Joe Scarborough, is "disqualifying" - and Scarborough is white. But who needs facts when you have race to bait...