(RNN) - The new year is not even a day old, and the promise of 2016 is on everyone's minds.

Will this be the year you lose that final pesky 100 pounds? Will you finally quit smoking? Will you pay off your student loans, move out of your parents' basement and take on another form of crushing debt by buying a home?

Probably not, but you've got 366 days (it is a leap year, after all) to keep saying you will.

Other people are looking at 2016 in a less optimistic light. For instance, one psychic has a very gloomy list of predictions.

Psychic Nikki, a "psychic to the stars," claims to have predicted 2015's terrorist attacks in Paris, California wildfires, Halle Berry's divorce and Jimmy Fallon getting injured, among many other things. This year she's forecasting a whole host of tragedies.

Among them are terrorist attacks and earthquakes pretty much everywhere. There's some happy news like a treasure from King Henry VIII being discovered in a castle wall, but most everything else is doom and gloom and dozens of famous people - and their relationships - may be in peril.

To get the new year started on the right foot, let's look at some of the oddly specific predictions for 2016:

A city will turn sideways due to earthquakes

If you're unhappy your home faces the west and gets a bright glare every evening, you may be in luck. That southern exposure you've always dreamed of may be in your near future.

Of course, everything else about this happening - like an annihilated infrastructure - will be horrible, so be careful what you wish for. But take solace in knowing that earthquakes don't spin like a hurricane or tornado. They act like waves, so turning a city 90 degrees probably isn't going to happen.

However, the prediction of India being split in half by an earthquake is at least plausible.

Drone strike at Buckingham Palace

Psychic Nikki also predicts peril for the Queen and that Prince Charles will become King but then possibly abdicate due to health issues, so this one is pretty deep.

Assuming this isn't like the rogue out of control small drone that landed on the White House lawn and implies a military strike, the world-wide implications of a world leader as beloved as Queen Elizabeth II being taken out while feeding her corgis has horrifying global implications.

The Royal Family also has to be careful around horses. Does this mean horses can fly drones? Because that sounds like the real headline.

Fidel Castro dies and the U.S. takes over Cuba

Didn't we already try this once? It didn't work out so well.

This prediction is very vague. Does this mean we're going to invade Cuba? Is Cuba going to become a state? Something this big in terms of global diplomacy needs a few more details.

Hillary Clinton will win the presidential election

Psychic Nikki also predicts a monkey will break into the White House grounds.

Not even going to go there.

A dingo kills a child in Australia

She's just ripping off movie plots now. The prediction says, "Another incident in Australia where a dingo kills a child, similar to the story depicted in the movie A Cry in the Dark with Meryl Streep."

That was based on a real event, but it's unclear if Nikki knows that was based on a real event. At any rate, this whole list may be just re-appropriated movie plots, especially with all the disaster movies Hollywood has turned out in recent years.

Nikki might also think a child will be kidnapped by Santa Claus and raised as an elf before he comes back home to a world he doesn't recognize, an alien from a destroyed planet will show up to repeatedly save a newspaper reporter who can't spell until he is killed by a green rock, a man who hates pirates will free a pirate from prison and team up with him to kill another pirate without a heart and with the help of an orange robot, a poor girl will … on second thought, probably shouldn't go there either.

A new breed mixture of dog and cat

Himalayan shepherds. Siamese retrievers. Persian terriers. Bluetick Maine Coon coonhounds.

2016 is going to be the best year ever.

Copyright 2016 Raycom News Network. All rights reserved.