A couple hundred people gathered Saturday to open the Memorial Day weekend by remembering what the holiday is all about.

Denver’s 15th annual Veterans Memorial Day Tribute honored 43 “Gold Star Families.” The Department of Defense distributes a Gold Star pin to immediate families of servicemen and women who lost their lives in designated military operations.

“We have this ceremony today to make sure we always, always remember our fallen,” Maj. Gen. H. Michael Edwards, adjunct general for the Colorado National Guard, said during his speech at the Pillar of Fire Christian Church on Sherman Street.

Many in the church were wearing “My Hero” pins to remember their loved ones. Names of those lost were read aloud, followed by a chime on a polished gold bell.

“It is nice to get together with other Gold Star Families that we don’t see very often,” said Nancy Pfander, mother of a fallen serviceman.

The families at the ceremony seemed like old friends, rubbing one another’s backs and hugging after names of the fallen were read.

“It’s nice to support each other,” said Silvia Buonicon, whose son died in the service.

The two-hour ceremony was filled with speeches and patriotic songs honoring the fallen, living veterans and those on active duty. The crowd, most dressed in red, white and blue, continually wiped tears from their cheeks throughout the tribute.

“You leave feeling very drained,” Buonicon said.

Many families were honored for the first time during the ceremony. Each received a hand-sewn banner when the name of their loved one and a short paragraph about him or her was read.

“I always feel the worst for those who are here for the first time,” Pfander said.

Christy Goetz Bixby attended the tribute for the second time after her husband was killed in 2010.

“Sitting with the Gold Star Families makes it feel like we are all one family,” Bixby said. “It means a lot to me because they are never forgotten.”

The solemn event followed a parade around Civic Center park — but that event created a certain amount of confusion.

The parade began in front of the City and County Building at 10 a.m. and lasted until 11 a.m.

But Mary Leeze Pearson, Natalee Pearson and Judy McCarville — sitting in their camping chairs and clad in red, white and blue attire — caught only the last five minutes of the parade.

The three women said they had a “really hard time” finding when the parade was scheduled to start — they found an event scheduled at 11:30 a.m. and showed up a few minutes before 11 a.m., thinking they would have plenty of time to get settled in.

The Denver.org website, which listed the parade under “Things To Do,” had the event starting at 11:30 a.m. The link on the page, however, leads to a Facebook event for the Veterans Memorial Day Tribute starting at 11:30 a.m.

Corrie Sahling: 303-954-1223, csahling@denverpost.com or twitter.com/corriesahling