Quarterback Clayton Thorson (left) and offensive lineman Eric Olson savor Northwestern’s win. Credit: Associated Press

By

Northwestern wanted to prove a point against No. 21 Stanford and drove it home with a strong running game and solid defense that produced a season-opening surprise.

Or, as defensive end Dean Lowry put it: "We unleashed a caged bull today."

Freshman Clayton Thorson ran for a 42-yard touchdown while playing turnover-free ball at quarterback, Justin Jackson added 134 yards rushing, and the Wildcats beat the Cardinal, 16-6, on Saturday in Evanston, Ill.

If Northwestern felt like a caged bull, well, back-to-back 5-7 seasons will do that. The recent losing ended a five-year run of bowl appearances that included a 10-win season in 2012.

Anthony Walker broke up two passes and had a fumble recovery, and Kyle Queiro intercepted Kevin Hogan in the end zone with about a minute left to seal the win.

"It was probably one of the best performances I've seen our 'D' play top to bottom against a ranked team maybe in my time," coach Pat Fitzgerald said.

Temple 27, Penn State 10: P.J. Walker scored the go-ahead touchdown late in the third quarter as the host Owls beat the Nittany Lions for the first time in 74 years.

Temple hadn't won in the series since Oct. 18, 1941. Penn State was 38-0-1 since '41 with a 7-7 tie in 1950 the only time the Owls played without a loss.

Scratch that.

The Owls played in front of a record crowd of 69,176 at Lincoln Financial Field and gave the fans who colored the stands in cherry and white perhaps the biggest win in program history.

Walker made it 17-10 with a 1-yard run late in the third and the Owls cruised from there.

The Owls rushed the field and sprinted toward the student section for a post-game party seven decades in the making.

Jahad Thomas, who rushed for 135 yards, had a 24-yard touchdown run in the fourth and Austin Jones added a 30-yard field goal to send what was left of the Penn State faithful fleeing toward the exits.

Stadium security lined the field in front of the student section and put up gates to prevent fans from storming the field.

The preventive — and party-pooping — measures worked from keeping the delirious students from mucking up the turf.

Indiana 48, Southern Illinois 47: Jordan Howard rushed for 145 yards and three touchdowns as the host Hoosiers outlasted the Salukis.

Indiana appeared to put the game away with 58 seconds to play on a 1-yard scoring run by Howard that put the Hoosiers on top, 48-41. But Southern Illinois marched 75 yards in 5 plays with Mark Iannotti hitting Jimmy Jones for a 25-yard touchdown pass with 18 seconds to play.

Southern Illinois chose to go for the two-point version, and Indiana's Andre Brown Jr. made the defensive stop on Connor Iwema at the goal line.

Maryland 50, Richmond 21: William Likely set a Big Ten record with 233 yards in punt returns, and Brandon Ross ran for career-high 150 yards and a touchdown as the host Terrapins crushed the Spiders.

Illinois 52, Kent State 3: Wes Lunt passed for four touchdowns and the host Fighting Illini routed the Golden Flash in the opener for both teams, a day after it was rescheduled due to lightning.

Rutgers 63, Norfolk State 13: Leonte Carroo caught three third-quarter touchdown passes after sitting out a first-half suspension and set a school record as the Scarlett Knights rolled past the visiting Spartans.

Carroo caught touchdown passes of 55, 56 and 18 yards from Laviano in a 28-point third quarter that broke the game open. He now has a career school-record 22 touchdown receptions.

Iowa 31, Illinois State 14: C.J. Beathard threw for 211 yards and a touchdown and the Hawkeyes pounded the visiting Redbirds.