Switch to high-deductible plans to help curb employer health benefit costs, survey finds

Michigan’s total health benefit costs for active employees increased 5.1 percent in 2013 to an average of $11,151 per employee, compared with a 5.4 percent increase for 2012 respondents, according to Mercer’s 2013 National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans.

But for 2014, Michigan employers project employee benefit costs to increase 5.7 percent as companies continue to change benefit plans, primarily going to lower-cost, high-deductible plans.

“The big story this year is consumer-driven health plans are really taking off,” said Jerry Konal, Mercer’s health and benefits practice leader in Detroit.

Nationally, Mercer said, 18 percent of covered employees are enrolled in a high-deductible health plan, compared with 16 percent in 2012. Midwest states are higher, with 27 percent. No data were available for Michigan.

Those Michigan employers that do nothing to reduce costs expect to see health benefit costs rise 10.2 percent. This year Mercer surveyed more than 100 Michigan companies, including 52 Detroit employers.

Nationally, health benefit costs rose only 2.1 percent in 2013, a dramatic decline from 4.1 percent in 2012. Cost increases also declined to 6.1 percent in 2011 from 6.9 percent in 2010, Mercer said.

“A good portion of the decline (nationally) is the small employers” that were very aggressive in using consumer-driven health plans to reduce costs, Konal said.

While all employers experienced savings on their health benefit plans this year, cost savings were strongest for employers with 10 to 499 employees.

Average costs for smaller employers rose only 1 percent while increasing 3.7 percent for employers with 5,000 or more workers, Mercer said.

In addition, “We are also seeing (cost reductions) from health management,” Konal said, “A high percentage of employers are using health management to control costs.”

Health management tools include workplace wellness programs, health risk assessments and tobacco-use surcharges.

But Konal said Mercer thinks small employers expect those health benefit costs to spike upward in 2014. And nationally, all employers expect cost increases to jump up to 5.2 percent next year.

“Many groups have hit the wall,” Konal said. “They don’t have much more room to shift the costs.”

In Michigan, here are some other highlights

In 2013, 37 percent of respondents offered a consumer-directed health plan with an account feature — health savings account or health reimbursement account.

72 percent of all employees covered in respondents’ health plans are enrolled in a preferred provider organization or point-of-service plan, 15 percent in health maintenance organizations and 14 percent in consumer-driven health plans.

The average employee contribution amount for employee-only coverage is $103 monthly for a PPO/POS plan and $118 monthly for an HMO plan. The Detroit figure was statistically insignificant for consumer-driven health plans, but across Michigan, the average employee-only contribution is $69.

Mercer also surveyed employers on whether they plan to terminate their medical plans within the next five years after the state health insurance exchanges offer individuals coverage options through healthcare.gov.

Eleven Some 11 percent of Detroit companies said they are likely or very likely to terminate coverage, compared with 6 percent of large employers nationally and 31 percent of small employers nationally.

“What’s triggering these employers is continued cost increases,” Konal said. “They are saying they are likely or very likely, but it is not absolute. They will carefully look at the market and the increase at rates. Can they continue? Many will because they have to be competitive.”

Mercer also said the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, could boost spending next year, depending on how many employees choose to be covered.

For example, Konal said, many employers anticipate spending more to cover more employees in 2014. Obamacare requests most people to obtain health insurance by March 31 or face a first-year penalty of at least $95.

Mercer said 22 percent of an average employer’s eligible employees waive coverage for themselves — because they have coverage through another plan or because they choose to be uninsured.

“There are a lot of unknowns when it comes to enrollment,” Konal said. “A big question is how many employees will enroll for the first time, given that the tax penalty for not obtaining coverage is relatively small.”

Konal said an employer might wind up covering more dependents if others in the area have made changes to discourage their employees from enrolling dependents.

Employers are also expected to continue the trend to increase employee contributions for dependent coverage (18 percent) or employee-only coverage (10 percent).

Some employers already impose a surcharge on premium contributions for spouses who have other coverage available (9 percent of large employers) or even make them ineligible for coverage (7 percent of large employers), Mercer said.