Health insurance plans offered through Obamacare are supposed to provide drugs that can help you kick the smoking habit — at no cost to you and with no pre-authorization required.

But too many insurers aren't adequately explaining that to policyholders and potential policyholders, the American Lung Association said in a recent report. That, the association fears, may be impeding millions of newly insured smokers from taking advantage of the benefit.

In January and February, the association reviewed the published lists of drugs covered in 348 health plans available under Obamacare nationwide. That's the same information customers or people shopping for coverage would see. Its report in late March said fewer than half of the plans listed all seven federally approved tobacco-cessation medications that are supposed to be covered.

That prompted the Pennsylvania Insurance Department to remind insurers last month of their obligation to provide that coverage. The Insurance Department and state Health Department also issued a consumer alert to make sure people know what services they are entitled to.

"An estimated 21 percent of adults in Pennsylvania, about 2.1 million people, continue to smoke," acting Health Secretary Karen Murphy said in the consumer alert. "We know that a combination of counseling and medication is the most effective treatment."

The lung association presumed insurers weren't following Obamacare regulations if drug lists didn't mention certain tobacco-cessation medications, and that they were available at no cost. Several insurers who sell plans in Pennsylvania disputed the findings and told me they cover the meds as required, even though they weren't mentioned on their lists, known as formularies.

But the association's research raises a good point about the need for insurers to provide complete information about their health plans.

"This analysis shows the critical need for more transparency in the marketplace websites and plan issuer formularies and materials," the report concluded. "Consumers need easy access to formularies in order to make informed decisions about which health plan will best meet their needs."

Many people are getting insurance for the first time and aren't savvy about using it. They could conclude that a plan can't help them kick the habit based on what they see on their insurer's drug list.

"The point is that we want to make sure smokers know what they have available," Erika Sward, assistant vice president of national advocacy for the American Lung Association, told me.

The Affordable Care Act requires insurers to cover all tobacco-cessation medications approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration: bupropion, varenicline and nicotine patches, gum, lozenges, nasal sprays and inhalers.

Drug formularies can change throughout the year. Sward told me the law doesn't require all covered drugs to be listed this year, but they will have to be listed next year.

Some of the 15 health insurance plans offered to Pennsylvania residents through Obamacare didn't have all of the required medications on their drug lists when the association checked.

The association said the formularies for all 15 plans listed bupropion and varenicline as being covered; 13 listed nicotine patches, nasal spray and inhalers; and 11 listed gum and lozenges.

The report said Assurant Health didn't list nicotine patches. Assurant spokeswoman Mary Hinderliter told me last week that patches are covered, but weren't listed because they are available over the counter. She said Assurant was updating its documents to reflect that coverage.

"Assurant Health complies with all smoking cessation requirements and has done so since the Affordable Care Act requirements went into effect," Hinderliter told me.

Likewise, the association's report said plans offered by Aetna failed to note nicotine gum and lozenges were covered, but Aetna spokesman Walter Cherniak Jr. told me they are. He said only prescription medications are included on Aetna's formulary. Gum and lozenges can be purchased over the counter.

The association said the First Priority Life Insurance Co. plan listed only two tobacco cessation drugs on its formulary — bupropion and varenicline. That plan is offered by Blue Cross of Northeastern Pennsylvania, which did not return my call.

The lung association's report said the UPMC Health Options plan didn't include nicotine nasal spray and nicotine inhaler on its list. Spokesman William Modoono told me they are covered but the plan had incorrect information on its website when the association checked, which since has been corrected.

What's important for you to know is this: If you buy health insurance through Obamacare, you are entitled to medications to help you stop smoking, even if you don't see them on your insurer's drug list. And you don't have to pay for them. Consult your physician and call your insurer if you have questions.

Health plans offered outside Obamacare, such as those provided through employers or purchased individually, also must offer free tobacco cessation medications if those plans were created after the national health care law took effect. Previously issued plans don't have to.

You can read the American Lung Association's report at http://www.lung.org. Search for "tobacco cessation."

The Watchdog is published Thursdays and Sundays. Contact me at watchdog@mcall.com, 610-841-2364 or The Morning Call, 101 N. Sixth St., Allentown, PA, 18101. I'm on Twitter @mcwatchdog and Facebook at Morning Call Watchdog.