On the web: undeadmonsters.com

That Frank Coffman is even squeezing in an interview this time of year is a minor miracle.

October is his crunch time. He has buyers calling him from all over the globe, every single day. There are no vacation days during the busy season, and Coffman is often up until 3 a.m. putting the finishing touches on orders he'll ship everywhere from Australia to Ireland to Texas.

It's a lot of work for one man, but there's no time for self-pity in the world of custom-fit, full-body gorilla and Sasquatch suit-making.

"I'm the only person anywhere, probably, who will make a personalized gorilla suit to fit people's measurements," Coffman said from an armchair in his home on Spruce Street in Boulder. "With others, the fur might not be very good, the mask might not be very good. China — they're turning those out like hot cakes, but they're baggy. I have a niche, and the Chinese aren't going to undercut me on that."

If Coffman, slender with vibrant red hair, in his 60s but still boundlessly energetic, sounds a bit jaded, it's because he's been down this road before. Thirty-five years ago, he was working as a baker and selling homemade masks in his spare time — werewolves, Satan faces and a Linda Blair "Exorcist" head, among others.

Advertisement

"The problem was that masks were a good business for a while, and then Nixon went to China," he said. "And China became capitalistic. It became no longer economical for me, and most people who were making masks had to quit and start making something else."

After weaning himself for decades, Coffman severed ties with the mask life five years ago, turning his complete attention to the production of full-body costumes. At $350 a pop, his gorilla and Sasquatch suits have gained such critical acclaim that he's now the go-to guy in the industry.

Frank Coffman, of Boulder, uses an airbrush to do the detail work on a Sasquatch mask Wednesday. Coffman has dedicated his career to making high-quality, custom-fit gorilla and Sasquatch suits, as well as an assortment of creature masks. Yeti suits may be next. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Over time, he has amassed a client base as eclectic as is imaginable.

Coffman recalled the time the Bordeaux Opera House rang to inquire about a gorilla suit for an opera about a sorceress who turned men into animals. Then there was the time he made two gorilla costumes — one male and one female — for televangelist Jerry Falwell's church in Virginia, which needed Coffman's help for a Noah's Ark re-enactment. And there was that nightclub in Shanghai, and that other nightclub in Banff. There was the Jimmy Kimmel show and the TV crime series "Bones." Peppered in between the higher-profile callers are hundreds of weirdos and regular folks who've convinced themselves they need gorilla and Sasquatch suits.

"When I look at it," he said, "sometimes I go, 'How'd I get to this point?' If somebody had told me 30 years ago I was going to be selling gorilla suits to Jerry Falwell's church ... . I mean, I was protesting the Vietnam War in the 1970s, and now I'm sending gorilla suits to Vietnam."

That Coffman has cornered the world market for his highly specialized product stands to reason. His gorillas — which account for about two-thirds of his business — actually look like gorillas. If Sasquatch were real, its face would probably look a lot like the wrinkled, hairy conehead Coffman stays up to the wee hours airbrushing and hot-gluing.

He recently earned the ultimate affirmation of his work's quality, when a friend donned one of his gorilla suits to the Denver Zoo's ape wing.

Some of Frank Coffman's masks in his Boulder studio. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"They instantly recognized it as one of their own," Coffman said. "One of the male silverbacks went charging at the Plexiglass. I'm surprised it didn't break."

Finding the right fit

In a general sense, Coffman's career arc probably isn't all that different from the trajectories of people in any number of other fields. He entered a broad field in his 20s, and, within it, managed to carve out a talent that pays the bills.

What separates Coffman from most other professionals, though, is that he has never had any patience for work that could be considered even remotely ordinary.

He moved from Los Angeles to Boulder in 1974 and took up maskmaking as a hobby four years later. His first production, a hard clay werewolf face, earned high praise among his inner circle. Word spread, and soon he had buyers knocking on the door. In 1980, Coffman left his job at the bakery — "I think I got fired," he recalled — and took off on his own.

His artistic prowess was never in question, but finding work wasn't always easy. Coffman was in and out of magic shops and Halloween stores, adjusting to life as his own PR department. The money wasn't always great, but he relished the independence.

"I really cannot stand to have somebody telling me how to do my work," he said. "Karl Marx called that wage slavery. I'm not a Marxist, but that was a good turn of phrase.

"When you work for yourself, though, you've got to enslave yourself."

And so he did, and continues to do.

When he has free time, he collects artwork, studies film and follows the news closely. He used to be a contributing columnist for the Colorado Daily and became something of a civilian detective investigating the infamous JonBenet Ramsey case, mining clues and working closely with the police. His contributions to that case are chronicled in the seminal JonBenet book, "Perfect Murder, Perfect Town." A photo Coffman took years ago of JonBenet's father, John Ramsey, was once published in the New York Times.

'There are always people who need gorilla suits'

So, even now in his peak season, Coffman doesn't define himself by his unique and surprisingly physically taxing career. When Halloween rolls around next week, he won't be dressing up.

"I don't care about wearing these suits," he said. "The masks, maybe I'll put that on sometimes, but just a little bit. I'll try things on, or wear it briefly, but my customers are a little more avid than I am. I'm not sure I'd want to wear a costume like that very long. It gets kind of hot."

The demand for his product is so high, however, that he's constantly pondering the next move.

At the moment, he's looking into adding a Yeti suit to the menu. He's been doing a pseudo-Yeti for years, gluing white fur and painting a paler face onto his current Sasquatch. Soon he'll sculpt a new mold, though, to sate a burgeoning base.

"I know there's a market for Yetis," he said. "I've had people calling and asking for them."

For Coffman, it's about staying ahead of the curve. As long as people need custom-fit costumes — and, if the thick stack of order sheets on his desk are any indication, they really, really do — he's going to keep striving for the best damn suits on the planet.

"There are always people who need gorilla suits, for some reason," Coffman said. "Or, they think they need them. And I don't want to churn out something that's good enough. It's got to be absolutely perfect."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Alex Burness at 303-473-1389 or burnessa@dailycamera.com, or follow him at twitter.com/alex_burness.