University of Chicago Medicine's proposed $66.9 million outpatient facility in Orland Park could strip patients from nine area hospitals, according to a state report.

The hospitals in the southwest suburbs have the capacity to treat more patients in several services that would be offered in U of C's facility, including radiology, ultrasound and mammography, according to a report by the staff of the Illinois Health Facilities and Services Review Board. The nine facilities are in a planning area that spans 11 Cook County townships and nine neighborhoods on Chicago's South Side, ranging from Adventist LaGrange Memorial Hospital about 16 miles west of U of C Medicine's Hyde Park home to St. James Hospital in Chicago Heights, about 25 miles south.

The proposed project is scheduled for an initial vote before the board on Aug. 27 in downstate Normal. The staff of the facilities board determines if proposals meet state standards for health care utilization, including potential duplication of services, but the board doesn't always agree with those findings. If approved, U of C Medicine's proposed project is expected to be completed in June 2018.

In a statement, U of C Medicine spokeswoman Ashley Heher said the project has received support from community leaders, physicians and patients. By 2018, the greater Orland Park area will need another 370 physicians and more than 400 exam rooms to keep pace with an expected growth in patient care, partly due to more people becoming insured under the Affordable Care Act. U of C Medicine already has a strong footprint in the area, with about 96,000 visits in fiscal 2013 coming from the south suburbs to Hyde Park, according to the staff report.

BRING SERVICES 'CLOSER TO HOME'

“With this project, UCM would effectively bring our specialty services closer to home for thousands of current and prospective patients,” Ms. Heher said in the statement.

U of C Medicine is an academic medical center with $1.3 billion in total operating revenue in 2013. It has three hospitals and a large outpatient facility on its Hyde Park campus. The health system proposes to build a four-story outpatient center and medical office building at 143rd Street and LaGrange Road in Orland Park. A two-story parking garage would have about 580 parking spaces.

The outpatient center would house 80 exam rooms for several specialties, such as orthopedics, cardiology, women's health and surgical consulting. The fourth floor would be left vacant and likely built out in 2020. The building also would include a 26-room infusion therapy center for cancer treatments AND diagnostic imaging equipment, such as an MRI machine and a CT scanner. The facility would have leasable space, likely for an independent retail pharmacy, the staff report said.

The project addresses the push across the health care industry to treat patients in the least expensive setting, which often means replacing costly hospital visits with outpatient settings, U of C Medicine said in documents submitted to the facilities board. Now the health system concentrates much of its outpatient care in one location on its South Side campus, unlike other health systems that have multiple sites.

The health system expects the number of annual outpatient visits in the planning area around Orland Park to grow by 700,000 in the next four years, to 5.7 million visits. Of those visits, almost half would be for specialty medicine, pediatrics and surgery, the health system estimates.

OPPOSITION FROM NURSES

But some physicians and a large nursing union oppose the project. In a letter to the facilities board, Mokena-based Affiliated Oncologists LLC ticked off a list of facilities that provide radiation oncology and infusion therapy near U of C's proposed medical office building.

National Nurses United, a labor union and professional association that represents 1,465 nurses at the U of C Medical Center, said the health system should focus its resources on opening a trauma center on the South Side.

“ . . . the University has made a very strategic financial decision to build an outpatient facility in a market that will provide a rich payer source,” Jan Rodolfo, the organization's Midwest director, wrote in an Aug. 7 letter to the facilities board.

The letter is the latest criticism of the health system for not providing an adult trauma center, particularly given its location amid impoverished and crime-ridden neighborhoods.

U of C spokeswoman Ms. Heher said in the statement that developing a level 1 trauma center would be a “massive undertaking” requiring significant hospital and state approvals, resources and funding. The facility also could negatively impact the funding and certification of other trauma centers already serving Cook County, she said.

“These are complex issues that require every partner in the community coming together to find a solution,” Ms. Heher said in the statement.

(Editor's note: This story has been updated to correct the number of U of C Medical Center nurses represented by National Nurses United.)