In the classic dark comedy Kind Hearts and Coronets (in which Alec Guinness plays eight different people, all of whom die terrible deaths), the murderous protagonist delivers a sweet little speech to his married lover:

I’d say that you were the perfect combination of imperfections. I’d say that your nose was just a little too short, your mouth just a little too wide. But yours was a face that a man could see in his dreams for the whole of his life. I’d say that you were vain, selfish, cruel, deceitful. I’d say that you were adorable. I’d say that you were… Sibella.

His seduction isn’t an ideal metaphor for America, whose imperfections don’t serve to make our nation more adorable. Our imperfections are just that: blemishes and stains and deep bruises on our national psyche, on a truth many people hold to be self-evident, that we are the greatest nation in the world.

But ranking nations is a silly practice.

There is plenty wrong with America. Deep lingering racism that explodes into horrific violence. Stomach-churning economic inequality. Partisan rancor so entrenched that the two sides deal in mutually exclusive sets of facts. (Ours are right.)

We have our fair share of ugliness. In the past few weeks we’ve watched Americans defend the most enduring symbol of our worst crime against humanity. We’ve seen people express genuine pain at the thought of same-sex couples finally gaining a long-denied measure of dignity.

People making the below-poverty-level minimum wage can’t get a raise to something a little closer to the poverty level. Effective action on a crisis that threatens the homes and lives of millions of Americans is a nonstarter because a lot of people believe scientists make up science for fun. Those same people treat the government helping folks get health care coverage as an impeachable offense.

Today is America’s 239th birthday. And yes, there are serious problems in this country that need hard work and long struggle to fix. But I love this country, and here’s why.

America isn’t a set of borders on a map or the land stretched from sea to shining sea; it’s not even the people who live here. America is that struggle. America is that hard work. I don’t love America because it’s imperfect, and I don’t love America in spite of its imperfections. I love America for our constant pursuit of perfection.

Millionaires and billionaires and giant corporations are far too powerful in this country. But when the Supreme Court handed down the Obergefell decision, company after company took to social media to celebrate with rainbow graphics. Did they do it because they’re inherently good? Of course not – corporations are not people, my friends, and they sure as heck aren’t moral.

Behind every freshly rainbowed brand’s avatar on Twitter or Facebook was years of hard work by LGBT activists who struggled tirelessly to force our country to recognize that they are human beings deserving of the full dignity and rights of citizenship. They’re the ones who get credit for that day. They’re the ones making America more perfect.

Slavery ended not just because of the bloodshed of war but because of the hard work of people – slaves themselves and many others – who knew America could be better. Civil rights happened thanks to hard work. Suffrage happened thanks to hard work. The social safety net from Social Security to Obamacare happened thanks to hard work.

America isn’t perfect; America will never be perfect. But America is trying, and that’s honestly a beautiful thing to watch.

The conservatives who dissented in Obergefell claimed the decision was creating a new right to marriage out of whole cloth. But maybe it was time for a new right to emerge. What we know for certain is that decision made America a little more perfect.

Every protest where people stand up for justice, every campaign run on a shoestring to put a good person into public office, every meeting to kick off an effort that just might finally change things around here once and for all makes America a little more perfect.

Celebrate America today. Don’t celebrate our imperfections; celebrate the ongoing work to fulfill the promise our founders wrote into the document that turned us from a loose confederation of allied states into the United States of America: the promise to form a more perfect union.