No guarantees: Jo Karabin with her children, Mila, 8, and Kiki, 4. Photo: Janie Barrett

Cash-strapped public schools are capitalising on an aggressive push by private after-school care operators in a move that will see parents paying higher fees but will do little to ease the chronic shortage of places across Sydney.

Some parent-run not-for-profit organisations pay a licence fee of less than $10,000 to operate on school grounds but private companies are now offering principals fees of up to $170,000, money which goes straight back to the school.

Providers warn this means parents can expect fees to rise next year by as much as 15 per cent, as operators find ways to recoup their licence fees.

Higher fees but fewer vacancies for after-school care: Jo Karabin with daughters Mila and Kiki (right). Photo: Janie Barrett

National Out of School Hours Services Association chairwoman Robyn Monro Miller said there was a "surge in privatisation" of after-school care and parents were essentially funding public education through rising fees.

Advertisement

"This is a form of cross-subsidisation. The licence fees that private providers are being asked to pay and the pressure being put on community-based not-for-profit to pay more is actually being put back on families because their fees rise to pay the rents," Ms Monro Miller said.

Ms Monro Miller said about 25 per cent of after-school care centres in NSW are now run by private operators but that figure is rising.

Late last year, a community-run after-school care at Loftus Public School, which had served the school for 27 years, was put out to tender and lost to Cubbyhouse Childcare, a commercial provider which runs more than 20 centres across Sydney.

More than 100 angry parents signed a petition concerned a “commercial operator will not provide the same level of care and community involvement as the current service”.

The shortage in after-school places is now so severe that parents at public schools on the lower north shore, the eastern suburbs and inner west are being told to make other care arrangements for next year.

In the Willoughby council area on the lower North Shore there are less than 500 after-school care places for more than 5000 students.

Mayor Gail Giles-Gidney said desperate parents were using tennis and music lessons as “pseudo after-school care”, while others were forced to rely on “child sharing”.

“I know of a lady of Chinese decent who has had to send her child back to China to live with family because she couldn’t get before and after-school care, which is just horrendous," she said.

In the Leichhardt area, there are almost 4500 primary school students and after-school care capacity for about 1200.

Jo Karabin thought she was acting “a bit silly” to arrive at the after-school care registration day at 5.30am when her eldest daughter started primary school in Balmain.

“But when I arrived there were already five others there,” the mother of two said.

“It was a highly competitive and highly stressful process and I’ve got no guarantee that my little one who starts next year will get a place.”

A spokesman for the Department of Education said local communities were encouraged to use public school facilities after hours and when licences expired for out-of-school-hours care services on school grounds, they were put out to open tender.

"The final licence fee is negotiated between the provider and the school principal; the department’s standard guideline is a rate set according to the number of children, the floor space used and the operating hours. However, the fee may rise as a result of the competitive tender process," the spokesman said.

In a submission to the Productivity Commission's inquiry into childcare, one private operator, Primary Out of School Hours Care, which runs centres at 26 schools across Sydney, warned that parents would face increased fees because of the impact of inflated licence fees.

The submission said that "unrealistic expectations" of licence fees were driving up costs, with some licence fees increasing by as much as 300 per cent, and the tender process "favours maximising financial return to the Department over quality of childcare".