Patience is not Troy Tulowitzki’s best virtue.

He’s a man of action, happiest when he’s fielding grounders and hitting home runs. Heck, just stepping into a batting cage puts a smile on his face.

But, for now, the Rockies’ star shortstop must put all of that aside as he continues to rehabilitate from August hip surgery.

While Tulo said he’s making progress and is optimistic he will be ready for the 2015 season, he has yet to begin baseball activities.

“Yeah, I’m itching to get back to baseball, but as long as I’m ready for the season opener, that’s all I’m focused on,” he said during a phone interview from his off- season home in Las Vegas. “If (doctors and trainers) say not to rush it, then I’m not going to jeopardize things.

“I’m definitely excited to start the baseball activity, but at the same time I know that my best chance to start the season is by playing it safe. So that’s what I’m going to do.”

As for trade rumors that continue to swirl — most of them linking him to the New York Mets — Tulo said only that the Rockies have “been good keeping me in the loop.”

“I have been talking to the Rockies throughout the process,” he said. “We have respect for each other. But my concentration right now is just on getting healthy.”

At the winter meetings this month, new Rockies general manager Jeff Bridich said it would take a lot in return for the club to trade Tulowitzki or star outfielder Carlo Gonzalez.

“We don’t have to move them, and we don’t know if it’s the right move to trade either one or both of those players who are all-stars — perennial all-stars,” Bridich said. “(Tulowitzki) plays a premium position and is the best shortstop in the game when he’s healthy. That’s not an easy bit to swallow for us.”

So for now, none of the trade talk appears to have legs.

Tulowitzki has begun light running and continues a rigorous program to increase flexibility in his hips.

“My bottom line is to try to get healthy to play games and play a lot of them,” he said. “That’s obviously something that I haven’t been very good at, for whatever reason. So I am trying to find that recipe for success.”

Tulo hit .340, with 21 home runs and 52 RBIs, in 90 games last season before he injured his left hip. He had surgery Aug. 16 to repair a torn labrum. Over the past three seasons, he has played in only 264 games. In eight full seasons, he has played in more than 130 games just three times.

Tulo is confident that if he sticks to his rehab, he can get rid of the qualifier that says he’s the best shortstop in baseball — when healthy.

“I feel good, but I think no matter what you say, people want to see it out on the field,” he said. “Me saying that I’m healthy is one thing, but me going out there and proving it is another thing. In spring training, I plan to be as good as I can be and let people judge for themselves.”

Tulo hasn’t paid a lot of attention to the minor moves Bridich has made thus far this offseason. Nor did he want to get into particulars about which moves the Rockies should be making to improve after a 96-loss season.

“That’s not my job,” he said. “My job is to get ready to play.”

But he does know what the Rockies’ top priority must be in 2015.

“I think we all know that we need to address the road issue,” he said. “We have to be better on the road. … Hopefully we will all realize what it means to take a professional at-bat on the road. I think we will work on that and talk about that, and hopefully there will be some improvement.”

The Rockies were 21-60 on the road this past season, where they hit only .228 and scored 255 runs, worst in the majors and the fewest in franchise history.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp