According to the latest reports, Republican presidential aspirant Carly Fiorina is making a favorable impression on voters in Iowa and South Carolina. She's not only lobbing pointed critiques at likely Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton, but she's also addressing policy issues with specifics and describing her personal history with heart.

It is too early in the process to know if Fiorina will be able to gain enough ground in the opinion polls to make the first nationally televised debate on Fox News in August. But, as some of the data from our GSPM/Zignal Labs PEORIA Project report make clear, she's running a strong (though small) digital campaign that has the potential to substantially boost her candidacy. Despite her controversial record at Hewlett-Packard and her losing Senate bid in 2010, she's the unlikely-to-win GOP candidate to watch this summer.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

Although Democratic Sen. Bernie Sanders' movement from virtually no media mentions (35) during the two days of his "announcement echo" to registering more than 15,000 mentions on the weekend he appeared on the CBS News Sunday talk show "Face the Nation" made the headline of our report, Fiorina's digital efforts were what I found most intriguing in our data.

First, while the duration was short (one day) and the volume was low (the total number of mentions of Fiorina was 21,328, less than one-fifth of 2016 aspirant Ben Carson's mentions) during her "announcement echo" period, the net sentiment on those media mentions (14.8 percent) was the highest of all the announced Republican candidates. And while absolute sentiment ratings should be taken with a large grain of salt (because while the logic algorithm known as Natural Language Processing has improved, coding challenges persist), they do provide helpful comparisons. It is also likely that the large margin of positivity she enjoyed is related to the low volume of her echo. (It is not unusual that as candidates become more known to the public, they also become more disliked.)

Second, Fiorina managed an "echo conversion rate" of 4.1 percent, meaning that for every 100 mentions, 4 included website shares. This is important because if those website shares turn into website visits and her team is then able to acquire e-mail addresses and solicit donations with landing pages and targeted communications, she may more quickly build a support network than some of her peers who appear to have more popularity, but less digital campaign prowess (e.g., Carson and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee).



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Hillary Clinton]