Sen. Bernie Sanders is exposing the Republican plan to pay for a tax cut for the very wealthiest Americans by taking private health insurance away from 27 million Americans.

In a statement, Sen. Sanders (I-VT) said:

Both the Senate and the House budget resolutions would make the rich richer and cause devastating pain to tens of millions of working families throughout the country. Instead of making health care more affordable, both Republican budgets would eliminate health insurance for at least 27 million Americans. At a time of massive wealth and income inequality, both Republican budgets would provide huge tax breaks for the top one-tenth of 1 percent, while paving the way for a tax hike on 13 million working families. Both of these budgets represent a massive transfer of wealth from the middle class to the wealthiest people in this country. The Republican philosophy of cutting Medicare, cutting Medicaid, and cutting nutrition programs for hungry kids, while providing huge tax breaks for millionaires and billionaires, would move this country in exactly the wrong direction.

According to a report from the Senate Budget Committee Democrats, Republicans would take away health insurance from 27 million Americans by disabling the federal health insurance exchanges, “What is particularly bizarre is even as Republicans in both chambers seek to dismantle the private insurance exchanges established by the Affordable Care Act, they propose moving Medicare onto a private insurance exchange that mimics the ACA exchanges. The key difference between the two systems is that the Republican budgets fail to provide sufficient funding for these exchanges, therefore raising out-of-pocket costs for beneficiaries.”

Republicans talk about the bottom line on their budget, but what they never mention is how it gets there. Republicans are planning on gutting Medicare and throwing 27 million people off of their private insurance in order to pay for tax cuts to the top one-tenth of one percent. It is common sense, if the people who have the most are going to get a big tax cut, somebody else has to pay for it. In the Republican budget, 27 million people will pay for a tax cut for the wealthy by losing their health insurance subsidies, which will mean millions of people will be thrown back into a market where they either can’t buy or can’t afford health insurance.

Sen. Sanders has exposed their plan by standing up for working people as the ranking member on the Democratic side of the Senate Budget Committee.

The Republican plan to hurt tens of millions of working people, seniors, children, and the poor must be made clear to every American. Republicans tried to pull a fast one on American workers, but Bernie Sanders busted them and exposed their plan for the world to see.