Obama is using executive power to affect immigration law - McClatchy News From the story: "With a proposed immigration overhaul stalled in Congress, (President) Obama is changing the policy step by step on his own. He’s using executive actions to affect millions of people, part of a pattern he’s embraced on a variety of topics in recent years to bypass Capitol Hill." Recent examples include deferred action and leniency toward immigrant military families.

As Asian-Americans Age, Their Children Face Cultural Hurdles - New York Times As the U.S. population ages, so are immigrants living in the U.S. How to deal with aging loves ones can be problematic for families from Asian and Latin American countries, where tradition dictates that the elderly are cared for at home by relatives, but economic reality dictates otherwise.

Graham Defends Fox News Chief Ailes on Immigration - Wall Street Journal Sen. Lindsey Graham (R- South Carolina) is defending the record of Fox News head Roger Ailes on immigration, after a new biography quoted Ailes as saying that "if he were president, he would send Navy SEALs in training to the border as part of a certification process" and that he would make it a requirement "to personally kill an illegal immigrant coming into the country."

Court won’t allow DaimlerChrysler suit in Calif. - Associated Press The U.S. Supreme Court has unanimously decided not to allow a lawsuit to move ahead in California that would have allowed survivors of Argentina's "dirty war" in the 1970s to sue a foreign auto company. Torture and kidnapping survivors, and relatives of Argentines who went missing, had sued in state court "alleging Mercedes-Benz was complicit in the killing, torture or kidnapping by the military of unionized auto workers."

California Lawmaker Pushes Bill Extending Obamacare To Undocumented Immigrants - Fox News Latino California state Sen. Ricardo Lara, a Democrat, is planning to introduce legislation that would allow unauthorized immigrants access to health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. Immigrants without legal status are now barred from participating in federal health exchanges under the federal law.