Ted Cruz’s all night faux filibuster has created a big problem for House Republicans. Sen. Cruz has chewed up so much time that Boehner will only have a few hours to respond to the Senate passed bill funding the ACA.

According to The Washington Post, “Speaking with little assistance from his Republican colleagues, Cruz assured that debate on the spending measure will stretch well into the weekend. With Senate passage all but certain on a bill that will include funding for the health-care law, Cruz’s strategy will give House Speaker John A. Boehner (R-Ohio) and his colleagues only a few hours to respond with a different version of the legislation.”

Sen. Cruz (R-TX) has responded to the House Republican criticism that he is ball less by making sure that Boehner and the House will have very little time to craft a reply to whatever passes the Senate. Cruz’s behavior is more evidence that his behavior is not about doing what’s best for the Republican Party. He isn’t interested in the welfare of the Republican Party. Since he opposes health insurance for 30 million Americans, Cruz isn’t interested in the welfare of the American people. This is all a selfish, grandstanding effort to both raise money and fuel speculation about his potential 2016 campaign.

Thanks to Ted Cruz, Speaker Boehner faces all the pressure. Republicans aren’t going to blame Cruz for forcing the House to pass a continuing resolution that doesn’t defund Obamacare. They’re going to blame John Boehner for passing the bill. Ted Cruz will look like a hero to the right, but every word he speaks is another nail in the Republican coffin.

Cruz’s dramatics illustrate why Republicans have no interest in getting rid of Obamacare. Much like abortion, the ACA has become a publicity and fundraising tool. If Republicans were successful in repealing the ACA, they would lose their favorite new tool for scaring and motivating their base.

Republicans can laud Ted Cruz as a great American, but he has completely screwed the Republican Party and exposed the fraud behind their Obamacare opposition.