MURRIETA: Kaiser Permanente inks $9.3 million land deal Share Pin It More Galleries Architectural rendering of the Kaiser Permanente medical center in Murrieta was released this week as Lee & Associates announced the $9.3 million land purchase for the hospital, medical office, diagnostic and treatment center and central energy plant. COURTESY OF LEE & ASSOCIATES Related article »

Kaiser Permanente is moving forward to build a new medical complex in Murrieta.

The health care organization signed the $9.3 million land deal in Mapleton Park Centre for a hospital, treatment and diagnostic center, medical office building and central energy plant in the city’s medical and technology corridor, according to Mike Tingus, principal of Lee & Associates.

Tingus, one of several brokers who represented the sellers in the transaction, Eliott Kahn Investments and the Goldman Family Properties, said Kaiser identified the 37.6 acre land site for the 824,500 square-foot health care complex about a year ago.

Kaiser’s proposed complex is in a prime spot, Tingus said in a telephone interview.

It will front Interstate 215 at Keller Road, where a new interchange will be built.

RELATED: Kaiser has 25-year timeline for proposed medical complex

Kaiser officials have said they will build the complex in phases. First on the construction list is an 80,000-square-foot medical office building with a pharmacy, laboratory, imaging services and urgent care facility. A central energy plant is next, followed by the hospital and diagnostic center.

Kaiser Permanente officials could not be reached for comment.

“It is clear to all of us in real estate that hospitals have developed an enormous appetite for expansion since the passage of the Affordable Care Act,” Tingus said. Kaiser’s decision to develop a new medical center reflects those expectations, but also the potential in this part of Inland Southern California for population growth.

“It’s a great deal,” Tingus said. “Now, there will be two great medical anchors for that community.”

Loma Linda University Medical Center–Murrieta is about three miles away. The medical center will supplement Kaiser’s existing offices in Wildomar and Temecula, according to a press release.

Contact the writer: 951-368-9423 or dgruszecki@pe.com