You look familiar! Obama meets his 'double agent' - the man who has made a living impersonating the President



Iman Crosson was a struggling actor waiting tables when someone remarked that he looked like Barack Obama, who at the time was running for President

He went home and made a spoof video that became an instant success

Crosson's YouTube clips impersonating Obama are hugely successful, with one amassing over 22 million views

He got to meet Obama at a White House meeting on Thursday

The President was impressed by his act but said Crosson 'needs some grey hairs'



He's a classically trained actor and dancer who has made a living doing his 'best Obama' since 2008.

And now Iman Crosson has finally met his, err, muse.

During a meeting at the White House on Thursday, for which a host of YouTube personalities were brought together to discuss the Affordable Care Act with President Obama, Crosson not only came face-to-face with the man he makes a living impersonating - he got to show him the act as well.

'It was actually very amazing,' Crosson told Politico.

Scroll down for video

Professional doppelganger: Iman Crosson has been impersonating Barack Obama since 2008. One of his YouTube videos (pictured) has amassed over 10 million hits

Likeness: After meeting his impersonator, Obama told Iman Crosson he 'needs some grey hair'

Finally: Iman Crosson fulfilled a long-held goal to meet President Barack Obama on Thursday during a meeting at the White House

An excited Iman Crosson described the meeting as 'very amazing'

'That’s something that I had wanted ever since I began doing the impression in late 2008, early 2009, and to actually finally get to the point of going there was amazing.

'It was a great experience and meeting the president and getting to see the man he is, it was all around amazing.'

Crosson was struggling with his craft and waiting tables to make ends meet when someone remarked he looked like Barack Obama, who at the time was running for President.

'I didn’t do impressions at the time, but I thought if I could be the guy who put an impression out there first, and he wins, that could be good,' Crosson said.

'So I went home and made my first video and posted it on YouTube, and it did really well. The rest is history.'





Obama impersonator Iman Crosson not only got to meet the President, but performed his act for him also

The White House released a video of the pair's first interaction, with Obama seeming genuinely chuffed at the likeness.

'It was definitely nerve-wracking to do that in front of him, but to do it and see the smile on his face, and to gesture to his camera lady and say, ‘Are you recording this?’ That was such a cool moment for me,' Crosson said Friday.

Crosson maintains his schtick is not just a spoof, and that it took a lot of practice to hone.

'I studied him a lot and his speeches and his candid interviews, his addresses, and the thing is when doing an impression of the president — because obviously it's comical — it’s a little bit more of a caricature then it is a spot-on voice,' he said.

One of his YouTube videos, which sends up Obama's announcement about the capture and kill of Osama bin Laden, has received over 22 million hits.

However, some observers are less impressed with Crosson's resemblance to the President, dubbing him 'Barraco Barner' in a reference to a mis-spelt tweet written this week by British woman Gemma Worrall which went viral around the globe.



Accurate? Some have suggested that Crosson is less than a perfect impersonator, comparing him to 'Barraco Barner' in a reference to a mis-spelling of the President's name made famous by British woman Gemma Worrall, pictured