Rapid City, SD

Arena seating and access problems for those with disabilities are at the heart of a proposed $180-million expansion of the civic center in Rapid City. And the proposed expansion is at the heart of a petition drive to bring the project to a public vote.

When Sioux Falls native Craig Baltzer started work a few weeks back as new executive director of the Rushmore Plaza Civic Center, he felt like he took a step back in time when he entered the Don Barnett Arena.

"One of the things that struck me as strange when I started working here, running around this arena, was how identical it is to the old Sioux Falls Arena," Baltzer. "Therefore, it has a lot of the same issues and same problems as the old Sioux Falls did."

Too small for many of the big-name concerns of today, the Barnett Arena is also riddled with Americans with Disabilities Act violations, some of which have challenged past concert acts.

One issue is access to comfortable performers dressing rooms located upstairs from the area floor and stage area. With no elevators to the dressing rooms, access is by narrow, steep stairs.

Elton John struggles with stairs, as do some other performers with mobility problems. So a main-floor athletic locker had to do.

"This becomes their dressing room," Baltzer says, standing in a clean-but-austere main-floor locker "And, you know, we can dress it up and we can do what we can but it's kind of like putting lipstick on a pig," he says.

A $180-million expansion project would fix those issues and make room for up to 19,000 arena seats. Approved last week by the Rapid City Council, the plan is the focus of a petition drive calling for a public vote.

"The reason I'm doing this is I believe in democracy in action," said petition circulator Suzan Nolan. "I think we ought to have a voice in things that go on in our community, especially when a group of people decides on a $180-million expenditure."

Nolan says she hears a mix of opinions on the plan, but most people support the public vote and are willing to sign the petition.

The petition drive needs at least 2,035 valid signatures within about three weeks from registered Rapid City voters to refer the Rapid City Council's approval of a funding plan for the expansion project. Circulators, including coordinator Don Frankenfeld, Mayor Sam Kooiker and city council President Jerry Wright are confident they can reach that goal.