LAKE WALES | Help is available to guide people who lack insurance through the enrollment process of the new health insurance exchanges.

Resources with information on the new health insurance exchanges include the federal marketplace site, www.healthcare.gov, and its toll-free number, 1-800-318-2596. If deaf or hard of hearing, call 1-855-889-4325. People who want help through Community Health Systems/Lake Wales Medical Center can call 1-800-353-1380 or 863-678-2734. Central Florida Health Care numbers are 863-413-8600 for Lakeland, 863-292-4280 for Winter Haven and 863-635-4891 for Frostproof.

Certified application counselors like Joel Alvelo are answering questions by telephone or making appointments at Lake Wales Medical Center with people who feel they need more help than provided by going online to the federal government website.

Alvelo and others are there through an eligibility services program by LWMC's owner, Community Health Systems.

"Every person is prepared and can answer your questions," Alvelo said, noting that the bilingual staff can help people enroll for a marketplace plan or in options such as Medicaid.

Central Florida Health Care, a nonprofit health corporation, has six certified application counselors. In Polk County, they are located at its Winter Haven, Lakeland and Frostproof clinics.

Kids Healthcare Foundation, doing business as Family Healthcare Foundation, is part of a major University of South Florida collaboration. The foundation's focus is promoting health insurance enrollment in Polk and several other counties.

"There is no fee for this assistance," said Maria Velasco-Fontaine, a navigator.

In downtown Lakeland tonight, Enroll America, a nonpartisan organization doing education and outreach about the Affordable Care Act, will have a table at the 6 p.m. First Friday event.

These groups have a common goal:

"Our goal is to assist as many people as we can with enrollment," said Melanie Hall, executive director of the health care foundation.

Along with assisting people with applications, its job is making sure people know plans are available and realize they could qualify for them, Hall said.

Fewer than half of adults nationwide, 4 out of 10, were aware of the marketplaces about to open or the financial help potentially available, according to a survey taken in July through September by Commonwealth Fund, a private foundation.

Open enrollment started Tuesday and goes through March 31, 2014. People need to enroll by Dec. 15 to start coverage by Jan. 1, federal officials said in a teleconference Tuesday.

More local assistance sites are coming. In Polk County, the health care foundation is working with United Way of Central Florida and Winter Haven Hospital, Hall said. Other groups also are interested in joining in.

Certified counselors get five hours of training and are able to help individuals and families fill out applications. Navigators have more training and can take a larger role in helping them choose and sign up for a plan, Hall said.

United Way will give its agencies information that will help them steer their clients to the marketplace, Hall said.

Lakeland Volunteers in Medicine — a large free clinic for the uninsured — can refer clients who might benefit from the insurance program to Success by Six, a United Way agency that shares its building, LVIM President Bobby Yates said.

"We'll be giving patients information on health care, the Affordable Care Act and how to contact the navigators," Yates said.

The choices uninsured people face aren't limited to which insurance plan to choose. They need to select among different levels of coverage, which have color codes such as bronze, silver, gold and platinum.

A bronze plan is similar to a health maintenance organization, Alvelo said. Going up the scale means more freedom of selection, he said.

People who qualify for subsidies need to get on a silver plan because that's what the government provides subsidies for, said Danny Warren, LWMC's chief financial officer.

A representative on a toll-free government number confirmed that people must choose a silver plan to get out-of-pocket savings.

"Many people — most people, in fact — will qualify for some kind of subsidy," Warren said at a Sept. 23 program on the Affordable Care Act that he and Alvelo did at the hospital.

People whose income is below 100 percent of federal guidelines determining poverty are an exception to that.

Expecting them to get help from expanded Medicaid programs, Congress didn't include subsidies for them. Florida is one of the states that didn't expand its Medicaid.

An outpouring of calls and some computer glitches occurred Tuesday on the federal website and on websites in some states. Counselors at Lake Wales found the system down on several of their attempts to help people interested in insurance.

Federal Medicaid officials said Tuesday they were working on correcting problems.

"January 1st represents a new day for millions of Americans," said Marilyn Tavenner, administrator of the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

The Florida Covering Kids and Families program at the USF Chiles Center for Healthy Mothers and Babies got a one-year grant of $4.2 million to put together a network to get people into the health insurance exchanges. It covers 64 counties in Florida. The foundation is in its net­work.

[ Robin Williams Adams can be reached at robin.adams@theledger.com. Follow on Twitter @ledgerROBIN. ]