By TARA BAHRAMPOUR, The Washington Post

Mary-Carroll Potter, 78, raised four children in the Washington suburbs, but now they are spread out across the world.

Although she's been invited to move closer to them, she prefers to remain in the neighborhood that has been her home for 50 years, even if it means continuing to live alone.

Thanks to a phenomenon that has swept through the Washington area at an astonishing rate, she's been able to do so. Potter is a member of Mount Vernon at Home, a "senior village" that, for an annual fee of $700 per individual or $950 per couple, coordinates volunteers to provide older residents with services to help them live independently.

"I've had a man come in to help change the light in the ceiling, I had another man do some caulking and another man change a lot of pictures in the house," Potter said. "It's not a total substitute for your child, but it's certainly a substitute for having a child who lives nearby."

A generation or two ago, many Americans assumed that when they grew older and more frail, they would go to a nursing home or assisted-living facility. But aging looks different now, and along with embracing dating sites and Zumba classes, today's older Americans -- 88 percent of those 65 and up, according to a recent AARP study -- prefer to stay in their residence for as long as possible.

They're also more assertive about getting what they want, with increasing numbers embracing the grass-roots movement of senior villages.

"The attitudes are changing. People don't want to just get old and sick and isolated, so I think they're looking for alternatives to that," said Debra Umberson, a professor of sociology at the University of Texas. "The boomers want to stay independent -- they want to stay more active and vibrant and connected ... and that's being reflected in their housing choices."

The number of villages registered with the Village to Village Network, a national umbrella organization, has increased from 50 in 2010 to 124 this year, with more in development. The first, in Boston, opened in 2002.

Senior villages are typically organized in neighborhoods to offer older residents a variety of volunteer services -- including grocery delivery, lawn mowing and transportation -- and to connect members with providers of paid services.

The village movement started mostly in urban areas but has increasingly spread to the suburbs and recently to rural places, said Natalie Galucia, Village to Village Network's member-services coordinator. As the movement matures, villages have added more complex services, such as social work, discounts with local merchants, trips, cultural activities and, at one Washington village, a program in which volunteers accompany members to doctor's appointments to take notes.

That village, Northwest Neighbors, started the service in December with 16 trained volunteers.

"It has helped our members especially when they're facing critical illness . . . and members who have poor recall," said Marianna Blagburn, the village's executive director.

Ally Feldman, 92, a retired professor, said he appreciated the note-taker going to a recent appointment with his arthritis doctor.

"Her being with me was very helpful in that she took notes and she understood things that I didn't understand," he said. "You see, I'm old."

Ed Missiaen, 72, is both a Capitol Hill Village member and volunteer. For him, the camaraderie of the village -- which opened in 2007 and is the oldest in the area -- echoes his stint as a Peace Corps volunteer in the 1960s.

"It's the idea of working together, trying to make things maybe a little bit better, which in a way was what we were trying to promote when we were in the Peace Corps."

With grown sons living on the West Coast, Missiaen said he and his wife joined not because they need the help so much now, but because "maybe one day I'm going to need these services."