CHAMBERSBURG, Pa. & PORTLAND, Ore.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Summit Health, a non-profit healthcare system in south central Pennsylvania, is partnering with CarePayment®, the nation’s leading patient financial engagement company, to offer an innovative patient payment program to patients of Chambersburg Hospital and Waynesboro Hospital. The flexible payment option, available March 1, 2015, allows Summit Health patients to pay their balances in manageable monthly installments at 0.00% APR for the life of the account. There are no hidden fees or applications and no impact on credit reports.

“Patients are becoming healthcare consumers,” says Kimberly Rzomp, Vice President and Chief Financial Officer for Summit Health. “They’re asking about pricing and payment plans because higher insurance deductibles and co-pays are driving up their share of medical costs. CarePayment’s program helps us deliver an important benefit to our neighbors. We’re making it easier for patients to get care and pay for it.”

According to Rzomp, Summit Health also has financial counselors at both Chambersburg Hospital and Waynesboro Hospital that are trained as Certified Application Counselors (CACs) to help patients as part of the Affordable Care Act apply for health coverage on the federal insurance exchange. Financial counselors also help with determining appropriate government assistance programs and applications.

Rising health insurance premiums and out-of-pocket costs are pushing people into tough decisions that could have serious health consequences. A recent Commonwealth Fund report found that four in 10 working-age adults delayed or avoided needed care due to high deductible health plans.

“The CarePayment program means patients don’t have to make such difficult choices,” notes Rzomp. “Managing their expenses over time gives patients peace of mind. They can add other approved hospital costs to the CarePayment account, which is a flexible, open-end line of credit. The financing program also offers great flexibility in how patients manage their accounts, including automatic payments, mobile and online account access, and paper or electronic statements.”

“With CarePayment, Summit Health removes a troubling barrier to care,” says Craig Hodges, CEO of CarePayment. “Summit’s investments in pricing transparency and quality, supported by our affordable financing program for patients, speaks to Summit Health’s commitment to caring for its community, patient satisfaction and added value.”

For more information, please call Chambersburg Hospital Patient Accounting at (717) 267-7129 or Waynesboro Hospital Patient Accounting at (717) 765-3406 to find out more about this affordable financing option.

About Summit Health

Summit Health is a non-profit network of hospitals and physician practices dedicated to building a healthier community. As Franklin County Pennsylvania's leading healthcare provider, Summit Health offers family care, specialists, lab and imaging services, a fitness center, a walk-in care center, urgent care centers, and two award-winning hospitals. More information is available at www.SummitHealth.org and www.facebook.com/SummitHealth.

About CarePayment

Headquartered in Lake Oswego, Oregon, CarePayment is a patient financial engagement company that accelerates provider transition to the new consumer-driven healthcare market. Powered by advanced technology and analytics, our innovative patient financing solutions improve patient satisfaction and loyalty while delivering superior financial results. By partnering with healthcare providers to make affordable financial options available, CarePayment helps patients get the care they need, when they need it, while protecting the financial health of provider organizations so they can continue to offer valuable care to the community. The CarePayment 0.00% APR payment program is compliant with applicable state and federal consumer credit laws, requires no application, and is supported by a friendly US-based customer service staff. Accounts for the program are issued by WebBank of Salt Lake City, UT. Find more information at http://www.carepayment.com.