His own retirement crisis lead the Democrat of Iowa to take a hard look at how to fix the system.

Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa (Photo: J. Scott Applewhite, AP)

At a press conference this week, U.S. Senator Tom Harkin (D-Iowa), Chairman of the Senate Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions (HELP) Committee, unveiled new legislation to tackle the growing retirement crisis and rebuild the private pension system. Harkin says many Americans vastly unprepared for retirement --seventy-five million working Americans do not have a retirement plan. USA TODAY's Rodney Brooks asked him to answer five questions explaining the legislation, edited for clarity and length.

You talk about a retirement crisis. How bad is the retirement crisis, and why should we be worried?

The retirement crisis is worse than most people realize. Consider this: The retirement income deficit – meaning the difference between what people have saved for retirement and what they should have at this point – is a staggering $6.6 trillion, and half of Americans have less than $10,000 in savings. Most people just won't be able to maintain their standard of living in retirement, and they will lean more and more on their families and the social safety net. That is a real problem, and people know it. Today, 85% of Americans are worried about their retirement prospects and 70% of small business owners say that a lack of retirement security undermines the confidence and willingness of older Americans to spend.

What is USA Retirement Funds and how would it help solve this crisis?

The USA Retirement Funds Act tackles the retirement crisis head-on by ensuring that the 75 million people without a workplace retirement plan will have the opportunity to earn a safe and secure pension benefit. The concept is simple: employers who don't offer a pension or a well-designed 401(k) would automatically enroll their employees in a USA Retirement Fund. If someone wants to opt out, he or she can. No one would be forced to participate, but by making the system opt-out instead of opt-in, we can get millions more people participating and on the road to a secure retirement.

Who can start a USA Retirement Fund?

USA Retirement Funds would be privately-run pension plans that could be started by non-profits, associations of employers, employee organizations, financial institutions or other organizations. Each fund would have to be approved by the Department of Labor and have a board of qualified, independent trustees able to represent the interests of employees, retirees, and employers. The trustees would be fiduciaries required to act prudently and in the best interests of plan participants and beneficiaries.

Is it tax deductible.

Yes. Individuals could contribute up to $10,000 per year pre-tax, and employers would also be able to contribute up to $5,000 per year for each employee.

How is this different from President Obama's MyRA?

President Obama's MyRA proposal is a great first step to help more people – especially lower-income individuals – save for retirement. He deserves a lot of credit for focusing on the retirement crisis, but the President has limited tools. Congress needs to act, which is why I introduced the USA Retirement Funds Act. My bill would ensure that everyone has the opportunity to earn a secure and portable retirement benefit that they can't outlive.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/LkAamH