Ben Carson came in a distant fourth place in the Monday, Feb. 1 Iowa caucuses with 10 percent, behind Republican Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas and Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida.

Carson, the brilliant neurosurgeon-turned-terrible-presidential candidate, has never offered a policy plan specifically for African Americans during the presidential campaign. And although we didn’t expect much from Carson since he’s a staunch Republican, some Black folks were hoping that because Carson is from Detroit, that he would draw on his Black experience while talking to voters on the campaign trail.

Well, it never happened.

And it got worse.

Last year, Carson criticized President Barack Obama, the nation’s first Black commander-in-chief, in a bizarre condemnation of Obama’s policies – and his mindset.

First, Carson called Obama a “psychopath.”

“Like most psychopaths. That’s why they’re successful. That’s the way they look. They all look great,” Carson said.

Bizarre.

Then he likened Obama’s Affordable Care Act to slavery.

“Obamacare is really, I think, the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery,” Carson said. “It is slavery, in a way, because it is making all of us subservient to the government.”

Meanwhile, Carson has appeared on several Black radio programs to denounce the media for criticizing Black conservatives.

“Many people in the media have predetermined that if you’re Black and you’re conservative that you’re bad,” Carson said, adding, “If I were a White conservative, they wouldn’t be concerned.”

Carson, who has not publicly supported many policies that benefit African Americans, plays the race card when it’s convenient for him. He recently blamed the media for what he considers a sacking of Black conservatives.

A highly successful neurosurgeon, Carson has disappointed some African Americans who thought, just maybe, that he would advocate for Black folks. He’s also a man of contradictions: He was raised by a single mother in public housing; his family used food stamps; he benefited from affirmative action to enter medical school and was supported by welfare.

But, “The disintegration of the family unit and the welfare state are enslaving African-Americans and ruining their futures,” he said.

Carson is a confused mess of a candidate. He didn’t win the Iowa caucuses, he won’t win the New Hampshire primary, and he won’t be crowned as the Republican nominee for president. We know it. He knows it. And there’s nowhere for Carson to go but down. That’s why Carson should quit the race now and spare us his warped views on, well, just about everything.

http://www.afro.com/ben-carson-should-drop-out-of-the-2016-presidential-race/

Reprinted from the Afro American