Vintage closed sign (Photo: Getty Images / iStockphoto) Story Highlights Lawmakers have approved or are considering bills that foster discrimination, could hurt the economy.

One of the recurring themes of Gov. Bill Haslam’s administration is that Tennessee is open for business.

That attitude has led to unprecedented growth, especially in the Nashville area, leading to a boom in jobs, record-setting tourism numbers and population growth because people want to live, work and play in Middle Tennessee.

Nashville has appeared on numerous national publications’ lists for quality of life, jobs, recreation and food, fashion and music culture.

Tourists and investors from London to Tokyo to Ottawa have sought to strengthen ties with the Volunteer State.

However, that progress is in peril if Tennessee lawmakers decide that they want to join a handful of other states seeking to humiliate and marginalize its minorities, be it because of religion, sexual orientation or gender identity.

That could send the message that Tennessee is not serious about being open for business. In turn, that will have serious effects on the growing economy.

Butch Spyridon, CEO of the Convention & Visitors Corp., said it plainly: “When the state starts introducing legislation that affects our ability to do business, it is not helpful and needs to be rethought. Our success in the hospitality industry is predicated on a welcoming and friendly environment. We don’t need to do anything to diminish or hinder the success that is driving the state’s economy.”

That includes legislation in the Tennessee General Assembly seeking to require students in public schools and colleges to use bathrooms that correspond to the sex listed on their birth certificate. It is a slap in the face to transgender individuals, blatant ignorance of intersex individuals, and a burden on educators who would be effectively forced to verify the genitalia of their students before letting them use the facilities.

North Carolina is already seeing the backlash for its bathroom bill. PayPal has canceled its plan for a global operations center in Charlotte.

As quoted in the Wall Street Journal, CEO Dan Schulman said: “The new law perpetuates discrimination, and it violates the values and principles that are at the core of PayPal’s mission and culture. As a result, PayPal will not move forward with our planned expansion into Charlotte.”

Imagine if a CEO said the same thing about Tennessee. Imagine if that led to producers of the popular TV show “Nashville” filming elsewhere even as the state is looking to invest $8 million to keep the show in the city for a fifth season. That show has helped tell the city’s story across the globe.

This will not be a proud moment in Tennessee history if we, through our lawmakers, choose to embrace a legacy of discrimination, not just because of the business the state will lose, but because it is the inhumane thing to do.

Recall the backlash that faced Indiana in 2015 over its Religious Freedom Restoration Act, which forced lawmakers and the governor to revise it and water down its effect of allowing business owners to discriminate against others based on religious beliefs.

Legislators have already effectively endorsed Christianity as the religion of the state by passing the Bible bill last week, which Haslam will hopefully veto.

He also will hopefully veto any legislation that seeks to discriminate against the citizens he is charged to protect.

If Tennessee is truly open for business, it would be open for business to all people, not just those deemed worthy by the majority of legislators.

Opinion Engagement Editor David Plazas wrote this editorial on behalf of The Tennessean Editorial Board. Call him at 615-259-8063, email him at dplazas@tennessean.com or tweet to him at @davidplazas.

UPDATE:

A Feb. 21 editorial titled “Fear, loathing drive anti-gay bills in Tennessee” called out six of those discriminatory bills. Here is the latest on three bills that are still actively being debated.

Bathroom restriction bill: House Bill 2414/Senate Bill 2387

Sponsors: Sen. Mike Bell, R-Riceville, and Rep. Susan Lynn, R-Mt. Juliet

Purpose: This bill would restrict bathroom use in public schools and colleges based on the sex listed on one’s birth certificate. The state faces a $1 billion federal penalty for Title IX gender discrimination violation.

Status: This had been set aside to summer study but was revised by a House committee. It will next be considered by the Senate Finance, Ways and Means Committee on Tuesday.

Counselor protection bill: House Bill 1840/Senate Bill 1556

Sponsors: Sen. Jack Johnson, R-Franklin, and Rep. Dan Howell, R-Georgetown

Purpose: This bill would allow therapists and counselors to turn away clients who express “goals, outcomes, or behaviors that conflict with sincerely held religious beliefs,” in violation of the American Counseling Association’s code of ethics. They would be required to refer potential clients to other professionals.

Status: Passed in the Senate on Feb. 17. Passed in the House on Wednesday.

Lynn also sponsored House Joint Resolution 0529, expressing the sense of the General Assembly that it opposes the Supreme Court’s Obergefell v. Hodges same-sex marriage ruling in 2015.

Status: Passed by the House on March 3. The Senate Judiciary Committee approved it on March 29 and recommended a Senate vote.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1S3CjS9