The Supreme Court ruled today in favor of a key part

of the Affordable Care Act.

In a 6 to 3 ruling...justices say people insured through

the health care law are eligable for federal subsidies,

regardless of what state they live in.

News 8's Keely Arthur joins us now with a look at

how the decision affects area residents.

Mike and Lisa,

Nearly nine million Americans....including thousands

right here in La Crosse...get federal subsidies to

make their health insurance more affordable.

And one local woman.

insured through the market place.

says the Supreme Court's ruling to uphold that decision

is a weight off her shoulders.

Karen Swanson has lived her dream...owning The Salon

in downtown La Crosse...for more than a dozen years.

NAT-that's a long long trip.

After her divorce.

however...the small business owner struggled...going

three years without health coverage.

You just put things off, you waited much longer than

you would've.

Determine to keep her business intact...and stay healthy.

Swanson immediately signed up for health insurance

through the market place.

My insurance is great,

And thanks to federal susbsidies her preimium dropped

from around six-hundred dollars to less than 200.

Before the afforable health care, this same plan would've

have not been in any range that would've been achievable.

When Swanson found out.

those subsidies were being challanged in the Supreme

Court....she feared she was going to go right back

to square one.

Everything kind of got put on hold.

nearly 16-hundred people who enrolled in the affordable

care act this year.

With the assistance of of La Crosse's...Saint Clare

Health Mission.

WERE ALSO WORRIED

If those tax credits to help with preiums would've

been taken away, all of the people who we helped,

would not have been able to afford their health insurance.

Swanson says the Supreme Courts recent decision to

keep the subsidy program intact.

Will allow her to keep doing what she loves...

and stay insured.

I'm so happy that's its going to continue.

Two of La Crosse's largest health care providers spoke

out about the ruling today...In a statement Mayo Clinic

Health System officials say

The federal premium subsidies will continue to reduce

the cost of insurance for millions of americans who

receive them and continue to improve access to health

care.

It is important that we not step back from our commitment

to health insurance coverage for all Americans.

Gundersen also released a statment saying...

Gundersen Health System remains focused on what is

best for patients and their families in the communities

we serve.This decision provides certainty in Healthcare

for our patients who have purchased health insurance

on the marketplace.

Thanks Keely,

The decision is not without controversy...

Many republicans, including presidential candidates,

quickly came out against the Supreme Court's decision.

House Speaker John Boehner said G-O-P members will

continue efforts to repeal and replace the law.