Even though Gov. Tom Wolf's pick for insurance commissioner Teresa Miller has made a career out of working in the world of insurance, she admits she, like most people, dislikes writing out a check to pay for her insurance coverage.

That was one of the details she revealed about herself in responses to e-mailed questions posed to her by PennLive as part of an ongoing series of articles to introduce Wolf's Cabinet officers to Pennsylvania.

However, that probably won't be the response that will leave people talking.

Anyway, Miller, 39, left her position as a partner at Crowell & Moring in the Health Care Group to become the insurance commissioner, a position that pays $137,392 a year. At the Washington, D.C. office of Crowell & Moring, she focused on matters related to the implementation and enforcement of the Affordable Care Act.

Prior to that, she worked within the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services within the Department of Health and Human Services and as administrator of Oregon's Insurance Division, among other public and private sector jobs she held. She has a law degree from Williamette University College of Law in Oregon and is a graduate of Pacific Lutheran University in Tacoma, Wash.

What attracted you to accept Gov. Wolf's offer to become insurance commissioner of Pennsylvania?

I am a big fan of working at the state level. I have a lot of experience at that level, and find it fulfilling because the state is where the regulation of the industry can have a major impact on improving people's lives. I believe this is Governor Wolf's goal, and I am excited to be here at the start of what I think will be an administration that does a lot of good for Pennsylvania.

I understand you're a shooting enthusiast. When you head to the range to relax, which is it, shotgun, rifle, or pistol?

Definitely pistol. When I compete in cowboy action shooting events, I use all three. But, the pistol is definitely my favorite.

When it comes to paying for insurance in your household, do you begrudge having to write that check?

Who likes writing a check for insurance? Not me. But, I do like the security it provides, and that is another reason I was eager to take this job. As a regulator, I view my job as making sure insurance companies are providing the security they have promised their customers, at a fair price.

Based on your multi-state experience, do you find Pennsylvania's insurance markets (i.e. auto, health, homeowners) to be competitive and consumer-friendly?

Yes, I think Pennsylvania has a competitive and generally consumer-friendly marketplace. At our offices, our mission statement is displayed outside our main conference room, and the first point reads - "We will promote a competitive marketplace for consumers." That fits with my commitment to fair regulation. I want to promote a vibrant, competitive marketplace so consumers have quality options to choose from while making absolutely sure companies keep their promises and provide good products at fair prices.

One area I plan to be engaged in is how insurers are using sophisticated mathematical pricing models, the latest being price optimization, to set rates. Using these models improperly could lead to two identical policyholders paying different premiums and result in rates that are unfairly discriminatory.

I understand flood insurance is more of a federal issue but what recommendations would you make to the feds that could make this insurance more affordable for Pennsylvania homeowners?

Flood insurance is an important issue facing many homeowners and small businesses in Pennsylvania. The insurance department is working to make flood insurance more available in the state. For instance, Lloyd's of London is now writing flood insurance here. But I will continue to advocate, as will Governor Wolf, for our residents on such issues as the accuracy of flood maps used by the federal government. And we have to make sure consumers who have mitigated their property's exposure to flood damage will get lower flood insurance premiums. Those are areas where I think the state can help property owners, and we will do the best we can to do so.