Rick Anderson (left), chief executive officer of Smart Choice MRI, pays a visit as Brandi Branchfield, an MRI technician, gets ready for a patient at the company’s Pewaukee location. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

Rick Anderson, the chief executive of Smart Choice MRI, received an unlikely call last spring: Executives from ThedaCare wanted to meet with him.

Smart Choice, known for its MRIs costing a flat fee of $600 or less, planned to open an imaging center in Appleton, and ThedaCare, a health system based in Fox Valley, soon would be a competitor.

"Our team was rather guarded the first couple of meetings we had," Anderson said.

However, the first meeting, in which more than a half a dozen ThedaCare executives, including Dean Gruner, a physician and chief executive, traveled to Mequon, went well.

The ThedaCare executives said they thought that they could learn a few things from Smart Choice and they were interested in partnering with the company.

Those meetings led to an agreement announced last week that ThedaCare is investing $3 million in SmartChoice.

The health system, in short, is investing in one of its competitors.

"Health care needs to change," said Keith Livingston a senior vice president and chief information officer at ThedaCare. "We want to be leading the change."

Change comes slowly to health care, he acknowledged. But there are signs — from retail clinics in drugstores to on-site clinics at employers — that new ways of delivering care gradually are taking hold.

They are part of what has been called the "convenience revolution."

"Consumer demand for shorter waits and easier access is forcing providers to develop new and more convenient portals to care," according to a brief by RAND Health, a nonprofit research institution.

Smart Choice is an example of one of those new portals.

The company, which has six imaging centers in Wisconsin, is opening four imaging centers in the Chicago area. The first opened on Monday. It then plans to open four in the Twin Cities and an additional five in the Chicago area this year.

"If everything goes according to plan, we go from six at the beginning of the year to 19," Anderson said.

Smart Choice also has brought a modicum of price competition to MRI scans.

An MRI at a Smart Choice imaging center can cost $1,000 less — and at times several thousand dollars less — than at a hospital. Its flat fee of $600 or less includes the cost of having the scan read by a radiologist at Cleveland Clinic. Yet its imaging centers can turn a profit within their first month of opening.

The company also has brought price transparency to at least one basic medical service — and price transparency is rare in health care. Prices for the same service can vary by thousands of dollars from one hospital to another in the same city and even more from city to city.

For example, the cost of knee arthroscopy with ACL surgery can range from $8,590 to $22,841 in the Milwaukee area, according to the Guroo.com website, an outgrowth of the Health Care Cost Institute, a nonprofit organization created to make claims data from health insurers available to researchers.

More health insurers, including UnitedHealthcare, Humana and Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Wisconsin, are making price information available to their customers. But getting the cost of a basic medical service still can require Herculean effort, or at least saintly patience.

"If you call a hospital and ask what an MRI costs, they can't tell you," Anderson said.

At the same time, more people have an incentive to find out what basic medical services cost.

Almost one in four workers is in a high-deductible health plan — defined as a plan with an annual deductible of $1,300 for an individual and $2,600 for a family, according to a recent brief by Health Affairs, a policy journal, and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

Many have much higher deductibles.

And the maximum out-of-pocket limit for health plans sold on the federal marketplaces set up through the Affordable Care Act was $6,450 for an individual and $12,900 for a family last year.

Some employers also have begun giving incentives such as $100 rebates or gift cards to employees who get care from hospitals, doctors and other health care providers who provided quality care at a lower cost.

Roughly 100 employers, such as QuadGraphics and Rexnord, are doing that with Smart Choice, Anderson said.

They include the City of Appleton — where ThedaCare is based.

Livingston and Anderson both referred to "retail medicine," and price is the only part of appeal of Smart Choice's imaging centers.

Someone who gets an MRI at a hospital may have to find a space in a large parking structure, find the imaging department in a large hospital and then wait 45 minutes, Anderson said. At a Smart Choice imaging center, patients pull into a parking lot and don't have to wait.

The centers also are open until 9:45 p.m., so people don't have to leave work.

"And if you call up and say I can't get there till 10, we'll stay open for you," Anderson said.

"It's our job to figure out how to make health care more affordable," Livingston said.

The amount Medicare pays for the service is less than Smart Choice's flat fee, Livingston said.

The challenge is to simplify a complex system — and possibly lower prices — while still meeting the health system's goal of having an operating profit margin of 4% to 6%, Livingston said.

That won't be easy.

But Livingston, who will have a seat on Smart Choice's board, believes that Smart Choice will have some lessons that help.

The two may be able to collaborate on other ventures, he said. And ThedaCare also sensed a promising investment.

Smart Choice has identified 19 markets where it stands a good chance of doing well, Anderson said.

"For now, it is land grab for us," he said. "We have got to get into as many markets as possible."

The company plans to focus on the markets with the highest prices for a MRI scan.

"We look for that spread," Anderson said.

Smart Choice has raised about $8 million from equity investors so far, including the $3 million investment from ThedaCare. But it will need to raise additional money to fund its expansion.

The investment from ThedaCare, Anderson said, could lead to similar investments from other health systems.

It also was an endorsement, of sorts, from a respected health care system.

"If we didn't think it was good quality care,we won't have gotten involved," Livingston said.