The Kentucky state capital under a blanket of fresh snow, seen Thursday morning in Frankfort, KY. By Tom Loftus, The Courier-Journal (Photo: Tom Loftus)

Despite snow delays in the Kentucky legislature, talks on a heroin bill are plodding along and the path appears mostly clear for a measure to address dating violence.

Meanwhile, a bill on local-option sales taxes will continue to face hurdles when lawmakers reconvene Monday for the final stretch of the 2015 General Assembly.

Heavy snowfall forced House and Senate leaders to postpone two days of the session on Thursday and Friday, but informal meetings continued among lawmakers trapped in Frankfort.

Virtually every major proposal to fight heroin remains subject to discussion, including stiffer penalties for traffickers, more funding for treatment and legal breaks for people who report an overdose.

The House version of the bill — sponsored by Democratic Rep. John Tilley, D-Hopkinsville — also includes a debated provision giving health departments an option to offer needle exchanges. That would allow addicts to trade out dirty needles for clean ones.

Senate President Robert Stivers, R-Manchester, indicated that attitudes have softened since Tilley presented the idea in committee last month and critics "probably were not as entrenched as they once were in their opposition."

At the same time, lawmakers have yet to decide whether to advance the House version of the legislation or the Senate bill, which is sponsored by Sen. Chris McDaniel, a Republican candidate for lieutenant governor.

That creates political pressures for both chambers. But Tilley said lawmakers have been meeting in good faith and making progress.

"I hate that politics has reared its ugly head," he said. "I firmly believe that people in both the House and Senate working group are trying to move beyond that, but it's certainly in play."

McDaniel, of Taylor Mill, said he is willing to let someone else sponsor the legislation, considering that dozens of people — including families, treatment experts and people from law enforcement — have helped write it.

He added that negotiations have centered on policy rather than whose name appears on the final bill.

"Heroin is bigger than me," he said. "I've said from day one that this isn't about who gets credit for it."

Both Tilley and McDaniel also say they are optimistic over reaching a compromise before lawmakers leave Wednesday.

Starting Monday, lawmakers are scheduled to gavel in for three days before they take a recess, allowing Gov. Steve Beshear to consider vetoes. They will return for a final two days on March 23 and 24.

Dating partner protection

House Bill 8 stands as a likely accomplishment of the 2015 legislative session. The bill would extend to persons in dating relationships the ability to obtain civil protective orders from the court.

Such orders are now only available to people who are married, have a child in common or who have lived together.

On Friday, Stivers said he had "a positive feeling" about its chances of being passed into law.

The bill is a priority for Beshear and first lady Jane Beshear and for years has had sufficient support in the House. It also has had the backing of Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Whitney Westerfield, R-Hopkinsville.

The measure failed in recent sessions, but the breakthrough this year is that Stivers has dropped his reservations and agreed that criminal courts do not provide sufficient protection from violence for persons in dating relationships.

Westerfield's committee approved the bill after making minor changes last week. It is expected to pass the Senate, then go back to the House, which is expected to agree to the changes made by the Senate committee.

Local option

Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer's priority of a constitutional amendment giving local governments a new way to fund major construction projects is in trouble.

Though it passed the House for the first time last month, it's now in the Senate State and Local Government Committee, where Chairman Joe Bowen, an Owensboro Republican and a supporter of the measure, says the bill "is on life-support … but still alive."

On Friday, Stivers characterized the status of House Bill 1 as "in limbo."

The bill proposes a constitutional amendment. As such it requires a three-fifths majority of the Senate to pass. If it is passed by the Senate, the measure must be approved by voters in November 2016.

The amendment would allow local governments to ask their voters to approve temporary local sales taxes of up to 1 percent with the revenue going for specific local capital improvements.

Chris Poynter, a spokesman for Fischer, said advocates for HB 1 believe they have a chance.

"We have all our supporters calling legislators with a simple message: Bring it to a vote," Poynter said. "We have every chamber of commerce in the state endorsing this as well as mayors and county judges. It's bipartisan. And this is about local control — the very thing Republicans say they want."

Problematic to the bill's passage, Bowen said, are doubts about how the process will work in practice for local governments and their taxpayers. Those details are spelled out in House Bill 344, which has been passed by the House and is also pending.

Bowen said some senators might vote for the amendment but do not want to consider HB 344. He said others want to see exactly how the process will work but have problems with the details in HB 344.

Teacher pensions

The House has advanced a bill — sponsored by House Speaker Greg Stumbo — to authorize up to $3.3 billion in bonds for the Kentucky Teachers' Retirement System. But the measure has yet to move in the Senate.

Stivers said Friday that Senate Republicans plan to put forth na alternative seeking more systemic changes at KTRS. Stivers declined to provide details or to discuss whether the Senate proposal will include bonds, saying the matter needed more discussion in caucus.

"Everybody agrees that money can't solve this problem," he said.

Gas tax

Kentucky's gasoline tax rate is adjusted each quarter to the price of gasoline and as such, it has plunged in the past year as prices have fallen. The rate was $31.9 cents in late 2014. It fell to 27.6 cents per gallon on Jan. 1. And it is projected to fall to 22.5 cents per gallon on April 1.

State transportation officials say this is having a devastating effect on funding of road projects. Each 1 cent in the tax draws about $30 million in revenue per year. That revenue is split even between the state and local governments — so cities and counties have also expressed great concerns.

Sen. Ernie Harris, a Crestwood Republican who chairs the Senate Transportation Committee, has filed Senate Bill 29, which would permanently freeze the minimum rate for the tax at its current 27.6 cents per gallon. But no vote has been taken on that bill.

Still, Harris said last week that he "absolutely" believes House and Senate leaders will come to some agreement to address the problem of plunging gas tax revenues, though perhaps not the exact approach as in SB 29.

But one major roadblock for the bill is that Senate leadership says that under the Kentucky Constitution any bill affecting state revenue must originate in the House. House leaders, however, say only "revenue raising" measures must originate in the House and the Senate can act on SB 29, which does not raise revenues but only keeps the gas tax rate where it is.

LEGISLATIVE SCORECARD

Passed

AT&T Bill, HB 152, would deregulate telephone companies like AT&T, allowing them to move away from landline service and into new technologies.

UK Bonds, HB 298, would authorize $132.5 million in state borrowing to help build a medical research center at the University of Kentucky.

Beer Bill, HB 168, would prohibit brewers from owning distributorships, forcing Anheuser-Busch to sell its distributorships in Louisville and Owensboro.

Still hanging, outlook good

Dating Partner Protection, HB 8, would extend civil court order protection against domestic violence to dating partners. Passed House, final approval likely in Senate.

Heroin, SB 5 and HB 213, would expand treatment, penalties and other efforts in a comprehensive battle against the heroin epidemic. But major differences between the bills must be resolved.

Public Private Partnerships, HB 443, would let the state contract with private companies to finance the construction of highways and bridges. Passed House and awaiting vote in Senate, where its chances appear slightly better than even.

Freeze Gas Tax Rate, SB 29, would freeze the gas tax rate at its current rate of 27.6 cents per gallon. Because this tax is adjusted each quarter to the price of gas, the bill would avoid a 5 cent per gallon drop in the tax rate expected to take effect April 1. No action yet, but sponsor says some action will be taken.

Still hanging, outlook not-so-good

KTRS Bonds, HB 4, would authorize the Kentucky Teachers' Retirement System to issue $3.3 billion in bonds to shore up investments and cope with $14 billion in unfunded liabilities. Passed House, but Senate has reservations and is expected to propose alternative measures.

Local Option Sales Tax, HB 1, a constitutional amendment to allow local governments to ask voters to approve time-limited increase of up to 1 cent increase in sales tax to finance specific capital improvement projects. Passed House, pending in Senate State and Local Government Committee.

Transgender Bathrooms, SB 76, would ban transgender students from using school bathrooms and locker rooms that don't correspond to their biological sex. Senate passed, but unlikely to get a vote in House.

Booster Seats, HB 315, would increase the age and size of children that must be restrained in booster seats in cars. Passed House, but appears stalled in Senate Transportation Committee.

Dead

Medical Marijuana, HB 3, would legalize certain medical uses of marijuana. Never got a vote in the House.

Smoke Free, HB 145, would ban smoking at workplaces and indoor public places. Passed House but stuck in Senate Veterans, Military Affairs and Public Protection Committee.

Raise Minimum Wage, HB 2, would raise the minimum wage from $7.25 per hour in steps to $10.10 an hour in 2017. Passed House but stuck in Senate budget committee.

Right to Work, SB 1, would prohibit membership in a union or payment of union dues as a condition for employment. Passed Senate but stuck in House Labor and Industry Committee.

Felon Voting Rights, HB 70, would restore voting rights to certain felons upon completion of all terms of their sentence. Passed House but stuck in Senate State and Local Government Committee.

Abortion, SB 4, would require a face-to-face meeting between a pregnant woman and her doctor at least 24 hours before an abortion is performed. Passed Senate, stuck in House Health and Welfare Committee.

Repeal Obamacare, HB 547, would prohibit General Assembly from requiring any individual to participate an any health care system. Never got a vote in the House.

Medical Review Panels, SB 6, would require medical malpractice claims be vetted by a panel of medical professionals before they are filed in court. Passed Senate but stuck in the House Judiciary Committee.

Charter Schools, SB 8, would create a pilot program of charter schools in Jefferson and Fayette counties. Passed Senate but stuck in House Education Committee.

Debt Limit, SB 94, would cap total annual state debt payments at no more than 6 percent of annual state revenues. Passed Senate. Stuck in House budget committee.

Casinos, HB 300, a constitutional amendment to legalize up to six casinos in Kentucky. Never got a vote in the House.​

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1BSDz3P