Welcome to The Closing Bell. This is your last stop for biz scoops and big news before the weekend -- a roundup of stories that can’t wait till Monday from our partners at Insider Louisville.

Brown-Forman expands parental leave

Louisville distiller Brown-Forman Corp. this month began offering expecting mothers 12 weeks of paid leave -- or about twice as much as the most generous maternity leave plans of the area’s 10 largest employers.

Insider Louisville this week had reported that about half of the area’s largest employers offer at least four weeks of paid maternity, paternity and adoption leave, though the other half offered little to none.

General Electric had the most generous maternity leave policy, offering up to eight weeks, though the University of Louisville, Humana and UPS also offered at least four weeks of paid time off.

Brown-Forman notified IL that on May 1 it began a new policy that provides 12 weeks of fully paid leave for childbearing mothers and six fully paid leave for spouses, adoptive and foster parents.

The company said it implemented the policy in recognition “that today’s families come in all shapes and sizes.” READ MORE ON INSIDER LOUISVILLE

Village Anchor, Le Moo owner planning new Anchorage restaurant and other concepts

Kevin Grangier isn’t slowing down. If anything, he’s planning to pick up steam when it comes to restaurant openings.

The Louisville restaurateur said he wants to develop five to seven “unique and successful brands” under the umbrella company Belle Noble Entertainment Group, which Grangier owns, according to information he emailed to Insider Louisville.

In a follow-up interview, Grangier said he doesn’t think his timeline is too aggressive. After opening the steakhouse Le Moo, “I better understand the learning curve.”

He’s calling his latest concept PICNIC. It’s a cafe and bar in the old train depot building next to The Village Anchor, which Grangier also owns. READ MORE ON INSIDER LOUISVILLE

Report: Health care exchange volatility typical for new markets

While insurers including Louisville-based Humana have signaled that they’re leaving some Affordable Care Act exchanges next year, industry experts said disruptions in the new industry are to be expected.

Humana, UnitedHealth Group and others have reported that medical costs of the individuals who have signed up for insurance on the ACA exchanges are higher than the health insurance premiums those customers are paying. The losses have prompted some of the companies to reevaluate on which exchanges they’re participating and how. READ MORE ON INSIDER LOUISVILLE

Fortune 500 company acquires Harry K. Moore

Louisville’s oldest operating real estate firm Harry K. Moore was acquired this week.

Chicago-based JLL purchased Harry K. Moore for an undisclosed amount to bolster its industrial and office real estate brokerage services, according to a news release. It also helps JLL grow its presence in the e-commerce trade area between Louisville, Indianapolis and Columbus.READ MORE ON INSIDER LOUISVILLE

VIA Studio rolls out new Waterfront Park website

The Waterfront isn’t just a place, it’s an experience.

An experience that’s different for everyone.

We’re a peaceful oasis in the heart of the city. We’re a natural haven for quiet reflection. We’re an ongoing festival of sounds and sights. We’re your favorite band blasting into the night sky.

And we’re right here, accessible to all.

That’s the lead-in to the lovely new Waterfront Park website created by VIA Studio. The site has a Wes Anderson aesthetic — kind of cute, kind of twee. But it’s super user-friendly and makes good information easily accessible — like the fact that you can rent a tandem bike for a half-day for $25. (Question: If you put two people who don’t know how to ride a bike on a tandem bike, does that work out? Asking for me and my also bike-averse boyfriend.)

The independently operated and maintained public park has a storied history neatly outlined on the site. The FAQs are especially illuminating; Did you know it’s free to dock your boat at the boat docks and you might even be allowed to stay overnight if you contact them in advance?

The events page is very clear. Speaking of, here’s a cool event coming up this weekend: On Saturday from 10 a.m. until 2 p.m. at the base of the Big Four Bridge, a waffle food truck will be handing out free waffles, as well as other giveaways, while supplies last. The purpose is to promote the FX show “Fargo.” Free waffles! —Melissa Chipman

PharMerica CEO to present at UBS conference

Louisville-based pharmacy services provider PharMerica Corp. announced this week that its CEO will give a presentation at a conference in New York City next week.

Gregory Weishar will present at the UBS Global HealthCare Conference at 9 a.m. Wednesday.

UBS, an investment bank, said the three-day conference will include more than 200 companies in the health care services and life sciences sectors.

A live webcast of Weishar’s presentation will be available on the Pharmerica website.

The company this month reported that its first-quarter profit fell 57 percent, as the company struggled with rising litigation and restructuring charges.

First-quarter net income was $4.1 million, down from $9.5 million in the first quarter of last year.

Revenues increased — but not as much as operating costs. Revenues, at $524.5 million, rose 2.5 percent, but the cost of goods sold jumped 4.6 percent, to $442.5 million. —Boris Ladwig

West Louisville nonprofit names new president, honors local doctor

As part of a long-range succession plan Louisville Central Community Centers‘ Board of Directors has promoted Kevin Fields Sr. to president and chief operating officer of the nonprofit.

Located at 13th Street and West Muhammad Ali Boulevard, LCCC is a nonprofit that offers everything from youth development and arts education programs to employment services and job training for adults.

Fields has worked as LCCC’s senior vice president and COO for nearly five years and is expected to become CEO of the nonprofit whenever current CEO Sam Watkins Jr. retires, according to a news release. Fields previously served as vice president of programs at the Louisville Urban League and director of special programs at Louisville Metro Housing Authority. READ MORE ON INSIDER LOUISVILLE

New salon for men opening in Westport Village Sunday

Who said pedicures are just for women?

Starting Sunday, a new business in Westport Village called 18|8 Fine Men’s Salon is offering men the spa treatment.

The salon’s services include haircuts, massages, manicures, pedicures and skin care treatments — all while they sip on an ice-cold beer, according to an announcement about the opening. The Executive Haircut package includes a hot towel treatment, two washes and a 15-minute head and neck massage. READ MORE ON INSIDER LOUISVILLE

Bernheim Forest names Scott Turner COO

Bernheim Arboretum and Research Forest recently named Scott Turner as chief operating officer. Turner joins Bernheim from Land Between the Lakes where he previously served as business performance manager.

“We are fortunate to add Scott’s expertise and deepen the talent of our Senior Management Team,” said Mark Wourms, Bernheim executive director, in a news release. “I am confident that his addition will strengthen Bernheim’s ability to fulfill its mission of connecting people with nature.”

“Bernheim created many special memories over the years for me and my family, so joining the leadership team is an opportunity that I look forward to.” said Turner. “Bernheim’s mission is unique and the opportunity to play a role in carrying it out is a once in a lifetime opportunity.” READ MORE ON INSIDER LOUISVILLE

Petco Foundation awards $38,000 grant to Alley Cat Advocates

Since its start in 1999, Louisville nonprofit Alley Cat Advocates has fixed more than 35,000 stray cats in our city through their humane Trap-Neuter-Return program. The national Petco Foundation recognized their achievements and awarded the organization a $38,000 grant last week to further support the program.

“It is springtime in Louisville, and that means it is kitten season. This gift comes at a particularly important time, because awareness and demand for our services peak as unaltered stray cats give birth to more kittens,” says Alley Cat co-founder and executive director Karen Little in a press release. “We’re honored to receive this generous grant and to be recognized for our success and the progress we have made in Louisville.”

The investment by the retail company will help Alley Cat Advocates reach more caretakers, who provide food and shelter for the stray cats. Since 2011, the efforts of the organization — with the help of caretakers — have contributed to a 61 percent reduction in the intake of cats at local shelters, dramatically reducing taxpayer cost, overcrowded shelters and animal euthanasia.

Now that’s the cat’s meow. —Sara Havens