Become a fan of the Political Gabfest on Facebook. We post to the Facebook page throughout the week, so keep the conversation going by joining us there. Or follow us @SlateGabfest.

To listen to the discussion, use the player below:

Advertisement



Gabfest T-shirts are now available at the Slate store!

We're auctioning off two pairs of tickets to play a real-life room escape game with the Gabfesters in San Francisco at noon EST on Dec. 11. Send your bid for one pair to gabfest@slate.com by Dec. 2. Face value is $100 a pair. One pair will go to the highest bidder, and the other pair will go to the second-highest bidder. All proceeds beyond the ticket price will be donated to the registered charity of the winner's choice.

We need your conundrums for our conundrums show. Send your dilemmas large and small to gabfest@slate.com, post them on our Facebook page, or tweet them to @SlateGabfest.

On this week’s Slate Political Gabfest, Emily Bazelon, John Dickerson, and David Plotz discuss what happens if healthcare.gov doesn't work by Nov. 30 (5:31), why Elizabeth Warren isn't Hillary Clinton's worst nightmare in 2016 (22:13), and whether bikes should be treated like cars (34:34).

Advertisement



Here are some of the links and references mentioned during this week's show:

Matthew Yglesias explains why "if you like your plan, you can keep it" shouldn't be a policy goal.

Conservatives should provide an alternative to Obamacare, not just gloat as it falters, Ramesh Ponnuru and Yuval Levin write in the Wall Street Journal.

Elizabeth Warren may be the only Democrat who could challenge Hillary Clinton in 2016, Noam Scheiber argues at the New Republic.

Dave Weigel writes that Scheiber's theory is bunk.

It's silly to assume only one woman can run for office at once, Hanna Rosin writes.

A New York Times op-ed decries drivers who get away with killing cyclists.

The Weekly Standard's Christopher Caldwell claims that cyclists (including Plotz) are trying to take over the road for liberal elitists.

Video of the Gabfest taping on Nov. 14 was broadcast live on Spreecast. If you missed it, here’s the archived video:

John chatters about how to help typhoon victims: Give them money.

Emily chatters about Collision Low Crossers, a book about a year in the life of the New York Jets.

David chatters about train-ride videos.

Topic ideas for next week? You can tweet suggestions, links, and questions to @SlateGabfest. The email address for the Political Gabfest is gabfest@slate.com. (Email may be quoted by name unless the writer stipulates otherwise.)