The Center for Disease Control has released its most recent abortion rates, and as of 2011 the number of people obtaining abortions in the United States has hit an all time low. In fact, the rate is so low that it nearly matches 1973, the year that abortion was first made legal.

As always happens when the abortion rate drops, reproductive rights supporters cheer effective birth control that prevents unintended pregnancy, and anti-abortion activists credit the latest slew of abortion restrictions, claiming that their “pro-women, pro-life” laws are making people rethink terminating pregnancies. Birth rate information for the same period shows that the former is more likely, especially as births to teens and younger women decreased while births to older women increased at the same time.

Abortion opponents could in fact be correct that their restrictions are having effect on the abortion rate, too, however. While 2011 marked the beginning of the massive onslaught of anti-abortion bills being proposed and passed across the U.S., those often took months to approve, sign into law and implement, meaning it will still be a year or longer before their restrictions would have a major impact on access. If contraception is decreasing unplanned pregnancy more effectively as it became easier to obtain thanks to Obamacare, it’s entirely possible that less people are getting pregnant but that more of those who accidentally do end up not terminating those pregnancies, either because it is too difficult to access an abortion, or because they do choose to continue their pregnancies.

That more women are choosing to parent is a theory posed by analyst David Frum at The Atlantic, who argues that pregnant women who are unmarried are choosing to single parent in greater numbers than ever before, thanks to a societal shift away from shaming unwed mothers. “The abortion spike between 1975 and 1990 reflected a new ranking of acceptable responses to an unmarried pregnancy: abortion, single parenthood, shotgun wedding, and adoption, in that order,” argues Frum, who then says that today, those acceptable ways to cope with a pregnancy have dramatically shifted. “[M]arriage has receded further from the cultural experience of the less affluent two-thirds of American society. As the wages of non-college-educated men have tumbled, marriage has looked like an increasingly pointless and even dangerous choice for poorer women. As marriage fades, unwed motherhood has evolved from an acceptable outcome to something close to an inevitability. The order of choices in the face of an unexpected pregnancy has thus shifted again: single parenthood, abortion, shotgun wedding, and adoption.”

Frum’s positioning of the hierarchy of preferred pregnancy outcomes seem to square with adoption trends, as well, which, no matter how the abortion rate climbs or falls, remains nearly unchanged. Trend stories from the 1980s and early 1990s show that the rate of pregnant people relinquishing babies during that period was around 3 percent, and statistics today show that mostly unchanged. The 2 to 3 percent is a sharp contrast to the roughly 19 percent of babies born to unmarried Caucasian women that were relinquished prior to abortion being legal, according to the New York Times (the report states that pregnant people of color always put babies up for adoption at very low rates that are unchanged based on the legality of abortion).

As long as abortion remains legal, it’s clear that pregnant people are predominately choosing between abortion or parenting, and that when they choose parenting, it is increasingly parenting without a formal partnership such as a marriage license. While in the past marriage was considered the answer to an unplanned pregnancy, today marriage is something that occurs later, with more forethought and, often because of that fact, with less divorce on the other end. Or, it doesn’t happen at all.

Of course, none of this is a shock to most people, but for those who stand outside abortion clinics trying to “counsel” a patient out of terminating a pregnancy, or who run so-called crisis pregnancy centers where they hope to convince a person with an unwanted pregnancy to carry to term, that means they need to completely readjust not just their talking points, but their entire societal view of a pregnant person if they want to effectively change her mind.

So often, when I see anti-abortion activists outside clinics, they speak not to the patient but to the male companion with her, urging him to “talk her out of it” or “step up and be a man” and care for his child, often ignoring the pregnant person herself as the final decision maker. They see marriage as the ultimate perfect answer to an unplanned pregnancy, followed by adoption, and single parenting only as a last resort. They have not yet been able to come to terms with the idea that for an unplanned pregnancy, most people will parent alone or terminate, but that adoption will hardly register as an option. After all, why go through the physical and emotional trials of pregnancy if you do not want to raise that child yourself?

Without the actual ability to make abortion directly illegal again, states have done all they can to make abortion difficult to access, and have thrown resources hand over fist at pregnancy centers that will help facilitate people carrying to term. In states like Ohio and Indiana they have even upped the ante by increasing benefits to adopting parents, shortening wait times, contemplating more tax breaks and making it harder for birth mothers to change their minds about relinquishing their children. At the same time they are cutting off resources like early childhood education, aid and assistance for those with young children, refusing child care assistance, living wages, paid parental or sick leave, welfare benefits and even expanding low income health care.

The objective is clear. If women are no longer feeling socially shunned for being unwed mothers, states will instead make it fiscally impossible to survive financially as a single parent, forcing them to either get married or give their infants up for adoption. Ironically, they are more likely to drive them to the abortion that neither she, nor the anti-abortion activists themselves, ever wanted in the first place.

Photo credit: Thinkstock