Saturday, March 19, 2016 - by Claire Henley Miller

For Susan Bruce, it all started with carrot cake.The owner of Fleur and Flour didn’t always know she would open a specialty cake and flower boutique and studio. According to Ms. Bruce, she didn’t know if she could make it work.But after a period of hardship struck her life, a surge of inspiration sparked this dynamic mother of two to follow her passion for creating beautiful things. It has been an ongoing journey on which Ms. Bruce not only brings joy to others through her love for baking and crafting floral arrangements, but one on which she, herself, is finding healing.“For me, beauty is healing,” she said in an interview inside Fleur and Flour, the brightness of her turquoise necklace bringing out the blue in her eyes.A trip up the elevator to the fourth floor of Chattanooga WorkSpace – a startup incubator on West 6th Street – transports Ms. Bruce’s customers from a brick, industrial building to the elegant streets of France.“Must always, always, always have flowers,” reads the sign at the design studio’s entrance. The walls Ms. Bruce painted white serve as the backdrop for chic and welcoming furniture, dreamy paintings of dancers and flowers, and of course the flowers themselves. An antique bottle Ms. Bruce’s 19-year-old son found stood next to her on an end table displaying big white roses in full bloom.The sweet smells of petals and icing swirled about the room as classical music filled the space with rich and soothing sound. A variety of vases covered the wooden table in the back out of which eye-catching blossoms burst. Before the interview, Ms. Bruce topped off the water in each vase. Then she cut a slice of her ambrosial carrot cake centered on the table and asked, “Would you like a piece?”Her passion for flowers and cake springs from her grandmothers. Growing up in the southeast, Ms. Bruce wrapped herself in the subtle splendor of nature – the barn where she rode horses, the swamp where the blue heron reigned. She recounted how her one grandmother – who is now 102 – had camellias in her garden in South Georgia that Ms. Bruce would pick to make “flower salad.”Her other grandmother loved to bake. As part of Ms. Bruce’s mission to revive “old treasured recipes,” she uses all natural ingredients to recreate her grandmother’s chocolate pound cake today.But it wasn’t until several months ago that Ms. Bruce realized she could turn her passion into her business. Having been born with a profound connection to beauty, she taught herself all about design and the history of furniture while working in the Hilton Hotel in downtown Birmingham.“I was out of college with a marketing degree, married, and working in this dirty hotel, having to sell it to the customers.”Because this job laughed in the face of her standard for beauty, she went on to work at a high-end furniture store. When she became a mother, she used her spare time while her baby boys slept to pore through garden magazines and books.“Decorating and gardening go hand-in-hand,” she said.To exemplify this, Ms. Bruce told how she used the knowledge and skills she gained from her self-studies to build and design her family’s Lookout Mountain home in 2001. The whole vision for the English-style stone cottage revolved around new dawn climbing roses. Once the house was finished, the roses trailed all the way up the rock walls and old doors.“It was a fairytale cottage, but not a fairytale home. Life got harder after that house,” Ms. Bruce said.In 2008 she and her high school sweetheart divorced. This was a devastating event Ms. Bruce said she hid from for a long time. She didn’t know what she was going to do. Then one day she baked her carrot cake from a passed-down, treasured recipe and shared it with her son, Will.“Mom, this is amazing,” Will said, taking bite after bite.Ms. Bruce seized this affirmation and ran with it. She opened Hummingbird House Cakes in 2014, using the hummingbird as her company icon because of the delicate creature’s power to “open our eyes to the wonders of the world.”But something was missing in her business, and Ms. Bruce knew it. Her love of floral design led her to start adding flowers to her cakes. “Because a cake is more beautiful with a flower on it,” she said.This idea evolved one day last summer when she ordered a shipment of garden flowers for a special Friday night sale at her studio. When she opened the box her eyes darted to the pale pink roses that reminded her of the new dawns trellising up the walls of her home she had since sold.“When I saw those roses it was like a light bulb came on, an aha moment of, ‘Oh my word, do you think I could be a florist?’”And so, Fleur and Flour was born. The boutique design studio offers custom flower arrangements for home and garden, businesses, and events like weddings. The cakes are great for work parties or for special occasions like birthdays, Ms. Bruce said.She also started Fleurish Workshops out of her studio, where the customer becomes the florist to whom Ms. Bruce teaches basic floral design techniques. All skill levels are welcome – from those who have only ever admired flowers in a vase, to those who dig in the dirt of their gardens regularly.Regarding the floral aspect of her business, Ms. Bruce aims to succeed in the art of painterly arrangements with a wild, natural feel that honors the spirit of nature.“It doesn’t have to be fancy, and it doesn’t have to be expensive…This whole thing is about a celebration of the simple sweetness of life.”Through her passion for beauty, Ms. Bruce hopes to turn Fleur and Flour into a sustainable business that brings joy to others. She believes every day must have joy. A piece of pound cake or a purple hydrangea adds that bright spot in the day to accomplish this.Not to mention her endeavors have also brought her healing. She said using her God-given talents to create lovely things for people brought her back to life. The cakes gave her purpose, and the purpose gave her passions back. The shell under which she had been hiding cracked. Fleur and Flour nourished Ms. Bruce to blossom into herself.“Here I am, world!” she declared in the midst of her stunning studio.She said, “Flowers fade, and they’re gone. But they come back.”With springtime unfolding, the bleak wintry days now abound with the reaching blossoms of dogwoods and roadside scenery of daffodils. Ms. Bruce, too, is springing back from a harsh season that faded her for a time.“Life is coming to me again,” she said, breathing in the air of the bright and beautiful world she created. “And I’m learning to let go.”