MONTGOMERY, Alabama -- The Alabama Public Service Commission members sent a stinging rebuke to President Barack Obama, in a letter dated Tuesday, urging him to keep energy costs low, and to relent on his administration's "war on coal."

The PSC's three elected commissioners -- Chip Beeker, Jeremy Oden, and President Twinkle Andress Cavanugh -- did not mince words.

Obama's "politically-motivated federal mandates" have made it "virtually impossible" for the PSC, which is tasked with utility oversight, to keep energy reliable and at low-cost.

The commissioners then brought up a quote from Obama's 2008 primary campaign, one often heard in Alabama's political circles today: "In 2008, you announced, 'Under my plan, electricity rates would necessarily skyrocket.' This statement was followed by a unique set of circumstances during your time in office: you actually followed through on a promise."

The commissioners compare that "successful" promise to Obamacare: "You lied when you said, 'If you like your plan, you can keep your plan.' You lied when you said individuals under Obamacare could keep their doctors. You have made lying to the American people one of the pillars of your administration. As a result of the one time you have actually kept your word, you have immeasurably burdened the hard-working men and women of our state."

The commissioners claim in the letter that Obama's EPA officials and its "radical environmentalist allies" are out to "kill the coal industry and deny this nation the use of 250 years' worth of natural resources, but also to drive up electricity prices in the South to stunt our economic growth and drive jobs back to the blue states which voted for you."

Low-cost energy, including use of coal, will provide jobs and economic growth in the South, the commissioners said.

After the verbal volleys, the commissioners beseech the president to relent: "It is not too late for you to reverse your course and implement an energy policy for this nation based on freedom and opportunity, not the principle of government picking winners and losers for political purposes."

"Respectfully," the commissioners then sign off.

Read the letter below, and tell us what you think in comments.

Letter to President Obama from PSC