No. 14 Rams cap it with sweep of UTEP

Jaime Colaizzi

EL PASO, Texas — For the first true road trip of the season, Colorado State's volleyball team couldn't have asked for any more.

For starters, the No. 14 Rams knocked off No. 9 BYU to open the UTEP/New Mexico State Invitational on Friday. Saturday, the Rams closed it out with a 25-13, 25-18, 25-23 sweep of UTEP, heading back to Fort Collins at 9-1 and likely heading up the rankings once again.

"I wouldn't have guessed we'd be 9-1," CSU coach Tom Hilbert said, based on the schedule. "We played some pretty good teams. We're getting through the matches that are tough, but we really need to rest before we go to ASU.

"I think we played well. We passed well and served well. That is what you worry about on road trips and I thought we did both well."

Jaime Colaizzi had 22 digs in the match, Kaitlind Bestgen recorded two of the team's five aces and the Rams only committed three unforced errors in the match.

After cruising in the first two sets, the Miners put up a challenge at the end of the third before the Rams were able to pull it out. Whenever they needed a kill, they could count on Kelsey Snider, who led the team with 13 kills on 22 swings, hitting .500 as they hit .286 as a squad.

"She was unstoppable," Hilbert said. "When we needed a sideout, she was getting it for us. She was really, really potent. I also thought Acacia (Andrews) played well. I pulled her early and put in Axie (Alexandra Poletto), but she came back and was really swinging hard."

Advertisement

Andrews finished with seven kills, with outside hitters Jasmine Hanna and Marlee Reynolds both tallying six. Deedra Foss had 36 assists on the day.

Sanja Cizmic started at opposite hitter for Dri Culbert, giving the junior who injured her knee during fall camp a day off. Hilbert said Culbert isn't hurt, but was sore after Friday's two matches.

Contact Sports Editor Mike Brohard at 970-635-3633 or mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard