Dorian Pippa works March 11 assembling a cedar bench in a friend's Longmont garage. Pippa recently was charged and convicted of DUI. Part of his restitution involves community service. He opted to participate in a Boulder County community service program called the Caring Crafts Program. This program invites offenders to use their skills to give back to the community. To view a video visit www.timescall.com. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

The fragrance of cedar sawdust filled his buddy's Longmont garage on a blustery March afternoon as Dorian Pippa built a garden bench to pay his debt to the community for driving drunk last year.

Like a cook following a new recipe, he glanced often at the building instructions while cutting slats and drilling screws.

The woodworking project gives Pippa, 26, a creative way to fulfill the community service part of his sentence, which also includes 26 alcohol awareness classes and two years of blowing into a breathalyzer, called an Ignition Interlock, that prevents him from starting his truck if it detects unsafe alcohol levels.

Dorian Pippa works assembling a cedar bench in a friend's Longmont garage. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

"If I was picking up trash on the side of the highway for my community service I wouldn't have a smile on my face," said Pippa, a carpenter who recently relocated to Denver. "Not that it's important (to the program). But if somebody has a skill, it should be taken advantage of."

About five years ago, the Boulder County Community Justice Services implemented the Caring Crafts Program to give offenders with woodworking and handcraft skills an option to complete community service hours by creating something-or-other for a local nonprofit organization.

Three-ring binders at the Boulder office list about 30 woodworking projects that range from rocking horses and dollhouses to benches and bookshelves, Barb Hable, the community service supervisor, said.

Advertisement

The program assigns the number of service hours per approved project based not only an estimated building time, but also on the time and money it takes to shop for supplies, she explained.

For instance, Pippa's project fulfilled 32 hours of his 48-hour community service sentence.

Besides his labor, the hours covered his time to shop for materials and the $120 out-of-pocket expense of the wood and hardware.

Dorian Pippa recently was charged and convicted of DUI and part of his restitution involves community service. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

"Then, I bargained with Barb a little, and she said that if I put a really nice stain on it and a polyurethane final coat, that I could finish the rest of the hours," Pippa said.

Hable welcomes dickering.

"People who have different talents, they can pitch an idea, and we can go from there," she said. "We've gotten lots of art projects finished that way."

The program also keeps binders with approved blanket, toy and other handcraft projects. Last Christmas a woman made wreaths to fulfill her community service obligation, Hable said.

Nonprofit organizations throughout Boulder County, such as Longmont's Wild Plum Center for low-income preschool children, appreciate how this more creative community service benefits them.

"The things these guys and gals create are really high quality," said Lori Stott, the center's community partnerships director.

In 2013, the center received rocking chairs, rocking horses, playground benches and more. This year, the center looks forward to receiving 270 bookshelves - one to give to each family represented at the center - along with some donated books, she added.

The Caring Crafts Program already has built 26 of the shelves and booked work for 100 more, thanks to skilled workers such as Pippa, Hable said.

His completed bench will go to either the center or to Growing Gardens, a Boulder-based nonprofit organization that plants gardens throughout Boulder County and hosts summer camps for kids.

"That's what I like most about this kind of community service. You can see things come together," Pippa said. "There didn't used to be a bench there, and now there will be."

Pam Mellskog can be reached at Mellskog@msn.com or 303-746-0942.