Mike Blake/Reuters

As investors watch Charter Communications for any signs that a deal for cable operator Time Warner Cable could be imminent, chief executives of both companies spoke at any industry conference late Wednesday.

MoneyBeat took a look at what Time Warner Cable CEO Rob Marcus and Charter CEO Thomas Rutledge told investors at a MoffettNathanson investor conference Wednesday about M&A, cable industry consolidation and regulatory backlash against future cable-industry deals.

As a refresher, late last week, the Journal reported that Charter is in early talks with banks to arrange a debt package of $25 billion to $30 billion that would provide the financing for the deal. In January 2014, Charter proposed to buy Time Warner Cable for $132.50 in cash and stock. Time Warner Cable’s board rejected the offer, demanding $160 with at least $100 in cash. The next month, Time Warner Cable agreed to an all-stock deal with Comcast that valued it at about $158.82, which Comcast called off a few weeks ago amid regulatory scrutiny.

Now, Charter has another opportunity to make a run at Time Warner Cable.

Here’s what the executives had to say at the conference:

Time Warner’s CEO on future M&A:

Mr. Marcus told the audience that he “feel[s] very good about the position Time Warner Cable is in.” He said he’ll measure any future M&A, where Time Warner Cable can go on its own. He said that there have been perceptions in the past that Time Warner Cable was “less than open to M&A,” but the announced transaction with Comcast, he said, should have disabused shareholders of that idea. “When there was a transaction that we thought maximized value for our shareholders, we executed on it.”

Charter’s CEO on M&A:

Mr. Rutledge said he would be worried about any deal that would put Charter’s leverage or the debt on the company at more than five times its earnings. “Too much leverage is a bad thing,” he said.

Time Warner’s CEO on cable consolidation:

Time Warner Cable Chief Executive Rob Marcus said he doesn’t know whether cable consolidation is inevitable. Since the dawn of the cable industry, there have been benefits to cable consolidation, he said, but “there are so many situations where industrial logic doesn’t prevail.” Many of the remaining players of scale other than Time Warner Cable and Charter Communications are privately-held, and there are always “social dynamics” that complicate deals, he said.

Mr. Marcus said there probably will continue to be some consolidation, but he doubts that “all cable companies will find their way into one of two camps.” The two-camp theory is one that Mr. Rutledge has espoused, but didn’t expand upon Wednesday.

Time Warner’s CEO on antitrust regulators:

“I firmly believed when we signed and announced the Comcast deal, and I believed right up until the bitter end, that we had very compelling arguments why our deal ought to be approved by the FCC and the DOJ. And obviously the guys who get to make those decisions disagreed with us. They really didn’t give us a compelling explanation of why they disagreed with us. They simply did.”

“With respect to the question of whether other deals could get done, I really don’t know the answer to that either, because I don’t understand the rationale that informed the decision with respect to Time Warner Cable/Comcast. It’s hard to make a calculus as to where the line ought to be drawn.”

Charter’s CEO on antitrust regulators:

The short answer from Mr. Rutledge on whether Charter can get a deal for Time Warner Cable: It’s nothing like the Comcast-Time Warner Cable deal. “We’re a very different company and a very different circumstance. We’re not vertically integrated.”

“So it’s hard and in terms of our penetration of big [designated market areas], that wouldn’t substantially change either. So I think it’s a very different animal from a regulatory perspective. Now, whether deals can be made or not, I don’t know.

Regulators, he said, think of the Newhouse family’s Bright House Networks LLC, which Charter was set to buy before the Comcast-Time Warner Cable deal collapsed, as one in the same as Time Warner Cable. Mr. Rutledge made it clear that he’s not worried that regulators would nix a larger Time Warner Cable deal if Charter also bought Brighthouse.

– Shalini Ramachandran contributed to this report.