Campbell Ewald wins $150 million California health care exchange account

Detroit-based advertising agency Campbell Ewald on Thursday said it has picked up the $150 million contract to market California’s state-run health insurance exchange.

The agency won a three-year agency-of-record marketing deal worth $50 million annually to promote Covered California, the state’s marketplace for the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The deal includes two one-year extensions after the third year, which means the total value of the contract could be $250 million.

Campbell Ewald will use a significant portion of the funding to buy statewide television, radio, print, digital and outdoor advertising, Covered California said in a statement. The ad agency said it will handle strategy; creative implementation; and digital and social communications, as well as media planning and buying.

The first work will launch this fall.

The exchange said it wanted an agency “bringing deep expertise in reaching Latinos, Asians and Pacific Islanders, and African-Americans, as well as millennials and members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communities.”

The work is to “develop a multilingual, multicultural media campaign with the goal of educating consumers about Covered California’s services and maximizing the number of Californians enrolled in health insurance coverage,” the exchange said.

“Improving awareness and access to a vital need like health care coverage is purposeful work – the type of work we at Campbell Ewald find meaningful and rewarding,” said Angela Zepeda, Campbell Ewald's president and chief marketing officer, in a statement.

Much of the work will be handled from Campbell Ewald’s Los Angeles office.

The contract began June 1.

Subcontractors on the account include Costa Mesa, Calif.-based Casanova Pendrill for Latino marketing; Long Beach, Calif.-based InterTrend Communications for Asian and Pacific Islander marketing; and Los Angeles-based Lagrant Communications for African-American marketing.

Campbell Ewald outbid seven other agencies to win the work. The RFP was issued in March.

“Covered California is eager to begin its new partnership with Campbell Ewald, which presented our review team with unique ideas and thoughtful, culturally relevant messaging that can help us to reach California’s diverse uninsured population,” said Covered California Executive Director Peter Lee in a statement.

Campbell Ewald replaces New York City-based Weber Shandwick, which has been the marketing and advertising contractor of record since prior to the exchange opening for enrollment in October 2013.

California also said it gave New York City-based Ogilvy Public Relations a three-year contract worth $2 million per year to handle public relations.

Covered California said it has served more than 1.8 million people who previously did not have health insurance, lost insurance or were denied insurance. The exchange launched in 2013, and its next open enrollment period is in the fall.

The Covered California job is a bright spot after recent bad news for Campbell Ewald. It is in the process of appealing to the federal government the recent loss of the five-year, $457.4 million U.S. Navy recruiting account, which the agency had had for 15 years. Also, in December the agency and two sibling firms lost the $280 million Cadillac account.

Campbell Ewald had $113.5 million in 2014 U.S. revenue, ranking it 94th among all advertising agencies by that metric, according to data from Advertising Age.

Other major clients include OnStar, Alltel Wireless, Atkins Nutritionals Inc., Consumers Energy, Kaiser Permanente, LifeLock Inc., Snuggle, Unilever and USAA.

Campbell Ewald in January 2014 moved its 500 employees from Warren to a $15 million headquarters created inside the old J.L. Hudson Co. warehouse attached to Ford Field in downtown Detroit.

Related Links