OKLAHOMA CITY--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Paycom Software, Inc. (NYSE:PAYC), a leading provider of comprehensive, cloud-based human capital management software, was recognized by the North American Excellence Awards for its Affordable Care Act (“ACA”) awareness campaign, which was shortlisted in the Content Marketing category.

Paycom’s campaign was designed to update businesses across the country about one of the most complicated pieces of health care legislation ever faced. The goal of the campaign was to reduce employers’ ACA compliance concerns by informing them of the law’s requirements and changes. The campaign also empowered businesses to take control of their ACA compliance needs through Paycom’s numerous resources and world-class human capital management software, most notably its Enhanced ACA application.

“Today's businesses are subject to an increasingly complex and ever-changing regulatory environment and that was only amplified by the introduction of the ACA’s employer mandate,” said Paycom’s founder and CEO, Chad Richison. “As leaders in Washington, D.C. continue to introduce new legislation, debate and change existing laws, we will continue to educate ourselves in order to become experts and a valuable resource to best serve businesses nationwide.”

In the North American Excellence Awards’ inaugural year, Paycom was recognized alongside Avaya, Mars Inc., PepsiCo and Zurich North America in the Content Marketing category. Applicants were judged based on their strategy, innovation, creativity and implementation, as well as the efficiency of their results. The judging panel consisted of executives from notable companies such as BMW, Coca-Cola and Ogilvy PR.

“I’m proud of my team’s ability to execute a creative and compelling awareness campaign on a very extensive and complex law,” said Paycom’s Chief Marketing Officer, Kathy Oden-Hall. “Our ACA marketing materials included a white paper, checklist, decision tree, mailer, fines calculator and blog articles.”

The North American Excellence Awards are hosted by Communication Director, a magazine for global decision makers in corporate communication and PR, and honor outstanding achievements in the fields of PR and communications. The awards are part of a worldwide implementation of Excellence Awards, being rolled out in Africa, Asia-Pacific, Europe, Latin America and North America simultaneously. This year’s awards attracted more than 2,600 applications from around the globe.

A symposium and winners’ dinner will be held on April 28 in New York City.

About Paycom

As a leader in payroll and HR technology, Oklahoma City-based Paycom redefines the human capital management industry by allowing companies to effectively navigate a rapidly changing business environment. Its cloud-based software is based on a core system of record maintained in a single database for all human capital management functions, providing the functionality that businesses need to manage the complete employment lifecycle, from recruitment to retirement. Paycom has the ability to serve businesses of all sizes and in every industry. As one of the leading human capital management providers, Paycom has sales offices across the country and serves clients in all 50 states.