Buy Photo Susie Farbin, left, and Diana Hicks, owners of MaMa Jean’s are seen here at their new, and largest, location on Sunshine Street in east Springfield. Photos by Bruce Stidham/For the News-Leader (Photo: Bruce E Stidham/News-Leader)Buy Photo

For Susie Farbin, selling natural foods is like running a family business.

For Diana Hicks, it's a second act career.

Since opening their flagship store in 2002, the two women who own MaMa Jean's Natural Market have watched their business grow 170 percent and go from six employees to 152. And with the addition of a third store, on East Sunshine Street in April 2013, they've increased their shop space by seven times.

"If anybody would have told me back when we opened in 2002 that we would have three stores one day, I would have said 'Right!" Hicks said. "That was never on our radar to have a multi-store operation."

And they haven't stopped planning.

RELATED: From a single market to an exploding business

A year ago, they launched a super-saver program on pantry items and in the future expect to add online shopping, take-home meal services and perhaps franchise the business.

The owners say a growing interest in healthy lifestyles, eating natural foods, and national media attention on products and supplements have contributed to the success of their sales.

Social media has also boosted business, said Amy Harmon, a longtime employee and marketing coordinator. "I really consider that part of customer awareness."

Customers come back also, the owners say, because their friendly staff embrace a healthy lifestyle and are knowledgeable about the products and how to use them.

"The thing I've always appreciated is the focus on customer service," said east store manager Austin Hartley. "We find out what they need and educate them. Whether that's a product or a book or we walk them to the produce section. We never say, 'I don't know.' We say, 'Let me find out.' "

Unexpected growth

It's been a year since Farbin and Hicks opened the store on Sunshine Street, just east of U.S. 65.

At 24,000 square feet, it's double the size of MaMa Jean's on Campbell Avenue, and their south store on Republic Road, established in 2008.

The south store is still their most congested, said Farbin, but when it comes to sales, the new store is "nipping at its heels."

With a wall of bulk herbs and spices, a full aisle of bulk natural foods, fresh produce and meats, supplements and organic products — plus a dine-in deli — the large bright store attracts new customers along with loyal shoppers who find the new location more convenient.

Sales for MaMa Jean's overall are up 35 percent since they opened the new store, owners say, although it's taken a bite out of sales at the Campbell store, down 13 percent, and the Republic Road store, down 8 percent.

The business has grown quickly and in some ways unexpectedly.

They might not have opened a second store if they hadn't needed more space to house product between truckloads. At the time, the first store's 7,000 square feet wasn't enough.

They knew Matt O'Reilly was opening the Green Circle Shopping Center on Republic Road, and it seemed a good fit. Shortly after opening the second store there, originally 8,000 square feet, they were able to expand the Campbell store to 11,000 square feet.

Later, they expanded the Republic store to 12,500 square feet.

But as the demand grew, space for product continued to be a challenge. They looked for land in the south where they could build a store to replace the existing one.

"We wanted it to be in that general area but couldn't find property reasonable enough to put this size building on it," Farbin said, gesturing around the new store.

They were working with a Realtor who knew that the old Furniture Broker store stood empty. Had they considered opening a third location?

"No, no we had not," Farbin said with a laugh.

They talked about it for three weeks, researching customer zip codes through their loyalty card program. Only 17 percent were coming from the east so they knew there was room for growth.

And they hoped a third store would alleviate congestion for customers and employees in the south.

Turns out "it's just a Band-Aid. It's still congested," Farbin said.

Healthy market

Customers who shop at MaMa Jean's vary, the owners say. Some are committed to buying 90 percent of their food there; others shop to supplement their stocks.

"Some come just for our bulk herbs and spices," Hicks said. They can be purchased "from a pinch to a pound," which is a savings for shoppers, Hicks added.

John Wagemann has done most of his shopping at MaMa Jean's on Campbell Avenue since 2004.

"I'm a cancer survivor. I strongly believe in eating God's green veggies from the garden," he said. "I can find everything I need here to eat. The whole list."

Wagemann was dining in the east store's deli because he had an appointment nearby.

The decision to add deli service to each store, which is a strain on the budget, the owners said, came down to atmosphere and customer experience.

"We took a trip to Kansas City and went into several natural food markets ... from chains to local. What's the feel? Do I want to be in here? And the ones that had the best atmosphere, that just felt like I want to be there and want to shop — the busiest ones — they all had food service," Farbin said.

"And the ones that didn't, it was like they had no soul."

Space equals savings

Opening the third store has helped the business — and customers — another way by reducing some prices for pantry items.

They already have a rewards program (get $5 off after spending $200). Now with more space to store large quantities, the owners can get palate deals for less and pass savings on to customers they say.

"We are doing our best to make sure MaMa Jean's is affordable to shop for a family," Farbin said.

That's why they started the super saver program (currently called SOS but to be renamed) on basic staples. Right now about 20 items are on the list, including raw almonds and oatmeal.

"The price reduction of those products has really increased sales on those dramatically. And I'm proud of that," Farbin said. "It's more than just a business here. We really do want people to eat better, to eat healthy."

In general, the cost for organic, natural foods can be higher but there are ways to defray that if you commit to preparing foods from scratch. Organic food is more nutrient dense so you don't have to eat as much, said Harmon, who teaches classes in cooking with natural foods for busy parents like herself.

"You aren't buying filler. You are buying food that fuels," Farbin said. "And if you go to the bulk section and buy your herbs and spices, you are going to save a ton of money."

Meats are more expensive, she said, because buying local products to sell costs more.

"We have tried to be the one-stop shopping for natural foods," Farbin said. "We try to carry as much product as possible so we are a full line natural market, not a health food store."

What's next?

Farbin and Hicks have talked about franchising, but the business grew and changed so fast, they need to tighten their operation and organize procedures before they are marketable that way. Establishing more efficiency is a goal for the coming year, and considering a franchise is at least a couple years away, they say.

They also plan to explore expanding on prepared foods that busy families can come in to buy and take home.

"There's a demand for that," Farbin said.

The business launched a new website recently. And while currently they don't sell products online, that's another expansion goal.

After 12 years, Farbin and Hicks are happy with their decision to open a store. Farbin is particularly pleased to have her grown son and daughter working at the business now, too.

"One thing that makes this career that Diana and I have created for ourselves is getting to work with the best people in Springfield," Farbin said.

"They are dedicated and passionate. We are really proud of that."

A few items you'll find at MaMa Jean's

• Fresh, organic sweet corn: MaMa Jean's carries fresh, USDA certified organic corn throughout the season that is guaranteed is non-GMO (genetically modified organism)

• Raw almonds (available in bulk): The health benefits of raw almonds are widely known and MaMa Jean's offers them as one of their super saver pantry items.

• Hit the Trail Mix (available in bulk): A popular bulk item that is a current featured item.

• MaMa Jean's Life Essentials Multi-Vitamin: House brand supplements.

• Teeter Creek Extract of Plantain: Teeter Creek, an area company, provides herbal extracts made from the fresh herbs available. Plantain extract is a great product to have on hand to relieve itching from bug bites and poison ivy.

• Echigo Farm Kim Chi: Echigo Farm is a local producer and Kim Chi is made of fermented vegetables.

• Cadia Organic Low Sodium Canned Tomatoes: Cadia is a new line of products that sell only to independent natural food retailers.

• Piney River Brewing Float Trip Ale: Piney River regularly attends MaMa Jean's Brew Squad events.

• Veriditas Essential Oils: Another company with a commitment to sell only to independent natural food retailers.

• Navitas Naturals Wheat Grass: The health benefits of wheatgrass are many, but finding fresh, affordable wheat juice can be difficult. Minimally processed, organic freeze dried wheatgrass provides daily health benefits with just ¼ teaspoon. One 1 ounce package provides 56 servings.

• Pink Himalayan Salt (available in bulk): One variety of their many specialty salts.

By the numbers

6 Number of

employees in 2002

152 Number of

employees in 2014

$200,000

Investment in the first store

35 Percentage of growth since opening third store

170 Percentage

of growth over 12 years

Source: MaMa Jean's

Discover MaMa Jean's mini market

Not long ago, Susie Farbin was asked if there was a fourth MaMa Jean's store downtown. The customer was just sure she'd seen it somewhere.

It's true, Farbin said, but not where you might think. A "mini-MaMa Jean's" play store at the Discovery Center opened in February.

MaMa Jean's is the new sponsor of the exhibit that allows kids to run, and to shop at, a pretend grocery store. Charlotte McCoy, communications director at Discovery Center, approached the business after they'd partnered on some classes.

"When they came to us with this idea, it was amazing and everyone's eyes lit up," Farbin said.

"And if you teach kids about eating healthy at an early age, hopefully it will stick with them throughout," added business co-owner Diana Hicks.

McCoy said, "Our market is the favorite (exhibit) in the whole place since we opened 16 years ago."

It's a great partnership, she said. It's good marketing for MaMa Jean's and meets their mission, and "we look at it from the point of, it's local, and it stays with our mission. And we are hoping to educate those children about different choices they can make."

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1kOL2cQ