Police line the street on Napoleon Avenue in Sunset, LA, Wednesday, Aug. 26, 2015. As of 6PM on Wednesday, at least three were confirmed to be shot including one police officer. (Photo: Paul Kieu, The Advertiser)

UPDATE 7 p.m.

The suspect in the Sunset shooting and stabbing probably will be charged with attempted first-degree murder of a police officer and attempted first-degree murder, St. Landry Parish Sheriff Bobby Guidroz said in a news conference.

The charges depend on whether the injured survive.

When asked about the charges, Guidroz at first said the suspect would be charged with the first-degree murder of a police officer, then corrected himself when a news reporter questioned the statement.

A Sunset police officer was shot Wednesday afternoon when he responded to a stabbing at 121 Anne St. Guidroz could not say what his condition is.

Two people were stabbed. One of them, Shamika Johnson of Sunset, was killed, according to KLFY TV-10.

UPDATE 6:50 p.m.

Shamika Johnson of Sunset was killed Wednesday afternoon, according to KLFY TV-10.

She was one of two people stabbed at 121 Anne St. A Sunset police officer who responded to the stabbing was shot. His condition is unknown. The names of the other victims have not yet been released.

Acadian Ambulance tweeted that two people were killed and two were injured in the incident.

Acadian is transporting the suspect to an area hospital. No other patients. 1 unit will remain on scene. 2 dead and 2 injured — Acadian Companies (@AcadianNews) August 26, 2015

The suspect, whose name is not being released at this time, has a criminal history, St. Landry Parish Sheriff Bobby Guidroz said.

The suspect is not seriously injured, but suffered burns and irritation to his face and eyes from tear gas. He is being assisted by Acadian Ambulance, will be taken to a Lafayette hospital for treatment, then booked into the Lafayette Parish Correctional Center, Guidroz said.

Law enforcement officers "had to go in with tear gas, C gas, hammers and firemen's axes" to breach an office door inside a convenience store.

"He was not coming out. He was ready to fight," Guidroz said, adding that the suspect resisted.

UPDATE 6:30 p.m.

According to St. Landry Parish Sheriff Bobby Guidroz, the suspect has been taken into police custody.

UPDATE 6 p.m.

Two people were stabbed and a Sunset police officer was shot, allegedly by the same person, St. Landry Parish Sheriff Bobby Guidroz said.

The suspect, whose name is not being released, is barricaded inside the office of the JR Exxon station and convenience store in Sunset.

"We hear him coughing and sneezing. The tear gas is eating him up," Guidroz said.

A police negotiate and a family member of the suspect are on the scene.The St. Landry Parish SWAT team is going to try to break down the door, which has a metal bar across it, he said.

“People are shocked. They are just shocked. They see it on the T.V., they read it in the paper, but it’s here. It’s here in our Sunset, Louisiana,” Sen. Elbert Guillory said. “People are in such disbelief.”

The incident began around 3 p.m. on St. Anderson Street in Sunset. The suspect allegedly stabbed two people, according to Guidroz. A Sunset police officer responding to the stabbing was shot.

The names of the injured, including the police officer, are not being released at this time.

The suspect then allegedly drove three blocks to the Exxon station and drove through the front of the store. Three people -- the owner, a cook and a customer -- were inside but got out safely, Guidroz said.

There are no hostages at this point.

Lafayette General Health spokesman Daryl Cetnar has confirmed one victim was transported via ambulance and is in critical condition.

UPDATE 5:40 p.m.

Louisiana State Police confirm to ABC three people shot in Sunset including police officer who is being airlifted to hospital.

State Sen. Elbert Guillory, R-Opelousas, a reserve officer, told KATC-TV the incident in Sunset began as a domestic disturbance and at least one person was stabbed an a responding officer was shot. There may be one more shooting victim, he said.

Law enforcement officials say multiple people, including an officer, have been shot in Sunset. There is no word yet on the extent of injuries.

Acadian Ambulance says Air Med has transported one patient; a total of eight ambulances and three helicopters responded to the scene so far. State Police are on the scene and say the SWAT team is surrounding a store on Anna Street.

An Instagram photo uploaded in Sunset apparently depicts the scene in Sunset. The photo shows a vehicle inside a store and shows a body lying on the ground. The user says the suspect ran people over, ran his car into a store and "in the store with a shotgun looking like Rambo."

UPDATE 5:25 p.m.

State police have confirmed that a Sunset police officer is among three people shot in Sunset.

On Napoleon Avenue in Sunset, dozens of law enforcement personnel and ambulances responded to the J Mart convenience store around 4:30 p.m. Wednesday. At least four people were inside when the situation began.

State Police Superintendent Mike Edmonson said the officer was “responsive” but he has no details on the extent of the officer’s injuries — or those of the other two people who were shot.

Law enforcement personnel are communicating with the suspect. The St. Landry Parish Sheriff's Department and Louisiana State Police have approached the scene in full-body armor, including helmets, camouflage and automatic weapons.

EARLIER

There are multiple reports of several people shot including a police officer at the J Mart near Anna and Napoleon streets in Sunset.

Acadian Ambulance has dispatched several units including AirMed to the scene.

Unconfirmed reports are that three individuals were taken to area hospitals.

We will update the story as more information is obtained.

We will update the story as more information is obtained.

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/news/local/2015/08/26/reports-several-people-officer-shot-sunset/32434571/