In January, about 41,000 Medicare beneficiaries began receiving medical care under a new program being carried about by PinnacleHealth System and five other health care organizations.

The six organizations joined together to form River Health ACO, a local version of a new type of entity created as a result of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

ACOs — Accountable Care Organizations — are intended promote better coordination of medical care for patients such as people with expensive medical conditions such as diabetes and congestive heart failure.

ACOs that save money get to keep part of the money while giving some back to Medicare.

In addition to PinnacleHealth, River Health ACO includes: Susquehanna Health, a four-hospital system located in north central Pa.; Family Practice Center, which is comprised of 62 family practices in central Pa.; Annville Family Medicine; Laurel Health Centers; and Susquehanna Community Health & Dental Center.

ACOs must be approved by the federal government and are evaluated based on 33 quality measures. They are expected to save money through tactics such as well-coordinated care, use of preventive care and taking a proactive approach toward high-risk patients.

PinnacleHealth CEO Michael Young said in a news release, “We are putting the patient at the center of care, helping them to navigate the healthcare system so they get the right care, from the right provider, at the right time and in the right place.”

PinnacleHealth said in December that affected patients would be receiving letters from their doctors, and that their Medicare coverage and their doctors won’t change.

While these patients can still see doctors who aren’t part of River Health ACO, they will receive more coordinated care if they choose a doctor participating in River Health, according to PinnacleHealth.

Meanwhile, the federal government announced last week that ACOs saved about $380 million in 2012, their first year of existence.

Since 2012, 360 ACOs have been formed, with the organizations covering 5.4 million Medicare beneficiaries.