Sanilac County Sheriff Garry M. Biniecki. (Photo: Courtesy)

Officials in Sanilac County are looking for ways to slow the number of corrections deputies leaving the county sheriff department.

The Sanilac County Sheriff Department has lost 11 jailhouse officers through resignation or retirement since 2012, and another five may leave in 2015.

With a target roster of 28 corrections officers and lengthy, expensive training requirements for new ones, the loss isn’t easy to recoup, said Sanilac County Sheriff Garry Biniecki.

“What the county needs to do is look very carefully at the benefit and wage package, which I believe is driving some employees away and may keep some potential employees from coming,” Biniecki said.

“They need to invest in our future.”

Biniecki said the sheriff department has 22 full-time and three part-time corrections officers. He said two of them finished training last week and two still are in training.

Biniecki estimated it costs about $20,000 and 14 to 16 weeks to train a new jail deputy.

He said that extra lag time for training prolongs the time the department has to work short-staffed.

Biniecki expects another reason some deputies are leaving is the added burden of federal inmates who are lodged in the jail — a number that has almost doubled since the county completed its jail addition in July 2013, while the number of corrections deputies stayed roughly the same.

On Thursday, the jail housed 90 federal inmates and 56 county inmates. The jail is licensed to hold 168 inmates.

Biniecki said in 2014 the bed rental program put about $2.4 million into the county general fund.

“The county benefits directly from those bed rentals,” Biniecki said. “But there’s no added benefit for guarding that extra inmate.”

Justin Faber, chairman for the Sanilac County Board of Commissioners, said commissioners have asked Biniecki to give a presentation on how many have left, and why they’re leaving.

“We’d liked to see some statistics about why people are leaving and where they’re going to,” Faber said.

Faber said in the years since the Affordable Care Act went into play changes have been made to county insurance policies and part-time hours.

The county used to pay 100 percent of health care premiums. Now, employees are required to contribute to the health plan depending on his or her level of coverage.

Part-time deputies that formerly worked longer hours now must be kept to 29 or fewer hours, otherwise the county must provide insurance for them.

“We can’t use part-time help like we did in the past,” Faber said.

Faber said the board recently hired the Michigan Municipal League to conduct a wage study, which focused solely on wages and not benefits.

“That wage study did find that some employees were underpaid and some were not so much,” Faber said. “The board is taking a look at how we can fix those things.

“We’re in an area where we’re not always the top-paying, but we need to pay our people fairly.”

Faber said the county currently is in union negotiations with the local Police Officers Association of Michigan and Command Officers Association of Michigan.

He hopes that the board can come to a solution through those negotiations and Biniecki’s input on the problem.

Biniecki said he expects to address the board later this month.

Read or Share this story: http://bwne.ws/1C7fTo2