A separatist rebel fighter smokes a cigarette at a checkpoint Tuesday in Donetsk, Ukraine. Ukraine's military reportedly is seeking to implement a renewed cease-fire with Russian-backed separatists. Eric FeferbergAFP/Getty Images

In hopes of pursuing a renewed cease-fire agreement, the Ukrainian military has stopped shooting at Russian-backed separatists in the eastern part of the country, which has been embroiled in fighting for eight months.

[READ: Russian President Vladimir Putin Asserts Right to Crimea in Ukraine]

Ukrainian General Staff Chief Viktor Muzhenko, head of Ukraine's armed forces, said the country hopes a cessation of hostilities Tuesday in the provinces of Donetsk and Lukhansk will last until more permanent measures can be put into place.

“Seeking to implement the peace plan, we are introducing a cease-fire regime, the so-called regime of silence, at 10 a.m. on Dec. 9," Muzhenko said, according to the Interfax-Ukraine news agency. “The regime of silence will take effect today and we will discuss the fulfillment of other stabilization measures in eastern Ukraine when we have guarantees that hostilities have really been halted.”

However, Muzhenko said two shooting incidents already have breached the cease-fire attempt, which follows a cease-fire agreement reached in Minsk, Belarus, in September that also has been repeatedly violated. According to the U.N., more than 4,300 people have died in the fighting, which began in mid-April, and hundreds of thousands have been displaced.



Russia Intervenes in Crimea EXPAND GALLERY Photo Gallery x of x Full Screen Ukraine's fugitive former president, Viktor Yanukovych, makes his first public appearance since Saturday during a news conference Friday in Rostov-on-Don, a city in southern Russia about 600 miles from Moscow. "I intend to keep fighting for the future of Ukraine," he said, and denied that he fled after being ousted. Pavel Golovkin/AP x of x Full Screen Unidentified armed men patrol outside of Ukraine's Simferopol International Airport on Friday. Ukraine accused Russia of staging an "armed invasion" after reports that Russian soldiers had appeared there and at a military airport in Crimea's Black Sea port of Sevastopol. Viktor Drachev/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen Unidentified soldiers patrol outside the Simferopol International Airport on Friday in Crimea, an autonomous region in Ukraine. Crimea has a majority Russian population, and pro-Russian men have been occupying government buildings throughout Simferopol, according to reports. Sean Gallup/Getty Images x of x Full Screen Armed men patrol on Friday outside of Simferopol International Airport. Viktor Drachev/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen An unidentified gunman aims his assault rifle while he and others block the road toward the military airport Friday at the Black Sea port of Sevastopol in Crimea, an autonomous region in Ukraine. Ivan Sekretarev/AP x of x Full Screen Russian troops block the road to the airport Friday in Sevastopol. Andrew Lubimov/AP x of x Full Screen Russian soldiers guard the entrance to the Sevastopol military airport Friday. The airport is valued for its location on the strategic Crimean Peninsula, which juts out into the Black Sea. Ivan Sekretarev/AP x of x Full Screen An armed Ukrainian policeman on Friday stands close to the fence of the Sevastopol International Airport. Ivan Sekretarev/AP x of x Full Screen Pro-Russian men known as Cossacks gather outside the Crimean parliament building during a pro-Russian demonstration on Friday in Simferopol, Ukraine. Sean Gallup/Getty Images x of x Full Screen Russia supporters rally Friday outside the Crimean parliament building. Sean Gallup/Getty Images x of x Full Screen "Any military action in this situation is unacceptable," former Ukraine President Viktor Yanukovych said during his first public appearance in a week Friday regarding the degree of Russia's involvement. Pavel Golovkin/AP x of x Full Screen A traveler walks past armed men Friday outside of Simferopol International Airport. Viktor Drachev/AFP/Getty Images x of x Full Screen An armed man patrols a square Friday in front of the airport in Simferopol. Andrew Lubimov/AP x of x Full Screen Soldiers patrol outside the airport Friday in Simferopol. Sean Gallup/Getty Images x of x Photo Gallery x of x Ukraine's fugitive former president, Viktor Yanukovych, makes his first public appearance since Saturday during a news conference Friday in Rostov-on-Don, a city in southern Russia about 600 miles from Moscow. "I intend to keep fighting for the future of Ukraine," he said, and denied that he fled after being ousted. Pavel Golovkin/AP x of x Unidentified armed men patrol outside of Ukraine's Simferopol International Airport on Friday. Ukraine accused Russia of staging an "armed invasion" after reports that Russian soldiers had appeared there and at a military airport in Crimea's Black Sea port of Sevastopol. Viktor Drachev/AFP/Getty Images x of x Unidentified soldiers patrol outside the Simferopol International Airport on Friday in Crimea, an autonomous region in Ukraine. Crimea has a majority Russian population, and pro-Russian men have been occupying government buildings throughout Simferopol, according to reports. Sean Gallup/Getty Images x of x Armed men patrol on Friday outside of Simferopol International Airport. Viktor Drachev/AFP/Getty Images x of x An unidentified gunman aims his assault rifle while he and others block the road toward the military airport Friday at the Black Sea port of Sevastopol in Crimea, an autonomous region in Ukraine. Ivan Sekretarev/AP x of x Russian troops block the road to the airport Friday in Sevastopol. Andrew Lubimov/AP x of x Russian soldiers guard the entrance to the Sevastopol military airport Friday. The airport is valued for its location on the strategic Crimean Peninsula, which juts out into the Black Sea. Ivan Sekretarev/AP x of x An armed Ukrainian policeman on Friday stands close to the fence of the Sevastopol International Airport. Ivan Sekretarev/AP x of x Pro-Russian men known as Cossacks gather outside the Crimean parliament building during a pro-Russian demonstration on Friday in Simferopol, Ukraine. Sean Gallup/Getty Images x of x Russia supporters rally Friday outside the Crimean parliament building. Sean Gallup/Getty Images x of x "Any military action in this situation is unacceptable," former Ukraine President Viktor Yanukovych said during his first public appearance in a week Friday regarding the degree of Russia's involvement. Pavel Golovkin/AP x of x A traveler walks past armed men Friday outside of Simferopol International Airport. Viktor Drachev/AFP/Getty Images x of x An armed man patrols a square Friday in front of the airport in Simferopol. Andrew Lubimov/AP x of x Soldiers patrol outside the airport Friday in Simferopol. Sean Gallup/Getty Images x of x ×

Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said Tuesday it is “fully obvious” that eastern Ukraine is far from a full cessation of tensions, but referenced a meeting expected to be held this week between representatives from Ukraine, Russia and rebel groups.

"In the coming days, a meeting of the contact group is planned, in which will be discussed a plan prepared by military specialists of practical measures … with the aim of a final cease-fire," Lavrov said, according to Russian news agency RIA Novosti.

U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine Geoff Pyatt stressed Monday that more violence will not solve the conflict.

“This is a crisis that’s not going to be solved on the battlefield. The end game is going to be played in the court of diplomacy, and the best vehicle we see for achieving that is the full implementation of the Minsk agreement,” Pyatt said



[ALSO: Ukraine Death Toll Now More Than 4,300, U.N. Says]

The U.S. has attempted to use sanctions to pressure Russia to withdraw its forces from Ukraine. The measures, also implemented by Europe, target Russian individuals, corporations and industries in an attempt to create financial penalties and force Russian President Vladimir Putin to back off. The Russian economy has been struggling in wake of the sanctions, and is predicted to enter a recession next year.

The Russian government, however, continues to maintain it is not arming rebels in Ukraine, while the West says Russia is responsible for fueling the fighting. In a speech to his country’s parliament last week, Putin said Crimea – a region annexed from Ukraine by Russia in March – is the same to Russians as the Temple Mount in Jerusalem is to Jews.

“Crimea is where our people live, and the peninsula is of strategic importance for Russia as the spiritual source of the development of a multifaceted but solid Russian nation and a centralized Russian state,” Putin said.