The Federal Emergency Management Agency has approved city plans for three flood recovery projects to be reconstructed in a more sustainable way

The Big Thompson River runs through Viestenz-Smith Mountain Park on Friday west of Loveland. The park has been closed since being damaged in the 2013 flood. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The city of Loveland has received approval for a change of scope in three of its flood recovery projects from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, meaning work on the three can move forward.

The scope of work for the three projects, merged into one, falls under FEMA's alternative projects pilot program. The program reimburses local governments for costs to restore areas after disasters in a way that's different than they were prior to the disaster — and in a way that makes them more sustainable. The three projects combined will receive $14.3 million.

Viestenz-Smith Mountain Park in the Big Thompson Canyon, which has been closed to the public since the flood, is one of the projects approved in this round of funding, as is the city's new solar facility and substation project to be located west of Mehaffey Park, and the Meadow pipeline project waterline.

Advertisement

Viestenz-Smith Mountain Park

Much of the park, located 10 miles west of Loveland on U.S. 34, was destroyed in the flood, and city officials sought public input in April on two different designs for how the new park would look, including re-excavating a new river channel. Ultimately, a hybrid of the two designs was chosen.

"We proposed that we build something back that's a little more sustainable for hazard mitigation," Senior Parks Planner Janet Meisel-Burns said.

The design includes widening an old bridge from 60 feet to 100 feet, elevating the parking lot, putting picnic areas on the north side of the park and river restoration.

The park project was approved for about $2.1 million of the $14.3 million total, and there's also money coming in from the city's insurance carrier. Meisel-Burns said the construction budget for the park reconstruction is $2.5 million. However, that will cover only the first phase of the project. Officials will apply for grant money for additional phases, she said, which could include additional river restoration and parking as well as repairing an additional bridge at the east end of the park.

But before any construction can even begin, Meisel-Burns said, city officials have to work with FEMA on what's called a Conditional Letter of Map Revision to make sure no damage is caused upstream or downstream. That could take six to nine months.

The process is required, Meisel-Burns said, because the city is proposing to change the floodway — back to the way it was during the flood.

The target timeline is to start construction in fall 2016, with the park opening in summer 2017, after the first phase is completed.

"We're just really thrilled that we're through the scope change review," she said.

Foothills Solar Facility and Substation

The solar facility and substation is intended to replace Idylwilde Hydroelectric Facility (the hydroelectric plant was located at Viestenz-Smith Park). The dam was destroyed in both the 1976 and 2013 floods. The dam has already been demolished and the hydroelectric plant will also be demolished.

City staff members say the new location — half of the 52.6 city-owned acres on West 22nd Street and West 29th Street — will help the Water and Power Division meet growth demands in the northwestern part of the city and meet a long-term goal of retiring the West Substation.

According to Customer Relations Manager Gretchen Stanford, the $9.1 million project has to be completed by September 2017, with a goal of putting in the solar facility by December 2016.

"If we put in 3 megawatts of solar, it will count three times that toward the renewable energy portfolio," Stanford said, which will meet the state's requirements of 10 percent renewables by 2020 for municipalities with more than 40,000 customers. The 3 megawatts would provide more than 400 households with power.

Loveland wouldn't necessarily have to meet the state requirement because it serves about 35,000 customers, she said, but it would receive the additional credit from the state if it does.

The project, Stanford said, made sense as an alternate project because Idylwilde was damaged in both the 1976 and 2013 flood.

"The most exciting thing about this project is it's the first electric generating facility that's going through the FEMA alternate project. ... It's really exciting for the city as a whole to lead the way for more electric generating in the future," she said.

Meadow Project

The Meadow project, which refers to the meadow below the city's Water Treatment Plant, included moving a waterline farther away from the banks of the river and taking measures to add extra protection and prevent erosion, so the newly-placed waterline can last for decades to come. That project was completed last year, but additional river restoration work was required by Larimer County during its review of work along the Big Thompson River. However, that additional work is not eligible for additional FEMA funding.

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.