A front will bring light snow, and just 2 to 4 inches of snow, to Northern New Jersey beginning this afternoon through sometime Monday morning.

The southern part of the state won't be as lucky. It will get a couple of inches from that first storm, as well. But then, a second storm will move through and drop even more snow, possibly giving some areas 11 inches of snow or more, according to the National Weather Service.

Call it a one-two punch.

"The second storm will be focused over the southern half of the state, bringing a lot of negative morning impact on the roads on Monday," meteorologist Mitchell Gaines said today.

Middlesex, Somerset and Morris counties are expected to see up to 6 inches. A winter weather advisory is in effect for those areas until 10 a.m. Monday. Sussex, Bergen and Passaic are only expected to get about 3 inches, according to meteorologists.

The corridor from Philadelphia to Freehold and Sandy Hook is expected to get 6 to 8 inches, according to the weather service. A winter storm warning is in effect until 1 p.m. Monday.

The heaviest snow is expected to fall southeast of the Turnpike, in Burlington, Ocean, Salem, Gloucester, Atlantic and Cape May counties, Gaines said. Meteorologists predicted between 7 to 11 inches for those southernmost counties. The winter storm warning expires at 4 p.m. for that part of the state.

The first storm will bring a mix of snow and sleet, with freezing rain possible a little later on, according to the weather service advisory. It should change over to all snow between 7 and 10 p.m.

The snow is expected to create nasty driving conditions, and Monday morning's commute could be "particularly difficult," Gaines said.

Don't get hopes up for a quick thaw, either. Gaines said temperatures are going to fall fairly rapidly early Monday into the single digits. Some areas could see temperatures fall below zero.

Nearly 1,600 flights in the United States were canceled and another 1,515 delayed Sunday afternoon. According to flight-tracking website FlightAware.com, 85 flights were canceled and 97 delayed today at Newark Liberty International Airport today. Another 82 have already been canceled for Monday.

The storm has already started to wreak havoc in the West, where four hikers had to be rescued because of rising floodwaters in California. A suspension bridge over the Ohio River between Cincinnati and Kentucky was closed because of ice covering its hard-to-treat metal grid deck.

Freezing rain and sleet moved across Kentucky, making road travel treacherous on Sunday, while arctic cold temperatures hit Nebraska, with wind chills hitting 20 to 35 degrees below zero.

The good news? After we endure this storm, sunny skies and highs in the mid to upper 20s and even the low 30s are expected for the next three days.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.