A large crowd, including members of the general public as well as local, state and national officials, gathered for a Senate campaign rally in support of U.S. Rep. Tom Cotton, R-Dardanelle, in downtown Fort Smith on Thursday.

Cotton, who is challenging incumbent U.S. Sen. Mark Pryor, D-Ark., in the Nov. 4 general election, criticized his opponent largely for his support of President Barack Obama’s policies, noting Pryor sides with the president “93 percent of the time.”

Cotton criticized the Obama administration for too much government regulation, higher taxes and wasteful spending, and noted that the country needs to get off of that path to restore America.

“Are you better off than you were six years ago?” he asked the crowd of more than 350 people who had gathered at Thursday’s “River Valley Political Rally” at the Fort Smith Museum of History. “Are you happy with our current policies? It’s time to retire Pryor.”

Erik Dorey, spokesman for the Pryor campaign, described Cotton’s “93 percent” claim as a “false statistic.” Cotton’s claim is based on statistics that do not weigh the significance of specific votes, but rather take into account mostly noncontroversial issues, such as nominations, he said.

Pryor has strayed from the president on gun control, the Keystone pipeline and burdensome EPA regulations, among other issues, Dorey said.

“It is false by any measure to say that Mark Pryor is anything but a fiercely independent and bipartisan voice for Arkansans who is never shy about standing up to any president or leaders of either party when their policies are wrong for Arkansas,” Dorey said.

Cotton and his wife, Anna, announced Thursday on social media that they were expecting their first child, a boy. Cotton used the opportunity to speak about the moment he learned he was to be a father and how it affected his perspective of the state of future political affairs within the state and the country.

“When you’re going to be a dad … it actually makes things a little bit more concrete about the future of our county and the future of our state,” he said, noting he has stood up for families during his tenure as a congressman and that he wanted to pass on to his son an America that is “just as strong and prosperous as it has been for the past 230 years.” In order to do that, Cotton said, the country must change its current political path.

Cotton also chastised Pryor’s support of the Affordable Care Act and his votes that support “reckless spending and foreign policy,” tasking those in attendance to send a message to Washington by encouraging their friends and family to show their support for his campaign.

Dorey countered by saying that Cotton has repeatedly voted to give power back to insurance-industry bureaucrats.

“Mark has said from the very beginning that this law is far from perfect, but he refused to return to the days where insurance companies regularly denied coverage to Arkansans with pre-existing conditions,” Dorey said.

Those in attendance felt Cotton’s platform made him right for the job.

“I think he’ll do what he says he’s going to do and I think he’s going to help Arkansas,” said Dyer resident Carole Lemieux, adding she hoped Cotton would relieve some of the burdens of being overtaxed. “(Sen. Pryor) has been in office too long and is out of touch with what we need.”

Fort Smith resident John Neubauer lauded Cotton’s military experience and “no nonsense” approach.

“He served in the military and I think he’s learned to be firm and I don’t think the other guy can do that,” he said. “He’s a no nonsense guy and I’d like to see a politician get in and do what’s right and I feel like he can do that.”

Cotton’s parents, Len and Avis, were pleased with the warm reception and the support shown to their son.

U.S. Sen. John Boozman, R-Ark., was on hand to show his support for the Cotton campaign, noting Cotton possesses Arkansas values and a “love of country and honor of the Lord,” tenants he said were needed in Washington.

Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee also endorsed Cotton’s campaign, telling the audience that electing Cotton was necessary not only to “turn the economy around,” but was to help Republicans gain the majority in the Senate.

“You’ve got a candidate Arkansas will be proud of, who will vote for values you send him there to do,” Huckabee said.

Times Record reporter Stacy Ryburn contributed to this report.