Police officers check a female motorcyclist wearing pants at a checkpoint in Aceh. Photo: AP

Jakarta: Gay sex and sex outside marriage in the Indonesian province of Aceh will be punishable by 100 lashes of the cane under new laws passed by the local parliament.

Even non-Muslim tourists to Indonesia's westernmost province are subject to the sharia penalty in a step that human rights groups have described as an "enormous step backwards".

A masked and hooded official canes an Acehnese man for gambling. Photo: AFP

The Aceh Islamic Criminal Code is a bylaw of the provincial parliament – the only district of Indonesia with authority to enact sharia provisions in the criminal law.

Advertisement

It now explicitly makes it a criminal act for men to have anal sex with each other, and for women to "rub together body parts for stimulation".

Being alone with someone of the opposite sex who is neither a marriage partner nor a relative is also punishable by caning.

Party Aceh, the dominant political movement that sprang from the former separatist army of Aceh, backed the law, saying ordinary people in the province were calling for it.

Suaidi Sulaiman, the party's deputy spokesman said the law had been passed "because Aceh is the 'verandah of Mecca'.

"Aceh people have been the followers of Islam since the 13th century … in Aceh everything is linked to religion."

Homosexuality is not a criminal offence in the rest of Indonesia.

"Aceh gays are free to be themselves outside of Aceh because Jakarta doesn't implement Islamic sharia," Mr Suaidi said. "But they know there is no opportunity for gays in Aceh."

Women's rights activist Samsidar said the new law had also increased the difficulty of proving rape, and opened the door for child victims of sexual assault to be considered as adulterers.

"The legal wording puts a child or a minor in the same position as adults in adultery cases, while, in our view, the children are the victims," she said.

Aceh is the province in which women can be punished for not wearing headscarves, and where, in some areas, they are required to ride side-saddle on motorcycles.

It is also the province where a vigilante group of eight local men and boys this year allegedly gang-raped a woman they accused of having sex with a married man, then presented her to the sharia police for further punishment.

The sharia police investigated her "crime" before dropping the charges.

The alleged rapists will face criminal sanction through the secular courts for their actions.

Amnesty International's Asia-Pacific Director Richard Bennett said Aceh's new laws, passed on Saturday, would be used "disproportionately to police and punish women's choices".

"They also act as a deterrent to women reporting rape and sexual violence who may fear being accused of sex outside marriage," he said.

Indonesia more broadly does not criminalise homosexuality, he said, but Aceh's new law was a "huge blow for equality" and would "add to the climate of homophobia, fear and harassment many in Aceh are already facing".

Aceh has caned 156 people in public ceremonies – usually after Friday prayers – since 2010.

Most are punished for gambling and drinking, but others have been punished for "khalwat", or consorting with members of the opposite sex.

Sharia was introduced in Aceh in 2001, as the central government tried to co-opt religious leaders in the fight against the separatist insurgency. That insurgency only ended in a 2005 agreement, the year after the Boxing Day tsunami devastated the region.

– with Karuni Rompies