Barack Obama will be in Las Vegas on Monday to deliver the keynote speech at Clean Energy Summit 8.0, where he'll no doubt receive unyielding applause for the most economically harmful, unlawful overreach of his presidency.

The president has ordered a complete restructuring of the American energy sector through regulatory fiat. His Clean Power Plan, the New Testament for the Church of Climate Change, gives the Environmental Protection Agency the kind of authority that not even the president is provided. The EPA will coerce states into adopting policies that would never pass Congress — the abandonment of coal-fired power, cap-and-trade schemes, more aggressive transitions to more costly green power — to meet the arbitrary goal of reducing the country's carbon emissions 32 percent by 2030 from 2005 levels. This will dramatically increase power costs, stifle economic growth, reduce standards of living and decrease the reliability of the power grid.

And without a single day's debate in the Capitol.

Imagine if Mr. Obama had tried to impose the provisions of the Affordable Care Act solely through rules issued by the Department of Health and Human Services, without the approval of Congress. As badly as Obamacare has worked out for the American people, at least it was subjected to a vote of elected representatives.

The president is advancing his agenda with unconstitutional abandon because the Republican Congress won't pass it. Although he blames the GOP for obstructionism — for being climate change deniers — Mr. Obama and other Democrats conveniently forget that cap-and-trade legislation failed to pass Congress in 2010, when Democrats were in full control of Washington, because of Democratic opposition. Some moderates within the party understand that you can't claim to champion the interests of the poor and the middle class while simultaneously killing jobs and making power so expensive that families can't afford to run their air conditioners.

And for what, exactly? A guess that all these measures will change climate change? The assurance that the hyperpolitical advocates of this approach can predict, with certainty, exactly what the world's climate will be like 15, 40, 80 years from now? Benjamin Zycher of the American Enterprise Institute says the EPA's own climate model predicts a temperature reduction of 15 thousandths of a degree by 2100 if Mr. Obama's entire climate change plan is realized. As a cost-benefit proposition, the Clean Power Plan fails miserably.

Contrary to what Mr. Obama believes, climate change science isn't settled, and it never will be. That's why his believers so often resort to false alarmism, demanding Draconian action based on emotional appeals. "The time for debate has passed! We have to do something right now!" Never mind that U.S. carbon emissions already are falling thanks to cheap, abundant natural gas and technological advances.

Nevada is already transitioning to a coal-free power portfolio, at great cost to ratepayers. But the president's plan cannot be allowed to stand. If he won't recognize the lawmaking authority of Congress, then the courts should slap him down — with states leading the challenge.