The public will have a chance to comment this week on proposed air quality rules for the Bay Area’s five oil refineries.

The new rules, from the Bay Area Air Quality Management District, aim for more accurate estimates of all refinery emissions and to assess any risks to human health. The district also wants to see a 20 percent decrease in emissions.

Refineries would have to compile a profile of all emissions over one year.

From the Bay Area News Group:

Political pressure for the tougher rules mounted after a 2012 fire at Chevron’s Richmond oil refinery sent thousands to hospitals with eye, throat and lung irritation. With the new proposals, clean air regulators say they want a more holistic approach that goes further than existing rules and permits aimed at reducing pollution from specific types of boilers, towers, other equipment and manufacturing processes.

Air district Rule Manager Greg Nudd said the proposal “goes beyond what we traditionally include in the emissions inventories for the refineries to include things like emissions from things like ships, trains, and trucks that bring in crude and take product out.”

The rules would put air monitors in the communities around refineries. And they would require refineries not to exceed baseline levels for certain pollutants that can affect public health.

The rules would affect the Chevron, Shell, Tesoro, Phillips 66 and Valero refineries.

The Western Petroleum States Association opposes the 20-percent-reduction goal. From Richmond Confidential last fall:

Guy Bjerke, spokesman for WSPA (objected) to the resolution, saying the emission cap will affect the current collaborations between the refineries and the district on laying down the rules for tracking refineries’ emissions, reporting the contents of crude oil, and assessing any related health risks. “Just working on these will take a lot of dollars and a lot of time,” Bjerke said.

Meanwhile, Andres Soto of Communities for a Better Environment, told BANG the rules are too weak: “We are very disappointed with the staff proposal,” he said. “The community suffers asthma, increased cancer risk and other problems from this pollution.”

You can read the air tracking and emissions mitigation rules at the BAAQMD site.

Here are the upcoming meetings this week. Occupy Oakland, among other groups, is advocating for strong rules.

Benicia

Monday, March 16, 5:30 PM – 7:00 PM

Benicia Senior Center

187 East L Street

Richmond

Tuesday, March 17, 5:30 PM – 7:00 PM

Madeline F Whittlesey Community Room

Richmond Public Library 25 Civic Center Plaza

Martinez

Wednesday, March 18, 5:30 PM – 7:00 PM

Contra Costa County Chambers

651 Pine Street

San Francisco

Friday, March 20, 2015 10:30 AM – Noon

Air District Board Room, 7th Floor

939 Ellis Street