People in mental health crisis — and the leaders of the state Senate — would get some additional help if Senate Majority Leader Thomas K. "Tommy" Norment Jr., R-James City County, gets his way.

Local legislators' proposed changes to Gov. Terry McAuliffe's budget for the two years beginning July 1 would boost spending on a wide range of state programs.

And those proposals are likely to be only a small part of some of the major revisions the General Assembly will make to McAuliffe's budget, with its proposal that the state use Affordable Care Act funds to expand Medicaid and free up funds now spent on health care for tax cuts and other purposes.

One of McAuliffe's priorities for those other purposes, mental health care, turns out also to be one of Norment's.

Norment's amendments include an additional $11.5 million over the next two years to pay for mobile crisis intervention services — a new approach to mental health emergencies that allows on-the-scene intervention in a crisis, instead of the current practice of requiring police or family members to bring people into a clinic or emergency room.

It marks the first time he's ventured a community mental health care proposal, and comes the year he took on the role of co-chairman of the Senate Finance Committee in addition to his powerful post as Senate majority leader.

"Mental health is a priority these days," Norment said.

Norment's proposed amendments also include a $16,200-a-year increase for his expenses as majority leader. In addition, he proposed an additional $247,000 year to pay legislative assistants and secretaries for unspecified members of the Senate's leadership,

Those requests are meant to highlight the differences between what the House of Delegates spends on its leaders' staffs and what the Senate does, he said.

In addition, he suggested a pay boost for senators, by bringing their reimbursement for attending meetings on legislative business to $300 a day from $200, when the General Assembly is not in session. That translates to an additional $87,600 a year to be divided, though not equally, among the 40 senators.

Norment's proposed mental health funding increase dwarfs the amendments other legislators from the Peninsula have proposed, though many of those account for millions, too.

Norment's proposals include another new venture, a $2.9 million boost in Medicaid funds to cover care at nursing homes that specialize in younger patients with chronic conditions or disabilities, as well as a perennial, a boost of $1 million for legal services for the poor, an interest he says dates from his days as a law student, volunteering at a legal aid office in Norfolk.

While state Sen. Ryan McDougle, R-Hanover, doesn't represent the area, the Republican caucus chairman proposed an additional $7.5 million for the Jamestown-Yorktown 2019 Commemoration Steering Committee, The money would go for staff, marketing and wooing private support for commemoration events.

"Whenever you have these commemorations it's an opportunity to engage, for the long term, more people to come," said McDougle, who, like a number of top state leaders, is on the Jamestown-Yorktown Foundation Board of Trustees.

Del. Keith Hodges, R-Urbanna, is proposing an additional $7 million over the next two years to provide community services for young people and adults at high risk of re-hospitalization for mental illness.

Hodges also wants an additional $2.4 million over the next two years to cover rising costs at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science in Gloucester, as well an additional $325,000 a year for graduate student financial aid. VIMS is a graduate program of the College of William and Mary. Hodges is also seeking an additional $500,000 to help the Virginia Marine Resources Commission remove abandoned boats.

Del. David Yancey, R-Newport News, and state Sen. John Miller, D-Newport News, proposed a total addition of $5.7 million in taxpayer money for Christopher Newport University, for staff pay raises, to hire 15 additional faculty members and for new technology. Their proposals also commit nontaxpayer funds, such as tuition, for these efforts.

Yancey wants an additional $3.5 million over the next two years to support the Denbigh High School Aviation Academy while Miller proposed an increase of $1.65 million. The aim is to create a workforce development center there to serve 500 students, Miller said.

Miller and Del. Brenda Pogge, R-Norge, have proposed an additional $3 million over the next two years to expand services for people with brain injuries.

"I've been able to see the kind of work they do at Denbigh House, and I have a number of friends who've had family members with brain injuries," Miller said. "This is important."

Miller, who regularly pushes legislation to make voting easier, wants the state to kick in $2 million next year to help cities and counties replace electronic voting machines. He estimates the money would cover about 10 percent of the cost.

Miller wants the state to set aside $1.9 million a year for Medicaid waivers for military personnel transferred to Virginia who need Medicaid funds for children with developmental or intellectual disabilities.

Miller also proposes an addition $1.4 million a year for a 2 percent increase in per-pupil funding for the Virginia Pre-school initiative.

State Sen. Mamie Locke, D-Hampton, wants the state to commit $1.5 million a year to match federal spending for a flood control study for Hampton Roads and the Northern Neck.

She proposed an additional $1.1 million for Children's Services Act programs, which fund care and treatment for troubled youth, including those who need specialized foster care or special school programs. In Hampton and Newport News, more than 650 children and teenagers get such services.

Some of the proposals don't cost additional money. They set priorities for what various state agencies do.