Under the Radar Blog Archives Select Date… April, 2016 March, 2016 February, 2016 January, 2016 December, 2015 November, 2015 October, 2015 September, 2015 August, 2015 July, 2015 June, 2015 May, 2015

Gawker presses on Philippe Reines emails

The website Gawker is asking a federal judge to order the State Department and former Hillary Clinton adviser Philippe Reines to produce sworn affidavits about his email practices and about why the agency asserted in response to a 2012 Freedom of Information Act request that it had no records of his correspondence with 34 news organizations.

"The appropriateness of the actions by Mr. Reines in particular — as well as the action or inaction by State — are legitimate subjects of concern in the context of this litigation," Gawker attorneys Brad Moss and Mark Zaid wrote in a court filing submitted Monday night. "The FOIA request serving as the basis for this litigation was filed almost three years ago. ... Throughout the entirety of that time, there is no indication that State had ever sought to recover any relevant e-mails from Mr. Reines, to say nothing of the fact that it is unclear on what legal basis Mr. Reines still retained exclusive control over those e-mails in the first place years after his departure from State."

In the wake of the revelation in March that Clinton exclusively used a private email account and server when she served as secretary of state, questions have also swirled about the email practices of her senior aides. At the State Department’s request, Clinton returned 55,000 pages of emails to the agency last December. Former Clinton aides Jake Sullivan and Cheryl Mills have also produced emails from their personal accounts in recent weeks.

Last week, Reines gave State 20 boxes of emails from his personal accounts. The volume raised eyebrows since Reines maintained earlier this year that his practice was to use his official account for official business.

"You’d be surprised how many reporters deliberately email government officials to their personal accounts. You’d be equally surprised to know that when they did, I moved the exchange to my state.gov account because, between you and me, my personal account is about the last place I want to be emailing reporters or conducting work," he told Gawker in an email in March.

Reines attorney Beth Wilkinson said the quantity of records Reines turned over was due in part to him receiving daily news clips from State on his personal account and in part to Reines deciding to err on the side of including any records that could possibly be considered work-related.

"Philippe was over-inclusive in providing documents in his possession to the Department. We're confident that the State Department will determine that the overwhelming majority of documents he provided are either personal or were already residing on Department servers because a state.gov address was included on the email — often his own," Wilkinson said. "These [news] clips emails alone accounted for 53,414 printed pages of what was sent to State earlier this week, and every one should already reside on the State Department server."

A source familiar with the Reines submission said Tuesday, by way of illustration, that the records include 185 copies of Mike Allen's POLITICO Playbook.

State said in the same court filing Monday that it should not be required to file any affidavits at this time and that it has no authority to demand that Reines submit one.

"Plaintiffs wrongly ask the Court to compel the Department of State to provide discovery in the form of affidavits addressing its ongoing efforts to respond to Plaintiffs’ FOIA request," Justice Department lawyers wrote. "Plaintiffs ask for an affidavit discussing the circumstances surrounding Mr. Reines’ provision to the State Department of his work-related email, but those circumstances have no bearing on the setting of a production schedule for the processing of records responsive to Plaintiffs’ FOIA request. The Department of State only received these documents on July 28, 2015, and ... it needs approximately six weeks to scan the documents and complete its initial review. ... Plaintiffs request an affidavit from Mr. Reines, the former Deputy Assistant Secretary of State. The Department of State cannot require Mr. Reines, a private citizen, to sign a sworn affidavit."

U.S. District Court Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson did not immediately grant Gawker's request for the affidavits. She issued an order Tuesday telling State to propose a schedule by next week for when it will commit to releasing materials from Reines' submission. The judge also set a hearing Sept. 8 for both sides to provide an update on the progress of the case.

Gawker's request appeared to be modeled on an order that another federal judge in Washington, Emmet Sullivan, issued Friday, telling State to ask Clinton, Mills and another close Clinton aide, Huma Abedin, to certify that they've turned over all records in their possession related to their service at the State Department.

While Reines and many other State Department employees — including Clinton — apparently believed they were preserving records by emailing them to State.gov accounts, the State Department revealed in March that it did not routinely save emails for archiving purposes during Clinton's tenure. As a result, it is possible State had few, if any, copies of Reines' emails with journalists by the time the agency began searching for those records.

In a related development Tuesday, yet another federal judge granted a Justice Department request to consolidate two cases demanding that the State Department and the National Archives act more assertively to recover any work-related emails still in Clinton's possession and to declare illegal her use of the private server for work purposes. Judge James Boasberg's ruling did not detail a reason for combining the suits, filed separately by watchdog groups Judicial Watch and Cause of Action.

Josh Gerstein is a senior reporter for POLITICO.