An ADOT traffic camera captured the police lights at the scene of the accident. (Source: ADOT)

The DPS investigation forced the closure of Loop 101 at Hayden Road for hours. (Source: ADOT)

A woman whose car had stalled on a busy Valley freeway was killed after she climbed out of her vehicle and was hit by at least four vehicles, Arizona Department of Public Safety spokesman Bart Graves said.

Westbound Loop 101 at Hayden Road was closed for nearly eight hours while DPS continued its investigation. It reopened just before 9 a.m. Saturday.

Officers began receiving reports of a four-door sedan on Loop 101 blocking the westbound lanes at Hayden Road.

The vehicle had no hazard lights on and was stopped in the freeway.

“Two minutes later we received more calls about a body in the roadway,” Graves said.

Update: L-101 westbound at Hayden Rd - All lanes reopened. #phxtraffic pic.twitter.com/ayGI2dFQuZ — Arizona DOT (@ArizonaDOT) December 19, 2015

When troopers arrived, they found the stopped vehicle had been hit by a full-size Chevy Tahoe, Graves said. The impact pushed the car about 100 feet down the freeway, he said.

“For some reason the woman of the stalled vehicle had gotten out of her vehicle was standing or walking on the freeway and was struck four or more times,” Graves said.

The woman's body was found about 300 feet from her vehicle, DPS said.

All of the vehicles who hit the woman stopped. The drivers were being interviewed by troopers.

"We don’t know if the woman thought she was on the shoulder or why she stopped her car in the middle of the freeway," Graves said.

Troopers said impairment is not suspected on the part of these drivers.

Graves said it’s possible more than four vehicles hit the woman.

“Officers have determined that the driver of the stalled car was the single occupant of the car,” Graves said.

No one else was injured.

Early on, Graves alerted his twitter followers with this message:

Westbound 101 closed due to car pedestrian fatal collision# pic.twitter.com/33pA3HWMkn — Bart Graves, PIO (@dps_pio_graves) December 19, 2015

"We would recommend people avoid Loop 101 in the area of Tatum. We’ve had this entire freeway shut down because of the complex nature of this investigation since 1 a.m.," Graves said.

Motorists were getting by on the frontage road westbound during the closure.

Again, all lanes reopened around mid-morning.

The victim, whose name wasn't immediately released, was in her early 40s.

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.