At the end of a whirlwind week for potential congressional candidates, some key endorsements have been scored by leading candidates to replace U.S. Rep. Rush Holt (D-12th Dist.) in Congress.

Sen. Linda Greenstein (D-Middlesex) scored the expected endorsement of the Middlesex County Democratic Organization just one day after Assemblywoman Bonnie Watson Coleman (D-Mercer) was endorsed by the Mercer County Democratic Committee.

“Simply put, there is no stronger advocate for the progressive values that we as Democrats embrace than Sen. Greenstein,” Middlesex Democratic chairman Kevin McCabe said in a news release. “Whether it is fighting for paid family leave, protecting seniors from predatory scams or standing up for organized labor, Sen. Greenstein embodies the best that public service has to offer.”

Assemblyman Upendra Chivukula (D-Somerset) is also running for the seat but the Somerset County Democratic Committee has yet to endorse a candidate.

Holt, 65, announced he would not seek re-election to a ninth term in Congress earlier this week.

“There’s some strong candidates, and I knew there would be,” Holt said this morning, noting the field of potential candidates made it easier to decide against seeking a ninth term. “That did factor into my thinking.”

The first labor endorsements of the primary season were also recorded yesterday, with Coleman announcing the support of the 20,000-member New Jersey Laborers Union, which is the statewide affiliate of the Laborers’ International Union of North America.

In a news release, the union cited Coleman’s sponsorship of the Economic Opportunity Act of 2013 as a factor in its endorsement.

“There is no learning process for Assemblywoman Watson Coleman,” Laborers’ national vice president Raymond Pocino said in a statement. “She understands the district, she understands the issues facing both residents and businesses and she understands what it will take to change things in Congress. She has unparalleled experience and an unmatched dedication to the people of the 12th Congressional District.”

Just hours later, Greenstein announced her own labor endorsement from the Mercer County Labor Council, which represents 50,000 workers in the greater Mercer County region.

“(Greenstein) has stood with us time after time after time,” Labor Council president Michael Maloney said. “She is a true friend of the labor movement, and has fought with us against the right wing’s attacks on working families. Linda understands that our families need good jobs, affordable health care, and safe communities. These are the hallmarks of her time in the Legislature, and we desperately need those values in the halls of Congress.”

Greenstein also announced the endorsement of her 14th District Colleagues, Assemblymen Wayne DeAngelo and Dan Benson (both D-Mercer) who have said they would seek Greenstein’s Senate seat if she were to win election to the 12th Congressional District.

“There is no tougher and more tested fighter in Trenton than Linda Greenstein, period,” DeAngelo said in a statement.

“The ideals that Congressman Holt has championed are the ideals that Linda champions, from a higher minimum wage to access to affordable health care to protecting our seniors and children,” Benson said.

Sen. Shirley Turner and Assemblyman Reed Gusciora (both D-Mercer) threw their support behind Coleman on Thursday after briefly considering their own campaigns.

“(Coleman) is feisty and you definitely know where she stands on the issues and what she believes in,” Gusciora said on Thursday. “It’s something that resonates with the whole district.”

“She shares our core Democratic values and has demonstrated strong leadership in the Legislature throughout her political career,” Turner said in a statement.

The Democratic winner of the June 3 primary could face Somerset County resident Alieta Eck, a former Senate candidate and the only announced Republican candidate for Holt’s seat, who received her home county Republican party’s endorsement today.

“(Eck’s) compassion and dedication to our most needy residents shows her heart and her advocacy for freedom in medicine and beyond shows her dedication to the ideals that made our nation strong,” Somerset County Republican chairman Al Gaburo said.

Contact Mike Davis at (609) 989-5708 or mdavis@njtimes.com.

On mobile or desktop:

• Like Times of Trenton on Facebook

• Follow @TimesofTrenton on Twitter