Dissecting the Dow’s Year

The Dow Jones Industrial Average ended 2014 with a gain, but a deeper look shows some blue chips were much bluer than others.

Today we separate the Dow’s annual winners from the losers. The way the chips fell might tell us something useful in 2015.

Source: The Wall Street Journal, 1/2/2015

***

In some ways, the Dow Jones Industrial Average is a relic. Its 30 components don’t reflect the U.S. economy as well as they used to, and its arcane price-weighted calculation gives some stocks too much influence.

Professional investors usually look at the S&P 500 when they want a market “snapshot,“ but “the Dow“ is still popular. Last year it rose 7.5%. The graph above shows you how bumpy the ride was at times.

The index return is a composite of the 30 stocks, each of which has its own yearly return. This table shows them all, from best to worst. Scan through the list and see what you notice. I’ll give you my own thoughts below.

Any investor who owned only those first seven stocks had a very happy New Year’s Eve. Anyone who stuck with the last few names probably spent the night drowning their sorrows.

(Note: The figures in the table reflect only the share price, not dividends. That means total returns would have been a little higher in most cases.)

How did the “average“ Dow stock perform last year? I’ll save you the math; it was 9.4%.

You might wonder why all the newspapers say the Dow rose only 7.5% last year. The answer lies in that price-weighting methodology I mentioned.

The Dow isn’t just a simple average. Stocks with higher share prices get a higher weighting.

Another wrinkle to the Dow is that it excludes utility and transportation stocks. They’re in separate indexes. Utilities had a good year, so their absence is one reason the Dow lagged the S&P 500 — which does include utility stocks.

A few other random thoughts on the Dow:

Three of the top five performers were technology stocks. We live in a tech-driven economy and Intel, Microsoft and Cisco own critical parts of it.

UnitedHealth Group ended way ahead of the Dow’s three pharmaceutical names (Johnson & Johnson, Merck and Pfizer). Under Obamacare, health insurers may be gaining an upper hand over drug-makers.

Walt Disney’s great year shows that “old“ media stocks are still in the game. Disney owns the ABC and ESPN television networks as well as theme parks and film studios.

Financial services were a mixed bag. Visa and Travelers did well, but the banking components like Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase along with American Express are in the bottom half of the list.

The Dow’s telecom stocks, AT&T and Verizon, both suffered in a brutal price war for mobile phone customers. Phone service is effectively a commodity now, with consumers buying from the lowest bidder.

ExxonMobil and Chevron were having subpar years even before oil prices collapsed. Both ended near the bottom. Relative to other energy stocks outside the Dow, they would be near the top.

***

Those are a few of my quick observations from the Dow’s 2014 scoreboard. What are yours? I’d love to know what you see in the data. You can leave a comment on our website or send me an e-mail.

***

Today was odd. A lone session sandwiched between a holiday and a weekend would usually be inconsequential, but this one was also the first day of a calendar year. That makes it doubly hard to analyze the day’s events. I’ll give it a stab, though.

Negative news from Europe started U.S. trading on a downbeat. The euro tumbled after European Central Bank chief Mario Draghi told a German newspaper the ECB would make “technical preparation“ to deal with low inflation.

To German ears, Draghi’s comments suggest the ECB will soon launch a “QE“ program that buys sovereign debt. German leaders are firmly against any such plan.

U.S. data wasn’t so great, either. The ISM Manufacturing Index dropped to a six-month low in November. That suggests October’s impressive report might have been a fluke.

Chinese manufacturing data disappointed, too, but had less impact on share prices. Traders think it will spur Beijing to take further stimulus actions.

Small caps started the year rough. The Russell 2000 Index, which lagged large-cap benchmarks last year, lagged them again today.

Technology was among today’s weakest sectors. Profit-taking pushed mega-cap Apple (AAPL) lower on the day.

Oil prices stayed weak. The West Texas Intermediate spot contract went as low as $52.03 at midday.

Good Luck and Happy Investing,

Brad Hoppmann

Publisher

Uncommon Wisdom Daily