Time is running out for uninsured Americans to get health insurance or face a tax penalty. The last day to enroll through healthcare.gov is Jan. 31.



Edwards begins Medicaid expansion on first day as governor On his first day in office as Louisiana governor, John Bel Edwards signed Executive Order JBE 16-01 to begin accepting funds to expand Medicaid for working families in Louisiana. More

In anticipation of that deadline, the city of New Orleans opened satellite sign-up centers Saturday, bringing enrollment and the experts to explain it all to 13 locations.



But most of those centers stood empty Saturday, showing a clear gap between the city's desire to get people enrolled in health insurance and the willingness of those people to actually do it.



During a news conference Friday, New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu joined leaders in local, state and national health fields to plead their case urging the 21,000 uninsured New Orleans residents who qualify for marketplace coverage to sign up.



“This is a great opportunity for us,” Landrieu said. “And it’s going to make us healthy, and it’s going to help the fiscal condition in the state of Louisiana. At the end of the day, it's going to give people an opportunity to be healthy and live longer lives.”



Doctor Rebekah Gee, the state's secretary of health and hospitals, said residents are failing to do just that, by not seeking out affordable health care and adequate coverage.



“As a practicing physician, I've seen my own patients come in, paying out of pocket,” Gee said. “I had one that I spoke of last week who had been diagnosed with breast cancer too late because she couldn't afford a mammogram. She was trying to save up to pay for expenses for her family.”



Despite the public effort, public support was minimal. Only 51 people took advantage of citywide sign up centers Saturday, and out of that just 31 people actually enrolled in some type of coverage. These are early figures provided by the Mayor's Office, but still nowhere near the tens of thousands of New Orleans residents who will face tax penalties if they remain uninsured when open enrollment closes this month.



The Affordable Care Act mandates that people who can afford health insurance enroll in coverage. A fee or tax for not doing so will be due with your 2016 federal income tax bill. The amount you will pay is significantly higher this year and goes up according to your income.



Heathcare.gov details those tax penalties. In 2015, the fee for not having health insurance if affordable insurance is available to you and you don’t qualify for an exemption is $325 per person or 2 percent of your annual household income, whichever is higher. For 2016, that fee increases to $695 or 2.5 percent of your income, whichever is higher. The higher your income, the more you will have to pay.



If you qualify, there is just one way to avoid paying that fee: sign up for insurance before Jan 31. Healthcare.gov states that a special enrollment period around the April 15 tax filing deadline will not be offered this year, and the current enrollment period will be the final opportunity for marketplace coverage in 2016, unless you qualify for a special enrollment period.



“We cannot be the powerful city that we all dream to be if we're not healthy and we're not smart, and you can't get there without insurance. Now you have access to affordable insurance and all you got to do is go get it," Landrieu said.



Saturday's sign-up event was part of a larger challenge, to see which city can get the most residents signed up before that Jan. 31 deadline. Sarah McLaughlin, director of communications for the city, said that 3,050 people have enrolled in the marketplace since the challenge began.



Healthcare.gov reports that 193,249 Louisiana residents have looked into plans on their site this week as part of the site’s enrollment data updates.



"The final number of plan selections associated with enrollment activity to date could fluctuate as plan changes or cancellations occur, such as in response to life changes like starting a new job or getting married. In addition, the weekly snapshot only looks at plan selections and does not include the number of consumers who paid their premiums to effectuate their enrollment," the website reads.



During Friday's news conference, officials said 11.3 million Americans are already signed up for health care this year through the health insurance marketplace. A total of 17.6 million Americans have received insurance through the Affordable Care Act since its was created.



To find out more information or to speak with enrollment specialists call 800-318-2596. Officials said free, confidential, in-person assistance is also available at enrollment sites. To find a nearby site, visit LocalHelp.HealthCare.gov. People can sign up for coverage at HealthCare.gov through Jan. 31.