CCHS, FHS golfers to compete in Carbondale at River Valley Ranch Course

Perry Ford of the Cañon City Tigers reacts after leaving a putt short during the Florence Huskies Invite earlier this season at SUMO Golf Village in Florence. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Breaking 100 both days and finishing in the top 40 are the goals for Cañon City junior Perry Ford and Florence junior Kylie Brixey at the Class 4A Girls Golf State Tournament, which gets underway Monday in Carbondale on the Western Slope.

Ford tees off at 9:24 a.m. from tee box No. 10, while Brixey starts from the same tee box at 10 a.m. The River Valley Ranch Course, located a half-hour's drive from Aspen, features rolling hills and a large stream. It plays just under 6,000 yards.

Ford enters the two-day state competition having played her best golf of the season at the Colorado Springs Regional Tournament in Colorado Springs, where she fired a career-best 89 and placed seventh. Her efforts over the season helped the Tigers win the Colorado Springs Metro League team title, while she finished second in the individual league standings.

Kylie Brixey during the Florence Huskies Invite earlier this season at SUMO Golf Village in Florence. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

"I was extremely pleased with her composure on the last six holes (at the regional tourney) as she stayed focused on each shot and not the situation," Tigers' first-year coach Sean Murphy said. "Perry had a very consistent season and got better as the season went on. Her season-average score was just under 100."

By playing within herself, Ford has become more dependable with her shot-making, Murphy said.

"She doesn't overpower a course, but hits the same shot over and over," he said. "She has done a great job of becoming a much more mentally strong golfer, as well. Midway through the season we started working on what we call ACE-ing every shot, which stands for Analyze, Commit and Execute. She has done a fantastic job of applying this when she is playing."

Advertisement

At state, Ford's approach will remain the same: play one shot at a time.

"I think she can realistically shoot in the low 90s and maybe push the top 30," Murphy said.

Brixey fired a 96 at the Southern Regional Tournament at the Hollydot Golf Course in Colorado City to qualify for state.

"She put a lot of pressure on herself and didn't play as well as she could have, but she played well enough," said Huskies coach Chad Ford, who is Perry's father and has been the head coach for three years.

Brixey, Chad Ford said, advanced to state by staying methodical in her approach.

"She hits it fairly straight most of the time," he said. "She doesn't have a whole lot of distance. Her short game is decent and she doesn't seem to get too flustered. She does a pretty good job of managing to avoid the really big numbers."

The fact that Brixey doesn't hit it far works to her advantage; when other players' stray shots go out of bounds, her shots stay in bounds, her coach said.

"She will drive other players crazy," Chad Ford said. "Hardly any of her shots get 10 or 15 feet off the ground and there's a lot of roll to them. A lot of kids hit these towering shots.

"But when we get to the hole and ask them what they shot, they say a seven, and we ask Kylie and she says a five. She knows how to get around the course with her game and has a perfect game for people to model after."

Brandon Hopper: 719-276-7644, hopperb@canoncitydailyrecord.com