Several ads on billboards around Nashville are prompting people to urge House Speaker Beth Harwell to bring Insure Tennessee to a floor vote. (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Sen. Green's Joint Resolution 88 proposes an alternative to TennCare, not to Insure Tennessee.

The resolution will not provide coverage to a single one of the 280,000 uninsured working Tennesseans.

Leaders must either pass Insure Tennessee or enact an effective alternative of their own.

Sen. Mark Green (R-Clarksville) has offered Joint Resolution 88, which some have described as an alternative to Insure Tennessee, Gov. Bill Haslam¹s proposal to expand TennCare to 280,000 uninsured Tennesseans. It has been implied that Joint Resolution 88 serves the same purpose as Governor Haslam¹s Insure Tennessee proposal.

The two plans are not in any way comparable. The two plans cannot even be described as like apples and oranges, but more like fish and bicycles. Joint Resolution 88 is not a health care plan for Tennessee. It is a plan to save money on the backs of our most vulnerable citizens.

Insure Tennessee is Governor Haslam¹s conservative alternative to expanding Medicaid. The governor negotiated for 18 months with federal officials to use federal Medicaid funds for a health care plan featuring vouchers, cost-sharing and incentives for healthy behaviors. Tennessee's business community, health care leaders and hospitals all supported Insure Tennessee, as did nearly two thirds of Tennessee voters. Despite this support legislative leaders never brought it to the floor of either the state House or Senate for a vote.

Senator Green's Joint Resolution 88 proposes an alternative to TennCare, NOT to Insure Tennessee. The legislature's website summary explains that the resolution is "small pilot project within the TennCare program."

Senator Green is proposing an experimental payment method for people already enrolled in TennCare.

He proposes to replace TennCare with a health savings account (roughly $1,500 a year) with a catastrophic insurance plan. I can promise the proponents of this plan that $1,500 will not cover the real annual costs for managing diabetes, asthma or heart disease, and that it discourages access to care. If Senator Green wants to experiment with his idea, I suggest he try it out on the insurance plan that Tennessee taxpayers provide to him and his fellow legislators, rather than on the most vulnerable citizens in our state.

The important point is that, whatever one may think of Senator Green’s experiment, it is no substitute for Governor Haslam's Insure Tennessee plan. Unlike Insure Tennessee, the resolution will not provide coverage to a single one of the 280,000 uninsured working Tennesseans, 24,000 of whom are veterans ineligible for TennCare.

It will not provide coverage for the uninsured patients that my fellow doctors and I see every day who live in fear of being bankrupted by medical bills. It will not leverage a single dollar of the more than $1 billion annually in federal taxes that we are sending to Washington instead of keeping at home for our working families and our health care system. The resolution will not help to keep our beleaguered rural hospitals open, and may accelerate rural hospital closings by reducing payment for services.

It is easy to understand why people grasp for an alternative to Insure Tennessee, since legislative leaders have yet to bring Insure Tennessee to the floor for a vote. But Senator Green's resolution cannot fulfill that need because it deals with a wholly different topic. It is time for House Speaker Beth Harwell and Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey to step up and either pass Insure Tennessee or enact an effective alternative of their own.

Robert Miller is a Vanderbilt pulmonary and critical care physician. He is the medical director of the Shade Tree Family Clinic, a free clinic operating in East Nashville.

Buy Photo Edward Chayehoi, 12, left, and Joyce Brown, both from Knoxville, sing before a rally in January in support of Insure Tennessee on Legislative Plaza. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1p98Z3g