Topics: From the Wires, News

SHANGHAI (AP) — In the still, early hours, cadres make their way down tree-lined paths. They walk through a polished lobby, down dim hallways and settle themselves in rows in plain, wood-paneled classrooms. Here, they sit at the vanguard of the Communist Party of China.

These rising Communist Party members from across the country have come to the China Executive Leadership Academy Pudong (CELAP) in Shanghai as part of the party’s decade-long effort to introduce its own elite to foreign ideas. Outside these walls, President Xi Jinping’s government is campaigning to scrub Western influence from classrooms, but here some 10,000 party loyalists each year hear from top Western scholars and executives about management techniques, media relations, urban development and innovation.

“It does no harm for top leaders to get to know different ideas in the world,” said Zhang Xuezhong, who was barred from teaching at East China University of Political Science and Law in 2013, after publishing an article critical of the government. “The Communist Party expects the people it rules to be ignorant, but they would not expect themselves to be like this.”

As China seeks to play a more decisive role on the global stage, such exposure is becoming more important — at least for those at the forefront of transforming China’s economy and international role. For everyone else, education has become an ideological battleground, where destabilizing Western values must be vanquished lest they weaken the party’s grip on power.

“Young teachers and students are key targets of infiltration by enemy forces,” Education Minister Yuan Guiren wrote in a January essay. Around the same time, he told university officials to bar “teaching materials that disseminate Western values,” state-run news agency Xinhua reported. His remarks came shortly after Beijing issued new guidelines ordering universities to promote loyalty to the party, core socialist values, and the teachings of Xi himself.

Meanwhile, Westerners continue to march through CELAP, bringing with them an uncontrollable parade of ideas.

Over 470 government leaders, business executives and academics from over 30 countries have taught at CELAP, according to the school, which says it has partnered with Harvard Business School, the Wharton School, Columbia Business School, Oxford University and Berkeley’s Haas School of Business.

Former prime ministers Gordon Brown of the United Kingdom, Julia Gillard of Australia and the late Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore have visited. Former World Bank President Robert Zoellick and former U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson have given lectures. The school also has tie-ups with IBM China and Procter & Gamble China.

“It’s a very unusual institution in China,” said Oxford University’s Nicholas Morris, who has taught at CELAP for a decade. “This institution’s job is to help Chinese leaders understand Western practice.”

Shanghai has long been China’s window on the world — the leafy streets of its old French concession strike some Chinese visitors as “exotic” — and the cadre academy in Shanghai’s new Pudong area was founded to focus on innovation, reform and management . The place reeks of exceptionalism. There is the soaring French architecture. The fleet of chefs and long reflective pools. There’s even a huddle of swans on a pond ringed with weeping willows.

Located near the intersection of “Splendid” and “Career” streets, the school can accommodate up to 800 cadres for one- to three-week courses, CELAP officials said. Thousands of party schools across China form an important network for maintaining control over the party’s more than 86 million members, improving governance and incubating new ideas, according to China historian David Shambaugh.