Contribution

Wayne Allyn Root is a bestselling author. His latest book is: “ The Power of RELENTLESS! ” Dubbed by the media as “the Capitalist Evangelist,” Wayne is a former Libertarian Vice Presidential nominee, international business speaker, serial entrepreneur and conservative media personality – appearing on over 5,000 interviews in the past five years. Wayne’s web site: ROOTforAmerica.com .

Branding is even more important in politics than the business world.

My message to the GOP: Brand Hillary Clinton right now. Before she brands herself. Before she becomes too big to fail. Before she becomes “inevitable.” Before it’s a foregone conclusion that the first female president will follow the first black president.

It’s all or nothing for the Democratic Party in 2016. It’s Hillary or bust. She has a 61-point lead…the biggest lead in Democratic presidential poll history.



There are no other contenders. Destroy Hillary now and it’s over.

Turn her into “Hillary “What Difference Does It Make” Clinton. Share:

What are they left with? Joe “Crazy Uncle” Biden? Elizabeth “I’m an Indian” Warren? The Democrats have nothing but Hillary. Take Hillary down now, before she gets started, and the GOP has a huge advantage in 2016.

For Hillary Clinton it’s already started. Her own BFF (Best Friend Forever), the late Diane Blair just branded her as “ruthless” in papers published after Blair’s death in 2000. Well maybe the GOP needs to take a few lessons in “ruthless” from Hillary.

I travel the world lecturing about branding. I recently returned from a 16-day, four-city tour of South Africa where I taught “Branding, American Style.” I’ve sold hundreds of millions of dollars of different products on TV, radio, infomercials and web. I understand branding.

Branding works. Why isn’t it already being done? Can Republicans be this stupid and dense? Anyone can see it. You’d have to be blind. Heck, the GOP has already seen it done to themselves, up close and personal.

“Team Obama” branded Mitt Romney for months in the spring and summer of 2012. Romney sat on the sidelines and waited…and waited…and lost the presidency. It was too late. He was already branded as “a rich, white, out of touch, business mogul who fires employees and hates poor people.”

But hey, that’s okay. All is fair in love, war and politics. That’s what branding is for. So what is the GOP waiting for?

The Democrats are facing a landslide defeat in 2014 because of Obamacare. If Hillary is defeated now, the Democrats will be out of luck in 2016 too.

What do they brand Hillary with? Well for once Karl Rove is right.

You don’t brand her with Monica Lewinsky or old Bill Clinton scandals. That’s old news. The voters don’t care about what happened in the 90′s.

But I know exactly how to brand Hillary.

Do you remember her Congressional hearings over the Benghazi disaster? Hillary famously said, “What difference does it make?” when referring to four dead American heroes. Make her own that brand. “What difference does it make” should become Hillary’s middle name.

Run “What difference does it make” ad campaigns on TV and radio 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Repeat it so much that you can’t say Hillary, without finishing the sentence with “What difference does it make?”

Start with Benghazi. Hillary was in charge. Bury her “brand” by using her own TV ads from 2008. During the Benghazi attack the red phone rang at 2 a.m., just like those ads promised. Hillary answered. When she heard the U.S. Embassy was under attack, did she say, “What difference does it make?” Four American heroes died because of her indifference.

Her actions made a big difference at Benghazi. But not in a positive way. The branding campaign should ask where was Hillary when the embassy desperately needed military rescue? Why did she refuse to mount a rescue? Why did she let those brave men die?

Remember when Obama compared Trayvon Martin to the sons he never had. Well if one of those Navy Seals was her son, would Hillary have said “no” to a rescue attempt? If it was her son, would she have said, “What difference does it make?”

Another round of branding ads should ask why Hillary participated in a cover-up. When did she realize the cover story told by Obama, herself and Susan Rice was a lie? Ask her if she still thinks a “spontaneous protest” over a movie that no one ever watched caused the embassy attack?

Throw in scenes of the entire Middle East in flames. Tahrir Square burning in Cairo. Libya in flames. Syrian children laying dead in the streets. Venezuela’s leader laughing at us. North Korea negotiating with…Dennis Rodman. That all happened with Hillary as Secretary of State. Ask voters “What difference did she make as Secretary of State?”

Then move to Obamacare. It’s destroying jobs. It’s damaging the economy. It’s crippling small business.

“What difference does it make?” Well plenty, if it’s your business.

Cancer patients are losing their health insurance, or their doctors, or the drugs that keep them alive. Ask “What difference does it make?” Well plenty, if the cancer victim is your child.

Middle class jobs are being destroyed by the millions by Obamacare. The Congressional Budget Office predicts 2.3 million jobs will be lost. The CBO says Obamacare kills the incentive to work. “What difference does it make?” Well plenty, if it’s your job that just got eliminated, or cut down to part time.

Ask Hillary where she stands now on Obamacare? Does she support it? Does she want government to get even more intrusive? How intrusive? Like a proctologist with his finger up our…wallet? Let’s see what America thinks of that idea. Let’s ask America “What difference does it make, if government gets even more involved in health care under Hillary Clinton?”

Brand that all over national TV and radio now…before Hillary’s presidential campaign ever starts. Run the ads day and night in battleground states. The result? Hillary’s presidential ambitions will be toast. That 61-point lead is 100 miles wide and only a half inch thick. Without Hillary, the Democrats have nothing in 2016.

That’s how you use branding to destroy Hillary’s campaign before it starts. To poison Hillary’s brand. Turn her into “Hillary “What Difference Does It Make” Clinton.

Do that, and soon Hillary will find out what difference four dead heroes on her watch makes. And what difference millions of lost health insurance policies make. And what difference a lie like “if you like your insurance, you can keep it” makes. And what difference 2.3 million lost jobs makes.

Make her run on Benghazi, Obamacare and Obama’s economy, and Hillary will soon find out what difference it all makes.

When it comes to the presidency…branding makes all the difference in the world.

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.