There is still time to make charitable donations and contributions to help you stretch your dollar before tax time.

Well here we are, almost at the end of the year and you know what time it is: TAX Time.

But it is not all grim news.

Even as financial experts say that the middle class is shrinking, there are more tax deductions available for low-to-moderate income taxpayers.

“You should not pay any more or any less tax than you owe,” Rafael Tulino, of the IRS. told Patch.

“Any eligible (and legal) tax deduction and/or credit that you qualify for should be claimed to reduce your bill or increase your refund.”

Tulino added that there are many tax credits — many phase out as income rises, however.

But those folks can afford accountants to find their tax breaks for them.

For the rest of us, said Tulino, there is software.

“Tax software holds your hand and asks you all the questions you need to help you get through it,” Tulino told Patch.

“Those questions prompt you for deductions and credits that you are or could be eligible for based on your full set of facts and circumstances,” he added.

To find the deductions and credits, just click here.

Meanwhile, here are a few quick tips to get the most out of your return, provided by the IRS.

Make Charitable Contributions . Make 2015 deductible charitable contributions on or before Dec. 31. Give to a qualified public charity and keep a paper trail. Clothing and household items must generally be in good used condition or better to be deductible. Donations charged to a credit card by Dec. 31 are deductible for 2015 even if paid in 2016. Taxpayers must be itemizing deductions on IRS Schedule A in order to benefit.





. Make 2015 deductible charitable contributions on or before Dec. 31. Give to a qualified public charity and keep a paper trail. Clothing and household items must generally be in good used condition or better to be deductible. Donations charged to a credit card by Dec. 31 are deductible for 2015 even if paid in 2016. Taxpayers must be itemizing deductions on IRS Schedule A in order to benefit. Check Investments and Consider a Portfolio Adjustment. Taxpayers can deduct capital losses up to the amount of capital gains plus an additional $3,000.





Taxpayers can deduct capital losses up to the amount of capital gains plus an additional $3,000. Contribute to a Retirement Account. The maximum 2015 IRA contribution is $5,500 ($6,500 if age 50 or over). The maximum contribution for a retirement plan such as a 401(k) is $18,000. ($24,000 if age 50 or older) Eligible taxpayers can also deduct IRA contributions. IRA contributions for 2015 can be made on or before April 18, 2016 to have it count on a 2015 tax return.





The maximum 2015 IRA contribution is $5,500 ($6,500 if age 50 or over). The maximum contribution for a retirement plan such as a 401(k) is $18,000. ($24,000 if age 50 or older) Eligible taxpayers can also deduct IRA contributions. IRA contributions for 2015 can be made on or before April 18, 2016 to have it count on a 2015 tax return. Get Credit for Retirement from the Retirement Savings Contribution Credit or “Saver’s Credit.” This under-the-radar tax credit may be worth up to $2,000. It is available to eligible taxpayers who contribute to a retirement plan and whose income is generally less than $61,000.

With the ‘Savers credit’ you can essentially save for retirement twice. It’s a tax credit for eligible lower to moderate income taxpayers who save for their retirement. You claim it when you file your tax return. For some, it can be up to $2,000 but the average amount claimed is somewhere around $200.

You tell your tax preparer that you contributed to a retirement plan. From there, he or she can alert you to eligibility or not. This easy to read tax tip explains it in detail - https://www.irs.gov/uac/Save-on-Your-Taxes-and-for-Retirement-with-the-Savers-Credit





Take Advantage of all Deductions and Credits. The tax code provides numerous tax benefits for eligible individuals and businesses. Besides the savers credit above, eligible taxpayers can reduce taxes paid by taking advantage of other credits such as the child and dependent care credit. Small business owners may find tax relief through the small business health care tax credit. Eligible homeowners will find tax relief for going solar on their homes. Medical and dental expenses are deductible for those who itemize their deductions.





Gift Giving. Taxpayers can give a gift worth as much as $14,000 in cash or property in 2015 to another person without having to file a gift tax return. Gifts to individuals are not deductible.





Taxpayers can give a gift worth as much as $14,000 in cash or property in 2015 to another person without having to file a gift tax return. Gifts to individuals are not deductible. Affordable Care Act. The ACA provides health insurance coverage and financial assistance options for individuals and families. In general, all U. S. taxpayers will have to account for the ACA once again when they file in 2016. Most, however, will just check a box on their form 1040. Complete details on all ACA tax forms and provisions can be found athttp://www.irs.gov/aca.





The ACA provides health insurance coverage and financial assistance options for individuals and families. In general, all U. S. taxpayers will have to account for the ACA once again when they file in 2016. Most, however, will just check a box on their form 1040. Complete details on all ACA tax forms and provisions can be found athttp://www.irs.gov/aca. Save Receipts and Paperwork. Accurate recordkeeping provides a good reminder at tax time.

Photo via Shutterstock