Topics: ACLU, Canada, Creative Time Reports, Electromagnetic Border Zone, Mexico, Politics News

This article originally appeared at Creative Time Reports

In 2010 U.S. Customs and Border Protection agents at the Canadian border stopped an American student on his way home to Brooklyn. Pascal Abidor was returning from McGill University in Montreal, where he was working on his Ph.D. Unfortunately for him, his doctorate is in Islamic Studies, and when the officers asked him to open his laptop and type in his password, they found images of Hamas and Hezbollah rallies, collected as part of his research into modern Lebanese Shiism. He was detained for several hours, and his laptop was impounded. When he finally got it back—following intervention from the American Civil Liberties Union—it had been forced open, and the contents, which included personal information as well as academic material, had been copied wholesale.

The subsequent court battle, which the ACLU lost, resulted in a ruling with consequences that were literally far-reaching. A judge affirmed not only that Border Patrol agents had the right to search travelers’ physical and electronic belongings without reasonable suspicion of wrongdoing but also that they could do so far beyond the border crossing itself, within a hundred miles of any “external boundary.” As the ACLU points out, two-thirds of the population of the United States lives within 100 miles of the border. Nine of the 10 largest U.S. metropolitan areas—including New York, Los Angeles, Chicago and Houston—lie within this band of extended border authority. As a result, some 200 million Americans actually live in de jure border zones, subject to an almost complete exemption from the Fourth Amendment, which is supposed to protect citizens from arbitrary stops and searches. This is the border state of exception, and it’s not limited to the edges.

This border state can be separated even from the physical boundary of the nation-state. Take the Spanish enclaves of Melilla and Ceuta, classic examples of external borders. Historical free ports on the Moroccan coastline, they are contiguous with and claimed by Morocco but administered by Spain. Since Spain joined the European Union, they have been subjected to increased pressure from African and Middle Eastern immigrants and are both now entirely surrounded by multiple layers of 10-foot-high barbed-wire-topped fencing, reminiscent of the Berlin Wall—or to give more recent examples, the Israeli–West Bank barrier, the Mexico–United States border wall and the eight-mile long Evros River fence between Greece and Turkey. This proliferation of fences follows lines of migration and power. It marks not a closure of the border but its increased permeability and indistinction.

Another kind of physically diffuse border is seen in the geo-nerd favorite town of Baarle-Hertog in Belgium / The Netherlands. That slash is manifested on the ground in a Swiss cheese of jurisdictions, with a total of 24 separate pieces of land that are either Belgian and enclosed by Dutch territory, or vice versa. Some are as small as a single house, or even smaller. One restaurant has different licensing laws on either side of the dining room. The same model is followed in effect by embassies worldwide: one can step off the streets of London, Paris or Vienna and into the territory of another nation—the path taken by Julian Assange.

These embassy spaces are not sovereign territory in the full sense but are another zone of exemption, which the host country cannot enter without permission from the diplomatic mission. It’s at this point that the border becomes decidedly gray, like the transit zones of international airports. Russian President Vladimir Putin has claimed that the transit area of Moscow’s Sheremetyevo International Airport is outside his jurisdiction when it comes to dealing with Edward Snowden, but the British Security Service Mi5 had no such compunction about detaining the journalist Glenn Greenwald’s partner David Miranda at London’s Heathrow Airport under the same circumstances. What these two cases teach is that the border is not defined by laws, strictly speaking, but rather by a legal regime whose precise code can be constantly reconstructed by political intent.

It’s in the interest of power, therefore, to extend as far as possible such effectively lawless zones—lawless not in the sense that no rules apply but rather because the laws in question can be manipulated, rebuffed or extended at will. International waters become expansions of border zones as the relentless logic of the border mandates effective control of the areas approaching it. In the Mediterranean this is seen in the interplay between different national and supranational bodies trying to defend Europe’s borders against the projected menace of uncontrolled migration. Since 2005 the European border agency Frontex (short for Frontières extérieures or, literally, “external borders”) has been tasked with coordinating the activities of border guards across EU member states that face nonmembers. In practice, the agency’s single largest budget allocation is for patrolling the ocean, which it does with equipment and personnel borrowed from national coast guards and navies. Most EU-wide effort goes into dissuading migrants rather than helping them. Frontex’s future plans include purchasing drone aircraft and satellite capability in order to patrol what its executive director calls the common pre-frontier—the deserts of Mali and the port cities of Libya and Syria.

For the moment, however, much of Frontex’s activity takes place on the sea. Following years of obfuscation and dodges, with refugee boats being passed from one jurisdiction to another if not “pushed back” entirely, the EU passed new regulations in April that permit Frontex to hand over refugees found in international waters to third countries—either their place of origin or, in practice, wherever is not Europe. Despite being in clear contradiction of the non-refoulement principle of international law, which states that refugees must not be sent or pushed back to a place where they might be at risk, this approach is fast becoming politically—if not morally—acceptable around the world.

The greatest current violation of the principle of non-refoulement is found in Australia, where the Abbot government has set up “offshore processing centres” in Papua New Guinea and Nauru and is violating the sovereignty of other countries as it implements its repressive immigration policy. On several occasions the Australian navy has turned back refugee boats off the coast of Indonesia, to the point of driving them back onshore. In February, The Australian reported on the discovery of oceangoing lifeboats on an Indonesian beach, lifeboats purchased by the Australian government just a month earlier. The Australian government refused to comment—and refused again when reports surfaced in August of Tamil refugees being intercepted, trained at sea to use the lifeboats and told to take their families back to India (where they had temporarily sought refuge after fleeing from Sri Lanka).

The key to non-refoulement is the requirement to determine if refugees are at risk at their point of origin. So how does Australia justify its interventions at sea? Where does the border go when no longer constrained by physical space, national territory or even dry land? The answer is into the electromagnetic spectrum, the borderless zone that is one endless border zone, allowing the free play of ephemeral legislation over fixed, physical bodies. The law assumes the quality of an electromagnetic wave; it fluctuates and flows, passing through and over the bodies of those in the zone, who are condemned to remain flesh, rooted in actual geography and thus exposed to power.

To counter the accusation of refoulement, the Australian government has started using networked communications to interview migrants while they remain in international waters. The occupants of a boat intercepted by the Australian customs patrol boat Triton in July were allegedly screened remotely, asked questions via teleconference by interpreters based on the mainland. The Australian Greens Immigration spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young called the reports “extremely concerning,” stating, “there is no way that people can have their claims for protection properly assessed by immigration officials over the phone and when they are in the middle of the ocean.”