Denver’s 52nd annual St. Patrick’s Day Parade got off to a quiet, sober start Saturday.

Bystanders trickled downtown and fought for elbow room as the event started at 9:30 a.m., but were quietly subdued. The parade began a half-hour earlier this year than last.

Ben Holmes, pipe major of Centennial State Pipes and Drums, was marching in the event for the 28th time. Holmes said the crowd appeared to be the same size as in recent years, but quieter and, he speculated, less inebriated.

“It seemed that they were more interested and less boisterous,” Holmes said. “Maybe instead of being all drunk, they’re all stoned.”

Drew Barker hoped so. Dressed in a camouflage kilt and armed with a peddler’s license from the city and county of Denver, Barker sold glass pipes, rolling papers and lighters on the outskirts of the parade to people “smoking up the green,” he said.

On the first St. Patrick’s Day since retail marijuana was legalized in the state of Colorado, Barker made steady sales.

“I’m a mobile head shop,” Barker said.

Ernie Ambrose and Tony Robinson walked their 2-year-old kids to the parade to gawk at floats, grab some strands of green beads and show off flashy costumes.

Ambrose was covered from neck to ankle in a lime-green velvet suit and talked through a faux mustache of the same color.

People in similarly flashy outfits stood beside the mile-long parade route, set primarily on Wynkoop and Blake between 17th and 27th streets. It ran in the opposite direction from last year’s event.

In nearly three decades of participating in the parade, Holmes said he has followed four different routes.

On Saturday, the parade rolled west past construction workers at Denver Union Station, where renovations and expansion projects began Dec. 3, 2012. Mirroring kids perched on parents’ shoulders and light poles, adult bystanders climbed on chain-link fences and large orange cones at the construction site to catch a glimpse of the action.

Jose Uribe, a construction worker who managed the perimeter of Union Station on Saturday, found himself continually shooing people away from the safety hazards of the site.

Uribe described the parade as “busy and dirty,” knowing that he’d be picking up trash on the train station property when it was all over, just as he did after the National Western Stock Show parade in January.

Uribe’s scowl faded as the crowd rose up in cheers for six convincing Vikings who, with a running start, rounded the corner in front of the station. The Fjellborg Vikings swung plastic axes and re-energized little kids who were beginning to realize how cold their fingers could get after two hours.

Alison Noon: 303-954-1223, anoon@denverpost.com or twitter.com/alisonnoon