Buy Photo Senate Democratic Caucus Chairman Jeff Yarbro, D-Nashville (Photo: File/ Sanford Myers / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

When Gov. Bill Haslam wants the General Assembly to pass a law, he must rely on lawmakers to carry the measure for him.

On the controversial Insure Tennessee health plan, that responsibility largely fell on the shoulders of Sen. Doug Overbey, R-Maryville, and Sen. Jeff Yarbro, D-Nashville. Overbey sponsored the bill during a special legislative session at the request of the governor. After it died, Yarbro took up the torch during the regular session. Overbey took over lead sponsorship of the measure after it made some progress in the Senate.

The plan to provide hundreds of thousands of low-income Tennesseans with federally subsidized health insurance wasn't overly popular at the General Assembly. There can be a cost, both legislatively and politically, for sponsoring polarizing legislation.

Overbey and Yarbro answered several questions from The Tennessean about why they decided to champion Insure Tennessee.

Reporter Holly Fletcher contributed to this report.

Q: What considerations did you take into account when deciding to take a strong and ultimately a leadership role in pushing the proposal?

Overbey: My decision to sponsor Insure Tennessee came after a frank and thorough discussion with Gov. Haslam. We talked about the process he had gone through with CMS (federal health officials) and the details of Waiver 25. I became convinced the governor had gotten significant concessions from CMS for a program specifically designed for Tennessee and with sufficient assurance the taxpayers of Tennessee were protected.

Yarbro: This is the most important policy challenge facing the state. I don't think you can sit on the sidelines on this one and claim to be leading. For most people throughout my district and throughout the state, this is a no-brainer. We have an opportunity to insure 280,000 people, pump over $1 billion into Tennessee's economy, protect hospitals and jobs, and do all that without an additional penny of state taxes. This will continue to be a top priority, and won't stop being a priority until lawmakers move past politics and find a solution.

Q: How will you explain your support to constituents who would have liked for you to oppose Insure Tennessee?

Overbey: From the beginning, I have offered my constituents a candid analysis of Insure Tennessee and how doing nothing is not an option. It is hard to argue against making health insurance available to more Tennesseans. This is something my constituents seem to get.

Yarbro: I understand that some people oppose the Affordable Care Act and want to see this federal law fail. But as long as it is the law of the land, we have to do what's best for Tennessee. The governor and Republican sponsors disagree with the Affordable Care Act, but crafted this plan to deal with the reality facing our state. Hospitals are facing impossible budgets and could close, and too many people are working but still can't afford insurance. If Insure Tennessee isn't the way to go, I'd love to hear other ideas. But none of the opponents have proposed a viable alternative. It's unacceptable to do nothing.

Q: What was the response from colleagues at the statehouse and from your constituents about your decision to lead the charge for Insure Tennessee — and did either surprise you?

Overbey: The response from constituents has been overwhelming supportive. My constituents understand that not only will Insure Tennessee help our fellow Tennesseans but will help assure the continued viability of our local hospitals.

As far as my Senate colleagues, I'm surprised and disappointed we weren't able to get the bill to the floor. It seems, despite the efforts of the governor and his team and the advocates, we weren't able to get past the rhetoric of the opposition that this was Medicaid expansion.

Of course, Insure Tennessee is not simply Medicaid expansion. Rather it is a well thought out, conservative program using market principals to provide health insurance — not TennCare — to more than 200,000 Tennesseans.

Yarbro: There are some legislators who just hope this issue will go away. But I have been surprised by the number of Republicans both inside and outside of the capitol who understand this is the right thing to do. If a vote on the floor were held today, I think Insure Tennessee would pass. If the legislature voted by secret ballot, it would probably pass two-to-one. There are a great many legislators who want an opportunity to vote on Insure Tennessee.

Q: If you could change one thing about Insure Tennessee between now and the next legislative session, what would it be?

Overbey: I don't know that the governor's proposal needs changing. Rather, I hope Gov. Haslam takes every opportunity to talk about Insure Tennessee as he travels across the state and continues to build public support.

Yarbro: Insure Tennessee hasn't stumbled because of policy disagreements. The problem is the process — and the politics. The legislature has a job to do, and we should either bring Insure Tennessee to the floor or present an alternative plan. Unfortunately, the legislature has chosen to do nothing but stand in the way. This issue won't go away. The question isn't whether we're going to eventually move past the politics, but how long we will delay making a common-sense decision for Tennessee.

Q: How did politics affect your decision to carry this legislation, and what do you think the political ramifications will be for you and other supporters of the plan?

Overbey: It's hard to access the political ramifications of being the point person on Gov. Haslam's proposal. I think overall it has been and continues to be positive. When the program was announced, Gov. Haslam had just won re-election and maintained a high popularity ranking.

I believe most people understand he developed a well thought out, conservative approach to provide health coverage for Tennesseans without access to insurance.

Yarbro: This has to be a bipartisan effort. After the special session, I wanted to make sure Insure Tennessee made its way back onto the agenda, but it had a better chance of passage with the sponsorship and support of Republicans like Sens. Richard Briggs, Becky Massey and Doug Overbey, who should be commended for their courageous efforts. Given the overwhelming benefits of this plan, I am confident that both Democrats and Republicans who support it would earn the gratitude of their constituents.

Q: Many Tennesseans without access to insurance feel they have few, if any, options for primary care, or that to a degree they're second-class citizens who work and pay the Medicaid tax but don't receive the benefit. What would you like to say to them?

Overbey: I want them to know we haven't given up. There have been many programs that weren't enacted by the legislature on the first go-round. Sometimes you have to sow the seeds of an idea and carefully tend the shoots before you are able to reap the harvest. This year we planted the seeds. Hopefully there will be a lot of watering and tending following adjournment that will lead to a harvest next year.

Yarbro: I regret that we couldn't get more done for you this year, but don't lose hope and don't give up the fight. It's going to take more people getting engaged, registering to vote, and holding their legislators accountable if we're going to get this done.

INSURE TENNESSEE

Here is the contact information for Tennessee's legislative leadership and those who did not vote to pass Insure Tennessee when the proposal was revived last month.

Leadership

Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey, 615-741-4524, Lt.gov.ron.ramsey@capitol.tn.gov

House Speaker Beth Harwell, 615-741-0709, Speaker.beth.harwell@capitol.tn.gov

Senate Commerce and Labor Committee members

(No votes or abstentions on Insure Tennessee)

Sen. Todd Gardenhire, 615-741-6682, Sen.todd.gardenhire@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Mark Green, 615-741-2374, Sen.mark.green@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Dolores Gresham, 615-741-2368, Sen.dolores.gresham@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Jack Johnson, 615-741-2495, Sen.jack.johnson@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Steve Southerland, 615-741-3851, Sen.steve.southerland@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Jim Tracy, 615-741-1066, Sen.jim.tracy@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Bo Watson, 615-741-3227, Sen.bo.watson@capitol.tn.gov

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1GaxlMY