Two congressmen and a hacking expert lead the guest lineup on this weekend's local public-affairs programs:

Rep. Alan Grayson, D-Orlando, talks to Greg Warmoth on "Central Florida Spotlight" at 12:30 p.m. Sunday on WFTV-Channel 9. The topics include gay marriage, gridlock in Washington, working with the new Republican majority and the presidential prospects of Hillary Clinton and Jeb Bush.

Rep. John Mica, R-Winter Park, talks to Sandra Osborne on "Political Connections" at 11 a.m. and 8 p.m. Sunday on News 13. The topics include President Barack Obama's call to normalize relations with Cuba, Obama's executive action on immigration, the omnibus spending bill and the future of the Affordable Care Act. Political analysts Michelle Ertel and Dick Batchelor join Ybeth Bruzual to discuss the first days of the 114th Congress, what the priorities should be and why House Speaker John Boehner faced (and survived) a challenge. PolitiFact's Joshua Gillin uses the Truth-O-Meter to rate a claim made on Facebook about unemployment during Obama's time in office.

"Orlando Matters" and host John Brown look at the growing threat of hacking at 7 a.m. Saturday on WRBW-Channel 65. Tom Jelneck, a tech industry expert, discusses cell phone hacks. Other guests are attorney Stephen Kramer, attorney Dana Harris and Faron Kelley of Run Disney. Other topics are pending NFL lawsuits and the Disney Marathon, which benefits local charities.

"Flashpoint" and host Mike Holfeld look at dog fighting in Central Florida at 8 a.m. Sunday on WKMG-Channel 6. WKMG found that dog fighting is more common in the region than arrest numbers suggest. The guests are Julie Galante, president of Me and My Shadow Dog Rescue; Kerri Burns, executive director of Pet Alliance of Greater Orlando; and Sgt. Al Giardiello of the Orange County Sheriff's Office. He is with the Agricultural Crimes Unit.

Marshall Criser III, chancellor of Florida's state university system, talks to Diane Trees on "Metro Center Outlook" at 9 a.m. Sunday on WUCF-Channel 24. The main topic: the changing face of higher education in the Sunshine State.

"Global Perspectives" offers a repeat of John Bersia's interview with civil rights leader Julian Bond. The program airs at 9:30 a.m. Sunday on WUCF. The topics include diversity in America and the ongoing struggle for voting and civil rights.