Pennsylvania has seen a 14-fold increase in drug overdose deaths over the last 35 years, with the death rate of relatively young white women climbing fastest, a new study has found.

The analysis, published Thursday in the journal PLOS ONE by the University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, was the first to examine in detail accidental overdose deaths in the state over time, according to the study's authors.

"Our latest analysis reveals that drug overdoses are the biggest problem facing our nation in terms of years of life lost — more than car crashes, or cancer, or HIV — and we as a society need to work together to solve it," co-author and Pitt Public Health Dean Donald. S. Burke said in a news release.

The research team broke down overdose deaths in Pennsylvania from 1979 to 2014 by sex, age and race using the Mortality and Population Data System, a repository of detailed death data from the National Center for Health Statistics housed at Pitt Public Health.

"Pitt Public Health has the most comprehensive mortality database in the nation, which can be easily cross-referenced with U.S. Census data to shed light on myriad public health issues," Burke explained.

Among the team's report:

• Pennsylvania ranks in the top 20 states for overdose mortality.

• Overdose deaths were concentrated in southwestern Pennsylvania, the Philadelphia are and northeast Pennsylvania near Scranton.

• 35-to-44-year-olds had the greatest increase in overdose deaths rates, growing almost 22-fold since 1979, but 25-to-34-year-olds may be overtaking them, with the highest death rate in 2014 — 40 deaths for every 100,000 people.

• Accidental overdose rates are higher in men than in women, though women saw a more dramatic increase in recent years.

Compounding matters, most women who enter substance abuse treatment programs also are responsible for children and tend to be more reliant on public insurance, the authors noted.

"Our county-level findings provide possible avenues for targeting interventions to areas and people with the highest drug overdose mortality," said co-author Jeanine M. Buchanich, deputy director of Pitt Public Health's Center for Occupational Biostatistics and Epidemiology. "It also points to issues on the horizon that public health officials could prepare for — such as overdoses in younger age groups and rapid overdose increases in areas centered on smaller cities with fewer resources."

The overdose epidemic is already being felt in the Lehigh Valley.

So many people died of drug overdoses last year that Lehigh County Coroner Scott Grim had to request extra money to pay for all the autopsies. By the end of September, the coroner's office had performed 84 autopsies on overdose victims — the same number performed in all of the previous year. The dead ranged in age from 15 to 64.

Northampton County experienced an even greater surge in fatal drug overdoses, according to Coroner Zachary Lysek: 44 in the first three quarters of last year, 50 percent more than was recorded in all of the previous year. Fifteen were directly attributable to heroin; it's unclear how many others involved prescription opiates.

Non-fatal overdoses are also a growing concern, according to a report published by the Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council in January. It found hospitalizations for pain medication overdoses had quadrupled in the Lehigh Valley over the decade and a half ending in 2014, and that heroin overdose hospitalizations more than doubled.

The trend lines for Lehigh, Northampton, Berks, Schuylkill and Carbon counties mirrored those of Pennsylvania, where the biggest surge in overdose hospitalizations occurred in the vast rural parts of the state.

"These statewide and regional hospitalization findings stress the alarming impact this current drug problem is having on communities across the commonwealth," said Joe Martin, PHC4's executive director. "Whether urban or rural, this issue is an equal opportunity offender."

As the devastation has mounted, public officials have grappled for ways to respond.

On Friday, U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell announced the allocation of $1.8 million to expand substance abuse services at five health centers in Pennsylvania — though none is in the Lehigh Valley. The award is part of $94 million in Affordable Care Act funding for 271 health centers in 45 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico.

"The opioid epidemic is one of the most pressing public health issues in the United States today," Burwell said in a news release. "Expanding access to medication-assisted treatment and integrating these services in health centers bolsters nationwide efforts to curb opioid misuse and abuse, supports approximately 124,000 new patients accessing substance use treatment for recovery and helps save lives."

In December, officers from 15 Lehigh County police departments were equipped with naloxone, an opiate antidote that can almost magically reverse heroin overdoses.

The naloxone program, funded by $17,000 from insurer Capital BlueCross and the Dorothy Rider Pool Health Care Trust and administered by the Lehigh County district attorney's office, provides each officer with a small kit that includes rubber gloves and two nasal atomizers. Naloxone is administered through the nose.

Act 139, signed into law by Gov. Tom Corbett in 2014, gave first responders the green light to use naloxone. The act also allowed family members and friends of opiate addicts to buy naloxone, but only after securing a prescription from a doctor.

Taking Act 139 a step further in October, Pennsylvania Physician General Rachel Levine, with Gov. Tom Wolf at her side, signed a statewide standing order for naloxone. Essentially, the standing order is a prescription that anyone can use to buy naloxone at any pharmacy that stocks it.

skennedy@mcall.com

610-820-6130