POLITICS: Takano relishes role as clown prince of Congress Share Pin It 1 of 5 More Galleries This meme, which mocks Republican attempts to repeal the Affordable Care Act, is modeled after the opening credits for the TV series “Breaking Bad.” Related article » MARK TAKANO Age: 54 Resides: Riverside Party: Democrat Education: Harvard University Represents: Riverside, Moreno Valley, Perris and Jurupa Valley Prior elected office: Riverside Community College Board of Trustees First elected to Congress: 2012

If this whole Congress thing doesn’t work out for Mark Takano, he might have a future in comedy.

The Riverside Democrat made headlines in 2012 as the first openly gay person of color elected to the House of Representatives. But lately, he’s gotten attention for online posts mocking Republicans, most recently a fake craigslist help-wanted ad for a House speaker following GOP Rep. Kevin McCarthy’s abrupt departure from the speaker race Thursday, Oct. 8.

“Most Congressmen Are Boring. This One is Funny -- On Purpose,” read a headline from a 2013 profile of Takano by the liberal magazine “Mother Jones.”

Takano’s jabs at the GOP are a double-edged sword, said Jack Pitney, a professor of politics at Claremont McKenna College.

“On the plus side, Takano gets lots of attention and has become a favorite of progressive Democrats nationwide,” Pitney said. “Their support could be very helpful if ever he decides to run for higher office.

“The downside is that he could develop a reputation as a smart-aleck rather than a serious legislator. In this respect, he suffers by comparison with (Rep. Raul Ruiz, D-Palm Desert), who has made a point of working across party lines to solve important problems of public policy.”

Takano has embraced social media, using Twitter and Facebook to get his message across. His staff also maintains “There Will be Charts,” a Tumblr blog of Takano’s snarky Internet comments, known as memes, and other information.

‘IT’S A GATEWAY’

In a telephone interview Friday, Takano said he uses humor to reach voters about important topics. Representatives, he said, have a duty to inform as well as represent the public.

“People are just so busy out there leading their lives and working and various forms of media are claiming their attention,” he said. “To break through all of that noise, you need sometimes a powerful tool or a powerful device.”

“It’s a gateway, a window into more serious work,” Takano added.

The congressman and his staff, including Chief of Staff Richard McPike and legislative director Yuri Beckelman, toss around ideas for memes, usually based on the events of the day. Ideas are constantly refined and not every idea ends up online.

“There’s a very strict rule about not being mean and not being personal,” Beckelman said.

Staff members often send Takano concepts while he’s in a committee meeting or otherwise busy, requiring him to discreetly check his phone.

“Sometimes I have to keep myself from laughing,” he said.

Takano’s big break came in 2013, when he got hold of a House GOP letter on immigration. A former high school English teacher, Takano used a red pen to mark up the letter before giving it an “F.”

“The assignment was to address what should be done about the 11 million (undocumented immigrants) already here,” he wrote. “Did you purposefully leave this out?”

NOD TO KANYE

The markup went viral and Takano continues to mix social media with pop culture to troll the GOP on other matters. A meme mocked Texas Republican Sen. Ted Cruz’s marathon Senate floor speech against Obamacare by imitating rap star Kanye West’s 2013 interruption of Taylor Swift’s MTV Video Music Awards acceptance speech.

“Ted Cruz, Ima let you finish, but Wendy Davishad the greatest filibuster of all time!” Takano says, a reference to the Democratic Texas state senator’s filibuster in support of abortion rights.