GA Communication Group

Share this article:



linkedin

google



Email

Print





Company Profile

We are a full-service communication agency with a focus in the diverse healthcare space. We love what we do because healthcare communication done well can dramatically impact well-being.

Our clients' brands range from highly scientific, specialized clinical therapies to consumer and OTC products. We work with people who think big and have game-changing products and therapies—we expect to be challenged.

GA enters its 33rd year having doubled both revenue and staff since 2008, earning recognition from INC 500 as one of the nation's fastest-growing private businesses for four consecutive years.

Services & Offerings

GA has long been valued for its strategic insight, creative ideas, and execution. The agency has developed significant core competencies and expertise in building and delivering campaigns in digital, social, and mobile platforms.

In short, we think, we create, and we execute for our clients and their customers.

Core Capabilities

• You'll find us candid, direct, and a breath of fresh air to work with.

• Our focus is on our clients and their unique business needs. We listen first and we don't speak in vague marketing tongues, jargon, or rhetoric.

• We are strategic, creative, and media and tech savvy and apply our efforts toward understanding client customers and where, when, and how to engage them.

• We have a gritty blue-collar work ethic that inspires us to get things done on behalf of our clients—on time, as promised.

• Our vast amount of knowledge, expertise, and experience in designing, creating, and executing programs and campaigns help our clients sell their brands to healthcare professionals, patients, and consumers.

Question: What does patient-centricity mean to you and is the industry doing enough to fulfill the needs of patients?

Patient-centered care is the keystone of the Affordable Care Act, with many of its provisions referring to patient experience and satisfaction as vital to better health outcomes. When it comes to marketing healthcare brands, patient centricity is equally vital. If marketers are to provide the best solutions for life sciences brands and services, understanding what makes patients tick needs to be at the top of any marketer's mind. With patients now -expected to help manage their own health, it's important that marketers adopt a patient-centric philosophy to stay in front of health-informed consumers to help prevent them from mistakenly seeking -inappropriate and misguided health content.









Address: Offices in Chicago and Los Angeles

Phone: (312) 803-1900

Website: www.gacommunication.com

New Business Contact: Joe Kuchta, CEO, jkuchta@gacommunication.com

Year Founded: 1982 Employees: 102

Click here to return to main story.