Here’s a question for all you market savants and savvy investors out there.

Over the past three years of this bull run, which of the 10 market sectors that make up the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index has performed best? The sectors to consider are: consumer discretionary, consumer staples, energy, financials, health care, industrials, information technology, materials, telecommunications, and utilities.

I bet many of you guessed information technology, with its high-profile constituents such as Apple Inc., Google Inc. and Facebook Inc. Or perhaps you chose financials, or maybe consumer discretionary, which includes some great companies like Starbucks Corp., Home Depot and Nike Inc.

Good guesses all, but alas those guesses are wrong. The best performing sector was health care, which includes pharmaceutical companies, hospital services, biotechnology and medical devices.

This is a bit surprising, because historically, health care stocks, along with utilities and consumer staples, are considered safe, defensive plays. By that, I mean investors tend to plow into these sectors during periods of extreme market volatility and fear of a falling market.

That’s because people are going to get sick and they’re going to buy electricity and food no matter what the economy is doing. Consequently, these sectors tend to hold up better than the others when the market is sinking.

But last year, the market was relatively calm throughout the year as the S&P 500 gained 13 percent — yet health care stocks climbed 23 percent.

In fact, the health care sector has outperformed all other sectors in each of the last three years by a mile. The annualized return of health care, which comprises 55 companies including Johnson & Johnson, Pfizer Inc. and Celgene Corp., is 25.7 percent over that period compared with the annualized return of the S&P 500 of 16.1 percent.

Financials and consumer discretionary stocks were the closest contenders with annualized three-year returns of about 20 percent. By the way, energy stocks, which have been clobbered by falling crude oil prices, were the worst performers with an annual return of only 4.7 percent, and that sector is down about 12 percent over the past year.

“Three years of outperformance in health care has only happened a handful of times,” said Derek Taner, portfolio manager of the $1.7 billion Invesco Global Health Care Fund. “If that happens for a fourth year, it would be unprecedented.”

A confluence of three factors has driven health care’s outperformance in recent years, and Taner believes there’s a good chance that it will continue into this year.

For starters, a large chunk of the performance is coming from biotechnology companies, which are teeming with new drugs and products.

Money is flowing into this sector as new drug approvals and novel treatments are driving stock prices higher. Biotechs specifically, and health care generally, accounted for 102 of the 275 initial public offerings in 2014, according to Renaissance Capital. The stock price return on these companies last year was one of the best at almost 40 percent.

“The pipeline of new treatments within pharmaceuticals and biotechs is more robust than I have ever seen it,” Taner said. “There are new drugs for treating cancer, Alzheimer’s, and we are on the cusp of finding cures for sickle cell anemia.”

The stock price of Celgene — one of the largest biotechs with an ever-expanding array of new treatments for cancer and immune-related diseases — is up 45 percent over the past year. And over the past five years it has soared from about $27 a share to about $122 a share.

The second factor that is providing a tailwind for health care is the increasing number of mergers, especially in the so-called specialty pharmaceutical area. The best example of this was the announcement last November that Actavis Plc would buy Allergan Inc., the maker of the anti-wrinkle treatment Botox, for $66 billion.

Shares of Allergan, which were trading around $116 in early 2014 before the company was a takeover target, now trade above $223.

“There is massive consolidation going on in the specialty pharma area,” Taner said. “You buy a company’s existing products and lay those products over your infrastructure, and it is very accretive to earnings.”

And finally, hospital services companies are benefiting from health care reform, specifically the Affordable Care Act. When Congress was debating health care reform five years ago, many health care stocks dropped because of the uncertainty and coming regulations.

Today, for better or worse, the reforms are in place, meaning more people have access to health care, and that care is being paid for in many instances by government subsidies. Hospitals will be the beneficiary of some $2 trillion in subsidies over the next decade, meaning they will be getting paid instead of having to write off bad debts.

Shares of HCA Holdings Inc., which owns hospitals and diagnostic centers, have basically doubled in the past year.

“I believe the positive themes that have been in motion in health care will remain in motion because these cycles last 10 to 15 years,” Taner said.