A group of Southern Utes, including Chief Buckskin Charlie, stand with Eben Fine at the Boulder semi-Centennial celebration in 1909. ( / Carnegie Branch Library for Local History, Boulder Historical Society Collection )

If you go What: "Searching for Truth and Reconciliation; The Colorado Example" is the topic of the third annual Chief Niwot Forum, featuring Ernest House Jr. The event is co-sponsored by the Museum of Boulder and the Native American Rights Fund When: 7-8:30 p.m. Thursday, Nov. 19 Where: Museum of Boulder, 2205 Broadway St., Boulder Tickets: $20 for general admission, $10 for museum and NARF members Info: 303-449-3464 or boulderhistory.org/

Recent events have highlighted the Ute people who live in Colorado.

The disastrous Gold King Mine spill into the Animas River in August sent toxic yellow sludge through the Southern Ute reservation. Cleanup costs are expected to be well beyond the resources of the tribe.

And in August, Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper and his cabinet kicked off the inaugural Summer Summit by participating in meetings on Ute history, culture and contemporary issues, making it the first event of its kind on tribal land, according to Ernest House Jr., executive director of the Colorado Commission of Indian Affairs.

House is charged with maintaining communication between the Southern Ute Indian Tribe, Ute Mountain Ute Indian Tribe and state agencies on behalf of the state government.

An enrolled member of the Ute Mountain Ute tribe, House will be the featured speaker at the third annual Chief Niwot Forum, an event co-sponsored by the Museum of Boulder and the Native American Rights Fund.

Hickenlooper's legacy on Native American issues will be substantial, House says.

Last year, the governor made history with an appointed commission to commemorate the 150th anniversary of the Sand Creek Massacre and his public apology to the Arapaho and Cheyenne tribes. Now the Utes are welcoming the governor's attention to their own concerns.

The Ute people have a long history in the Boulder area. Here, hundreds of years before the Arapaho and Cheyenne, the Utes' original territory spanned almost all of Colorado, including the Boulder and Denver region.

Skilled riders, the Utes had acquired horses from the Spanish and were among the first Indians to have horses in significant numbers, according to Colorado historian Tom Thomas.

After treaty violations that intruded on their hunting grounds and traditional way of life, the Utes retaliated. In 1854, Utes killed white settlers at Fort Pueblo. In 1879, Utes killed Nathan Meeker, a U.S. Indian Agency official, and others in remote northwestern Colorado.

Thomas, an instructor in U.S. history at the University of Colorado and a strategic planner for the National Park Service, says Meeker had deliberately plowed up one of the Ute horse racetracks to impose his idea of civilization on the tribe.

In the aftermath of the Meeker Massacre, the saying "The Utes Must Go" reflected the sentiment of white Colorado settlers and was an oft-repeated headline in newspapers. The Utes were forced to reservations in 1881.

"The Utes were expelled and driven off the land that was granted to them by treaty," Thomas says. "It has all the hallmarks of ethnic cleansing."

Ute land was then opened to white settlement.

Many place names in Boulder County remind us of the presence of the Ute people, including the Ute Highway, Ute Lookout (a rock formation in Sunshine Canyon) and Chipeta Park in Nederland. Ute City was the original name of the town of Aspen.

Although they were long gone from their homelands in the mountains near Boulder, booster and Chamber of Commerce president Eben Fine recruited a group of Southern Utes to come to town for the semi-centennial celebration of 1909.

The University of Colorado hosted Southern Ute elder Eddie Box Sr. for a blessing of the newly renamed Cheyenne-Arapaho student residence hall in 1989.

As John Echohawk, executive director of the Native American Rights Fund, has said, we don't know the true history of American Indians in this country.

But we should. And because we are all the beneficiaries of broken treaties in Colorado, we have a responsibility to educate ourselves.

Carol Taylor and Silvia Pettem write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com, Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net or write to the Daily Camera, 2500 55th St., Suite 210, Boulder, 80301.