House Speaker Nicholas Mattiello said he's willing to consider cutting spending if that's what it takes to reduce Rhode Island's long-term structural deficits.

During a Statehouse interview Monday, Mattiello said that when it comes to the almost $200 million deficit for the fiscal year starting next July, the state needs to be more efficient "and we're going to have to look at what our neighboring states do and get our expenses in line with our neighboring states."

As Mattiello noted, Rhode Island's expenses are growing faster than its revenue -- a situation he calls "unsustainable." Future deficits have been estimated at $256.7 million for fiscal 2017, $330.5 million for fiscal 2018, and $419 million for 2019. Although the state is required to close each fiscal year with a balanced budget, lawmakers have lacked a long-term plan for closing these worsening deficits.

Mattiello, who became speaker last March when a state-federal raid brought down his predecessor, Gordon Fox, said it's time for the legislature to come to terms with Rhode Island's worsening tide of red ink.

"I've asked my fiscal staff and my Finance chairman to take a look at that and give me numerous different scenarios to eradicate the structural deficit," Mattiello said during an interview broadcast Tuesday morning on Rhode Island Public Radio. "That's going to be something that we have to look at. It doesn't come without a lot of pain and difficult choices, but the structural deficit gets bigger as we go out, so we're going to look at tackling that and we're going to do that in the context of protecting our business environment and staying competitive with our neighbors on taxes."

Senate President Teresa Paiva Weed has rejected the idea that the state's current deficit calls for less generous human service spending. She said the answer is to deliver services more efficiently.

Governor-elect Gina Raimondo has tasked Elizabeth Roberts, her nominee to lead the Executive Office of Health and Human Services, with making the state a national leader in curbing Medicaid costs -- a key driver in the state budget.

Asked for specific steps he'll support to curb future structural deficits, Mattiello said, "We’re going to have to cut our expenses back. We’re going have to get in line with where our neighbors are. We’re not going to raise taxes, and we’re going have to look to see what our neighbors do. If we spend more money in certain social services area than our neighboring states, we’re going to have to cut back to what they do. We’re going have to get more efficient within those areas."

The next General Assembly session starts January 6.