Wagner won the Farash Foundation's $100,000 Social Entrepreneurship award. (Photo: Provided photo)

It was a shock for Sister Christine Wagner to learn she was in the running for a $100,000 Social Entrepreneurship award from the Farash Foundation in 2014. She was busy leading St. Joseph’s Neighborhood Center’s efforts to improve the health of people with little money. At the time, Wagner said, she would have been hard pressed to define “social entrepreneurship.”

She knows quite a lot about providing health care to people who can't afford it. That job has gotten a little easier since Wagner was chosen as the winner of this Farash prize two years ago. St. Joseph’s Neighborhood Center was given $100,000 and has been using the funding to move from paper medical records to digital ones. This was of critical help to the center, which provides an intergrated model of health care. Simply put, if someone comes in with a bad cough, the health care provider will try to find out what else might be going on in their lives. "It's not just the upper respiratory infection," said St. Joseph's Neighborhood Center Board Chair Bob Thompson. "These are individuals without insurance, which indicates they are struggling. We want to know what else they are struggling with."

Health care providers at St. Joseph's Neighborhood Center try to determine whether patients' health can be improved in other arenas, from mental health to smoking cessation. The center screens each patient to determine the reason they lack health insurance and tries to find options that might be possible. In the past, patient histories have been kept in handwritten paper files. With digital files, it is much easier to get a "total view of the individual," said Thompson. Digital records will also help the center collect data and spot and analyze trends concerning people who lack access to health care.

Wagner said that the much-appreciated award was an affirmation of the center’s efforts to find the “bleeding edge” of barriers to health care and find creative ways to overcome them. In recent years, this has meant helping the poor and powerless navigate a health care system of increasing complexity. Wagner supported the federal Affordable Care Act, which is intended to help more people access medical insurance. However, she says, its unintended consequences have placed some working poor in a terrible bind. Many scrape together enough money to afford the premium for an affordable policy but are stung by deductibles that can be more than $6,000. If a doctor visit ends up costing $100 or more out of pocket, people who are scraping by are unlikely to go. “They have purchased insurance that they can’t afford to use,” Wagner said. St. Joseph’s has started offering assistance to such people, and to those who simply need help sorting through the dozens of options of medical insurance that are now available to them. Wagner's other priorities include better integration of mental and physical health care.

In addition to the money, Wagner received an obelisk designed by artist Nancy Jurs. On the top of the scuplture sits a flowering heart. The video that the Farash Foundation created for the Social Entrepreneurship award states that this physical prize embodies qualities that Max Farash valued: a strong foundation, determination to see an idea through to reality and undertaking the very best ideas, the ones that come from the heart.

Sister Christine Wagner accepts her Social Entrepreneurship award in 2014. (Photo: Provided photo)

The publicity that came with the award has led more people to come to Wagner and St. Joseph's to learn about integrated health care delivery. She is happy to help them try to replicate and build on the center's successes.

"It is an affirmation that you have moved in creative ways," she said.. "You get this sense that you really have to live up to the award now."

As Wagner continues her work, the Farash Foundation is looking for a new social entrepreneur to honor. According to the foundation website, social entrepreneurs create new solutions to problems by combining the passion of social mission with business-like discipline and innovation. They must focus on treating the underlying causes of community problems rather than just symptoms. They must display insight, courage, creativity, persistence and determination. The nomination deadline is April 19. For more information on how to nominate someone, (you may not nominate yourself), go to farashfoundation.org or call (585) 218-9855.

Erica Bryant is the Pay it Forward Columnist. Contact her at ebryant@gannett.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1oVXCuA