In his classic work "Presidential Power," the late, great presidency scholar Richard Neustadt argued that presidents cannot be evaluated solely on the basis of whether they accomplish a key objective, such as persuading Congress to pass the president’s most important legislation. One must also look at the impact of that accomplishment on a president’s effective influence on government down the road.

Recent comments by Democratic Sens. Chuck Schumer and Tom Harkin suggesting that passing President Barack Obama’s signature domestic legislative achievement – the Patient Protection and Affordable Care act, better known as “Obamacare” – was a political mistake are a reminder of Neustadt’s important observation. Schumer, the senior Senator from New York, argues that Obama, and Democrats more generally, misread their party’s mandate from voters in the 2008 elections. Rather than pushing to extend health insurance to the roughly 5 percent of Americans lacking coverage, Democrats would have done better politically by first focusing on restoring economic prosperity, which was a far higher priority among the middle class. By centering their legislative efforts through 2009 and into 2010 on passing Obamacare, however, Democrats lost the opportunity to work on economic recovery, provoked the rise of the tea party movement and, ultimately, cost themselves control of the House in 2010 and, in 2014, the Senate.

Harkin, a retiring Iowa senator and one of the legislative architects of Obamacare, concurs with Schumer, albeit for different reasons. Harkin believes that because Obamacare, as passed, created such a complex health care system, it is difficult for Americans to appreciate its benefits. It would have been far better, he argues, if Congress had either pass a simpler health care bill – perhaps one that included the public option – or had not acted at all on the matter.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

Not every Democrat in Congress agrees with these criticisms, of course, but the fact that the debate even among Democrats over Obamacare continues, six years into Obama’s presidency, is a reminder that any effort to evaluate his presidency will likely start with this key piece of legislation. For what it is worth, since midway through 2009, when debate on health care legislation began in earnest, a plurality of those surveyed have consistently registered negative feelings toward Obamacare, with more than 56 percent registering disapproval in the most recent Gallup poll.

More importantly for Neustadt’s argument, however, there is evidence that Obama’s decision to push health care legislation did cost him considerable political support in Congress, thus weakening his effective influence in other areas for much of his presidency. In particular, Stanford political scientists David Brady, Morris Fiorina and Arjun Wilkins examined the electoral fates of 231 Democrats in Congress who faced competition while seeking re-election in 2010, shortly after passage of Obamacare. They find that “a positive vote on health care appears to have had a negative impact on members’ vote shares in all but the most heavily Democratic districts.” This negative impact was particularly pronounced among freshman Democrats who had yet to establish an electoral cushion protecting them from the Obama health care backlash.

Just how big was that backlash? By constructing a counterfactual in which all House Democrats voted against health care, and those House Democrats representing districts in which less than 60 percent of voters supported Obama in 2008 also voted against the cap-and-trade climate bill (another controversial piece of legislation) rather than for it, the authors conclude that “about 40 of these incumbents would have increased their margins from losing to winning, easily enough to save the Democratic majority.” As it was, however, most Democrats supported both pieces of legislation which clearly contributed to the “shellacking” they received in the 2010 midterms.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Barack Obama]

Of course, it is probably unrealistic to believe congressional Democrats would have bucked their party leader on such a high profile issue by voting against Obamacare. But Obama could have decided, particularly after Republican Scott Brown’s surprise Senate victory in January 2010 to replace the late Ted Kennedy in Massachusetts, to pull the plug on the already unpopular health care bill, at least for the time being, thus sparing congressional Democrats from having to vote on the controversial legislation heading into the midterms. Indeed, that was the advice White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel, among others, was giving him. Instead, Obama agreed with the more liberal members of his party, such as House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, to push ahead on health care legislation.

Note that Obama’s political losses in Congress extend beyond the 2010 midterm. Middlebury College student Tina Berger calculates that through the first six years of Obama’s presidency, his party has lost almost 27 percent of the 257 seats which Democrats held in the House at the start of his first term, and almost 23 percent of the 57 Senate seats with which he began. This is the second highest percentage of seats lost by a president in both chambers in the modern, post-Hoover presidential era, exceeded only by Dwight Eisenhower’s partisan losses during his two presidential terms. These losses mean that Obama will have spent most of his presidency facing a divided government, including a final two years in which the opposition party controls both the House and the Senate. This is a stunning reversal of political fortunes, particularly since many commentators thought Obama’s historic 2008 political election signaled a coming era of Democratic dominance in national politics.



[SEE Political Cartoons on the Democratic Party]

So, does this mean passing Obamacare was a mistake? Not necessarily. Neustadt’s point is not to warn presidents never to expend political capital on potentially costly legislative endeavors. It is instead to remind them that before embarking on any controversial legislative endeavor, they must try to anticipate the impact of that effort on future legislative effectiveness. If, in so doing, a president decides the benefit of passing an important piece of legislation is worth a potentially substantial cost in future bargaining capacity, then so be it.

These judgments, of course, are difficult to make. Surely Obama could not have anticipated the rocky rollout of the Obamacare website. And it remains to be seen whether the Supreme Court will effectively eliminate subsidies for beneficiaries with insurance bought in states that didn’t set up their own health exchanges, thus potentially gutting an important component of health care coverage. In short, presidents must make these difficult decisions under conditions of tremendous uncertainty. And even with perfect foresight, it is not always clear what the “correct” choice will be. Democratic presidents dating back to Truman sought repeatedly, and unsuccessfully, to expand the federal government’s commitment to providing health care coverage for all Americans, something they viewed as a fundamental right. For better or for worse Obama, by pushing the nation one step further toward achieving that goal, succeeded where his predecessors did not.