McAuliffe looks forward to productive session

RICHMOND — They may be from different political parties, but Gov.-elect Terry McAuliffe is feeling pretty good these days about whether he and the Republican leaders of the General Assembly will be able to get things done.

"When you get up from the table, you want both sides feeling good," he said. "If you leave thinking you've skunked the other guy, I promise you, that deal is going to come back to bite you."

And that's not something he wants to have happen with his top priority – helping diversify the state economy – or with other key items on his legislative wish list: fixing the state's broken mental health system, workforce development, ethics reform and expanding health care coverage for lower-income Virginians.

That last usually goes by the name of Medicaid expansion, an anathema to many in the GOP.

"I don't care what you call it," McAuliffe said. "I come at this as a business matter.... How do we cover the 400,000 Virginians with quality care while bringing our own federal tax dollars back to us .... and do it in a way that protects us on the back end?"

He said he understood Republicans' concerns that expanding Medicaid could eventually expose the state to big bills, even though the Affordable Care Act initially covers the cost of the expansion.

"Let's begin the discussion by saying is there a way to do this the Virginia way," he said.

McAuliffe said he believes outgoing Gov. Bob McDonnell has set the right tone during the transition, particularly by spending time with him talking about priorities for the next two-year budget. In the same spirit, McAuliffe said the money committees of the state Senate and House of Delegates separately sat down with him for three-hour briefings.

"I think that's unprecedented," he said, adding that he felt McDonnell listened carefully to his feedback on the budget.

McAuliffe said he thinks there is general agreement on the need to reform the Standards of Learning tests, with people on both sides of the aisle agreeing that there are too many tests and that they don't really measure problem-solving and critical thinking.

He's hoping that legislators will support a plan that Secretary of Transportation Aubrey Layne is working on to reduce tolls on the Elizabeth River tunnels between Norfolk and Portsmouth. He and Layne are still tweaking the proposal.

On ethics reform, McAuliffe said he plans to issue an executive order banning gifts of more than $100 to himself, his family and members of his administration, and said he is eager to work with the General Assembly as it tackles the issue.

On mental health, he said there's already been a good start, with a series of bills proposed by Del. Joseph Yost, R-Giles, to give mental health workers more time to find hospital beds for people in crisis, along with a $38 million increase in state funds for emergency and community care that McDonnell proposed.