United Airlines has struck a partnership with ride-booking service Uber. Charleston International Airport says Uber drivers still must get a permit or risk being ticketed and having cars impounded.

The debate over Uber now has landed at airports all over the country.

Getting around Charleston airport ground transportation revenue comes from permits for taxis, charter vehicles and limousines. 2011: $199,624 2012: $214,214 2013: $197,032 2014: $160,299* *Through August Taxi operators pay $200 per permit per vehicle per year to operate at the airport. Charter vehicles from hotels pay $120 per vehicle per year plus $2 per room. Charter limousines pay $120 per vehicle per year plus $1 per pickup. Uber drivers fall under this category. Motor coaches or buses pay $15 per vehicle per trip or they can pay $120 per vehicle per year. Minibuses or limousines doing a one-time pickup pay $11. Charleston County Aviation Authority

In the latest twist, the expanding ride-booking service has started hitching a ride with United Airlines, further aggravating Charleston International and other airports.

Got coverage? To operate a taxi, limousine or other permitted ground transportation vehicle at Charleston International, drivers must have: $500,000 certificate of liability. $500,000 auto insurance policy. $100,000 property damage policy. Charleston County Aviation Authority

The air carrier, which serves the Lowcountry with 15 daily flights, said it has partnered with the San Francisco-based app provider to allow its passengers to book Uber rides when they make their reservations.

Uber allows anyone who undergoes a background check to drive their personal cars to give people rides for a fee, challenging the long-regulated system that oversees taxis, limousines and other ground transportation providers at airports and in municipalities.

United's decision prompted a stern reaction from Paul Campbell, Charleston County's airports director.

"United can't supersede the rules at Charleston International," Campbell said. "Uber drivers have to have a permit to use our airport. If we catch them without a permit, we are going to ticket them."

The airport also has threatened to impound the vehicles.

The Charleston County Aviation Authority, which operates the state's busiest airport, doesn't mind Uber drivers ferrying passengers to and from the airport as long as they have the proper permits.

"Is United also going to assume liability?" asked Charleston airport spokeswoman Becky Beaman, referring to passengers who book an unpermitted Uber vehicle.

An Uber spokesman defended the service.

"Taking Uber to and from the airport is the safest, most reliable and affordable option around," company agent Taylor Bennett said in a statement. "We welcome the opportunity to show airport administrators how Uber can reduce curbside churn, eliminate deadhead trips and end long taxi queues. We fully stand behind our driver partners and will cover any legal or financial costs associated with unjust citations."

United said the cities that Uber serves have evolving policies and regulations governing transportation services.

"United will only display services on our app approved by the city and transportation authorities in our airport cities," United spokesman Charles Hobart said.

John Powers with Travel Management Group said he is reluctant to offer the Uber service to customers of his North Charleston travel agency.

"I wouldn't do it because there are too many legal issues," he said. "If someone wasn't a skilled driver, there might be too much blowback."

Passenger safety is one issue, Campbell said, but Uber drivers are undercutting transportation companies that pay and abide by strict rules for the right to do business at the airport.

The issue also could create a minor inconvenience for passengers. On her way out of Charleston recently, vacationer Susan Lyons of Boston, who has the Uber app but hasn't used it, said if she booked a ride with Uber and her driver was ticketed for not having a permit and couldn't fulfill the reservation, she'd look for another ride.

"I'd take a cab," Lyons said.

She also said the experience would leave a bad impression of the airport.

"They would need to get their act together," she said.

Jeffrey Foland, executive vice president for marketing at United, said the airline was offering Uber's services in response to customer demands for mobile technology and "emerging views of the marketplace," according to a report in The New York Times.

With its Uber app, "we want to provide functionality," he said. "Our customers want it. They told us they like it, and they're using the product."

Charleston International is not the only airport fuming at United's decision.

An Orlando airport executive took issue with what some have seen as a unilateral move by United to link up with Uber as airports are struggling with whether, or how, to accommodate such rapidly expanding competitors to their traditional ground-transit services, the Times reported.

Why would United be so quick to welcome Uber when "a lot of airports in the United States are against Uber, also because the drivers are not vetted and not regulated?" Victoria Jaramillo, marketing director at the Greater Orlando Aviation Authority, asked Foland at a Las Vegas aviation conference, according to the Times.

Last week, Nashville International Airport became the first U.S. airport to recognize Uber and Lyft, a similar ride-booking service. The deal calls for their drivers to obtain permits and pay airport fees to pick up passengers curbside at designated locations.

"Airports welcome anything that helps them provide better customer service," Tom Devine, the general counsel for Airports Council International-North America, a trade group, told the Times.

There are 450 U.S. commercial airports, with widely varying ground-transportation service issues, including traffic congestion around terminals. Uber adds to that mix a new potential legal liability for airline passengers who get picked up or dropped off by unauthorized drivers.

All together, Charleston International took in just over $197,000 in vehicle permit fees in 2013, a fraction of its $30 million budget last year.

"Our main concern is passenger safety and ensuring taxi service is available when it's needed," said Campbell, the director. "The revenue is down the list of the most important items."

As of last week, no unauthorized Uber drivers had been ticketed at Charleston International, he said.