Topics: Abortion, AlterNet, political ads, political campaigns, Supreme Court, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Republican lawyers are asking the U.S. Supreme Court to declare that they have a First Amendment right to lie during political campaigns.

The case concerns a challenge by a national anti-abortion group, Susan B. Anthony List (SBA), which tried to put up a billboard in 2010 attacking Rep. Steven Driehaus, D-Ohio, saying that he was pro-abortion because he supported Obamacare.

The Democratic incumbent stopped the billboard by threatening to sue SBA’s ad agency. He also filed a complaint with the Ohio Elections Commission (OEC) that the ad would have violated a state law making it a crime to knowingly lie in a campaign ad. The OEC found probable cause to procede with a case, which, in turn, prompted a series of court challenges that is now before the Supreme Court and will be heard later this year.

“We are thrilled at the opportunity to have our arguments heard at the Supreme Court and hope that not only will SBA List’s First Amendment rights be affirmed, but those of all Americans,” said Marjorie Dannenfelser, SBA List president. “The Ohio Election Commission statute demonstrates complete disregard for the Constitutional right of citizens to criticize their elected officials.”

American democracy has been dying a death by 1,000 cuts in recent decades as political lawyers have chipped away at the anti-corruption provisions in campaign law. The Supreme Court’s Citizens United decision is a well-known example, opening new ways for the wealthiest Americans—like the Koch brothers—and operators like Karl Rove to secretly funnel hundreds of millions into campaigns, which both did in 2012.

Last fall, the Court heard an appeal brought by an Alabama Republican businessman and the Republican National Committee that is seeking to lift the limit on campaign donations that any individual can give to political parties and so-called non-candidate committees. The case,McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission, could create another way for wealthy people to donate millions to political campaigns. In general, the worst recent abuses were pioneered by Republicans but have been quickly copied by Democrats.

The SBA List litigation is yet another potential knife in democracy’s back because if the Supreme Court says the SBA has a constitutional right to say anything— overruling state law that require truth in political campaigning—it will surely encourage more lowbrow behavior in elections, as opposed to campaigns based on facts and real debate.