The Hillary email fiasco has had steroids injected into it, with the revelation that she ordered an aide to remove the classified markings on a sensitive document and send it–unsecured–to her. That’s a federal crime. You can’t tamper with sensitive information as irresponsibly as Clinton has reportedly done during her tenure as Secretary of State. It also rehashes what many have said about the political power couple in the past; that it’s all politics, they’re secretive, and they pay by their own rules. Given how Clinton and her campaign have behaved regarding the allegations stemming from her private email system, all three are demonstrated with this avoidable public relations disaster. With these new developments, it’s no surprise that Congress is investigating (via The Hill):

A second congressional committee has launched an investigation into the security of former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s private email server. House Science, Space and Technology Committee Chairman Lamar Smith (R-Texas) sent letters this week to four companies that played roles in maintaining and protecting the server. “Understanding these companies’ roles in providing software and services to maintain former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s private email server is critical to improving government cybersecurity standards,” Smith said in a statement. The investigation will run alongside a similar inquiry led by Senate Homeland Security Committee Chairman Ron Johnson (R-Wis.). […] Smith sent letters on Thursday to Platte River, which housed Clinton’s server after she left the Obama administration in 2013; SECNAP, a security firm that installed a threat monitoring device on Clinton’s server; Fortinet, which provided encryption software for Clinton; and Datto, which backed up the server.

As Guy reported, the FBI has expanded their investigation into Mrs. Clinton's email activities as well. Sen. Johnson (R-WI) has previously written a letter to Datto, asking them to turn over those back up servers to the FBI last October; they complied.