If a proposal from Mayor Bill de Blasio’s administration is approved as expected on Wednesday, New York will soon take a step forward into the digital age. A constellation of Wi-Fi hot spots offering free high-speed Internet access will emerge across the city, on sidewalks where thousands of all-but-defunct pay phones now stand.

The city’s Franchise and Concession Review Committee is expected to vote to give the contract to a consortium that includes Qualcomm and Titan, an outdoor-advertising company. The $200 million project, called LinkNYC, would install up to 10,000 digital kiosks over the next 12 to 15 years, providing Wi-Fi at speeds ranging from 100 megabits per second to 1 gigabit per second. The kiosks, which will also offer free domestic, 911 and 311 calls, are to be supported by advertising and generate at least $500 million in revenue for the city.

The mayor’s office, never known to underplay a good thing, announced this project with great fanfare. But let’s be clear about what these are — not the arrival of digital nirvana, but a pretty impressive collection of advertising kiosks with Wi-Fi attached, great for tourists and residents who are able to bring their smartphones, tablets, laptops and other devices within 150 feet of them.

This is well beyond what other cities have tried. Comptroller Scott Stringer deserves credit for trying to make the good-sounding deal better, by warning that inequality is built into the contract. That is, most of the new kiosks with the highest speeds will be concentrated in Manhattan. The Bronx and Staten Island will be home to many of the slower kiosks, which are still blazingly fast by current standards of available Wi-Fi.

Mr. de Blasio’s office promises not to overlook poorer neighborhoods as the program expands. And it says that LinkNYC revenue will provide millions of dollars for as-yet-unspecified projects to improve digital access across the city. The administration should make sure to upgrade the phone kiosks in every corner of the city — bringing them up to speed, literally — as the program advances.