“The house has potential.”

Every time I hear those words, a story follows that has more ups and downs than the New York skyline.

The word “potential” alone is dubious, as in, “that kid has potential,” “that relationship has potential,” “that job has potential.” The word “potential” gets called out when one wants to infuse a precarious situation with rosy hope and optimism.

It’s loaded.

Put the word “house” in the same sentence, and you’ve just added another barrel to the shotgun.

And yet “the house has potential” was precisely what the contractor said as he walked through the 15-year-old, bank-owned house that my friend and I had dragged him out to look at. The house had been on the market and vacant for months — and neglected for years.

My friend, D.C., is in the market for a house. I’m along for the ride because I like this stuff, being sick in that way, and because D.C. thinks that because I write these columns, I know what I’m doing. (Someone should to talk to him about that … )

We’ve looked at a dozen houses. Some were brand new, “turn-key” properties, with the price tags to go with that description.

“They’re like a new car,” I tell him, shaking my head. “Nowhere to go but down.” I am biased against new houses.

Some were fixed up, but poorly.

“Why pay extra for someone else’s mistakes?” I ask. I am against paying for, and then tearing out, perfectly good materials just because I don’t like them.

Some houses started off on the wrong track — and stayed on it. For those, I had just one word. “Scrape.”

But a couple of the houses we saw, like this particular fixer, had potential.

“The place can only go up from here,” I said. “You wouldn’t have to feel guilty about tearing good stuff out, because there isn’t any. You could put in the finishes you want, with my approval, and instantly add to your investment.”

“I’m looking for a house, not for trouble,” said D.C. His worry level is an 11 on a scale of 10.

And … I see what he sees in this hurting house. The interior paint is filthy and nicked; outside, it’s peeling. The wood floors need refinishing. There’s dog urine on the baseboards. The pool is as brown as a pond. The fireplace has smoke stains. The oven door is broken, and the cabinets come in five styles and colors. The carpet is trashed. The ceiling has water stains; it’s buckled and cracked in places. In one room, there’s a hole big enough to crawl through.

The contractor climbs down from the attic and confirms what we suspect. The place needs a new roof, and has mold beyond what he’s allowed to tackle (which is 6 square feet).

One of the two 15-year-old air-conditioning units is broken. And we mean smashed, as if someone hit it with a hammer, which they probably did one August day when temperatures were hot, tempers hotter and money tighter than a pin-up’s girdle.

But beneath it all is a well-proportioned house. It’s in a great neighborhood, surrounded by much nicer homes. It has good light, good bones and good flow.

“What do you think?” D.C. asks.

“If it were my money, which it’s not, I’d make an offer,” I said.

“Based on what?” he said.

“Heart math.”

His eyebrows ask for an explanation.

“The asking price, minus costs and time and stress to repair, plus a gut-level feeling that you could make the place rock.”

“So the house has potential?”

“I’m afraid so.”

Syndicated columnist Marni Jameson is the author of two home and lifestyle books, and the forthcoming “What to Do with a Houseful of Memories” (Sterling Press). Contact her through www.marnijameson.com.

Six foreclosure-buying tips

As D.C. weighed making an offer on his bank-owned fixer-upper, I summoned in my mind all the tips I’ve extracted from experts in home restoration, fixing, flipping and foreclosures, and factored in my own experience building and remodeling. Here’s my advice.

1. Follow the formula. When you’re making an offer on a foreclosed property, start with the bank’s asking price, then subtract 150 percent of what it would take to get the home up to baseline — and that means a refreshed interior, intact walls, working appliances and a serviceable roof. For example, say the asking price is $400,000, and it would cost $50,000 to do all the necessary repairs and replacements. Add half the cost of the repairs for your time, energy and sweat for a total discount of $75,000. Offer $325,000. Submit your offer with a summary of the contractor’s repair estimate, and an explanation that you are subtracting $25,000 for assuming the risk of the unknowns. And make no bones about it: there are risks.

2. Be brutally unsympathetic. When you’re making an offer on a bank-owned property, don’t worry about offending the owner with a low offer. You can’t, because banks have the emotional capacity of ice machines.

3. Show and tell. Take pictures of damaged areas and include them with the offer. Often with foreclosures, including this one, the ice machines, a.k.a. the bankers, haven’t set foot on the property. The machine doesn’t know how run-down the house is and has likely based the listing price solely on neighborhood comparable properties, known as comps.

4. Get real estimates. Do not wing it. I repeat, do not guess how much the repairs will cost. Get a written estimate from an experienced contractor — better yet, several. We paid the contractor $100 for his time to look the place over, take measurements and prepare a comprehensive bid for what it would cost to bring the home up to baseline — not for extras. This is not in lieu of a home inspection; you’ll want one of those as well.

5. Stay cool. The ice machine might make a counteroffer. But even ice machines understand the cost of carrying an empty property for months.

6. Stick to your number. You, unlike the bank, have the advantage of not being a machine. Figure out the most you will pay, and if the bank won’t accept it, walk. This is often hard, especially for the heart part of the heart-math equation, but do not get emotional. There are other houses. If the bank accepts your offer, then you can get emotional. And you will have plenty of reason to.