By Kate Bartley

Growing up here in the Miami Valley, Angela Hannah and Katrina Williamson shared a lot — outfits, hairstyles, even photographs in their wedding dresses. Matching hysterectomies and mastectomies, however, was never the part of the plan.

"We have to remind ourselves every day why we are doing this," Hannah said. "It's not a walk in the park. There is a lot of grief that is involved."

The 39-year-old twins used some bad news to change the course of their lives. Their grandmother died years ago of pancreatic cancer. Their mother Jayne Robertson, is currently undergoing chemotherapy during her fourth battle with ovarian cancer.

"It is exhausting. The fatigue is just astronomical. The fatigue never goes away," Robertson said.

After watching Robertson's struggle, her three daughters opted for genetic counseling, and ultimately, genetic testing through the My Risk test from Myriad Genetics. They are among many local people searching for clues to their health in their own DNA. Angelina Jolie received widespread media attention in 2013 when she told the public that she'd tested positive for BRCA1, a gene associated with an increased risk of breast and ovarian cancers, and subsequently had a double mastectomy.

Robertson's youngest daughter learned that she does not carry any worrisome genes, but Hannah and Williamson found out that they both carry the BRCA 2 gene. That means they have an 87 percent likelihood of developing breast cancer in their lifetime and they are nearly as likely to develop ovarian cancer. Their cousin Sherry got the same results.

"We said, 'Why not preserve life and do what we can to prevent what my mom has gone through?'" Hannah said. "I knew that in the long run, if I got cancer, I wasn't going to forgive myself. I would not have been able to move forward, so I'm doing everything I can to prevent it early on."

"It wasn't easy, but to me, when I had the knowledge of having the BRCA gene, I knew automatically what I needed to do," Williamson said.

The twins and their cousin -- all wives and mothers-- opted for prophylactic hysterectomies at Kettering Medical Center. Williamson has already had prophylactic mastectomies at Johns Hopkins Hospital, and the other two women will soon follow. They stagger their surgeries to better care for one another.

"My [two] boys are are watching this, you know. What better way -- not to say that I wish this on anybody -- but what better way to teach them that family takes care of family?" Williamson said.

The twins' doctor is Caroline Peterson, Kettering Health Network's Director of Breast Screening & Early Detection. She says genetic testing is more affordable and comprehensive than ever. Doctors can now screen for 25 different genes for breast, ovarian, colon, uterine, pancreatic, prostate cancer, and even melanoma.

The retail cost of the test is approximately $3500, but with changes from the Affordable Care Act starting January 1 of 2015, Peterson says 92 percent of her patients pay nothing out of pocket.

"What we're trying to do is identify those patients who are as high as 87 percent or even just greater than 20 percent," Peterson said.

If a patients tests negative, there is no guarantee they won't develop sporadic cancer. For example, Peterson said the average woman has an 11 percent chance of developing breast cancer over her lifetime. 80 percent of woman who get breast cancer develop it sporadically, meaning they don't carry the gene. The majority are in their 60s or 70s.

"Now that we have the capability as of this year to test for those moderately aggressive genes, too, it's allowing us to identify 104 percent more types of heredity types of genes, so it helps us discern a heredity factor from the familial factor," Peterson said.

Prophylactic surgeries like mastectomies and hysterectomies reduce the cancer risk "to almost zero," according to Peterson.

Hannah and Williamson get choked up talking about their mother's struggle with cancer.

"It's difficult. She's the glue to our family. She keeps us together, and it's hard to see her suffering," Hannah said.

They say her cancer has been an unwelcome, but helpful gift to them-- of information and of urgency.

"It defines who we are today. Here we are, trying to get the word out so that other people can be blessed by this information, " Hannah said.

"I have two young kids, and I didn't want them to go on with life without mommy, " Williamson added.

The American Cancer Society says genetic testing can help you understand the risk of developing certain cancers and passing it on to your children. However, it can make some people anxious or depressed and give them a false sense of security. Experts say it is a personal decision that you should make in collaboration with your family, doctor and a genetic counselor.