"It's certainly going to be very difficult for an independent community hospital to survive in a post-health care reform environment" -- Martin Ciccocioppo.

The new, perhaps sad reality is that it's becoming impossible for a smaller hospital to stand independently, no matter how well it manages its finances and cares for its patients.

That, more than anything, would be what drives Holy Spirit Health System into the arms of much-bigger Geisinger Health System, centered about 70 miles to the north.

The two systems on Monday announced their intent to explore a far-ranging affiliation that would, among other things, give Holy Spirit access to Geisinger's financial might. They expect to reach a final decision in six to nine months.

"Holy Spirit isn't alone in looking for a partner. We've seen many of the hospitals in Pennsylvania that have been independent and are now looking for a partner," said Martin Ciccocioppo, vice president of research for the Hospital & Healthsystem of Pennsylvania.

One of those is Good Samaritan Health System in Lebanon, which earlier this year announced it must find a larger partner to ensure long-term viability.

The driving forces include:

The Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, which is offering financial incentives for better coordination and cost-effectiveness of medical care. In response, hospitals and health systems have been acquiring medical practices, imaging and lab and other services, so they can provide and coordinate the full range of medical care. The bigger the system, the greater their ability to afford this.

Medicare has begun penalizing hospitals for things such as high readmission rates, and plans to expand the penalties to other things, such as surgical complications. Avoiding penalties can require expensive upgrades in equipment and expertise that will severely stretch smaller facilities.

Both the government and private insurers are beginning to "bundle" payments, so that hospitals are paid for quality of care rather than volume. Again, larger systems, with their economies of scale, are best-positioned to succeed.

"It's certainly going to be very difficult for an independent community hospital to survive in a post-health care reform environment," Ciccocioppo said.

Asked for reaction to a possible Holy Spirit-Geisinger affiliation, Good Samaritan spokesman William Mulligan said: "In this era of healthcare reform, it has become increasingly apparent that small and mid-size hospitals will need to find partners to address the complex challenges of managing population health. Most healthcare organizations are evaluating their best options to achieve the size and scale of operations needed to manage these new expectations under health reform. We wish Holy Spirit and Geisinger well as they move forward in developing their new relationship."

Good Samaritan CEO Robert Longo has said possibilities for his hospital range from affiliation to merger to being acquired by another entity, although he expressed a belief that outright sale is unlikely.

Good Samaritan said it hoped to zero in on a likely partner by the end of the year.

"At this point, we have not selected the candidate," Mulligan said on Monday. He said he couldn't comment on possible partners, or whether they might include Geisinger.

York-based WellSpan Health, which will acquire Ephrata Community Hospital in Lancaster County, previously expressed interest in Good Samaritan.

Even bigger systems aren't immune from consolidation pressure. Altoona Health System, for example, recently opted to become part of the vast University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

Geisinger also has been in an acquisition mode, recently acquiring hospitals in Bloomsburg and Shamokin, and forging a deal with the parent of Lewistown Hospital that's expected to become final this fall.

And while they've never publicly admitted any lack of confidence, Holy Spirit executives are no doubt conscious of the ambitious moves of bigger, cross-river rival PinnacleHealth System, which is building a new hospital and cancer center in Hampden Twp. just a few miles from Holy Spirit.

For its part, Holy Spirit seems to be bargaining from a position of strength, even though its annual patient revenues of $300 million are small compared to those of Geisinger, which has nearly $2.9 billion in annual net patient revenues.

Dr. Glenn Steele Jr., the CEO of Geisinger, noted Holy Spirit is stronger financially than other hospitals that recently became part of Geisinger.

Holy Spirit's board of directors will remain intact and in control, Steele stressed. At the same time, Holy Spirit will benefit from Geisinger's financial strength.

Asked about investment in Holy Spirit, Steele offered no specific projects, but said: "We'll do what we always do when we move into an area. We'll build for the future."

Meanwhile, Sister Romaine Niemeyer, the CEO of Holy Spirit, said its religious mission will remain intact, including pregnancy-related policies, and it will continue to be sponsored by the Sisters of Christian Charity, its New Jersey-based founder.

And although Geisinger has long directly employed most of its doctors, Steele said it won't impose that model on Holy Spirit, which will continue to offer privileges to independent doctors.

Dr. Bret DeLone, a surgeon who became employed by Holy Spirit several year ago, said his reaction is "uniformly positive" to the possible affiliation with Geisinger.

He stressed that Geisinger is nationally acclaimed for its innovative approach to things such as managing chronically-ill patients and improving surgery outcomes, and any hospital would gain through the connection.

He also acknowledged the new and growing importance of scale.

"You do need a certain size, a certain footprint to keep doing your job," he said "You can be the best community hospital, and you still need the economies of scale."

DeLone also said Holy Spirit also has much to offer -- including giving Geisinger a gateway to the Harrisburg-area market.

Geisinger owns its own health plan, and being able to provide health care services in the Harrisburg area enhances its ability to expand the health plan.

DeLone said: "Geisinger has been isolated from this marketplace. They are really going to benefit from having a campus that is a significant distance from their base of operations."