They've been seen sporting refreshingly casual day-to-day attire in the past.

But when Sarah Michelle Gellar and Kristen Bell crossed paths at the Jhpiego's Laughter Is The Best Medicine event in Beverly Hills on Tuesday, the actresses were dressed to the hilt.

While Sarah, 38, showed some skin in an off-the-shoulder bright pink dress, Kristen, 34, went for a conservative approach with her classy blouse and tight trousers.

Scroll for video...

Crossing paths: Sarah Michelle Gellar (L) and Kristen Bell (R) made a stylish entrance to the Jhpiego's Laughter Is The Best Medicine event in Beverly Hills on Tuesday

The Veronica Mars star let her blonde locks tumble down in playful waves, and highlighted her natural beauty with strawberry pink blush and full lashes.

Kristen, who is married to actor Dax Shepard, upped the glam factor with several glittering necklaces and a large clutch.

The star was recognised with the Visionary Award that night.

Upbeat: Sarah flashed a brilliant grin beside actress Julie Bowen

Elsewhere on the red carpet, Sarah flashed an upbeat grin.

Sarah's hair featured a side part and was braided into a beachy and bohemian style.

The I Know What You Did Last Summer actress beamed while letting her face shine with bronze blush, cherry red lipstick and plenty of mascara.

Super stylish: The Gossip Girls actress was radiant as she made her way inside the event

Earlier, the actress defended a joke she tweeted that same day, which read: 'Finally got verified on #Instagram @sarahmgellar. It took me over three months .....thanks #ObamaCare.'

She added less than an hour later: 'And for the record - Obamacare was a joke. I'm neither #democrat or #republican (as some reports say) I'm an Independant thinker.'

Minutes later she tweeted: 'My Obamacare joke was just that, a joke. How's this? I'm verified on #insta- pretty sure that qualifies me for cut the line at #Starbucks"'.

The Twitter exchange appeared to be out of mind and out of sight once the star arrived to the Beverly Hills event.

Cheerful: The actress, who is married to Dax Shepard, appeared to be in an upbeat mood

The night benefits the non-profit Jhpiego, which works with women and families in developing countries to better their health.

Sarah appeared upbeat as she enjoyed a dose of 'me time' at the event.

The blonde beauty is married to her I Know What You Did Last Summer co-star Freddie Prinze Jr., who will be releasing his first cookbook.

The couple are parents to two children, two-year-old Rocky and five-year-old Charlotte.

In addition to being the mother, the actress just signed on to voice a character on the second season of Star Wars Rebels.

The animated series also features voice work by her husband.