Members of the audience salute the National Anthem at the 3rd Congressional District Republican Convention Saturday morning at the Greenwood County Courthouse.

U.S. Rep. Jeff Duncan said Republicans must unify behind their eventual nominee or face having another Democrat as president.

"After seven years and four months of 'hope and change,' you would expect things to be a little bit better across this great nation, but unfortunately, that's not the case," Duncan told a crowded room Saturday during this year's 3rd Congressional District's Republican Convention. "We're at record-high levels of unemployment in this country, we're at record-high levels of Americans on some level of government assistance, we're at record-low levels for labor-participation rate in this nation."

Duncan, a Laurens Republican who recently filed for another term to his District 3 seat, said there are too many violent protests in the country as well as instances where law enforcement has been targeted. He also said it's harder for Americans to start businesses now because of tax regulations and the Affordable Care Act.

"When a nominee is finally chosen after this long, long primary season, Republicans have truly got to come together and unify, because lack of unification means that a Democrat occupies 1600 Pennsylvania Ave.," Duncan said, "and this country can't, I don't believe, afford another four or eight years under Democrat rule."

Other GOP leaders from across the state were in Greenwood for the convention, including State Republican Party Chairman Matt Moore, State Superintendent Molly Spearman and National Committeeman Glen McCall.

Chosen as delegates at the convention were Susan Aiken of Anderson, Elliott Kelley of Pickens and Mark Willis of Greenville. The alternate delegates are Jo Ann Burroughs of Greenwood, Scott Cooper of Edgefield and Marvin Gootee of Saluda.

Moore talks AG controversy, presidential politics

Moore told attendees they can't believe everything they see in the news.

The state party chairman was recently embroiled in the controversy surrounding state Attorney General Alan Wilson's firing of Democratic First Circuit Solicitor David Pascoe from investigating allegations of wrongdoing at the Statehouse.

News outlets across the state reported that emails and text messages surfaced last week showing one of Wilson's aides attempting to get Moore to make inflammatory remarks smearing Pascoe.

"I've been in the news some recently for things here in South Carolina, and it's disappointing in our state that at times, frankly if you do the right thing, people want to give you a pat on the back because... the wrong thing happens too much," Moore said.

"The media and talk radio, I love it sometimes, but it's kind of like professional wrestling, there's a lot of sweating, a lot of acting, but at the end of the day it's sort of fake and entertainment," Moore said. "So you can't believe everything you read."

Moore said he's spoken with GOP leaders and they agree the Republican National Convention will be an open and honest process that will lead to the party having a nominee in the fall.

"There will be no excuse for anyone to not support the Republican that gets it, no matter who it is, period," Moore said. "All these questions and all this media craziness you see on TV or read about in the papers, just ignore it."

Moore said people should trust in their GOP leadership.

"We are a conservative party and we must demand that of whomever are nominee is for president and vice president," Moore said. "Our state party is strong, we are on a path to another great 20 to 50 years of Republican leaders who are here in South Carolina."

Contact Ariel Gilreath at 864-943-5644 or follow on Twitter@IJARIELGILREATH.