A 26-year-old woman is shown preparing heroin with water on the top of an aluminum can, so that she can inject it into a vein in her hand while sitting in a car. She says she is HIV positive but can’t stop taking drugs. (Photo: Matt Stone/The C-J)

When southeastern Indiana became the face of the nation's opioid addiction epidemic, people asked, "Why Scott County?"

But the county's unprecedented HIV outbreak — the first in the nation linked to the injection of oral painkillers — revealed underlying issues in Indiana long noted by public health experts that suggest it could happen elsewhere in the state.

The addiction epidemic has hit Indiana harder than other states, and Indiana has less of a public health infrastructure to deal with the crisis. It ranks among the states with the fewest drug treatment providers and the lowest public health spending.

Other obstacles include the state's previous ban on needle exchange programs, its moratorium on methadone treatment clinics and a criminal justice approach to the problem, instead of one focused on treatment.

"We've tried the war on drugs for several years. We've lost that battle," said state Rep. Steve Davisson, R-Salem, a pharmacist who grew up in Scott County and has been working to change some of the state's policies. "So we have to have a new mentality now."

The HIV outbreak in Scott County drew national attention with some shocking details.

Addicts are injecting a liquefied form of the potent painkiller Opana more than 10 times a day. Children, parents and grandparents are injecting together as a community activity. The more than 150 cases of new HIV infections identified since December exceed the number of people infected with HIV through injection drug use in New York City last year.

Specific factors contributed to the Scott County outbreak — including the area's generational poverty, its rural setting and its proximity to I-65, which links the community with major drug markets.

But it's not the only vulnerable community.

"Scott County is probably not unique," said Eric Wright, who chairs the Indiana State Epidemiology and Outcomes Workgroup. "You drop HIV into the mix in any one of those other rural counties and you could have a similar outbreak."

More addicts, fewer treatment options

The national opioid epidemic is driven by prescription pain medications, and Indiana exceeded all but eight states in the number of pain prescriptions written per 100 people in 2012 — more than enough for every Hoosier to have his or her own bottle of pain pills.

After increasing significantly since 2000, Indiana's prescription drug dependence is now significantly higher than national rates, according to the Epidemiology and Outcomes Workgroup.

The most effective way to treat substance abuse, according to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, is with a combination of behavioral therapies and medication.

Methadone was the first drug used to manage the physical symptoms of withdrawal from another opioid. But critics view methadone as just substituting one drug for another.

"While methadone is helpful to some people for a while, it's very addictive, so we're only changing whatever they're on now to a legal addiction," said state Sen. Patricia Miller, R-Indianapolis, who defends the state's longtime moratorium on treatment programs that can dispense methadone.

Miller, a registered nurse who chairs the Senate Health and Provider Services Committee, said other reasons for the moratorium included stories legislators heard about methadone being resold on the street, about people overdosing on methadone and the fact that some of the clinics near neighboring states were being frequented by those states' residents.

"There are a lot of reasons," Miller said.

Because of Indiana's moratorium, the state has less than half the number of opioid treatment program clinics for its size than Illinois — which has 71 to Indiana's 14 — and has fewer per capita than all surrounding states except Ohio.

Wright and his epidemiology group noticed opioid abuse was growing in parts of the state far from clinics. He testified before a state legislative commission in 2013 that the moratorium should be lifted.

"We were concerned that restricting access to well thought out and very controlled treatment programs was hampering our ability to address the larger and growing epidemic of opioid addiction," he said.

Besides methadone, there's now another drug — buprenorphine — used to help manage addiction while treating behaviors. It can be given in an office setting, instead of being restricted to an opioid treatment program as is methadone, if doctors obtain a waiver allowing them to prescribe.

But only 2.2 percent of doctors nationwide have a waiver and most of them are in urban areas, according to a study published this year in the Annals of Family Medicine. Indiana's rate is even lower — only 1.7 percent of doctors can prescribe buprenorphine.

Indiana also ranks fourth-worst among states for the number of mental health and addiction treatment providers per 1,000 adults with addiction, according to an analysis by Advocates for Human Potential Inc. More than half of counties — including Scott — don't have a practicing psychiatrist.

"People are not realizing the extent to which (Scott County) is symptomatic of a state where there are absolutely grotesque shortages of appropriate mental health and addiction treatment infrastructure and expertise," said Dr. R. Andrew Chambers, director of the addiction psychiatry training program at the Indiana University School of Medicine. "This is something that we have been raising alarm bells about for a while in Indiana."

Cost also has been a factor.

Before the 2010 Affordable Care Act expanded Medicaid eligibility and required both Medicaid and private insurance plans sold through exchanges to include substance-abuse services, there wasn't a good payment mechanism, said Stephen C. McCaffrey, head of Mental Health America of Indiana.

"The result is there was little reason to go into the profession," he said. "So we have a huge workforce development shortage."

Public health funding low

Funding for other parts of the state's health infrastructure also has been in short supply.

When Mitch Daniels first campaigned for governor in 2004, he said Indiana was leaving tens of millions of dollars on the table while other states had mobilized to compete for health care grants from the federal government. During his time in office, his administration tried to rebuild relationships with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Indiana briefly moved up from last place in per-capita CDC funding in 2008 to as high as 35th in 2010. But it has been back at the bottom since 2012, according to annual rankings from Trust for America's Health in Washington.

Indiana also ranks low — 44th — in the per-capita amount of its own money spent on public health.

Beth Meyerson, co-director of the Rural Center for AIDS/STD Prevention at Indiana University, said the HIV outbreak in Scott County revealed "we're not prepared and our system is kind of broken down."

"I often say that (the Indiana State Department of Health) is fighting the good fight with two hands tied behind their backs," she said. "We really have a notion in the Midwest of 'pull yourself up by the bootstraps' and there isn't a very good communitarian notion of care."

Federal and state funding cuts prompted Planned Parenthood to close five clinics in Scottsburg, Madison, Richmond, Bedford and Warsaw.

Patti Stauffer, vice president of public policy for Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, said she can't make a direct link between the closure of the Scottsburg clinic — which served 1,500 patients in the last full year before it closed — and the HIV outbreak.

"But that health center was providing HIV tests in Scott County, and any positive tests would have been reported to the state," she said.

Low public health funding affects a state's ability to detect problems such as an HIV outbreak and to address them quickly, said Jeff Levi, executive director of Trust for America's Health and an HIV expert. "But some of the issues associated with this have less to do with money and more to do with policy and appropriate policy response."

He said the biggest obstacle was the state's previous ban on needle exchange programs, as well as a lack of access to substance abuse treatment.

Changing strategies

The health of counties across the nation is evaluated annually by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute. This year they reported that more than 60 percent of counties in the country have improved premature death rates since 2004. In Indiana, however, only 43 percent of counties have gotten better.

Scott County has the worst premature death rate in the state. It also has been ranked the least healthy county in the state for the past six years.

Since the HIV outbreak, help has poured into Scott County from the state and federal governments and nongovernmental groups. (The cost to the state's Medicaid program for treating those infected is estimated to be nearly $5 million a year.)

State legislators responded by approving more funding to address substance abuse, including money to help pay off student loans for health professionals willing to treat addiction. Lawmakers now let local governments start needle exchange programs if they can prove to the Department of Health that a hepatitis C or HIV epidemic is occurring. And they will allow up to five more opioid treatment programs in Indiana over the next three years.

Davisson, the lawmaker from Salem, had wanted 25 more. But said five is a good first step.

"I feel like if (Scott County) had had access to something like that earlier, we might have been able to prevent some of the problems," he said.

McCaffrey, the head of Mental Health America of Indiana, said many steps are needed to address the problem. But, for the first time, all the stakeholders in the criminal justice, public health and mental health communities have come together to say "we need to figure out how to provide treatment," he said.

"That has never happened before in Indiana," he said. "We have a history of just locking people up."

Still, the emergency response teams trying to figure out how to control what's happening in Indiana are realizing that substance abuse treatment in Indiana is very minimal and the system can't turn on a dime.

What is evident, health experts says, is that communities with warning signs shouldn't think that what happened in Scott County is an anomaly.

"I really don't think we're unique," said Scott County's Bridgewater. "We just happened to be first."

Email Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

States with the most opioid pain relievers prescribed per 100 people in 2012

Alabama: 142.9

Tennessee: 142.8

West Virginia: 137.6

Kentucky: 128.4

Oklahoma: 127.8

Mississippi: 120.3

Louisiana: 118

Arkansas: 115.8

Indiana: 109.1

Michigan: 107

Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

States with fewest 'behavioral' health care providers per 1,000 adults with addictions, 2010-2011.

Nevada: 10.8

Georgia: 17.3

Texas: 17.7

Indiana: 18.3

Florida: 20

Arizona: 20

Source: Jeff Zornitsky, Advocates for Human Potential Inc., using data from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration and the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

States with lowest per capita funding from the CDC, 2014

Indiana: $15.14

New Jersey: $15.57

Pennsylvania: $15.57

Ohio: $15.68

Missouri: $16.00

Wisconsin: $16.00

Source: Trust for America's Health

States with lowest per capita investment in public health, 2014

Nevada: $3.59

Missouri: $5.67

Arizona: $8.40

North Carolina: $11.73

Mississippi: $12.28

Kansas: $12.50

Wisconsin: $13.03

Indiana: $13.08

Minnesota: $14.27

Ohio: $14.59

Source: Trust for America's Health

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1bYGXzO