Topics: From the Wires, News

SINTRA, Portugal (AP) — What’s behind Europe’s sluggish recovery and high jobless rate? What can central banks and governments do to get things going?

The European Central Bank convened some of the world’s most prominent economists Thursday through Saturday to probe those questions at the Penha Longa golf resort set amid steep, densely forested hills near the town of Sintra, Portugal, near the Atlantic Ocean.

Much of the discussion was highly technical. Equations and charts flashed in quick succession on the projection screen in the conference room.

Here are some of the more memorable utterances, no math background required.

GET BUSY

European Central Bank head Mario Draghi started things off with a sharp call for pro-business reforms by governments.

Such reforms “are about unleashing an untapped potential for substantially higher output, employment and welfare,” Draghi said in his opening remarks.

“And in the current environment, this would play a crucial role in ensuring that the ongoing cyclical recovery becomes a stronger, structural recovery. “

Draghi avoided most details, but such measures could include things like reducing the paperwork needed to start a business. It could also mean less restrictive rules governing hiring and firing, and reducing the gap in legal protection between established workers who are hard to lay off and younger workers who remain stuck with short-term contracts at low wages.

Draghi said governments should take advantage of the breathing space afforded by ECB stimulus measures. Those include rock-bottom interest rates and a 1.1 trillion euro ($1.2 trillion) monetary stimulus in the form of bond purchases with newly printed euros.

Europe’s economy ticked up in the first quarter, showing growth of 0.4 percent. Yet the 19 European Union nations that use the shared euro currency are still struggling to get past a crisis over too much government debt in some countries. Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Cyprus needed bailout loans from other countries, and spending restraint has held back growth.

Unemployment remains stubbornly high at 11.3 percent, and at 50 percent for young people in Greece and Spain.

ACTIVE MEASURES: “There is no way the central bank all on its own can solve all of Europe’s problems, and there has been a tendency for policy makers to sit back and let the ECB do it all, and that is both unreasonable and unconscionable” said Dennis J. Snower, president of the Kiel Institute of the World Economy in Germany.

Snower advocates active measures to help people get back into work, such as retraining workers whose skills don’t fit employer needs, or subsidies to companies that take on the long-term unemployed. “Find the disadvantaged people and give them maximal incentives to get into the labor force, and give employers maximal incentives to hire them,” he told The Associated Press on the conference sidelines.