More options: Share, Mark as favorite

If you want to understand a President Hillary Clinton’s healthcare plan, look at the elaborate scheme that Medicare unveiled this week to give federal regulators the power to restrict use of prescription drugs. The plan contained all the elements Clinton already champions, and implemented the platform on which she can build.

President Obama used vast authorities he garnered under ObamaCare to change how doctors are paid to prescribe injectable drugs like chemotherapy to Medicare patients. This “Part I” of the plan aims at a small and fixed percentage that doctors are paid off the total price of the drugs they prescribe. That money is meant to cover the cost of infusing injectable drugs in a doctors’ office. The aim of the new policy is to eliminate any financial incentive doctors might have to select costlier drugs.

But the biggest effect of the change will be to saddle more doctors with losses when they infuse drugs in their offices, forcing this medical care into hospitals where it’s easier to finance, and also easier to federally regulate. This will be especially true for oncologists, who have already been merging their once-independent practices into hospitals as a result of declining reimbursement. The new plan will hasten this shift.

Yet it’s “Part II” of the new regulation, which kicks in as early as January 2017, that’s getting far less attention but is even more profound. Under this second part of the plan, Medicare gains the authority to stipulate when they believe that drugs are similar enough that they can be used in place of one another. The agency would then say that within a group of different medicines that the Medicare staff judges to be clinically “similar,” the agency would only pay for the cheapest therapeutic option.

This plan is the culmination of ObamaCare’s aspiration to exert more control over the practice of medicine. Under the scheme, Medicare would have the ability to stipulate when the agency believes that drugs are clinically interchangeable, even though in most of these cases, the Food and Drug Administration will never have made a similar judgment. It’s no coincidence that this closely mirrors plans already offered by Ms. Clinton as well as her intellectual engine at the progressive think tank Center for American Progress. Under the new plan, Medicare deems drug’s to be interchangeable when “the therapeutic effects achieved are generally similar.” New drugs would be pegged to the price of older and “similar” alternatives until it’s proven to the satisfaction of Medicare’s staff that the new drug deserves a premium.

Both parts of the plan are hatched from an authority that ObamaCare grants Medicare to implement “demonstration programs” to find policy approaches that can lower the programs spending. The idea is to give Medicare the power to try different payment arrangements, even if they conflict with the current practices and regulation, and then roll these plans out more widely if they prove cost saving.

The Obama team is stretching authority they gained under ObamaCare as a way to achieve through unilateral executive action, policies that have already been firmly rejected by Congress. Part II of the plan labels the approach “reference pricing,” a phrase lifted directly from parallel schemes that exist in Europe and Australia.

The plan also builds off proposals issued last fall by Clinton and by the Center for American Progress, that would have the Medicare agency empower “comparative effectiveness” bodies to evaluate drugs based on their benefits and costs, and decide which medicines merit coverage. The Medicare agency is widely recognized as lacking clinical expertise to draw credible clinical distinctions between drugs. Here the new regulation reveals the ultimate intention of these schemes. The idea is to selectively outsource some of the politically hot policy work of making the clinical judgments to third parties, and then peg federal payment to these conclusions.

No surprise, the new plan speaks glowingly of some of these third party bodies that have already sprung with the purpose of taking on this role. Many of these groups, like the Boston-based Institute for Clinical and Economic Review(ICER) or the federally chartered Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute(PCORI) are created or supported by grants from the federal government or ObamaCare. They have already carved out a role as politically active skeptics for a lot of new technology. They apply their own subjective budget parameters to what is judged “cost effective,” using criteria developed outside a politically accountable process.

The collective goal is to get more control of how doctors prescribe injectable drugs like cancer medicines. In this way, Medicare can get more leverage not only over the how these drugs are priced, but also how doctors use them. The alternative was to make the system for reimbursing injectable drugs subject to more competition, similar to how Medicare’s coverage oral drugs is structured, under the Part D program. Instead, the Obama team is trying to control costs more directly; by regulating the clinical choices doctors make to sometimes use costlier medicines.

These constructs have long been liberal dogma when it comes to our relatively free market for drug development. Turning over the determination of “comparative value” to third parties, and then tying federal reimbursement to these subjective conclusions, represents a circuitous way to exert government control over how drugs are priced and prescribed. Only with far fewer fingerprints affixed. Implementing drug price controls was never going to be transparent. The idea is to back into the scheme through a more convoluted series of outsourced middlemen.

The new plan sets this in motion, right in time for the next administration. Folks at CAP and inside the Clinton orbit have been perfectly honest in describing these policy intentions. ObamaCare already provides a Clinton Presidency with the power to implement these ideas unilaterally. This week the process got underway.