A call for solutions

Across the country, lawmakers are starting to recognize the need to ensure better care for homebound seniors.

With money from the Affordable Care Act (ACA), six states, including Michigan and California, are working to develop more rigorous standards for training and assessing home-care workers. And several nonprofit groups have created registries to match the needs of seniors living at home with aides who have specialized skills, such as working with people with dementia or Alzheimer's.

The Elder Justice Act, which Congress approved as part of the ACA, called for spending $500 million to help state and local adult-protective services better detect and prevent elder abuse. But lawmakers have yet to authorize any money for the program. That lack of funding has also stalled plans to conduct a comprehensive study of elder abuse.

In what labor groups saw as a major step toward improving the lot of workers and their patients, the Obama administration approved regulations in 2013 that would require home-care agencies to start paying overtime to their employees, reversing a decades-old exemption under federal law. But the home-care industry filed suit, and a federal judge in Washington struck down the new rules, which were scheduled to go into effect Jan. 1, ruling that the Labor Department had exceeded its authority.

Phil Bongiorno, executive director of the Home Care Association of America, a trade group that represents 2,500 home-care businesses with some 300,000 employees, says the industry was concerned that the requirement to pay overtime would make care less affordable as higher costs were passed on to consumers. He adds that the trade group has developed "best practices" for training and screening employees, although they are not currently a condition of membership in the organization. "We are trying to set the standard in home care," Bongiorno says.

'She was like a sociopath'

Denise Goodwin, 47, had worked as an assistant in an animal hospital before seeing the profit potential in working with humans. Prosecutors say she preyed on older men, trolling online senior dating services to find victims. She applied at a San Diego home-care agency, specifically requesting hospice duty. After she passed a background check, the agency assigned her to the Rabourn home in 2010.

In short order, Goodwin plundered the estate, charming Gerald Rabourn into giving her control over his finances after his wife died. She sold the house and liquidated his stocks, pouring the money into condos. A suspicious neighbor called adult protective services, but the agency closed an investigation after Rabourn refused to cooperate.

Based on phone and bank records, police believe Goodwin murdered Rabourn a month after arriving on the scene, although his body has never been found. She covered her tracks for several months by telling people that Rabourn had remarried and was on vacation. Mary Weaver, Rabourn's daughter, who lived in Kansas City, filed a missing-persons report with San Diego authorities in February 2011 after her birthday passed without a card from her father, a missed ritual that to her was a telltale sign that something was profoundly wrong.

Goodwin was convicted of murder by a San Diego County jury last October. She was sentenced Jan. 30 to life imprisonment without parole. Weaver, a chaplain who ministers to people at assisted living facilities, attended the sentencing and used the occasion to eulogize her father. Weaver was hoping that Goodwin would reveal the location of her father's body so he could be laid to rest, but instead, Goodwin sat emotionless in the courtroom. "She was like a sociopath," Weaver says. "Most people should understand, when you are putting someone in your home, you need to be sure this is who they say they are."