VAIL — Every skier knows the tingle of excitement that comes with clicking into a pair of skis to kick off a new season. But when Lindsey Vonn does it Sunday in Portillo, Chile, it figures to be a very special moment.

“I’m really excited,” Vonn said. “I’m super antsy. I’ve had my boots laid out for a couple weeks already. Hopefully we will get some good weather and I will be training, but just to be out there skiing is going to be awesome.”

Her recovery from reconstructive knee surgery has gone exceptionally well and put her ahead of schedule. It’s been six weeks since she even needed to ice her knee after a workout.

“My knee doesn’t get swollen anymore,” said Vonn, the Olympic downhill champion and a four-time World Cup overall winner. “Nothing really bothers it. I can play tennis, I can do whatever I want. I can do plyos (jump drills) and agilities.

“I’m not injured anymore.”

Vonn said she is as strong as before, if not stronger. She is visibly leaner after tweaking her diet.

“I think my strength is awesome,” Vonn said. “There’s no excess weight. I have the muscle mass I need, and the weight I need to be able to ski downhill fast, but there’s no excess. That’s going to be good for my knee.”

Vonn said she expects to begin her season with World Cup races at Beaver Creek, Nov. 29-Dec. 1, on the new course built for women’s races for the 2015 world championships. The U.S. Ski Team is thrilled Vonn is ahead of schedule in her comeback.

“It all goes back to passion, to loving what she’s doing,” said chief executive Bill Marolt. “She doesn’t take any shortcuts. She had a serious knee injury, and nobody really knew what the timeline was going to be. But because she’s in such great shape, she was able to overcome this injury.”

She worked hard and also accompanied Tiger Woods to “six or seven” golf tournaments, including the majors. She expects Woods to be at some of her races when his schedule allows. Woods had ACL surgery on his left knee in 2008.

“He’s helped me stay patient through the recovery process,” Vonn said. “It was different, coming from him, because he’s been through it and he’s an athlete. And giving me the confidence that it’s going to be better than before.

“Just being able to talk to him about it, having him through the rehab process was really critical for me.”

Vonn has 59 World Cup victories, second on the all-time women’s list and only three behind Annemarie Moser-Proell of Austria.

She’s already nervous about those three races at Beaver Creek. She won a super-G in 2011, the only time the women have raced there, after a race intended for Val d’Isere, France, could not be held for lack of snow. It was her first World Cup win in the United States.

“I think it’s going to be more intense than the Olympics,” Vonn said. “It’s going to be my first race back. Friends and family are going to be here, just like they were (in 2011). At least now, I’ve won on home soil, so there’s no pressure there, but it’s going to be a big deal to come back from this injury and be skiing on the world championships hill.

“At the same time, it’s going to be awesome to be back. It’s going to be fun to have my first race back at home.”