A little-known provision of the Affordable Care Act requires drug companies and manufacturers of medical devices to report payments and gifts they make to doctors.

The Physician Payments Sunshine Act was intended to shine a light on possible conflicts of interest that might influence medical treatment, education or research.

It also was intended to make all parties more aware of the possibility of such conflicts, and to encourage everyone to avoid them.

The need for such an effort has been supported by various studies, including one released this month on prescription rates for cholesterol-lowering drugs.

Harvard University researchers found that industry payments to physicians were associated with higher rates of prescribing the more expensive brand-name statins.

But the Sunshine Act goes only part of the way in requiring disclosures.

It requires drug companies to report gifts to physicians — including optometrists, chiropractors and dentists — but it leaves out other medical professionals who are authorized to write prescriptions.

These include nurse practitioners and physician assistants, who have been playing an increasingly larger role in patient care.

These two groups wrote about 10 percent of the nearly 1.4 billion prescriptions in Medicare’s prescription drug program in 2013, according to Pro Publica, a nonprofit journalism site. And they wrote 15 percent of all prescriptions — not just those for Medicare patients — nationwide in the first five months of the year, according to IMS Health, a health care information company.

But drug companies are not required to disclose any gifts, including cash, made to nurse practitioners or physician assistants.

Sens. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, and Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn., have introduced a bill to close this loophole.

The poster child for their proposal is Heather Alfonso of Middlebury, Conn.

Alfonso, a nurse practitioner at a pain center, was her state’s top prescriber of Subsys, a powerful painkiller used to treat cancer pain. She was writing more than $1 million worth of Subsys prescriptions a year — most of which went to patients who did not have cancer.

Alfonso admitted to being paid $83,000 by the drug’s manufacturer over a 14-month period to prescribe the medication.

While most medical professionals are undoubtedly hardworking people with high ethical standards, there will always be the Alfonsos. There will also be practitioners who, without realizing it, are being influenced by companies that pay to gain access to them.

The Grassley-Blumenthal bill is facing some opposition, as did the original Sunshine Act.

But passage of this addition to the Sunshine Act should be a no-brainer for Congress — unless it prefers a patchwork of state laws aimed at plugging this loophole, which is already taking shape.

The United States faces many health care challenges, including rising drug costs and an opioid epidemic. Grassley’s and Blumenthal’s bill is a needed step in tackling them.

More Editorial articles »