(Photo: Andy Marlette/Pensacola News Journal)

No, not on my island!

Grand Resorts is dead. Thanks a lot Fort Myers Beach leaders and “Not in my backyard” folks! Your voices united: “No, not on my island!”

We had an opportunity to work with Mr. Torgerson and build something great, but your negativity blew it.

We could have had tens of millions of dollars of investment in our community: Boardwalk by the beach, Times Square expanded four-fold, Escalators to safely carry pedestrians over the boulevard and alleviate traffic, Parking.

Now we can keep the awesome portable toilets at Crescent Beach. We can look forward to a few new private hotels up on stilts that will have minimal benefit to the community. We will remember all you great visionaries when a storm surge destroys Times Square.

- Dale Bonnema, Fort Myers Beach

Editor’s note: Tom Torgerson said he would pursue a new Grand Resorts–FMB proposal that removes, or makes optional, the most controversial elements of his original plan (April 13, Beach development goes back to the drawing board).

Panther zone

I’m writing to express my 100 percent disapproval of the Eastern Collier Habitat Conservation Plan. Our state and its endangered species can no longer afford to cater to those that value money over life and beauty, including people appointed to protect our wildlife. No McMansion or steak dinner is more important than the imperiled species that need that space for survival. No matter what measures are included to try to appease us, it’s not worth giving away any more critical panther land.

The plan’s additional protections are nowhere near enough to make the plan even remotely acceptable. The offered panther corridor isn’t wide or reforested enough to make it usable, and the underpasses won’t offset road kills due to new traffic.

Wildlife lucky enough to survive the loss of their home would be attracted to our food sources, resulting in more killing from the FWC who are called for nuisance animals. This is not to mention the unconscionable incidental take section.

The HCP gives landowners too much power over jeopardized wildlife. The Public Trust doctrine states that the wildlife belongs to me as well, and I say “no” to more development that our lands cannot handle.

Keep it out of panther zone.

- Jennifer Christiansen, Ed.S., Fort Myers

Exquisite production

Brava to Steffanie Pearce, Director of Gulfshore Opera, for the spectacular production of Donizetti’s comic opera, L’elisir d’amore, at Artis Naples on April 21 and at Charlotte County PAC on April 15. Opera lovers in Southwest Florida enjoyed two delightful performances of L’elisir and the voices of four extremely talented, hard-working soloists, Anthony Kearns, Danielle Talamantes, Musa Ngqungwana, Wes Mason. From the masterful conducting of Naples Philharmonic by Ryan McAdams, and creative stage direction by Edwin Cahill, to the lovely village set designed by Samuel Vasquez, and costume design by Ena Gleeson, the four principles and chorus members enchanted with Donizetti’s beautiful music and humor. Anthony Kearns has previously sung operas in Naples. In L’elisir, he has found the real métier of roles for his beautiful voice. With great use of his bottle of elixir, he showed more talent for acting than I have seen in his five previous opera roles. His exquisite “Una furtive lagrima” reminded me of Luciano Pavarotti’s rendition and brought many to their feet in applause and bravos. I hope to hear the rich, full voice of Danielle Talamantes, again. Thank you, GO.

- Mary Jo Kittle, Arlington, Virginia

Universal health care not new idea

I would like to suggest to Richard Repasky (April 21, Original creators of ACA) that he should do a little homework on universal health care. The concept of universal health care did not originate with the Clintons or President Obama. Forms of universal health care have been around in other countries for over 100 years and have evolved into their current forms.

The president was not brainwashed, nor was he a parrot for the Clintons. He was trying to establish a program to deliver health care to all Americans. Lack of health care for everyone in this country is destabilizing and economically wasteful.

The ACA is not a form of universal health care. It is a compromise. The health insurance lobbies and the politicians that they financially support are the reason for this flawed compromise.

- Sandra Pangonis, Cape Coral

Government control

Re: The April 21 article regarding single-payer system best option for health care (Health care needs single-payer system, Morton Tavel). This article, although written by a doctor, highlights exactly what the liberal Democrats have been after for years. Obamacare is about to make it come true.

Obamacare had no intentions of improving health care. “Keep you own doctor, premiums reduced $2,500” were merely the bait, and many swallowed it. The full intention of Obamacare was to increase government control.

Obamacare was designed to be too expensive for insurance companies to maintain, just as is happening. Once the single payer (government run) system is in place, government will then have control of our society in a multitude of new ways, i.e. regarding penalties for being over-weight, smoking, drinking, etc. Being handicapped or aged will not be tolerated.

Over half the population will receive free insurance. Employers and wage earners will learn to live with unbelievably expensive premiums. (More redistribution of wealth.)

This has happened in other countries, it will happen here, unless we stop it.

Welcome to the ever increasing world of liberalism! Wake up America!

- David Russell, south Fort Myers

FMPD discrimination?

As a longtime resident of Fort Myers, Florida, I do not understand why the FMPD is accused of discrimination. There has been a female, colored, as well as, a white police chief. The Hispanic Affairs Advisory Committee and the Southwest Florida Chamber of Commerce honored the FMPD agency with a Hispanic Achievement Award.

- Fran Stevens, Fort Myers

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1TyRVNZ