For the first time in history, there will be more than 100 women in Congress. But don’t cheer just yet. While that is a significant number, the story of parity is better told through percentages: Women are still less than 20 percent of the 535 voting members of the U.S. Congress.

At this rate, it will take another 500 years for women to be evenly represented, one study shows. “I’m glad we’ve hit 100, but it’s not a cheerful statistic,” said Rep. Diana DeGette, the senior member of Colorado’s nine-member congressional delegation, and its only woman. “We gain a few seats every term, but that does nothing to take us to full parity.”

For the last two decades, Colorado has done little to change the national ratio. Despite being the first state in the nation to give women the vote by popular election, Colorado is one of only 11 states that’s never elected a female senator or governor (or a female mayor of Denver). “We absolutely have a glass ceiling for higher office in Colorado,” said DeGette.

But there’s hope: Colorado’s legislature tops the nation with 42 percent women, according to the Colorado Legislative Women’s Caucus. And Democrats in the Colorado House just elected the first all-female leadership team: Speaker Dickey Lee Hullinghorst and Majority Leader Crisanta Duran. In the Senate, Democrat Morgan Carroll was elected minority leader, and Republican Cynthia Coffman is Colorado’s new attorney general.

But breaking down the barriers between women’s stellar participation at the state level and their conspicuous absence in national and executive level politics will require a collective effort by Colorado’s political denizens, statewide media, and voters in every shade of purple.

Electing more women to political office isn’t just about having equality for equality’s sake. “It’s really about having that diversity of ideas and diversity of experience,” said Faith Winter, newly elected state representative and executive Director of Emerge Colorado, a group that trains and encourages women to run for office. “If we really want to have a citizen legislature, then we should have a legislature that reflects our citizens.”

It’s also about getting things done. Although the midterms are barely over, congressional Republicans are already drawing battle lines with a Democratic president. But in the ongoing fight to be king of the hill, no one wins.

In contrast, studies show female politicians are more collaborative and willing to reach across the aisle to find solutions: It was a bipartisan group of Senate women who forged a budget compromise that ended the government shutdown in 2013.

DeGette also tells the story of being approached on the House floor by Rep. Michele Bachmann. the “Tea Party queen.” “Diana, you know if women were in charge, this government would never be shut down,'” she told DeGette.

“This may be the first and only time I ever agreed with Michele, but I think she was right because women are used to working in a collaborative way,” said DeGette. “They’re used to looking at the issue and the goal rather than the personality and the ego.”

But it’s not just collaboration that sets women apart as leaders. Women scored higher than men in 12 of 16 leadership competencies, including more assertive traits like taking initiative, displaying integrity, and driving results, according to leadership consultants Zenger Folkman.

Whether or not it’s intentional, Colorado’s male bias begins early in the political cycle. Conversations are already starting about candidates for races in 2016 and beyond, said DeGette. And women are notably absent from those discussions.

“I am already hearing this old adage … that there are no qualified women for these offices, but here’s the list of men,” she said. “I just don’t think people think of women in the same way as they do men in Colorado.”

Like the CEO suite, Congress “was made for men by men,” which creates an inherent bias, said LaRae Orullian, the first president and CEO of the Women’s Bank of Denver. But women are equally qualified to lead in both arenas, she said.

Orullian helped form Velvet Hammer in the 1970s. The group of Denver women met with male CEOs to ask why there were no women on their boards. When the CEOs inevitably said there were no qualified women for the job, the group presented résumés of qualified female candidates.

Today, Orullian works with Electing Women, a Colorado group that promotes the political candidacies of women nationwide. “It’s really important for us as women to show support for one another and get out on the front line and let our voices be heard,” she said.

By the 1990s, it seemed that Colorado was finally moving toward political parity. Congress welcomed a record number of female representatives in 1992, dubbed “Year of the Woman.” In 1996, DeGette won the seat vacated by Patricia Schroeder, Colorado’s first congresswoman. Republican Gale Norton and Democrats Josie Heath and Dottie Lamm all ran for U.S. Senate seats. And Lt. Gov. Gail Schoettler lost a tight race for governor to Bill Owens in 1998.

But since then, Colorado women have barely made a splash in national politics. We’ve sent only two other women to Congress: Republican Marilyn Musgrave and Democrat Betsy Markey. Republican State Rep. Amy Stephens ran for the U.S. Senate last year, but bowed out to Cory Gardner.

Yet it’s easier today for women to get elected, and Colorado needs to recognize that change. Female candidates are just as likely as male candidates to raise funds, get positive media attention, and win elections, according to Jennifer Lawless, director of the Women & Politics Institute at American University. So why aren’t more women running?

“Women need to be willing to put themselves forward,” said DeGette. And “the powers-that-be in the business community, the media, and political insiders need to examine their own beliefs and suppositions to see if they have a gender bias that they haven’t thought about.”

“I also think that we need to break down the barriers we have at those high levels of office in Colorado for people to think about women in these jobs.”

Lisa Wirthman of Highlands Ranch is a monthly columnist.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.