In The Arena We Need to Solve the Poverty Crisis. Just Not Obama’s Way.

Economic inequality has become the left’s great hope for recovering its political integrity after the Obamacare disaster. President Obama, trying to change the subject, has latched onto the issue and is sure to make many more speeches about it in the New Year. New York’s new mayor, Bill de Blasio, promises to make that great city an experimental lab for progressive ideas aimed at curing inequality.

And if that doesn't convince you that the left will speak of little other than inequality for the next few months or years, note that former President Bill Clinton was on hand to swear in Mayor De Blasio and say a few words on the subject. Hillary Clinton, primed to run for president in 2016, looked on from the VIP stands. With the Clintons, there are no coincidences.

Story Continued Below

For years, analysts across the political spectrum have pondered why, after decades of providing upward economic mobility to millions, the U.S. economy no longer seems able to move so many people up from the lowest rung of the economic ladder. Is the American Dream of upward mobility dead?

This is a serious subject deserving serious consideration in the market place of ideas. Unfortunately, that doesn’t mean we’re about to get a thoughtful debate.

Instead, the president mischaracterizes the problem and offers a simplistic solution: There are just too many rich people, and they are causing the problem. So, he proposes, let’s take more money from those successful people and redistribute it to the poor through welfare, raising the minimum wage, extending endless unemployment benefits and other government handouts.

This stance is based on economic fallacies. Worse, it is divisive to our society because it runs on the fumes of envy and resentment. Punishing success will only deter further success ... not what you want if you want the economy to grow. Better for the president to curb government policies that pick economic winners and losers (or as someone put it after the Solyndra affair, that picks only losers). Government intervention in the marketplace foments favoritism and cronyism and leads to more inequality.

President Obama has even lost top scholars at the liberal-leaning Brookings Institution, who grumble that the president is “over-stating, and over-simplifying, the problems at hand.” Creating opportunity and economic mobility for the poor, they write, “will require cool analysis, bipartisan alliances, and a long-term strategy. It’s the wrong issue for knock-about politics.”

De Blasio has been no better. His inauguration was so ripe with hate-filled rhetoric that even the New York Times, which endorsed his mayoral campaign, was moved to object. The new mayor himself seems not to grasp that his “tale of two cities” has been created by the very type of government intervention that he seeks now to increase.

As for our former president, he was in classic Clintonian form as he purposely confused community with government. “We are interdependent,” he averred to the New York crowd. “Look around. We can’t get away from each other. We have to define the terms of our dependence.” Does Clinton really conflate government, which seeks to exempt the individual from responsibility for his fellow man, with what Edmund Burke called the “little platoons” of civil society, the agents that actually nurture communities?