Members of the Bohemian Caravan Dance Company dance with audience members during the Day of Dance for Your Health event April 18, 2015, at Loveland High School. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald file photo )

If you go What: Day of Dance for Your Health. When: 9 a.m.-1 p.m. Saturday, April 16. Where: Loveland High School, 920 W. 29th St. Cost: Free. More info: Visit www.BannerHealth.com/McKee Spirit, or call 970-820-3000.

A community health fair focused on prevention is bringing back more health screenings this year.

The Day of Dance for Your Health on April 16 is not a "typical health fair," as described on the event flier, with health information, demonstrations, games and giveaways. The event will take place at Loveland High School in the school's cafeteria and gymnasium.

"We really want to promote movement, not necessarily exercise, but just getting out and moving," said Sheryl Fahrenbruch, outreach program manager of Spirit of Women, which is part of the outreach department of McKee Medical Center and Banner Fort Collins. "You don't always have to go to the gym to get exercise."

The Day of Dance for Your Health began last year by combining the Loveland Community Health Fair put on by McKee Medical Center with the Spirit of Women Day of Dance, new to Loveland that year, to avoid duplication of events.

The health fair featured screenings and health information, while Day of Dance promotes a preventative approach to health care though diet, movement and exercise.

With health care going toward prevention and wellness, the hosts of the event — McKee Medical Center, the McKee Medical Center Foundation and the Spirit of Women — included the screenings this year as part of preventative care, Fahrenbruch said. The screenings will be for blood pressure, hearing, lung function, skin cancer and posture, among other health care checks.

"It helps folks get connected with area physicians. They can ask those questions one on one, and then they can follow up with primary care," Fahrenbruch said. "We're trying to focus on the most common issues people can have."

The event, which has the tag line, "Power to Boogie," continues the same Dr. Seuss theme as last year.

There will be 44 booths, compared with 31 last year, centered on health themes in the areas of primary and dental care and specialty medicine. The booths will offer screenings, interactive games and giveaways. There will be a deejay, door prizes and a children's area with face painting and crafts.

Every 10 minutes, dance troupes will do dance demonstrations and encourage audience participation in interactive dances that will include salsa, hip-hop, zumba and belly dancing.

Other new attractions at the event will be the LHS band boosters serving a healthy menu, basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation skills training and a demonstration of the Da Vinci robot demo unit. Participants can experience what surgeons do when they use a surgical robot to perform surgery by using the controllers to do small tasks such as placing a rubber band on a peg.

"I was just floored. It's almost like a giant PlayStation," Fahrenbruch said. "The surgeon sits at a control panel, using fingertips to run the remote control. ... It's really a neat opportunity for people to see a surgical robot, ask questions and see the latest and greatest in surgical technology."

Last year, attendance at the event was 1,500, and organizers hope for the same number or more this year.

"We encourage folks to come, gather information, try a new dance or just observe," Fahrenbruch said. "It really is a community event. That is our whole goal, to reach out to the community and give them tools they can take and use."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.