Re:“Mike Coffman is no friend to immigrants,” June 6 guest commentary.

Will the real Andrew Romanoff please stand up?

Four years after Julie Gonzales, State Sen. Jesse Ulibarri and I collaborated on a guest commentary for The Denver Post questioning where Romanoff actually stood on immigration, we still don’t know.

We cannot forget what then-Speaker Romanoff accomplished in the 2006 special session of the Colorado legislature. He sponsored immigration legislation that was so extreme, legislation in other states that dealt with undocumented immigrants looked moderate.

We learned a difficult lesson with the patchwork of harsh, politically convenient immigration laws sponsored by Romanoff. The speaker of the House can deep-six legislation or, as the most powerful legislator, he can push it so it does pass the House.

As we wrote in that 2010 commentary, “House Speaker Andrew Romanoff bragged about its implementation, boasting, ‘Colorado passed more bills to curb illegal immigration than any other non-border state in the nation. We did more to solve the problem of illegal immigration than Congress has done in a decade.’ “

Now, Sen. Ulibarri would have you believe that Romanoff had no choice but to push this anti-immigrant legislation through. Romanoff knew his legislation would hurt not only undocumented immigrants, but also citizens of our state who could not prove legal status.

Regardless of the consequences, Romanoff pushed on.

Now that he is running for Congress, Romanoff expects Latino voters to forget his unpardonable sin of leading the pack to criminalize undocumented immigrants for seeking such services as emergency care.

Rep. Luis Gutierrez, D-Ill., author of the DREAM Act, has called Coffman “a proven leader in Congress on the issue of immigration.”

Ulibarri claims he was misquoted in the commentary we wrote four years ago. Not true. Andrew Romanoff threw the Latino community under the bus in the 2006 special session, and today he comes courting Latino voters again, hoping they have forgotten.

Fool us once, but don’t count on fooling us again.

Fidel “Butch” Montoya is director of H.S. Power and Light Ministries.