Harsdorf takes on issues at local listening session

State Sen. Sheila Harsdorf (R-River Falls) speaks to about 15 people gathered for a listening session at the New Richmond Civic Center on Thursday, Jan. 29. (Photo by Micheal Foley)

State Sen. Sheila Harsdorf (R-River Falls) speaks to about 15 people gathered for a listening session at the New Richmond Civic Center on Thursday, Jan. 29. (Photo by Micheal Foley)

Government finances, health care, transportation, education and job growth were among the topics State Sen. Sheila Harsdorf (R-River Falls) addressed during an hour-long listening session held at the New Richmond Civic Center on Thursday, Jan. 29.

About 15 people attended the event and each had the opportunity to ask at least one question after Harsdorf’s introductory remarks.

“The governor is going to be announcing his budget on Tuesday (Feb. 3),” Harsdorf said. “At this point, you’ve probably started to hear about certain provisions he’s released from the state budget. I sit on the Finance Committee. We will be working on the next few months of the budget bill.”

Harsdorf invited the listening session attendees to upcoming budget hearings that are being planned around the state. She said she hopes to hold at least one such session in the northwestern part of the state.

Harsdorf’s remarks continued by explaining that the state legislature has been focused on creating a friendly business climate and addressing a job skills gap.

“We passed a program called Wisconsin Fast Forward that’s administered by the Department of Workforce Development that’s really a flexible program that works with local school districts and local technical colleges for meeting those workforce needs by training those workers with the skills they need to find employment,” Harsdorf said.

She also touted recent legislation to ease the tax burden on Wisconsin residents.

“Wisconsin continues to be a high tax state,” Harsdorf said. “We passed a number of tax relief measures last session. We lowered income tax rates. There were five and we consolidated them to four tax rates, and we lowered each of those rates.”

As for the next budget, Harsdorf said the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau is forecasting a 3.7 percent growth in state revenue, but even with that growth, the state government will experience a shortfall due primarily to medical assistance costs and property tax relief.

Health care

When Harsdorf opened the session up for specific questions, several came in, with the first one from disabled veteran Wanda Viellieux asking about how the Affordable Care Act known as Obamacare is affecting Medicaid. Harsdorf said she would research the matter and asked Viellieux if she was willing to share her experiences. Viellieux told Harsdorf about recent negative impacts saying “what used to take four to eight weeks now takes closer to six months.”

Harsdorf also faced a question about the state not accepting federal Medicaid assistance funds to expand BadgerCare, and a comment from a resident about potential cuts to the medical assistance programs. She also addressed concerns about how costly the Health Care Exchange is in this part of the state. Harsdorf said health care costs have always been higher in this part of the state, mostly due to a lack of competition.

Resident Mark Struble contended that the threshold for qualifying for state medical assistance is so low that nobody qualifies for it anymore, and Harsdorf countered by asking, “Then why do we have one in five residents on medical assistance?”

Struble insisted that many St. Croix County families are being kicked out of the BadgerCare program because they earn too much money.

“There was a change in enrollment in BadgerCare, but then the people who didn’t qualify for BadgerCare can go to the Affordable Care Act exchanges, which are subsidized according to income,” Harsdorf said.

Personal property tax

A question came from New Richmond’s District 2 Alderperson Scottie Ard who asked about the possibility of the state repealing — in its next budget bill — the personal property tax that is imposed on businesses.

Harsdorf, who is a longtime proponent of eliminating the unpopular tax, said, “If it’s in the budget, that would be good news to me.”

Harsdorf said that while the tax has been in place for a long time, numerous exemptions have been added through the years, and now the tax mainly falls only on main street businesses. The challenge of repealing that tax is that it brings in roughly $270 million, according to Harsdorf.

Education

Resident Janet Knutson expressed reservations over the governor’s proposal to allow real life experience to qualify a person for a teaching license.

“I haven’t seen the details of the proposal, but I have reservations about that,” Harsdorf said.

Harsdorf said that while real life knowledge is beneficial, skills such as delivery and presentation also play a key role in providing a high-quality educational experience to help students learn.

Another key education issue brought up by resident Barb Arnst was the recently announced $300 million cut to the University of Wisconsin System.

Harsdorf said that along with the $300 million cut, Gov. Scott Walker is also unlocking a set of measures to allow the institutions to operate more independently and flexibly instead of being locked into the statewide government programs and vendors, which can cause delays and increase costs.

“It won’t ease the pain short term, but it will help in the long term,” Harsdorf said. “For example, UW-River Falls might need something and be able to find it at a local retailer. But right now they have to go through Procurement in the Department of Administration. Sometimes it costs them more, and it definitely takes them longer. They want to look at things they can do more cost effectively.”

Transportation

Multiple transportation issues were also discussed at the listening session. Leading the way were multiple issues regarding the Highway 64 corridor, from the proposal to eliminate certain access points near Somerset to installing a traffic control light at the Wall Street intersection in New Richmond.

One official in attendance said the Wisconsin Department of Transportation sent a letter to his municipality saying that the highway designation plans are being reevaluated based on input gathered at last fall’s public meeting.

Meanwhile, Hammond Town Chairman Paul Hueg voiced concerns over the unnecessarily complex new regulations governing farm equipment known as implements of husbandry on local roadways. Hueg deals with the issue from two perspectives: as a town official and as a farmer.

According to Hueg, farmers in our area can easily operate in more than a dozen municipalities and must follow different sets of rules and acquire different permits for each one.

Harsdorf, a longtime farmer herself, offered sympathy for the farmers dealing with the new regulations and explained how they came to be.

“One of the senators pulled the stakeholders together and worked on the bill. It went through some modifications. The challenge was maintaining support from stakeholders, so that it wasn’t defeated,” Harsdorf said. “Then we would go back to the status quo, which we knew was not working. So, we passed the bill with the support of the farm group and the Wisconsin Towns Association with the understanding that as we move forward we may come back and tweak it.”

At the conclusion of the listening session, Harsdorf thanked the attendees and invited anyone who has further questions, comments or concerns to contact her at 608-266-7745 or Sen.Harsdorf@legis.wi.gov.