Luci Gutiérrez

This week, the Varsity Math team is visiting the National Museum of Mathematics in New York, where they find a lot of puzzling situations.

Staircase Surface | Freshman Relay

The team loves to look at the giant light sculpture in the central well of the spiral staircase in the museum. It consists of a circular paraboloid, a surface whose vertical cross sections are all parabolas and whose horizontal cross sections are circles. There are many lines of light connecting different points in the sculpture. Jean notices one in particular that starts at a point on the paraboloid 64 units vertically above the lowest point of the parabola, and passes through the vertical central axis (the line consisting of the centers of all of the circular cross sections) at a height of 24 units above that lowest point.

How many units vertically above the lowest point of the paraboloid does the line again intersect the paraboloid?

Beaver Bash | Freshman

National Museum of Mathematics

The team also gets a look at a new exhibit called Beaver Run. It has 24 turntables with two quarter-circle track sections (see the diagram). Each turntable can be rotated to either of two positions, 90 degrees apart, in which all of the ends of the tracks line up, but the tracks connect differently depending on which position the turntable is in. The team members immediately make up a two-player game: Players take turns setting the position of a turntable, one at a time. Once a player has set the position of a given turntable, it may not be rotated again. The first player wins if there are an odd number of loops of track at the end of the game, when every turntable has been set, and the second player wins if there are an even number of loops. (As shown in the diagram, the edges of the board have fixed pieces of track to close off the loops.)

Which player has a winning strategy in this game, and what is that strategy?

See answers to last week’s puzzles below. Come back next week for answers and more puzzles. Note: Comments may include spoilers.

The National Museum of Mathematics (MoMath) is North America’s only museum devoted to mathematics. Learn more at momath.org.

SOLUTIONS

For the relay, in Champion Countdown, Charlie must start counting down at 10:02:26 p.m. on Dec. 31. Then, 2,015 seconds later, Charlie is saying 1,517; with 2,015 seconds to go, Charlie is saying 696. In Boxes not Urns, the probability of drawing different colors is 60/91. So in New Year-amid, Ms. Leavenmath has 31 pupils in her class, which leads to exactly 2,016 blocks in the rectangular prism.

In Gonzi Scheme, Topnotch Finances must invest at least $6 million to avoid bankruptcy of their account.

See MoMath’s website for extended solutions.