On Friday afternoon, Martin Luther King Jr. Family Clinic CEO Joyce Tapley checked her email, not expecting to see much of interest. Instead, she saw an email worth $275,000.

Tapley’s South Dallas clinic was one of 32 clinics nationwide to receive a federal Health Center New Access Point award, a grant that will now help Tapley and her staff expand to a second location.

“I’ll tell you, I was highly ecstatic,” she said Monday. “We’ve been preparing ourselves to open up another location for quite some time. We knew there was certainly a great need there, and we hoped that we would be the ones selected to provide it.”

“There” is Balch Springs, where Tapley hopes to open a second location of the MLK Family Clinic within the next four months. The Fair Park location is a private practice healthcare group that has been serving Dallas-Fort Worth and surrounding counties since 1986. It offers a plethora of services, including an OB/GYN, a dentist, a pharmacy, and a host of other primary care needs. More than 70 percent of the patients are from outside the immediate area, Tapley said, which prompted the plan for a second location. The 200-page application for the grant was submitted in March, and MLK Family Clinic competed against 400 other groups for the 32 grants.

Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius announced awards of approximately $67 million Friday, including $19 million made available by the Affordable Care Act. The new sites will—ideally—increase access to preventive and primary healthcare to more than 130,000 additional people. An additional $48 million will be awarded to nearly 1,200 more health centers, to support ongoing operations.

“Health centers have a proven track record of success in providing high quality healthcare to those who need it most,” Sebelius said in a statement. “New health center sites in some of the neediest communities in the country will provide access to healthcare for individuals and families who otherwise may have lacked access to high quality, affordable, and comprehensive primary care services.”

In addition to the money for the new Balch Springs location, the clinic was also granted $30,000 to improve its Fair Park location. Dallas County Hospital Clinic, Los Barrios Unidos Community Clinic, and Mission East Dallas were also awarded smaller grants, as was Denton’s Health Services of North Texas and Fort Worth’s North Texas Area Community Health Center.

Houston Area Community Services ($325,000) and South Central Houston Community Health Center ($867,000) were the only other Texas groups awarded Health Center New Access Point grants.