Topics: Australia, Climate Change, Climate deniers, Conservatism, Global Warming, Grover Norquist, Rupert Murdoch, Tony Abbott, Sustainability News, News, Politics News

Australia, the sunburned country, is uniquely vulnerable to the dangers and risks of global warming. Whether it is the severe effects of flooding, unseasonal heat waves, devastating bush fires or decade-long droughts, Australia’s people, economy and natural environment have all keenly felt the impact of extreme weather and climate change.

Australia’s national scientific organizations have been raising the alarm for more than a decade, and the previous government accepted that scientific consensus and enacted a cap-and-trade scheme in 2012. But after a divisive election last year — one that saw native-born Rupert Murdoch exercise his considerable influence in Australian media markets to disastrous effect — the country is now governed by a deeply unpopular Liberal-National government, crafted in the image of the most climate-denying elements of the Tea Party. And its position on climate change has significant impacts on global efforts to reduce carbon emissions: Australia is not only the chair of the G-20 group of nations, but also holds a place on the U.N. Security Council.

The rest of the world saw this ideology on full, embarrassing display with the recent visit by Prime Minister Tony Abbott to Canada and the United States. A week after President Obama’s introduction of substantial policy reforms to reduce carbon pollution, and China’s first-ever pledge to cap carbon emissions, the Australian prime minister stood next to his Canadian counterpart and scoffed at the idea of global warming, saying that climate change is “not the only or even the most important problem that the world faces” and that measures to reduce carbon emissions would “clobber” the economy.

All of this marks a shift for Australia, from constructive middle-power to fringe-dwelling rock-thrower and -blocker. Back at home, Tony Abbott is on course to make Australia the first nation in the world to abolish a legislated carbon price.

But how on earth did this happen?

The calm before the storm

Tony Abbott was elected prime minister last September, after six years of rule by the progressive Labor Party, which had engineered Australia’s leap forward as a leader on global climate policy. Following its rise to ruling party in 2007, the first act of the new Labor government was to ratify the Kyoto protocol, after a decade of refusal by the former prime minister and close George Bush ally John Howard. Howard himself was defeated and ignominiously lost his own seat in parliament. Labor’s historic victory was later dubbed the world’s first “climate election.”

For the decade leading up to that 2007 election, Australia had suffered a prolonged drought affecting almost the entire continent. Water restrictions were introduced in most major population centers, and the nation’s food bowl, the Murray Darling Basin, was close to collapse. A series of severe bush fires also ravaged the country, peaking in 2009 with Australia’s worst ever bush fire disaster, Black Saturday, when 173 people died.

Public support for action on climate change was at an all-time high, and before the 2007 election, Labor leader Kevin Rudd called climate change the “greatest moral, environmental and economic challenge” facing Australia and the globe. He repeated the statement and the sentiment many times as prime minister.

On the back of this wave of support, Rudd introduced carbon pricing laws in 2009 called the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. The conservative opposition was in disarray, and its private-equity millionaire leader Malcolm Turnbull, a climate-action advocate, largely supported the policies. So did, surprisingly the national coal-miners union.

Someone who did not support the legislation was Tony Abbott. Backed by the hard-right sections of his party — many of whom openly denied the scientific basis of anthropogenic global warming — he defeated Turnbull in late 2009 in a vote for the leadership by a single vote. The carbon pricing laws were then defeated in the senate, where the Greens party voted with the climate deniers to block the carbon pricing laws. Two moderate Liberal-National senators crossed the floor to vote with the Labor government, but to no avail.

Meanwhile, the failure of the Copenhagen Climate Council to deliver the strong climate action that many were hoping for, combined with the failure of the carbon pricing laws in the senate, saw Rudd shelve the policy to concentrate instead on the economy and healthcare reform in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. His moral and political standing subsequently collapsed, and he was replaced as prime minister in 2010 by Julia Gillard.

Unholy alliance: Murdoch, Norquist and Abbott

In 2010, Gillard managed to shepherd a cap-and-trade law to passage, in the form of the Clean Energy Future Act. However, the government’s popularity was on the wane, and the opposition party took full advantage. Tony Abbott called the science of climate change “crap” and various senior figures in his front-bench team openly questioned the scientific basis of anthropogenic global warming. Abbott spoke at anti-carbon price rallies in front of banners proclaiming Prime Minister Gillard as a “witch” and a “bitch.”

Behind the scenes, several key members of Abbott’s party including the now-Finance Minister Mathias Cormann, visited the United States to meet with conservative think tanks such as the Heritage Foundation, and conservative players in last year’s government shutdown debacle of 2013, including Matt Kibbe and Grover Norquist.

Gillard’s carbon pricing laws eventually came into effect in 2012, amid the biggest fear campaign ever seen in Australia. Rupert Murdoch-owned mastheads, controlling as much as 70 percent of the newspaper market, carried front-page stories attacking the laws.

U.S. climate-denier talking points became commonplace in the Australian media. Gina Rinehart, whose wealth is significantly derived from coal mining, aggressively bought up shares in Australia’s only major non-Murdoch-owned media company, Fairfax. She is now its largest shareholder. Australia’s only national daily newspaper, the Murdoch-owned Australian, promoted “misleading” stories giving credence to climate denialist views, outnumbering those accepting climate science by 10-to-1, according to a report in the Quarterly Essay.

A senior Liberal-National senator who played a major role in Abbott’s rise to the party leadership was sponsored to attend a Heartland Institute conference in 2013; that same senator is also a member of the American Legislative Exchange Council, an organization that has opposed climate action in the past. Another senior backer of Abbott and former Howard government minister, Nick Minchin, who has since retired, is an avowed climate skeptic and claims recent warming is due to a “natural cycle”

Despite the fear campaign, after a year of operation of the carbon pricing laws, the evidence was in: Carbon emissions from the now carbon-constrained sectors of the economy decreased by 7 percent, and new renewable energy generation increased by 30 percent.

Nothing was going to save the Labor government, though. They were swept from power by the Abbott-led opposition in September 2013. Abbott named repealing the carbon price laws as his No. 1 legislative priority in the days after the election. And among his first acts as newly elected prime minister, in contrast to Rudd in 2007, was to block the creation of an international Commonwealth climate compensation fund, and to abolish the independent Climate Commission.