Two major stars presenting at the Country Music Association Awards Wednesday night launched into a mocking exchange about the state of Obamacare's broken website.



Brad Paisley and Carrie Underwood joked about the website and the program. At one point Paisley feigned a serious back injury and Underwood asked him if he “had that Obamacare.”



The crowd roared, reported The Washington Beacon and other media outlets.



Editor's Note: 22 Hidden Taxes and Fees Set to Hit You With Obamacare. Read the Guide to Protect Yourself.



The two then launched into their own version of a George Strait classic, this one titled "Obamacare by Morning."



Read the entire exchange below the video.







"Oh. Anyway, I think I need to see a doctor," Paisley said.



Underwood looked puzzled.



"Hey, do you have that Obamacare?," she asked. She was sitting down with a laptop.



PAISLEY: Obamacare? What’s that?



UNDERWOOD: Oh, it’s great. It’s great.



PAISLEY: What is it?



UNDERWOOD: I started signing up last Thursday and I’m almost done. Let’s go to the website and get you signed up.



PAISLEY: Oh, okay.



UNDERWOOD: Let’s see here. Let’s see. can’t be too hard, right.



PAISLEY: Why is it spinning?



UNDERWOOD: Oh, it does that.



PAISLEY: Okay, but why’s it smoking?



UNDERWOOD & PAISLEY: Oh, I don’t — maybe we should restart it? Obamacare by morning, why is this takin’ so long? I’m gonna wind up with hemorrhoids if I sit here till dawn, we’ll have cataracts and dementia, oh this is gettin’ on my last nerve, Obamacare by morning, over six people served.



UNDERWOOD: We’ll finish that later.



PAISLEY: Work on that later. By the way, thank you George Strait, I always loved that song.

OMGGG the mocking of Obamacare on the CMA's last night makes me love country music even more!!!! #true #downtoearthpeople — Ashley Godfrey (@ashanne5) November 7, 2013

I bet money everyone offended by the CMA's ripping on Obamacare would ROFL if the VMA's made fun of Bush. Don't be a hypocrite yo. — Grayce ♛♥ (@GrayceBeverly) November 7, 2013

Strait won his third entertainer of the year award and his first since 1990 Wednesday night against country music's current hitmakers, and there wasn't a disappointed person in the house. Heck, Blake Shelton — one of five performers with a leading two victories — was excited to lose to the 61-year-old whose popularity defies his age.

"That's how it needs to be because he's not just entertainer of the year, he's entertainer of the last three decades, I guess, or four decades," Shelton said. "I don't know who's keeping score. I mean, it's George Strait. He's King George. I couldn't be happier with how this turned out."

Shelton was one of five top winners with two trophies apiece, along with Florida Georgia Line and the trio of Taylor Swift, Tim McGraw and Keith Urban, who won music video and music event of the year for their "Highway Don't Care" collaboration. Like Strait, Swift also was going for her third entertainer of the year, which would have been a CMA record for a woman. Like Shelton, she couldn't have cared less when she lost, instead hugging Faith Hill as they cried tears of joy for Strait. She noted they've both opened for Strait in their careers and she recounted a story about how Strait and his wife Norma dropped in to one of her first headlining concerts when she was a teenager just to wish her luck.

"And that's the kind of artist he is," Strait said. "And when you're that kind of person, and you win something, everybody's cheering for you and people are crying. And that's the kind of legacy you want to leave behind.

Editor's Note:

22 Hidden Taxes and Fees Set to Hit You With Obamacare. Read the Guide to Protect Yourself.

The crowd gave Strait a standing ovation as he made his way to the stage, and stayed standing throughout his speech — which by the usually reclusive Strait's standards, was long. It wasn't just a special night for those in the arena. It was also the show's top trending moment on Facebook.

His retirement from the road has gained lots of attention, but Strait isn't a relic. He remains relevant, recently earning his record 60th No. 1 and signing a five-album deal with Universal Music Nashville that will keep in making records.

Backstage he shared with reporters how it has felt as he circles the country on his The Cowboy Rides Away tour, his last.

"When I first started out this year, the first few shows, I about lost it every night, you know, leaving the stage ... thinking, This might be the last time I ever play on this stage again,'" Strait said. He joked he had so much fun, "The cowboy might be riding in again."

Strait's victory capped a show that was simultaneously focused on the past, present and future.



Related Stories: