Town encourages participants to take pictures of themselves at various landmarks

Some Colorado communities host "Turn Off the TV Week" or "Unplug" programs to encourage their residents to get out from behind their technology and be active.

But in honor of National Parks and Recreation Month, which takes place during July, the Erie Parks and Recreation Department is encouraging residents to tote their smart phones or tablets with them as they embark on a "selfie" scavenger hunt.

During the program, which starts Tuesday, participants are encouraged to take pictures of themselves, known as "selfies," at a list of 10 locations and landmarks throughout the town.

The theme of the 2014 National Parks and Recreation Month is "Out Is In." Erie Parks and Recreation Director Farrell Buller said the department came up with the selfie scavenger hunt as a fun way to get residents outside to see their town.

"The staff here came up with the program and I thought it was so cute," Buller said. "One of the locations is at one of the playgrounds, one of them is the Coal Creek Trail. It's just to get people out there and on the scene."

Participants who complete the list can show their selfies to Erie Community Center staff members to redeem a prize. The town does not plan to collect or post the selfie images, Buller said.

"The goal is to focus on setting trends instead of following them, making 2014 the year people go outside, change their outlook and get involved in their community through parks and recreation," Buller said.

Buller said participants are encouraged to walk, run or bike to the designated locations, but any means of transportation is acceptable.

Advertisement

"Most of the locations are easy to get to," she said. "There's a couple that you have to go to by foot or by bike, but however you get there is OK. If nothing else, hopefully it will get people to get out to different parts of Erie."

Scavenger hunt forms are available at the Erie Community Center, 450 Powers St., or on the town's website, erieco.gov.

Erie Mayor Tina Harris on June 24 proclaimed July to be Parks and Recreation Month in Erie. The scavenger hunt is just one of the unique ways the town will celebrate the month.

Buller said the town also will distribute unannounced awards throughout July to residents "caught in the act" of using Erie's parks and recreation facilities.

Contact Colorado Hometown Weekly staff writer Doug Pike at 720-648-5022 or piked@coloradohometownweekly.com.