A GTA hockey dad says a misunderstanding with Ontario's minor hockey league will leave his son sidelined for more than a year.

The Ontario Minor Hockey Association says David Muszynski lied to get his son more ice time.

The end result: 10-year-old centre Ethan Oja-Muszynski, who dreams of playing in the NHL, loves the Pittsburgh Penguins and Sidney Crosby and even wears No. 87, won't lace up his skates this year except to skate a few laps around the frozen backyard pond.

The OMHA learned Ethan had been simultaneously enrolled in the triple-A Caledon Hawks at the same time as the TNT Tornadoes, a house league team based in New Tecumseth, during his novice and minor atom years in rep hockey.

That violates a Hockey Canada regulation designed to allow players at all levels an equal opportunity to play.

The OMHA found this out after discovering a misspelling of Ethan's last name on registration forms. David Muszynski says he doesn't know how the mistake happened.

"They're sentencing and convicting and trying. Nobody called me. There's been no due process," he said. "A week of training for a kid is like a year of training for an adult. It's a huge setback."

Muszynski says he can't recall exactly how Ethan was registered or who filled out the form because it was an informal arrangement made at the rink.

The penalty is rare and severe and should act as a deterrent, said OMHA executive director Richard Ropchan, who said he believed the wrong name was entered in an attempt to get more ice time unfairly.

"We have a lot of sympathy for the player and the situation, but not a lot of sympathy for what the parent tried to do," he said.

He added there will be no black mark on Ethan once the suspension runs out.

Ethan has played hockey since age 5, and competed with A-level teams since he was 7. He moved into triple-A this fall before he and his father, who sometimes coaches, were suspended.

His father says he was unaware house league was off-limits and that an OMHA office error allowed the mistake to go unnoticed for two years before the suspension. He was always open about Ethan playing for two teams, he added.

Whether the error was in fact or in judgment, Muszynski wants a chance to sit down with hockey officials and work out a solution that allows his son to play, whether that means paying a fine or a shortened suspension.

This fall, Muszynski filed for a residential transfer from the Hawks, which are under the auspices of the OMHA, and the Markham Majors, a Greater Toronto Hockey League team. He and Ethan had moved from the family home in Caledon to East York to help care for Ethan's ailing grandparents. Ethan wanted a chance to stay with his dad and on the ice.

When processing that application, the OMHA discovered he had been playing for two teams. Ethan had skated in a handful of practices with the Markham team when a letter arrived in Caledon.

It says, in part: "it has been discovered that player Ethan Oja-Muszynski has been registered with two separate minor hockey associations for each of the past two seasons (2011-2012 and 2012-2013)."

That violates Hockey Canada regulations, as well as rules set by the Ontario Hockey Federation and the OMHA, the letter says.

"Effective immediately Ethan Oja-Muszynski and David Muszynski are suspended until November 12, 2014," it says, signed by OMHA executive director Ropchan.

It also notes there is an appeals process. Muszynski did not appeal the decision at the time because his father had just had a stroke, he said.

The suspension letter states Ethan and David Muszynski had violated OMHA regulation 8.4, which prohibits playing under a false name and carries a minimum one-year suspension.

That means the OMHA says Ethan was registered using a phony name in order to play for two teams at once. Muszynski believes it resulted from a clerical error omitting one of Ethan Oja-Muszynski's two hyphenated last names.

The OMHA says the wrong name was written intentionally because the team registrations were filled out the same way both years, and so it applied the suspension immediately.

There have only been a handful of cases in recent years where a player has been suspended for using a falsified name, said Ontario Hockey Federation president executive director Phillip McKee.

The registration system will not allow an identical name and birth date for two players, he said, so a modified name was likely used: one with Ethan's hyphenated surname and one with Muszynski only.

"There are policies in place, and part of that is so kids aren't sitting out of hockey because someone's playing multiple leagues," McKee said, declining to say whether he supported the decision to suspend Ethan or not.

He was unaware there was a discrepancy between Hockey Canada's policy and the provincial one. The province only prohibits playing for two competitive teams in the same season. But McKee said the OHF defers to the national body when there is a conflict.

While the rules are designed to prevent some kids from taking up all the spots, Tornadoes coach Dean MacDonald confirmed there was plenty of space on his roster. He told the Star he was unaware playing for his team would have major consequences for Ethan or his father.

Muszynski says he knows some people do cheat, but thinks the punishment is too harsh. In effect, Ethan's suspension will last two seasons of competitive hockey, because he can't go to tryouts in April, which means he can only play house league hockey next year.

For now, Ethan might pick up a few shinny games but without hockey, life for a 10-year-old is "boring," he said from the Thornhill arena where the Majors were finishing up their practice without him.

Now short one player, the team has struggled a bit, said coach Martin Ross as a Zamboni cleared the ice. But he understands why rules are necessary.

"If they don't have those rules, is everybody going to run amok? Can (Muszynski) not pay a fine, like a speeding ticket?" Ross wondered.

"(Ethan) is a good kid, he listens, he loves the game. I hate to see a kid sit out over paperwork."