CHANTILLY, Va.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The Internal Revenue Service has awarded Citizant a $10 million Technical Integration Support Services (TISS) contract to facilitate the successful deployment of Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act applications and create an IRS DevOps center of excellence.

Under the contract, which will last up to 2.5 years, Citizant will provide program and project management support services including governance; release and risk management; and technical, data, and infrastructure integration support. In order to extend beyond the Agile development capabilities it currently provides to the IRS and other customers, Citizant will hire new industry experts with DevOps experience in Chantilly, VA and Austin, TX.

“As budgets tighten and the IRS pushes forward to ensure the success of the Affordable Care Act, Citizant’s support to the IRS continues to grow,” said Alba M. Alemán, CEO of Citizant. “Citizant’s long-term strategy to partner with leading experts in industry and academia allows us to introduce innovations that help our Federal customers evolve and transform into high-performing organizations. By providing integration and DevOps leadership, we will help the IRS deploy large, integrated systems more quickly and responsively, despite tight budgetary constraints.”

Citizant will receive support on TISS from the Santeon Group, a world leader in Agile transformation and development services. Santeon’s CEO, Ash Rofail, co-founded the largest Agile certification body, the International Consortium for Agile (ICAgile). Santeon leads the industry with contributions in Agile frameworks, models, practices, and high-performance development and testing solutions.

Information about the job openings for this contract are available at www.citizant.com/careers.

About Citizant

Citizant designs and delivers smarter, leaner business and IT transformation solutions to the U.S. government, with a focus on the Departments of Treasury, Homeland Security, and Justice. The company employs experts in Agile software development, enterprise data management, enterprise architecture, and program management support. Citizant is ISO 9001:2008 certified and has been independently appraised companywide at the Software Engineering Institute’s CMMI-DEV Maturity Level 3 and CMMI-SVC Maturity Level 2. Citizant is headquartered in Chantilly, Va., and has offices in Washington, D.C., and Austin, Texas. More information about the company is available at www.citizant.com. Follow Citizant on LinkedIn (www.linkedin.com/company/citizant) or on Twitter at @Citizant.