No. 5 Ohio St falls 107-105 in 3 OTs to No. 20 Michigan St

hello

Ohio State forward Makayla Waterman reacts after fouling out during the third overtime of an NCAA college basketball game against Michigan State, Saturday, Feb. 27, 2016, in East Lansing, Mich. Michigan State defeated Ohio State, 107-105. Associated Press

Ohio State head coach Kevin McGuff signals from the sidelines during the second half of an NCAA college basketball game against Michigan State, Saturday, Feb. 27, 2016, in East Lansing, Mich. Associated Press

Ohio State forward Alexa Hart (22) grabs a rebound in front of Michigan State guard Branndais Agee during the second half of an NCAA college basketball game, Saturday, Feb. 27, 2016, in East Lansing, Mich. Associated Press

Ohio State guard Kelsey Mitchell (3) and Michigan State center Jenna Allen fight for possession during the second half of an NCAA college basketball game, Saturday, Feb. 27, 2016, in East Lansing, Mich. Associated Press

Ohio State guard Ameryst Alston sits on the court during an overtime period of an NCAA college basketball game against Michigan State, Saturday, Feb. 27, 2016, in East Lansing, Mich. Michigan State defeated Ohio State, 107-105 in triple overtime. Associated Press

EAST LANSING, Mich. -- Ohio State is on the verge of losing the Big Ten title in agonizing fashion.

Jasmine Hines scored a career-high 36 points in her final home game, and Tori Jankoska made three free throws in the final minute of the third overtime to lift 20th-ranked Michigan State to a 107-105 victory over fifth-ranked Ohio State, denying the Buckeyes a chance to celebrate a conference championship Saturday.

Kelsey Mitchell scored a career-high 48 points for Ohio State (23-6, 15-3), which also lost in overtime to Minnesota earlier in the week. Now the Buckeyes need No. 6 Maryland (26-3, 15-2) to lose to Minnesota on Sunday in order to share the title.

"We had a chance to control our destiny today and we didn't do it, so that's disappointing," Ohio State coach Kevin McGuff said. "But I'm proud of the effort that our kids put forth."

Mitchell played almost every second of the 55-minute game, one of five players credited with at least 52 minutes. Her three-point play put Ohio State up 105-104 with 41 seconds remaining, but Jankoska was fouled in the backcourt and made two free throws to put the Spartans (22-7, 13-5) back ahead.

Jankoska added another free throw with 2.1 seconds left.

The 6-foot-3 Hines had never scored more than 24 points in a game for Michigan State, but the Spartans repeatedly found the senior down low against an Ohio State team that defended aggressively with a full-court press.

Hines scored inside with 8 seconds left in the first overtime to tie it at 83, and Mitchell couldn't convert at the other end. It was Hines who kept Michigan State's offense afloat on a day star Aerial Powers went 8 of 27 from the field. Powers still ended up with quite a stat line: 23 points, 16 rebounds, nine assists, eight turnovers, four steals and two blocks in 53 minutes.

With the Spartans up 106-105, Powers stole the ball from Mitchell and looked like she was in the clear for a layup, but she was too concerned about being caught from behind and lost the ball out of bounds at the last instant, giving Ohio State another chance to take the lead.

Michigan State kept Mitchell from driving to the basket, and her two attempts from beyond the arc were off target.

Jankoska's free throw made it a two-point game, and she missed her second shot intentionally, giving the Buckeyes little time to get any kind of shot off.

Ohio State has not won the Big Ten regular-season title since 2010.

"We weren't going to let anyone come in here and win a Big Ten championship on our floor," Hines said.

ALL EVEN

Neither team led by more than eight points. Powers missed a jumper in the final seconds of regulation with the score tied at 72.

Ohio State led by four late in the second overtime, but Branndais Agee and Jankoska made 3-pointers for Michigan State to tie it at 94 and force a third OT.

"I definitely thought down the stretch that we stopped some of the plays that we needed to, but it just wasn't enough," Mitchell said.

FOUL TROUBLE

Three Ohio State players and one Michigan State player fouled out, and the Spartans had two more with four fouls at the end. Spartans coach Suzy Merchant was glad the game didn't go to a fourth overtime.

"I don't know if we would have had one more in us, with the foul trouble that we had," she said.

TIP-INS

Ohio State: Mitchell's previous career high was 42 points. She finished Saturday's game with eight rebounds, five assists and 10 turnovers.

Michigan State: Jankoska scored 20 points. ... The Spartans lost 85-80 at Ohio State on Dec. 31.

UP NEXT

Ohio State will be seeded either No. 1 or No. 2 in the Big Ten tournament. Michigan State will be the No. 3 seed.

___

Follow Noah Trister at www.Twitter.com/noahtrister