Action Points Women with an average risk of breast cancer should have screening mammography every 2 years during ages 50 to 74, according to updated recommendations from the United States Preventive Services Task Force.

Note that selected women 40 to 49 might reduce their risk of dying of breast cancer with regular mammographic screening, but the benefit is much smaller as compared with older women and leads to too many false-positive tests and unnecessary breast biopsies, according to the USPSTF.

WASHINGTON -- Women with an average risk of breast cancer should have screening mammography every 2 years during ages 50 to 74, according to updated recommendations from the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF).

After reviewing available data, the panel concluded that women, ages 60 to 69, derive the greatest benefit from screening mammography in terms of preventing breast cancer death.

Selected women 40 to 49 might reduce their risk of dying of breast cancer with regular mammographic screening, but the benefit is much smaller as compared with older women and leads to too many false-positive tests and unnecessary breast biopsies, the USPSTF concluded in a draft document posted on the task force website. The posting begins a 30-day public comment period.

With the release of the draft, the USPSTF stands by most of its previous recommendation, published in 2009.

"It's more along the lines of 'if it ain't broke, don't fix it,' than it is a paradigm shift," USPSTF co-chair Michael LeFevre, MD, told MedPage Today when asked which phrase better represented the updated recommendation. "We did a complete update of all the evidence, all the new information that came up. Modelers started from scratch and redid their models. We got updated information from the Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium, looked at it again, and came to the same conclusion (as in 2009)."

The 2009 recommendation set off a verbal windstorm of reaction from supporters and detractors of the USPSTF document. At the center of the controversy was the USPSTF recommendation against "routine" mammographic screening of women 40 to 49. The public uproar culminated in the U.S. Senate passing legislation requiring insurers to cover screening mammography for women 40 to 49.

Then, and in the 2o15 draft recommendation, the USPSTF has tried to emphasize that screening in that age group should be an individualized decision, reached by women in discussion and their healthcare providers, said LeFevre, a professor of family medicine at the University of Missouri in Columbia.

"Our goal is to inform, not just physicians, but also their patients, about what the science tells us about benefits and harms, so they can make good decisions for themselves," he said.

Tweaking the Wording

Toward that end, the draft recommendation states that all women who are regularly screened with mammography, irrespective of age, face a risk of diagnosis and treatment of breast cancers that would never have posed a threat during their lifetime. For that matter, the nonthreatening cancers might never have come to the attention of healthcare providers in the absence of screening.

The USPSTF acknowledges that women with an increased risk of breast cancer may derive more benefit from mammographic screening that begins at age 40. The panel also allows that women who value the potential benefit of screening over the potential harms might choose to start biennial screening at age 40. However, support for the recommendation is limited -- level C evidence, meaning that the benefit of screening mammography only slightly outweighs the harms.

In regard to sticking with a recommendation for biennial screening, rather than annually, the panel's review of evidence failed to turn up clinical trials comparing shorter and longer screening intervals. The trials reviewed had screening intervals of 12 to 33 months, and no clear trend emerged in support of annual screening mammography. The evidence also showed no difference in breast cancer mortality among women 50 or older screened annually versus biennially.

New to the 2015 screening recommendation, the USPSTF considered use of adjunctive and newer types of imaging studies. The panel found the evidence insufficient to evaluate the potential harms and benefits of adjunctive screening with techniques such as breast ultrasound, MRI, or other imaging modalities, specifically breast tomosynthesis (3-D mammography). The USPSTF also found evidence lacking to make a judgment on the benefits or harms of screening mammography in women 75 or older.

Unlike the 2009 recommendation, the 2015 iteration makes no mention of the advisability of teaching women breast self-exam. The literature review for the earlier recommendation identified some studies suggesting that breast self-exam is not particularly beneficial, which many people interpreted as discouraging women from examining their breasts. To avoid misinterpretation, the panel simply omitted discussion of the issue.

"It was not intended to suggest that women shouldn't be familiar with their breasts," said LeFevre. "We certainly support women being very aware of their breasts and reporting anything they notice as changes to their physicians."

'Lack of Transparency'

What the USPSTF might not avoid is another round of controversy. The American College of Radiology and Society of Breast Imaging got the first word in, with a joint statement that said the recommendation pertaining to women 40 to 49, if adopted, "would result in thousands of additional and unnecessary breast cancer deaths each year. Thousands more women would experience more extensive and expensive treatments than if their cancers were found early by a regular mammogram."

Noting that the Affordable Care Act requires level B evidence or higher to support coverage, ACR/SBI officials asserted that USPSTF recommendation would effectively strip large groups of women from coverage to which they would otherwise be entitled: women 40 to 49 who want screening mammography at regular intervals and older women who want annual rather than biennial screening.

"We believe that the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services can now clarify whether adoption of these USPSTF recommendations would mean that private insurers no longer have to cover mammograms for millions of women," ACR board chair Bibb Allen, MD, said in the statement.

Accusing the USPSTF of a "lack of transparency," the ACR/SBI said the task force selectively considered studies that "underestimate the lifesaving benefit of regular screening and greatly inflate overdiagnosis claims. They ignored more modern studies that have shown much greater benefit."

"This lack of transparency, lack of breast cancer expertise [on the USPSTF], and exclusion of studies that would support screening effectiveness and lower overdiagnosis estimates may result in unnecessary lives lost," said SBI president Murray Rebner, MD.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) had a more charitable assessment of the USPSTF draft. The update more closely aligns the USPSTF with ACOG's advice in its practice bulletin on breast cancer screening, specifically by recognizing "that the decision to screen women in ages 40 to 49 is a personal one that should follow appropriate counseling that reflects both the potential benefits and harms," ACOG president John C. Jennings, MD, said in a statement.

ACOG plans to submit formal comments during the 30-day public comment period, Jennings added.

The American Society of Breast Surgeons also stood pat in its recommendation for annual mammography beginning at age 40, but allowed that reasonable people can disagree about how to interpret the same evidence.

"When recommendations are based on judgments about the balance of risks and benefits, experts can look at the same data and reach different conclusions," ASBrS officials said in a statement. "Although mammography is less sensitive in younger women and may lead to additional imaging and biopsy for lesions that are ultimately benign, numerous studies have demonstrated that screening mammography leads to improved survival for women aged 40 to 49.

"Advancements in digital mammography and 3D mammography continue to improve the rates of detection while minimizing false positive findings. We would encourage women to discuss the use of screening mammography with their physician."

When Is a 'C' Really a 'C'?

The "C" recommendation that the USPSTF gave screening for women in their 40s does not equate to a "recommendation against" mammography for women in that age group, the American Cancer Society said in a statement from its chief cancer control officer Richard Wender, MD. In 2012, the task force clarified the meaning of the level C recommendation, stating that "it means a woman should make an individualized decision with her doctor about whether to start mammography in her 40s based on her values, preferences, and health history."

"Nonetheless," Wender acknowledged, "coverage for screenings that receive a C rating from USPSTF is not mandated under the Affordable Care Act."

Crediting the USPSTF with "empowering women to make informed decisions," Wender went on to say the ACS is "concerned that the C rating might lead to coverage for fewer women and more out-of-pocket costs for women in their 40s. Costs should not be a deterrent to women who otherwise would seek to have a mammogram."

The ACS and its advocacy affiliate "strongly supports coverage of breast cancer screening for women in their 40s and will work to ensure that coverage remains available for screening when a women and her doctor decide it is in her best interest."

Although primary care physicians and their patients are the principal targets of USPSTF recommendations, two of the largest organizations representing primary care declined to comment on the draft recommendation.

The American Academy of Family Physicians has a formal review process for clinical recommendations and does not comment until the process has finished, a spokesperson told MedPage Today. In general, the AAFP supports the USPSTF's evidence-based process, she added. The American College of Physicians does not comment on other organizations' guidelines, according to a spokesperson.

Additionally, a spokesperson for the American Society of Clinical Oncology said the organization does not have a formal position on screening mammography but will review the draft recommendation and submit formal comments if deemed appropriate.

LeFevre and co-authors disclosed no relevant relationships with industry. Allen, Brawley, Jennings, LeFevre, and Rebner showed no relevant financial payments from industry. Jasmer received payments of $492, $81, $53, and $26 from AstraZeneca; $217.42 and $113.33 from Forest; $132.25 & $59.12 from UCB; $122.30, $60, and $21.43 from GlaxoSmithKline; $82, $25, and $18.78 from Novartis; $50, $17, and $10.99 from Cephalon; $14.76 from Boehringer Ingelheim, and $15 from Pfizer for services rendered from 2011-2014.

Reviewed by Robert Jasmer, MD Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco and Dorothy Caputo, MA, BSN, RN, Nurse Planner