With Earth Day and Arbor Day now in our rearview mirror, the countdown to a host of other summertime days of celebration such as Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day can begin. This reminds me of when I was 10 years old, and I complained to my father that there is a Mother’s Day, Father’s Day, Grandparents’ Day, Teacher’s Day and Secretary’s Day, but no Child’s Day. My father exclaimed, “Every day is Child’s Day!”

While we focus a good amount of attention on days like this, it’s worth noting that another special day recently passed us by with little fanfare: Did you know that there is a Rare Diseases Day? It’s Feb. 28. (My friend and health care scholar Bob Graboyes of the Mercatus Center quipped that it should be February 29th. Exactly!)

This year, the Food and Drug Administration commemorated Rare Diseases Day with a summary of its activities over the last year in approving “orphan drugs.” These are drugs intended to treat conditions affecting less than 200,000 patients per year – or, if more than 200,000 patients per year, drugs where there is “no reasonable expectation that the costs of drug development and marketing will be recovered in future sales of the drug in the United States."



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

In 2014, 15 of the 35 new drugs approved by the FDA received “orphan drug” designation, the highest since the Orphan Drug Act was passed 1983. The FDA cited the approval of a drug for Castleman’s Disease, a condition affecting 1,200 patients per year, as an example.

I am a big fan of the spirit of the Orphan Drug Act. Unfortunately, it has become corrupted recently, in great part due to the difficulty in obtaining FDA approval and dealing with the agency during the development and review process. Couple that with the mega-premium pricing orphan drugs command, and you see how this strategy leads to great profitability because of the negligible marketing and sales spending required to penetrate most orphan disease claims. Because of the incentives (including seven years of market exclusivity from competitors and exemption from the Affordable Care Act’s branded prescription drug fee), every major pharmaceutical company is pursuing orphan diseases aggressively.

We are getting to the point, in the words of my father, where every day will be Orphan Drug Day. But every day should be Patients’ Day. That could happen if the FDA just did its job: Review all drug applications efficiently, within the statute-specified time periods, and look for reasons to approve new therapies instead of convenient excuses to deny the availability of safe and effective products to patients.



[READ: Health Care in Your Hands]

A recent study by the Biotechnology Industry Organization illustrated the problem: Total venture funding of drug R&D has dropped 21 percent; disease areas affecting large populations have seen drastic declines in investing, including diabetes (81 percent), psychiatry (56 percent), gastrointestinal (49 percent), respiratory (41 percent) and cardiovascular (32 percent); and rare disease funding has seen a large increase over the past decade in terms of both dollars raised and number of companies funded.

Americans would most likely have preferred that the FDA concentrate its efforts on more quickly approving drugs for Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (Esbriet and Ofev), meningitis B (Bexsero) and multiple sclerosis (Lemtrada). These products were approved in Europe two to four years before their approvals in the United States.

With genomics, we can now sub-segment virtually any disease to very small populations, whittling down the treatable population to under 200,000, and devise medical situations where there are no other drugs approved to treat these specific claims. The former results in orphan drug designations, while the latter results in fast track, priority review and breakthrough therapy designations, which shorten review times. These approvals are veritable no brainers because the data are so compelling, and few patients will be treated, therefore, FDA fear of exposure is minimized.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

Knowing that the FDA is cautious, investors and drug developers are giving the agency what it wants: a growing pipeline of drugs for rare diseases. Even though science is advancing wonderfully in the big diseases as well, why should investors and companies try to develop novel products for major diseases when the FDA is likely to require extremely time-consuming and expensive trials, and may move the goal posts at the end, regardless?

The FDA’s mission is “to promote the public health by promptly and efficiently reviewing clinical research and taking appropriate action on the marketing of regulated products in a timely manner.” This means not being content with the medical status quo, but rather, to quote Gene Roddenberry of Star Trek, “to boldly go where no man has gone before.”

Leonard Nimoy now rests in peace, dying of complications from Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, a condition he shared with 10 million other U.S. citizens. Too bad drug developers and investors haven’t been busy pursuing drugs for debilitating conditions affecting millions of Americans, instead of pseudo-orphan drugs.