Sioux Falls, SD

The national average per gallon of gas is $2.24, and it's even lower here in Sioux Falls.

"It's fantastic. It's just like getting a raise at work," Tim Sukat said.

2015 is starting off with some nice looking numbers for drivers. According to AAA, the average price of regular gas in South Dakota's largest city is $1.97. That's down from $3.16 from New Year's Day 2014.

Tim Sukut of Sioux Falls is filling up his parent’s car today. He usually drives a pickup truck with a twenty gallon tank. On average, if he would have filled up that tank completely a year ago, it would have cost him $63.20. Today, it would cost $39.40. That's a savings of almost 24 dollars.

"We just enjoy having it. We don't have to worry as much about pinching pennies it helps. We're taking a trip to Arizona. The gas prices down there are a little over two bucks but not bad," Sukat said.

Laurie Darlow is filling up today before making her drive back home to Gillette, Wyoming. She likes to have cheaper gas in her tank before making the almost 500 mile trek home, but she doesn't think everything is great with the dropping prices.

"Our economy is based on oil and gas and so when we see the prices go down, that's great for the consumer, but it hurts the economy for the people in the oil and gas industries. So kind of have to look at it both ways," Darlow said.

No matter what you think of it, gas prices continue to drop, as the national price of gasoline has dropped for a record-breaking 98 days.

According to AAA, Americans saved $14 billion at the pump in 2014, compared to 2013.

Business

Gas & Energy {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.