With just ten days until Nevada Caucus Day, presidential campaigns are starting to ramp up agaom in the Silver State.

On Wednesday, Planned Parenthood Action Fund President, Cecile Richards made several stops in Northern Nevada to rally support for democratic candidate, Hillary Clinton. Richards hosted two women's health round tables in Fernley and at the University of Nevada, Reno, a phone bank in Carson City, and an organizing rally in Reno.

The organizing rally for Clinton focused on access to healthcare, especially when it comes to women's health and reproductive rights. Planned Parenthood endorsed Clinton last month. It's the first time the organization, which serves 1 in 5 American women, has endorsed a primary candidate.

Richards rallied hundreds who showed up at Clinton's Reno campaign office. Her main message: Women's rights aren't just a social issue.

"She understands that if you don't have access to health care, everything else in your life is unstable, and it is one of the most fundamental economic issues," Richards says.

She adds, those rights are being threatened.

"Every single republican running for president has said he wants to end Planned Parenthood access, overturn Roe vs. Wade, it really, I mean, the stakes are so high," Richard says.

Planned Parenthood has drawn criticism from the GOP and pro-life groups because some of its clinics provide abortion services. Late last year, videos from the Center for Medical Progress circulated, purporting that the women's health care provider was illegally selling fetal tissue. The Texas Grand Jury that was supposed to be investigating Planned Parenthood over the videos, instead indicted the activists behind the videos on felony charges. Twelve states that have investigated Planned Parenthood have cleared the organization of wrongdoing. However, CMP maintains Planned Parenthood illegally traffics fetal tissue, and its methods to gather video evidence falls within journalistic bounds.

Richards tells News 4 that since the videos were released, support for Planned Parenthood has never been stronger.

Supporter, Carissa Snedeker, says Planned Parenthood offers much more in her case.

"If it hadn't been for Planned Parenthood, I actually might not be here today," she says.

Snedeker shared with Richards her story of being an uninsured 30-year-old. She had went to a Planned Parenthood clinic for birth control, and through their care, she learned she had an abnormal pap smear. It turned out to be dysplasia. It was caught and treated early.

"So, it's very important to me that other women have the same access to health care that I had," she says.

As GOP candidates call for the repeal of the Affordable Care Act, and the defunding Planned Parenthood, Clinton supporters at Wednesday's rally say the stakes are too high.

"I think it's important for women to have control over their own bodies," says Scott Carden.

Ii am tired of old men in Congress trying to control my body and that's why it's important for me to support Ms. Richards," explains Kimberly Carden.