This week the attorney general will host public hearings on the latest proposed transaction for the troubled Daughters of Charity Health System. While the terms of the deal with New York hedge fund BlueMountain Capital differ from those of the thwarted Prime offer, the importance of protecting low-income patients from a possibly uncaring private firm remains a public interest and a community priority.

Absent conditions imposed by the state attorney general, there is no guarantee that the charitable elements of the original DCHS mission will be sustained. BlueMountain is an entity driven by the pursuit of profits. Under the proposed agreement, the DCHS hospitals, including San Jose's O'Connor Hospital and Gilroy's Saint Louise Regional Hospital, will initially be run as nonprofits under a separate management firm. But BlueMountain retains the option to buy the system and convert it into a for-profit operation as soon as three years after the deal is signed.

Without conditions imposed by the attorney general, will BlueMountain continue to serve Medi-Cal patients? Reducing the number of Medi-Cal providers places a significant burden on the remaining portions of the safety net, particularly as the number of Medi-Cal patients increases under the Affordable Care Act.

Attorney General Kamala Harris imposed a set of stringent conditions on the proposed Prime deal designed to protect the public interest and benefit safety-net constituencies. After reviewing the details of the current offer from BlueMountain, we believe the bar for that deal should also be set high. Specifically:

Advertisement

The terms of conditions must persist beyond BlueMountain's option to buy. The BlueMountain proposal presents unusual complexities that warrant a term longer than the 10 years imposed on Prime. For example, if the term of conditions is 10 years, what happens if BlueMountain exercises its option 10 years and one day after the deal is closed? A for-profit firm would have replaced a nonprofit with no period of conditions to follow.

Protect low-income constituencies. The DCHS had a strong record of providing services to the poor, and the attorney general's conditions should require that commitment with conditions that mandate:

The same level of charity care and community benefits as were provided under the DCHS;

A 24-hour emergency room with sufficient backup staff to serve the needs of low-income patients;