“There are a lot of unanswered questions. Our business is growing, and we may near the 50-employee count someday. That would greatly impact our decision to add additional full-time staff. We have been unable to find affordable health insurance that we could provide for our employees. We had hoped something would become available with the ACA; however, the opposite seems to be happening. From what we are hearing, all the rates are going to be going up even more than they have already.”

The paper specifically identifies three trends: The erosion of the 40-hour work week, "small" businesses trying not to grow bigger than 50 employees, and the greater use of staffing companies. Here's how Vicki Warren of the Texas-based Regal Machine Manufacturing describes her experience with Obamacare:

Express Employment Professionals, the largest privately held staffing company in the United States, released a white paper this week on Obamacare's impact on employment. "The [Affordable Care Act] is great for the staffing industry, but it’s not very good for American job creation, small business, or for workers," says Bob Funk, the group's CEO and former chairman of the Kansas City Federal Reserve.

Express Employment Professionals, the largest privately held staffing company in the United States, released a white paper this week on Obamacare's impact on employment. "The [Affordable Care Act] is great for the staffing industry, but it’s not very good for American job creation, small business, or for workers," says Bob Funk, the group's CEO and former chairman of the Kansas City Federal Reserve.

The Weekly Standard http://assets.weeklystandard.com.s3.amazonaws.com/tws15/images/logo-large.png

The Weekly Standard

2013

Washington, DC

Politics

http://www.weeklystandard.com/how-obamacare-is-hurting-workers-and-small-businesses/article/757264

2013-09-27T14:53

2013-09-27T15:16

How Obamacare Is Hurting Workers and Small Businesses

Express Employment Professionals, the largest privately held staffing company in the United States, released a white paper this week on Obamacare's impact on employment. The [Affordable Care Act] is great for the staffing industry, but it’s not very good for American job creation, small business, or for workers, says Bob Funk, the group's CEO and former chairman of the Kansas City Federal Reserve. The paper specifically identifies three trends: The erosion of the 40-hour work week, small businesses trying not to grow bigger than 50 employees, and the greater use of staffing companies. Here's how Vicki Warren of the Texas-based Regal Machine Manufacturing describes her experience with Obamacare: “There are a lot of unanswered questions. Our business is growing, and we may near the 50-employee count someday. That would greatly impact our decision to add additional full-time staff. We have been unable to find affordable health insurance that we could provide for our employees. We had hoped something would become available with the ACA; however, the opposite seems to be happening. From what we are hearing, all the rates are going to be going up even more than they have already.”

John McCormack

http://cdn.weeklystandard.biz/cache/280x280-.jpg