Photo

Good Tuesday morning and welcome to First Draft’s second day. It is a busy one.

President Obama heads to New York on Tuesday morning to address world leaders just hours after opening a new front in the war against Islamic extremists with an aerial barrage in Syria. But unlike with previous armed conflicts, he will be seeking support, not permission. (Russia would say no, anyway.)

The president stayed out of sight on Monday night even as the Pentagon confirmed the first strikes inside Syria against the terrorist group known as the Islamic State. He had told the nation in a speech Sept. 10 that he had authorized such strikes, but he left it to military commanders to decide when and where to open the air campaign. The White House said only that he was kept updated on the operation.

So his trip to New York for three days of meetings with presidents and prime ministers at the United Nations General Assembly meeting will present Mr. Obama with his first chance to talk publicly about the airstrikes.

The president will in effect be presenting his peers with a fait accompli and asking them to individually stand by his decision, even though he does not have an invitation from Syria’s government to use force inside its borders against the terrorist group.

While in New York, Mr. Obama will also seek to pass a Security Council resolution calling on all nations to prosecute those who travel abroad to join terrorist organizations or help finance them. And he will meet with Haider al-Abadi, the new Iraqi prime minister, whom Mr. Obama hopes to make a strong ally in the fight against the Islamic State.

New Scrutiny for the Secret Service

The Secret Service is about to experience some of the toughest questioning it has ever faced in the wake of Friday’s White House breach. Its director, Julia Pierson, is scrambling to defend her agency — and her own performance.

In an exclusive interview to be published later Tuesday, Ms. Pierson describes the mood Sunday night as 700 agents and officers gathered in New York to prepare for the start of the United Nations General Assembly meeting. It had been just two days since an intruder jumped the White House fence and got through the North Portico doors before being tackled.

She said she urged her employees to ignore second-guessing from critics: “We need to be fully vigilant professionals, although we are in the media again.” She exhorted them to “make sure we’re focused.”

But will she be able to hold off calls for changes in practices and personnel? A string of controversies (some involving agents and prostitutes) and security lapses has exposed the Secret Service to withering criticism. And Friday’s fence-jumper could produce calls for more sweeping changes. Already, a House hearing into the matter has been set for next Tuesday.

Representative Jason Chaffetz, a Utah Republican, promises to be rigorous. “We have a lot of good men and women, but their leadership has some serious questions to answer,” he said. “Over the last five years or so, their luster of elite protection has lost its shine.”

— Michael S. Schmidt

U.S. Plans for Climate Change, With No Guarantees

At 1 p.m. before the United Nations on Tuesday, President Obama will present his blueprints for confronting climate change.

But as he nears the twilight of his term, a reality is sinking in. Most of the work will have to be done by Mr. Obama’s successor. Or maybe the president after that. Or the president 20 years from now.

And there is also no guarantee that what the administration proposes Tuesday will be enacted, given a reluctant Congress, or that what is enacted will be enough to hold off the worst climate changes.

Gina McCarthy, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, will be front and center at the gathering. She will not only be traveling to New York with the president, but will also be sitting directly behind him as he addresses world leaders. In the face of a resistant Congress, Mr. Obama has used the agency to push through new policies, including a sweeping effort to curtail coal.

​​“This is not a talking point,” said Thomas Reynolds, a spokesman for the E.P.A. “The U.S. is using the E.P.A. to show its leadership internationally.”

— Coral Davenport

What We’re Watching Today

Jeb Bush may be mulling a run for president in 2016, but for the moment he’s trying to get Republican candidates for the Senate elected. On Tuesday night, he’ll headline a big-ticket fund-raiser for Tom Cotton, Joni Ernst, Cory Gardner, Dan Sullivan and Monica Wehby in Tampa, Fla., paying a favor to some potential political allies.

The Affordable Care Act has waned as a campaign issue, but HealthCare.gov is being overhauled, and a new enrollment season is on the horizon. At 1:35 p.m., Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell will share the latest on the law in a speech at the Brookings Institution.

The Clinton watch continues. Curious what matters to Chelsea Clinton when it comes to measuring economic prosperity? At 9:30 a.m., she’ll be moderating a conversation on the subject at the Clinton Global Initiative conference in New York.

Tales of the House Supply Closet: ‘The Tie of Shame’

The two ugliest ties in Washington are stored in a House supply closet with markers, Post-it notes and VHS cassettes of past proceedings.

“I like to call the pink one ‘the tie of shame,’ ” said Laura Reed.

Over the years, Ms. Reed and her colleagues at the House Press Gallery have lent the silk ties out to hundreds, perhaps thousands, of reporters who have lacked the appropriate attire to chat with members in the Speaker’s Lobby downstairs. Often the reporters ask if there are other options. There are not.

The Eagle brand pink tie has a kaleidoscope pattern and is mottled with blue cornflowers and a stain that could be chocolate, salsa or dried blood. (“That’s new,” observed Ms. Reed.) The vastly more popular choice is paisley blue, made by Tommy Hilfiger, and split at the seams to reveal a foam stuffing. “It has seen better days,” she said.

How many is not entirely clear. Ric Andersen, who sits in front of the closet and has worked at the House for 15 years, said the ties predated him. “Nobody knows where they came from,” he said.

Unlike the “umbrella of shame” that is also stored in the gallery (yellow, with the word shame written in red), no reporter has tried to steal the House neck wear.

“The ties,” Ms. Reed said, “always come back.”

— Jason Horowitz

Our Favorite Reads From Elsewhere

The Daily Telegraph reports says Britain is ready to join the United States in the attack in Syria.

Xinhua, the Chinese news agency, warns the United Nations against making Beijing bear the brunt of climate change recommendations. “Such a claim is untenable,” it says.

Pravda’s view of American policy in Ukraine: “The Lunacy of Sanctions and the Psychosis of U.S. Exceptionalism.”

Justice Elena Kagan officiated her first same-sex wedding. The ceremony in Maryland marked the union of her former law clerk and his husband.

Daniel Larison of The American Conservative says Hillary Rodham Clinton “doesn’t seem to be paying much of a price politically within her own party for being reliably hawkish.”