Paul Pierce and the Wizards agreed to terms on a two-year deal on Saturday night, a person with knowledge of the agreement told The Associated Press. The deal is for the mid-level exception, which is about $5.3 million for next season, and includes a player option in the second year of the contract. The person requested anonymity because the Wizards have not officially announced the signing.

“Welcome the truth (at)paulpierce34 to DC…(hash)wizkids!!” Wizards point guard John Wall tweeted.

After spending the first 15 seasons of his career in Boston, Pierce is on the move for the second straight summer in a deal first reported by ESPN, and the Wizards couldn’t be happier.

***

Luol Deng agrees to 2-year deal with Heat

Free agent forward Luol Deng agreed Sunday to a $20 million, two-year deal with the Miami Heat, said Herb Rudoy, one of Deng’s agents.

The deal includes a player option for the 2015-16 season, Rudoy said.

Deng is entering his 11th NBA season, having spent almost his entire career with the Chicago Bulls. He appeared in 40 games with the Cleveland Cavaliers after a trade last season. He fills a need in Miami, which lost LeBron James last week after the four-time NBA MVP said he would leave the Heat after four seasons and return to the Cavaliers.

Deng has averaged 16.0 points per game in his career, after being chosen No. 7 overall from Duke in the 2004 draft.

His contract should be signed early this week.

***

Chandler Parsons headed to Dallas

The Houston Rockets declined to match the Mavericks’ three-year, $46 million offer sheet for forward Chandler Parsons, ESPN.com reported Sunday. The 25-year-old forward will have a player option for the third year on his deal, allowing him to become a free agent in 2016.

Parsons indicated the news on Twitter when the message “HELLLLLLLLLO DALLAS #MFFL” was posted on his account Sunday evening.

A restricted free agent this summer, Parsons averaged 16.6 points, 5.5 rebounds and 4.0 assists last season with the Rockets. (The Denver Post)

***

Chris Bosh “excited for the challenge”

Chris Bosh is staying in Miami because of his family, and because he believes the Heat will still be competitive even without LeBron James.

Bosh made his comments Sunday in a telephone interview with The Associated Press from Ghana, where he’s been doing some work with NBA Africa in recent days while taking a break from a family vacation.

Bosh says he was tempted by an offer to join the Houston Rockets. He says he turned it down because his decision hinged on more than “the business of basketball” and instead revolved largely around the fact that his wife and children are happy in South Florida.

He’ll soon be signing a five-year, $118 million contract to stay with the Heat.

***

Pau Gasol tweets he’s joining Bulls

The Chicago Bulls recovered quickly after losing out on Carmelo Anthony in free agency, landing Los Angeles Lakers big man Pau Gasol to bolster the team’s offense.

Gasol announced on his verified Twitter account on Saturday evening that he reached agreement with the Bulls.

“It hasn’t been easy,” Gasol tweeted. “After meditating it a lot I’ve chosen to play with the Chicago Bulls. Looking forward to this new chapter of my career.”

The Spaniard is one of the NBA’s most offensively gifted and versatile big men, and he has long been one of Kobe Bryant’s favorite teammates with the Lakers. Gasol spent the last seven seasons in Los Angeles, teaming with Bryant to win two championships and reach another NBA Finals.

The exact terms of his agreement with the Bulls were not immediately clear. The Bulls and Lakers had reportedly been discussing sign-and-trade options earlier in the day Saturday, but no official announcement from either team had been made.

***

AP source: Marvin Williams to join Hornets

CHARLOTTE, N.C. — After losing out on Gordon Hayward, the Charlotte Hornets landed one of his former teammates with the Utah Jazz.

The Hornets agreed to a $14 million, two-year contract with free-agent forward Marvin Williams, according to a person familiar with the deal.

The person spoke to The Associated Press on Saturday on condition of anonymity because the deal has not yet been made public. The person says it will be signed next week.

The 6-foot-9, 237-pound Williams has played nine seasons in the NBA with the Jazz and Atlanta Hawks. He averaged 9.1 points and 5.1 rebounds in 66 games for Utah last season, including 50 starts.

The 28-year-old Williams is averaging 10.8 points and 5.1 rebounds for 626 career games.