BOSTON (WWLP) – Paying more for health insurance in Massachusetts because of the Affordable Care Act. It’s a story the 22News I-Team has been following and I-Team reporter Ryan Walsh had an exclusive interview with the man in charge of the state’s health connector.

Smaller insurance companies like Health New England say they may have to raise insurance premiums drastically if the state doesn’t do something about the “Risk Adjustment” provisions of the Affordable Care Act.

(Are risk adjustment provisions fair In Massachusetts?)

“I won’t be one to comment too deeply on fair or not fair, it is the law,” said Louis Gutierrez, Executive Director of the Massachusetts Health Connector.

Risk adjustment figures out which healh insurance companies have sicker patients and then pays them for it. Those companies, at this point its Blue Cross Blue Shield, would be paid millions of dollars directly from other insurance companies like Health New England. Massachusetts is the only state to have its own risk adjustment methodology.

“It was communicated to us that our federally approved methodology was one we had to live by,” said Gutierrez.

We’re waiting to hear if the federal government will grant two waivers to the Affordable Care Act, but risk adjustment won’t be one of them.

“We don’t see a waiver as being in the cards right now very fortunately we’re at a very different place in terms of the perceived need for that waiver,” said Gutierrez.

Gutierrez told the I-Team that the initial numbers of potential $50 million payouts have gone down as they continue to go through healthcare claims from 2014. At this point their estimates are only 75% accurate.

“It’s really important that many of our fears that were initiated by the earlier numbers are greatly reduced,” said Gutierrez.

The final bills will be sent out at the end of June.

Health New England wouldn’t release their latest numbers, but did send 22News this statement:

“Since we provided estimates six weeks ago that conservatively reflected the potential impact of risk adjustment on our health system, the Health Connector has worked with us to refine our shared understanding of potential losses, and our financial exposure does not appear to be as drastic as we initially expected. Still, the ultimate fiscal impact of risk adjustment is not yet known. It remains a significant issue for us and other small insurers across the state, and we’re concerned that western Massachusetts will end up subsidizing insurance premiums elsewhere in the state. Massachusetts should not be punished for implementing universal coverage nearly a decade ago. We call upon our state’s leadership to continue to work with their federal partners to avoid unnecessary impacts to our communities.”

-Dr. Mark A. Keroack

President & CEO, Baystate Health

President & CEO, Baystate Medical Center

Chair, Board of Directors, Health New England