Sioux Falls, SD

Petitions are being circulated for a ballot initiative gaining rare support from both sides of the aisle.

It comes from South Dakotans for Ethics Reform and is co-chaired by a republican and democrat living on opposite sides of the state. But one thing they do have in common - they want to construct new anti-corruption laws.

On a busy downtown Sioux Falls corner, a full-time volunteer collects signatures for a new ballot initiative drafted by South Dakotans for Ethics Reform.

The "South Dakota Government Accountability and Ant-Corruption Act" is being pushed by an unlikely South Dakota bi-partisan group.

Former Democratic US senate candidate Rick Weiland and former Republican state senator Don Frankenfeld spent months drawing up the extensive 34-page act that aims to reform campaign finance. It will also ensure enforcement of political ethic laws in South Dakota.

"We've got to have checks and balances or things do happen. We've seen things happen," Weiland said.

A recent State Integrity Investigation gave South Dakota an "F" on a report card assessing states at greatest risk of corruption. That ranking propelled Weiland and Frankenfeld to work together.

"Our goal is not to stop corruption, but to prevent corruption," Frankenfeld said.

The act would ramp up enforcement of South Dakota's ethics laws by creating a five member, bi-partisan ethics commission with the power to investigate corruption. It would also limit the amount of donations given to candidates and make election spending fully transparent.

"It really opens up our state government, a lot more transparency than what we have. A lot of what the act addresses were the reasons we got an F and we are ranked as the second most at risk of corruption in the entire country," Weiland said.

"We've done some polling on this. It's early, but it looks like about 80 percent of South Dakotans are in favor of the anti-corruption act if it is presented in outlying form," Frankenfeld said.

A major aspect of the act would give each registered voter $100 worth of credits to back the candidate of their choice.

"Giving everyday folks an opportunity to contribute like this dilutes the impact of big money in our political system and it's a great investment," Weiland said.

The money given to voters for campaign donations will come from the state's general fund - and will be capped at $12 million.

Last year, there was $1.4 billion in the general fund with the majority of that money going towards education and healthcare. Critics of the ballot measure say they don't want that money going towards political campaigns.

We caught up with appropriation committee chair Deb Peters who says she doesn't want millions of dollars set aside to fund campaigns.

"We would rather put our money back to our priorities, our kids, our elderly, our Native Americans, we really should put it back where our priorities are. Taking care of people and making sure our kids are taken care of and then figure out where to spend it. Right now, the political arena is not where we should be spending our money," Peters said.

Peters argues South Dakota doesn't have the corruption scandals seen in other states. But with a few thousand signatures collected and a deadline three weeks away, backers say they're prepared for a fight.

"If the devil is in the details and I'm sure we will be discussing a lot of details between now and when the election will take place," Frankenfeld said.

We reached out to Governor Dennis Daugaard for comment on the initiative. His office tells us that the republican leader opposes spending taxpayer dollars on political campaigns.

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.