WHITTIER >> Recently, Marcy Valenzuela of Whittier went to see a doctor at PIH Health for rheumatoid arthritis that has been causing her pain.

It was her first doctor’s visit since she was diagnosed three years ago with the disease that typically affects the small joints in your hands and feet.

The only reason she could afford to go is that Valenzuela, 25, who grew up in the foster-care system, is now eligible for Medi-Cal under rules put forth by the federal Affordable Care Act that took effect this year.

Youngsters who were in the foster-care system now can get free health care coverage until they turn 26.

“I was excited,” said Valenzuela. “I couldn’t believe it. I was really relieved. I felt like I was bombarding my doctor with so many different problems but it was because I hadn’t seen a doctor for so long.”

Valenzuela is one of 20,000 former foster youth in California who are newly eligible for health care coverage.

“Youth were formerly allowed to stay on Medi-Cal through the age of 21,” said Constance Farrell, spokeswoman for Alliance for Children, a group that provides free legal services relating to education and adoptions for foster children. It also assists foster youth after the age of 21 when they’ve left the system.

“That is essentially the same as children staying on their parent’s insurance,” she said about the new rules. “It’s an equitable structure.”

The new coverage is needed, especially for foster children, said Taylor Dudley, staff attorney for Alliance for Children.

“Foster children traditionally have the most chronic and debilitating health conditions among low-income children,” Dudley said. “It’s often times due to abuse and neglect.”

The new coverage for foster children doesn’t require them to apply every year, she said. It also offers substance abuse counseling and mental heath services as well as general care, Dudley said.

“We have seen many foster youth take advantage and use the program,” she said. “Many use the program because of long-standing health conditions.”

For others, it’s needed because of an accident, she said.

One client of Alliance for Children was involved in a hit-and-run accident while riding a bicycle, she said.

“Before the Affordable Care Act, he would have had hundreds of thousands dollars in medical bills,” Taylor said.

John Peel, executive director for Whittier-based Concept 7, a foster-care and adoption agency, said it’s too early to see the full effects of the new rules but it could ensure that the foster children consistently see a doctor.

Advertisement

“Some of the younger population don’t go to the doctor very much,” Peel said.

But health-care coverage is important, even for those who are young, he said.

“When we start recognizing what it’s not like to have health care, it’s usually when you have a catastrophic illness and can’t get any health care,” Peel said.

That’s what happened to Valenzuela when she turned 22. She was having anxiety attacks and digestive issues.

“I didn’t realize I needed medical care so bad until I actually lost it,” she said.

She went to an emergency room and was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis.

Valenzuela was referred to a specialist but never went because she had no insurance.

She also dropped out of school because of knee problems.

This year, she qualified for Medi-Cal thanks to the federal Affordable Care Act.

She went to a doctor in February and later saw a gastroenterologist and got some medication.\

Valenzuela also is seeing a dentist for the first time in a long time.

Valenzuela was born in to the foster-care system. Her parents couldn’t take care of here because of their drug addiction, she said. She lived in different facilities, including a large group home.

She left the system at age 18 and a year later became homeless in Pico Rivera.

Valenzuela later got into a transitional housing program and now is living on her own in Whittier.

Valenzuela is now paid by Los Angeles County to provide care for her sister and brother as part of the foster-care-system. Since they’re under 18, she’s not allowed to provide their names.

Valenzuela is going back to Rio Hondo College, where she plans on getting an Associate of Arts degree in administrative justice.

She wants to get an advanced degree in social work.

Still, Valenzuela also knows she will lose her health insurance when she turns 26 in August.

She’s not sure what will happen then but plans to apply for regular Medi-Cal.

“My income isn’t very high,” she said. “I’m hoping my insurance isn’t too expensive.”