Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz Ted CruzWhat happens when the GOP base abandons the party platform? Fiorina returns to attack Clinton's 'lust for power' Trump clinches GOP nomination MORE suggested Tuesday that the Obama administration is treating police as "the enemy."

"Many of us have been growing more and more concerned at seeing police officers the subject of public vilification, seeing police officers being undermined and hearing from police officers across this country that they are less and less able to do their jobs," the Texas senator said during a hearing on Capitol Hill.

ADVERTISEMENT

"In my view it is deeply harmful, not only for the men and women of law enforcement, but for the safety of the American people, for the federal government to treat police officers as the enemy, for the president or the attorney general to be holding up police officers for vilification," Cruz added later.

Cruz made the comment while chairing a hearing for the Senate Judiciary Committee's Subcommittee on Oversight, Agency Action, Federal Rights and Federal Courts.

The title of the hearings itself, which alluded to a "War on Police," became a hot topic of debate among lawmakers on the panel as well as their witnesses, which included members of the Justice Department, NAACP, a chief of police and members of conservative think tanks.

"I know there was an effort to make this a neutral title for this hearing, but I think it leans a little bit in a provocative way," Sen. Dick Durbin Dick DurbinPuerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate Funding boost for TSA sails through committee Senate panel passes 4.5B defense bill MORE (D-Ill.) said during his opening remarks.

Durbin asked questions of witnesses to point out that in many civil rights investigations into police, local police departments themselves had requested and cooperated with the federal probes.

"Some war," Durbin said.

Sen. Chris Coons Chris CoonsDems: Warren ready to get off sidelines Dems pressure Obama on vow to resettle 10,000 Syrian refugees Wildlife crime bill deserves unanimous consent in Congress MORE (Del.), the ranking Democrat on the committee, said the idea of a "war on cops" as alluded to in the hearing title "reflects, unfortunately, I think, more overheated rhetoric all-too-common in Congress when discussing complex policy matters rather than any on-the-ground reality."

The hearing discussion touched on the so-called Ferguson Effect of whether police around the country are reluctant to enforce the law amid additional scrutiny of their behavior.

Experts have been attempting to explain an uptick in violent crime in some U.S. cities amid vocal sentiment targeting police in the wake of killings of unarmed black men in places like Ferguson, Mo.

Coons that it was "insulting" to those law enforcement officials who show up to work every day to suggest police have been less effective in recent months.

Later, Coons ripped the hearing's "wide range of sloppy, unfounded and unscientific insults to the law enforcement community that has suggested somehow that it is citizens protesting civil rights violations that are causing increases in crime."

Cruz pointed out the rift between Obama and his FBI director James Comey over the so-called Ferguson Effect, suggesting that Obama was "impugning the integrity and veracity" of Comey. Cruz also suggested Obama "assumes the police are guilty until proven innocent."