TAMPA — A 42-year-old Riverview man is accused of dousing a man with pepper spray, kicking him in the head and threatening him with a gun during a road rage incident in Tampa on Sunday afternoon, police said.

Andre Anthony Rivera, of 12639 Adventure Drive, Riverview, was arrested shortly after 5:30 p.m. Sunday by Tampa Police and faces charges of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, police said.

An initial call to police came from the intersection at Armenia Avenue and West Kennedy Boulevard, where Rivera is accused of threatening to shoot someone. Next, police got a call from the area of Jackson Street East and North Morgan Street, where Rivera is accused of pointing a gun at the man and kicking him, records said.

Investigators said that Rivera was threatening a woman in another vehicle when the second victim tried to intervene. Witnesses said Rivera chased the man with a gun after spraying and kicking him, and threatened to shoot him, police said.

At Jackson and North Morgan, a caller gave police the tag number of a silver Honda driven by Rivera, police said.

Rivera was arrested at Adamo Drive and South 22nd Street after an officer on her way to work was flagged down by witnesses, police said.

Inside Rivera’s Honda, investigators found a loaded .40-caliber handgun, a retractable baton, three canisters of pepper spray, two loaded magazines and a knife, investigators said.

Rivera was taken to the Hillsborough County Jail where he was being held on $2,000 bond.

Anyone with information about the woman Rivera threatened is asked to call Tampa Police at (813) 231-6130.

Sunday’s incident did not mark Rivera’s first arrest on a weapons-related charge.

In June 2008, he was arrested in Hillsborough County on charges of armed burglary of a dwelling while in possession of a firearm and aggravated battery with a deadly weapon. Rivera was released on his own recognizance after serving five days in jail, and the case was settled the following month, records indicate.

In 1990, he was convicted on a misdemeanor charge of carrying a concealed weapon in Miami.