Age: 69

Occupation: Executive Director, El Comité de Longmont

How many years have you been in the St. Vrain Valley? 42

What brought you here? What has kept you here? I came because my husband got a job with IBM. We stayed because IBM kept us here. They were actively recruiting Hispanics in the area.

What has been the biggest change for the Latino community in your lifetime? More educated, more self-empowerment, less oppression and more activism than when I was a child. We're not quiet anymore. We are speaking out, we are voting, though we could do a better job of voting. We're more vocal about social justice and equality, and we participate more.

What accomplishment of El Comité are you most proud of? Getting adult ed as one of our great programs. You know, they closed it and we said, "No! It has to continue!"

I say, "We help the young, the old, the restless, the in-between, and even the dead!" We work with a diverse population with a big variety of problems: Wage theft, unemployment, immigration, housing, domestic abuse, health, legal problems, landlord-tenant disputes, wrongful termination, end of life issues and navigating the funeral system. We can even marry people here!

We have great partnerships with (Boulder County District Attorney) Stan Garnett, Sheriff (Joe) Pelle, the Department of Justice and politicians like Jonathan Singer. Our foundation is based on four pillars: Legal assistance and referrals, addressing basic needs, community bridge building and advocacy and empowerment. There is a comfort and trust level when people come here. We help them if we can and if we can't, we know where to send them in the community to get help. It empowers people when they understand how our system works.

I'm also proud of our citizenship application workshops. Four times a year, we help people fill out their application and send it in. Now that we have the adult ed program, people can study and prepare for the interview and fill out their application. It's like one-stop shopping.