Republican voters are hoping to elect a president who opposes immigration reform, among other issues, a new poll by the Washington Post and ABC News revealed.

The data, released on 3 April, reported that 70% of registered Republican voters would like to elect a president who opposes a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants. Only 24% of Republican voters would elect a president who supports immigration reform. In contrast, 68% of Democratic registered voters and 52% of Independent registered voters would elect a president who supports immigration reform.

According to the poll, 63% of registered voters believed it was "extremely important" or "very important" to elect a president who opposes immigration reform that includes a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.

Overall, American voters want to support a president who is in favor of immigration reform, instead of one who is against it, by 51-45, the Washington Post noted.

Republican voters also appeared to go against the grain in other major issues, including climate change action, the Iran nuclear deal and Obamacare.

Republican voters overwhelmingly would prefer a president that opposes government climate change action at 55%. In contrast, 13% of Democrats and 32% of Independents want a president who is against government climate change action. Only 32% of Republicans would elect a president who is in favor of climate change action, as opposed to 77% of Democrats and 61% of Independents.

The poll revealed that 60% of Republicans would like the next president to oppose a deal with Iran regarding nuclear weapons and only 31% would like someone who favors an agreement.

Meanwhile, Democrats prefer a president who favors an agreement 63-28 and Independents are in favor of a present who wants an agreement 51-40.

According to the Washington Post, the polls show that the Affordable Care Act is unpopular across the board, but that most Americans want the future president to keep the law, 49% to 45%. However, Republicans want the next president to repeal the healthcare law by 82%.

These views are expected to shape the upcoming presidential election, although it remains to be seen how candidates will be affected based on their stances.

Immigration reform will like prove to be a decisive issue among Latino voters, who are more like to vote for a candidate who is in favor of comprehensive reform.