The Big Three credit rating agencies (Standard & Poor’s, Fitch, and Moody’s) issued rating median reports on nonprofit hospital systems late this summer. Most medians were stable to slightly negative.

More specifically, balance sheet metrics, such as days cash on hand and cash-to-debt, remained at or near post-recession highs due to better performing investments, prudent capital investment and refrain from issuing new debt.

According to Fitch, operating profitability metrics, such as operating margin and EBITDA margin, improved slightly overall in 2012 due to effective cost management and revenue enhancement initiatives. S&P offered similar sentiment referencing steady profitability metrics as improved operating efficiencies and system growth were offset by operating burdens related to healthcare reform, growing costs, lower volumes, rising bad debt, increased costs from employed physicians and weak reimbursement rate increases. Moody’s was the most bearish on 2012 performance citing weaker operating performance after three years of stability. This downward trend was a result of lower volumes and revenue growth, high exposure to government payers and increased expenses.

A tough row to hoe

What’s the outlook for hospitals in 2014?

Moving forward, the skies are a little darker. Fitch’s outlook is guarded as it anticipates a narrowing in operating margins, as expense reduction efforts will likely fail to keep pace with reimbursement and volume declines.

Moody’s is similarly pessimistic, predicting operating performance will remain weak. The industry-wide transition to a value-based reimbursement system will be highly disruptive. Their report predicts lower reimbursement and volumes, as there are no overriding factors that will drive increased admissions. Lastly, continued sequestration and Medicare reductions will hamper performance largely driven by poor net reimbursements.

S&P also offered a negative sentiment, predicting ratios will gradually soften in the next year or two. It also cites incremental pressures due to healthcare reform, as the same level of cost cutting that hospitals have employed the last few years is not sustainable.

What’s the lowdown?

Reviewing the credit rating agencies’ median reports can be a beneficial exercise for analyzing past performance and predicting future industry trends. By noting potential headwinds, hospitals can attempt to stay one step ahead of the ever-changing landscape when trying to navigate these difficult times.

From this particular cycle of reports, several tidbits of advice can be offered to hospitals on maintaining stable operations moving forward, despite the generally negative consensus on hospital trends.