Boys Basketball: Red Wing dominates Winona, returns to 1AAA title game

Red Wing's Travis Toivonen (11) tries to put up a shot against a pair of Winona defenders during the second half of Saturday's Section 1AAA semifinal game at the Mayo Civic Arena in Rochester. Toivonen had 22 points and 10 rebounds in the Wingers' victory. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

Red Wing's Ben Miller takes a jump shot over the Winona defense during the second half of Saturday's Section 1AAA semifinal game at the Mayo Civic Arena in Rochester. Miller had 11 points in the Wingers' 71-54 victory. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

With a chance to get to the Section 1AAA finals for the third straight time, the top-seeded Wingers floored Winona and never let the Winhawks get back into the game with a 71-54 drubbing in the section semifinals at Mayo Civic Arena.

“We came out with fire,” said senior forward Ty Buck, who finished with 20 points on 6 of 11 shooting with eight assists, six rebounds and two steals. “Coach told us before the game that it’s a section game, not a regular-season game and if we don’t come out on top right away, it’s going to be a tough game all the way through. We came out on top and held it all the way through.”

Led by eight early points from Travis Toivonen, the Wingers sprinted out to a 20-7 lead midway through the first half. The hot start, according to Red Wing head coach Doug Toivonen, was the by-product of two of the team’s best practices of the season building up to Saturday’s game against the Winhawks.

“Everything we talked about, what we needed to do, we did it in practice,” Coach Toivonen said. “What you saw in the first half, that’s how we practiced the last two days and the kids were able to transfer that over to the game. It’s real nice to see.”

The inside game was where Red Wing managed to do the bulk of its damage. Led by Toivonen’s 22 points and 10 rebounds, the Wingers scored 23 second-chance points while out-rebounding Winona 36-17. Ben Miller had 11 points and five rebounds, and Joe Sevlie came off the bench and provided nine rebounds (five offensive) and nine points.

“The first two games (against Winona) we did a good job of attacking the gaps and getting some things inside,” Coach Toivonen said. “They play a zone and you’re not always sure who’s going to be down there (in the post). We found if we could get them spread out a little bit, which is what we did, we have good finishers inside.”

Travis Toivonen added, “We had really good ball movement. A lot of guys had good dribble-penetration and then they had good dishes. We played really good team offense.”

Up 36-18 at halftime, the Wingers (22-6) never took their foot off the accelerator as they led by as much as 28 points midway through the second half.

Donald Ells III led Winona (9-19) with 19 points, with 16 of those coming in the second half. Phillip Appicelli was the only other Winhawk in double digits with 15 points.

Unlike the last two years where Austin awaited Red Wing in the 1AAA finals, the Wingers will face off against second-seeded New Prague with a state berth on the line. Red Wing has already had success against the Trojans with a 66-62 win back on Dec. 20.

The section title game will take place at 6 p.m. Friday at the Mayo Civic Arena.

“We’re all pumped. I’ve played in the section finals the last two years and I’ve lost both years,” Buck said. “I’m coming out, me and (fellow captain) Ben Miller are going to come out next Friday with some fire under us, and hopefully the whole team will be with us. I’m sure they will.”

Coach Toivonen added, “Whoever wins this game (between New Prague and Kasson-Mantorville), they’re going to see a really good Red Wing basketball team next Friday. Our kids are going to be excited. It’s going to be a long week, but Friday’s going to come pretty quick and we’re going to be real excited. And hopefully, we can do something different that we haven’t done the last couple years.”