Just when you thought you had heard the worst there is about the projected cost of ObamaCare, here comes more bad news. A new report from InvestmentWatch today says people who enroll in MediCAL, California’s version of Medicaid, are being automatically enrolled in SNAP (Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program), or food stamps, based upon their level of ObamaCare qualification.

The report says that those who apply cannot opt out or decline to be enrolled in SNAP. It does not matter if they request the assistance or even feel they need it. And it's not just happening in California.

Alabama Republican Sen. Jeff Sessions’ Senate Budget Committee staff told the The Daily Caller earlier this month, "Many states use an online system to streamline the enrollment process for low-income assistance programs. After entering some information about your family structure and financial resources, these systems guide individuals through an application for a series of programs, Medicaid and [SNAP] included. Once people learn they are eligible for a program, they are more likely to enroll."

Employers around the country have been reporting other costly provisions contained in ObamaCare.

Zero Hedge published a letter from a reader yesterday describing the astronomical costs of President Obama’s healthcare law to both his company and its employees.

Here is an alarming excerpt from that letter:

“My company, based in California, employs 600. We used to insure about 250 of our employees. The rest opted out. The company paid 50% of their premiums for about $750,000/yr. Under [ObamaCare] none can opt out without penalty, and the rates are double or triple, depending upon the plan. Our 750k for 250 employees is going to $2 million per year for 600 employees. By mandate, we have to pay 91.5% of the premium or more up from the 50% we used to pay. Our employees’ share of the premium goes from $7/week for the cheapest plan to $30/week. 95% of my employees were on that plan. Remember, we used to pay 50% now we pay 91.5% and the premiums still go up that much!! The cheapest plan now has a deductible of $6350. Before it was $150. Employees making $9 to $10/hr, have to pay $30/wk and have a $6350 deductible.”

Reports like this are coming in from all over the nation, and they underscore the devastation ObamaCare is likely to cause to both employers and families economically.

The individual mandate provision in ObamaCare which compels Americans to purchase health insurance is also causing an explosion in the number of people signing up for Medicaid. Far more people are enrolling in Medicaid than are purchasing health insurance since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act on Oct. 1.

“When we first saw the numbers, everyone’s eyes kind of bugged out,” said Matt Salo, head of the National Association of Medicaid Directors, in an interview earlier this month with The Washington Post. “Of the people walking through the door, 90 percent are on Medicaid. We’re thinking, what planet is this happening on?”

In some jurisdictions, fully nine of 10 health care enrollees opt for Medicaid instead of purchasing their own healthcare plan, according to The Washington Post.

If those numbers are accurate, it would drive up the cost of ObamaCare to an unsustainable level. Tommy Thompson, who served as U.S. Health and Human Services secretary under George W. Bush, predicts that if ObamaCare is not repealed it will require a taxpayer bailout.

"It's actuarially unsound," the former RHHS Head said on CNBC's "Squawk Box" on Tuesday. "If you don't have the healthy young people involved, ObamaCare cannot function. It's going to require a huge infusion of tax dollars or huge cuts."

The more than becomes known about ObamCare, the clearer it becomes that the only solution is its complete repeal.