Cop that: Gennady Golovkin delivers a right hand to the face of Daniel Geale. Photo: Getty Images

New York: Daniel Geale's plan was to avoid Kazakh champion Gennady Golovkin's power shots, but it took just three rounds and two big right hands to end the Australian's dream.

Golovkin inflicted a cut above Geale's eye in the first round, dropped the Tasmanian in the second round with a right hand and in the third connected with another massive right that ended the fight.

Referee Mike Ortega stepped in to give Golovkin the technical knockout victory.

Triumphant: The champ, Gennady Golovkin, retains his belts. Photo: Getty Images

It was the Kazakh's 17th straight knockout victory.

Advertisement

"Daniel Geale is a champion and gave his best," Golovkin said.

Geale had big hopes in the biggest fight of his career at New York's fabled Madison Square Garden on Saturday, but Golovkin was too strong and remains the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Organisation middleweight champion.

Down goes Geale: The Australian challenger is knocked to the canvas in the third round. Photo: Getty Images

Golovkin was the short-priced favourite and lived up to the hype.

Despite several hundred vocal Australian supporters, the arena was dominated by Golovkin fans who booed Geale and roared for the Kazakh.

At the end of the fight Golovkin told his fans to show Geale respect.

There was a sprinkling of celebrities and sports stars ringside, including Socceroo Tim Cahill, real estate mogul and reality TV star Donald Trump, actress Rosie Perez and former sitcom star Tony Danza.

Cahill carried an Australian flag into the ring at the start of the bout for Geale.

The Geale bout begins a month of world title fights in the US for Australians with Melbourne's Blake Caparello challenging Sergey Kovalev for the WBO light heavyweight belt in Atlantic City on August 2.

A week later Queenslander Jarrod Fletcher seeks the vacant WBA middleweight belt against Daniel Jacobs in Brooklyn and Sakio Bika defends his WBC super middleweight title against Anthony Dirrell on August 16 in Los Angeles after they battled for a draw last December.

Golovkin's professional record moves to 30 wins (27 knockouts) Geale's record drops to 30 wins (KO 16) and three losses.

AAP