Casino union workers demonstrate outside the Trump Taj Mahal Casino Resort in Atlantic City on Oct. 24. The union is protesting the court-ordered termination of their health care and pension plan as part of an effort to transfer ownership of the casino to billionaire investor Carl Icahn. (Photo: Associated Press file )

Carl Icahn is not the savior Atlantic City so desperately needs.

The billionaire investor, who controls the Taj Mahal, has offered to rescue the struggling casino. He’s willing to invest $100 million — but only if owner Trump Entertainment Resorts can get $175 million in aid from New Jersey and Atlantic City and if the company can get out of paying into workers’ pensions and health insurance to the tune of $14.6 million a year.

The state said no. The city said no. And the workers said no. But while Senate President Stephen M. Sweeney and Mayor Don Guardian have held firm in refusing to throw good money after bad, the 2,953 people who keep the casino running have far less power. U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Kevin Gross ruled last month that Trump Entertainment could cancel its collective bargaining agreement with UNITE HERE Local 54, eliminating the company-sponsored pension and health plan.

Instead, workers will get a 401(k) and an extra $2,000 to buy insurance through Medicaid or the Affordable Care Act health exchanges. Generous, isn’t Icahn, to allow taxpayers to share the honor of subsidizing compensation for rank-and-file workers while scaling back the company’s investment in them?

If Icahn doesn’t mind shifting low-paid casino employees to taxpayer-funded health insurance, why stop there? Why not stop paying them entirely and give them the privilege of staffing the tables, maintaining slot machines, serving drinks and cleaning bathrooms in exchange for bragging rights? There’s a certain cachet in being able to say you work for one of the nation’s premier gaming holding companies, even if it has filed for bankruptcy four times and is down to its last casino. Who needs to be paid on top of that?

More seriously, though, what’s to stop other casinos from demanding the same tax breaks and concessions? Maybe Caesars Entertainment, which is pondering the future of Bally’s, Caesars and Harrah’s, will be next. Or maybe it’ll be Icahn Enterprises, which owns Tropicana. Once the precedent is set, it’s unlikely that other operators would let Trump Entertainment have the only advantage.

For a man who wants to be seen as a savior, Icahn has a funny way of trying to make friends and influence people. In an open letter to the members of Local 54, he cast himself as a perpetual underdog who is the casino’s only hope. As a tough kid who grew up in Queens and the victim of “slanderous nonsense” spewed by Sweeney and Local 54 President Bob McDevitt. As a man who is not afraid to stand up to low-paid workers in order to maximize shareholders’ profits.

Rather than present the concessions he seeks as an investment in a more prosperous company that will benefit workers and Atlantic City in the long run, Icahn uses threats and speculation to cow them into giving him what he wants. Unfortunately, his plan to turn workers against their union and government against government seems to be working.

On Monday, Taj Mahal employees begged Mayor Don Guardian to reconsider. Guardian declined, noting that the company had already received massive tax breaks before it stopped paying its taxes. Yet while he’s drawn the line at giving any more of his suffering city’s money to a foundering company, he’s still trying to get the state to step in with a solution.

Given what Atlantic City has been through this year — losing four of its 12 casinos and shedding some 8,000 employees — no one wants to be standing near the next domino when it falls.

But if superhuman efforts are required to save the Taj Mahal, it’s not worth it. Let it fail, and let Icahn move on to his next challenge. Odds are, casino workers will learn soon enough that a true savior won’t play games with their livelihoods.

Read or Share this story: http://on.cpsj.com/1qqnh9g