Michael Savage

“This is not your father’s Navy.”

After the horrific shooting at the Washington Navy Yards, Michael Savage denounced the changes that have made U.S. military bases so vulnerable to these kinds of incidents (Free audio).

“Who disarmed these workers?” Savage asked. “Who disarmed the military? There’s a lot of blame to go around.”

Savage also declared that the shooter “was basically committing a hate crime,” even though it will never be reported that way by the mainstream media (Free audio).

“If you look at his victims,” said Savage, “it’s strange that almost all of them were white. There was one Asian. Truthfully, my friends, none of them looked like the shooter.”

Rush Limbaugh

Limbaugh came to the defense of Sen. Ted Cruz this week, claiming his fellow Republicans are carrying out an “all-out assault” on Texas senator.

Rush noted that New York Times columnist David Brooks, “a supposed conservative,” had accused Cruz of threatening “the traditional Republican Party” (Free audio).

“What in the hell are they supposed to do, Mr. Brooks?” Limbaugh asked rhetorically. “This is what every one of you ought to be doing. Why do you call yourself a Republican if you all you want to do is lay down and agree with Obama and the Democrats? Why don’t you switch parties if it’s so much better over there.”

Aaron Klein

Bill De Blasio is now the frontrunner in the race to be the next mayor of New York City. Aaron Klein digs into De Blasio’s ties to ACORN and other radical groups and explains why his past could negatively impact the “Big Apple’s” future if he’s elected. Speaking of New York City, Klein presents the “real story” about the NYPD’s program of mosque surveillance.

Klein also explains how Russia and Iran are the two countries benefiting the most from the president’s dealings with Syria, and where the Syrians are now hiding their chemical weapons (Free audio).

Mark Levin

Levin forcefully challenged “phony pseudo-conservative” Republicans and their reluctant fight to defund Obamacare (Free audio).

After accusing the president of “raw, brazen tyranny,” Levin made sure he slammed the GOP for surrendering “from day one” rather than fighting the White House’s unconstitutional health-care reforms.

Levin had on guest Congressman Tom Graves of Georgia, who has sponsored a bill designed to delay or defund Obamacare. As it stands, Graves’ measures are winning increased support in the House (Free audio).

Levin also appeared on Glenn Beck’s show, to talk about his new bestselling book, “The Liberty Amendments,” and how it can serve as a blueprint for lasting reform (Free audio).

Laura Ingraham

Early reports on the Navy Yard massacre placed an AR-15 in the hands of the shooter. These reports later turned out to be false, but Charles C. W. Cooke of the National Review accuses the mainstream media of intentionally distorting such details.

“There’s literally no way or thing that would have changed what happened,” Cooke said when Ingraham asked him if gun-control laws might have prevented the crime.

Partisan reaction to these incidents reflect, he said, “the different ways in which the left and right see human nature. I see human nature as imperfectable, and trying to stop people with ill intent through the force of law is almost impossible.”

Ingraham also welcomed guest Rick Nelson, the former director of the CSIS Homeland Security and Counterterrorism Program. He talked about security (or the lack thereof) on America’s military bases.

He maintained: “If you have an individual determined to commit an act of violence, he/she will find a way – whether it’s a bomb, knife, or gun – to circumvent security procedures and commit that act. And it presents us with a very difficult challenge, one which we might never be able to fully eliminate” (Free audio).

Glenn Beck

The White House announced on Monday that it is waiving the Arms Export Control Act to allow “non-lethal assistance” to Syrian “rebels.” Glenn Beck calls this an impeachable act, and is calling for the impeachment of various members of Congress, not just the president.

“We know some of the arms are going to fall into the hands of al-Qaida,” Beck said. “And how do we know that? Because the president just had to waive the law saying that we are going to arm known terrorists. If that’s not an impeachable offense, for Lindsey Graham, for John McCain, for John Boehner, for the president of the United States, I don’t know what an impeachable offense is” (Free audio).