A Tulsa woman, Cindy Gasior, owner of Transitions Home Staging and a member of the Real Estate Staging Association® (RESA®), the trade association for professional real estate stagers and re-designers, was named one of the Top Ten Professional Stagers of the Year in the US.

Cindy will go on to compete for the overall title of RESA’s Top Professional Stager.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

Cindy Gasior founded Transitions Home Staging and has been a professional real estate stager since 2005, primarily serving the Tulsa and Bartlesville areas. In 2013, her work was named one of the RESA’s Top 10 Best Occupied Stagings - North America. Cindy’s work was also recognized in the Tulsa Parade of Homes winning Best Interior Decor ($500-$699K category) and Second Place Overall ($400-$500K category).

Last year, Cindy was hired to outfit the housing for the cast of the recently released movie August: Osage County. The cast members who lived in houses designed and furnished by Cindy included Meryl Streep, Julia Roberts, Chris Cooper, Ewan McGregor, Dermot Mulroney, Juliette Lewis, Margo Martindale, Julianne Nicholson and Abigail Breslin.

In support of our ever-growing industry, we are pleased to announce that the Real Estate Staging Association is recognizing leaders within the staging industry for their outstanding contributions and personal accomplishments.

“Being selected by RESA as one of the Top Ten Professional Stagers in the US is quite an honor. It is really a testament to my proactive Realtors and savvy sellers who recognize the value and return on their investment in professional home staging. We work as a team to create buyer-friendly spaces to sell houses for the best price in the shortest amount of time “ said Cindy Gasior.

“We would like to thank everyone for their participation in the awards process; without the support of our membership we would not be able to recognize so many well-deserving professionals in our industry. All of the finalists in all categories may be viewed at www.HomeStagingIndustryAwards. com . All of the winners will be announced at the annual Home Staging Industry Awards convention and banquet January 29, 2014, at the Treasure Island Hotel in Las Vegas,” said Shell Brodnax, President/CEO of the Real Estate Staging Association.

About The Real Estate Staging Association®

The Real Estate Staging Association ® (RESA®) is the trade association for professional real estate stagers and redesigners. For more information about real estate staging, or to find a professional stager or redesigner, call 800-201-8687 and speak with Shell Brodnax, or visit the RESA® Web site at www.RealEstateStagingAssociation. com