"Every once a while, a person will come along with all it takes to be really special."





BIRMINGHAM, Alabama -- The late Dr. Tinsley R. Harrison -- a seventh-generation physician born in Talladega in 1900 -- was an important if unsung figure in medicine in the 20th century.

Harrison served as the dean of three medical schools in the United States, including the School of Medicine at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB).

Under his leadership from 1950 to 1970, the program at UAB began to achieve national and even international distinction.

Fittingly, a campus building -- The Tinsley Harrison Research Tower -- and several medical school programs at UAB bear his name.

In addition, Harrison's book, "Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine," published in 1950, remains a best-selling internal medicine text in the United States and around the world, having been reprinted 16 times and translated into 14 languages, according to a Dec. 1 UAB news release.

It is not surprising then that Harrison's life is now the subject of a biography -- the first written about him.

"Tinsley Harrison, M.D." (NewSouth Books, hardcover $45) chronicles Harrison's life and career and tells the story of medicine in the 20th century as it grew from its often primitive roots into a modern, high-tech profession.

The book's author, the late Dr. James Pittman Jr., was a friend, colleague and one-time chief resident under Harrison, studying with the great man in the 1950s and 1960s.

The book, which was released Dec. 1, brings together six years of Pittman's taped interviews with Harrison, leading up to his death in August 1978. It also includes interviews with Harrison's friends, colleagues and family members.

Pittman, who received a medical degree from Harvard University, led a storied medical career of his own, becoming dean of the UAB School of Medicine in 1973 and serving 19 years in the position.

And the effort to write, edit and finally publish the biography at NewSouth Books, located in Montgomery, is an epic story.

Pittman worked on the biography for more than three decades, finally turning in a 1,000-page manuscript to the publisher in about 2006, just before his health began to decline. Eventually he became unable to assist with editing and died in January of this year.

A team of doctors who worked with Pittman and Harrison over the years were enlisted as proofreaders and fact-checkers. Spearheading this process was Dr. Joseph LaRussa, an allergist-immunologist in Birmingham who is affiliated with UAB Hospital and Children's of Alabama.

LaRussa, who attended medical school at UAB and has been in practice for about 15 years, was perhaps the perfect person to lead the effort.

"As a fourth-year med student, I was in the Tinsley Harrison Society, and Dean Pittman was my mentor when I gave a presentation," said LaRussa, who also accompanied Pittman many times when he made rounds, in a telephone interview on Wednesday.

LaRussa -- who said he visited Pittman often in recent years -- had heard about the biography from Pittman and some of his colleagues.

He also heard many tales about Harrison from veteran UAB doctors like Charles A. "Scotty" McCallum (who also served as UAB president from 1987-1993) and Wayne Finley. "I would spend hours with them, and they would tell me Tinsley Harrison stories that were wonderful," LaRussa said.

LaRussa said he could not get his mentor's unfinished biography of Harrison out of his mind. "When Dean Pittman passed away, the whole thing started bugging me a little bit," he said.

In February, not long after Pittman's death, LaRussa decided to step in and try to help finish the book. "I rolled the dice and called the publishing company," he said. "I was not sure what I had gotten myself into."

Along with the editors at NewSouth, LaRussa began cleaning up the now 600-page manuscript -- which he had been warned would take a lot of work -- and helped track down pictures of Harrison in the UAB archives for use in the book.

He said that he was helped tremendously in fact-checking the book by Harrison's son, John B. Harrison, who at the age of 80 is still practicing oral surgery in Huntsville, and Dr. Dick Briggs, a veteran pulmonary specialist at UAB who knew Harrison well.

Editing the book, which took about 10 months, was worth all the effort, according to LaRussa. "I probably will never do something like that again, but really, bottom-line, it became a tribute and a way to honor Dr. Pittman, Tinsley Harrison and their relationship and one way for my generation to give back to their generation," LaRussa said. "We call them the medical veterans."

As he worked to make UAB a world-class medical facility, Harrison was able to recruit nationally known physicians from the faculties of such institutions as Harvard University and the Mayo Clinic.

LaRussa said he is not surprised that Harrison -- who grew up visiting patients with his father, a country doctor, on a horse-drawn buggy -- was able to draw people to come to UAB and work with and for him.

"He had such a strong medicine background -- not just the knowledge but how to care for people, how to ask questions, how to talk to people," LaRussa said.

And Harrison -- who started college when he was 16 and finished medical school at 22 -- was "really smart," LaRussa said.

"Every once a while, a person will come along with all it takes to be really special," LaRussa said. "When you have some who is confident, who is smart, who loves teaching, who cares about people -- what a wonderful representative to have, in the 1950s when UAB was just getting going. There was no better person to pull in folks."

The book can give the reader a "true appreciation" of the remarkable strides made over the last few decades by UAB -- a relatively young medical school -- LaRussa said.

Reading Pittman's biography of Harrison is inspiring, according to LaRussa, at least in part because it reminds the reader that the practice of medicine -- so often embroiled in recent years in controversies such as that surrounding the federal Affordable Care Act -- has a higher purpose that young doctors should keep in mind.

"When you finish Dr. Pittman's book, you feel that the art of medicine needs to move back to the top of the ladder instead of the politics of medicine," LaRussa said. "I think it is maybe our responsibility to preserve the art of medicine as they practiced it and pass it along to the next generation."

Both Harrison and Pittman deserve to be remembered as great mentors of new generations of physicians, according to LaRussa.

After all, a beginning medical student -- even with an undergraduate college degree to his or her credit -- is still just "one big blob of clay" and in need of years of additional training, LaRussa said.

"There are people who are there to gently get you along the way you need to be," LaRussa said. "Dean Pittman, like Dr. Harrison, was just really gifted in his ability to teach. They were both teachers of medicine."

For more information about the biography, go to www.newsouthbooks.com.