President Obama appears to have remained overnight in Miami – incurring extra costs for taxpayers – just to play golf in the Florida sunshine.

Obama headed out this morning to the exquisite Grande Oaks Golf Club in Fort Lauderdale, a trip that required a half hour motorcade from his hotel his Miami. And it will be well worth the trip, at least for him. According to the course website:

Grande Oaks Golf Club is a private club located in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Home of the movie “Caddyshack,” Grande Oaks offers members an exclusive atmosphere with some of south Florida’s foremost socialites. The Raymond Floyd re-designed 18-hole championship course, 40-acre practice facility and southern plantation style clubhouse provides sanctuary, serenity and the utmost in service.

Nice. Obama is undoubtedly paying his own green fees, but taxpayers must foot the bill for the huge presidential entourage that remained overnight in Miami instead of returning the Washington Friday.

Obama finished up his fundraising duties in Miami Friday night at 8:20 pm ET. Normally he would then jet back to the White House for a late evening arrival. But instead, he headed to a hotel.

There are no official events on his schedule today, golf seemingly his primary duty. He’ll depart Miami for Washington at 3:25 pm.

This marks the 150th time Obama has played golf as president, and the 39th time this year.

Playing with Obama today are basketball great Alonzo Mourning, former U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk and Cyrus Walker, who is a cousin of Obama advisor Valerie Jarrett.

With the burden of reelection behind him – and no further need for the self-proclaimed warrior for the middle class to keep up appearances – Obama’s 39 outings to the links this year is easily an annual record, eclipsing the mark of 34 he set in 2011. He’ll no doubt pad the total should balmy weather occur in Washington this month and when he heads to Hawaii in December for his annual Christmas vacation.

Last year, with an election to be won, Obama only played 19 times. He golfed 28 times in 2009 and 30 in 2010.