Photo by Matthew Lloyd/Getty Images

The campaign against the Affordable Care Act's "risk corridors" has gained traction since I wrote about it in November. At that time, Marco Rubio's bill to kill the funds intended to help insurers make up the costs of riskier consumers was obviously a lark, seen—like an unfair number of Rubio ideas are seen—as a hey-look-over-there distraction from the immigration battle. It was designed to undermine Obamacare, as Cato's Michael Cannon explained.

"It shifts part of the cost back to insurance carriers, by preventing the government from shifting that cost from Carrier A to Carrier B," Cannon said. "This will make Carrier A unhappy, perhaps to the point where it will no longer participate in the Exchanges, and maybe even to the point where it will join the chorus demanding that Congress reopen the law."

Advertisement



That's the idea—and as Sahil Kapur reports, it has finally caught on with the broader right. The key is Rubio's description of the corridors as an "Obamacare bailout." The "bailout" framing was nuclear-strength in 2008 and 2010 (remember Sen. Bob Bennett? No? This is why), and no one can say how long the half-life runs. And "Obamacare"? Almost as unpopular! Linking the two is like casting Ryan Gosling and Channing Tatum in the same movie, and watching the tweens line up.

So, we have columns like Charles Krauthammer's "Stop the Bailout - Now," which uses the b-word 13 more times. "Who can argue with no bailout?" he writes. "Let the Senate Democrats decide: Support the bailout and lose the Senate. Or oppose the bailout and bury Obamacare." Bailout. Bailout. Bailout. Bailout. We have Ramesh Ponnuru, who joins Cannon and Krauthammer in describing the possible victory in Bond villain-esque terms:

Insurers are already screaming about Rubio’s proposal, desperate to keep Obamacare’s subsidies even as they ask for relief from its regulations. If Rubio’s bill or something like it passes, they would have to raise premiums and thus make their plans even more unattractive than they already are -- or just withdraw from the exchanges. Obamacare would, in other words, become even less likely to succeed than it already is.