Oakwood Hospital - Southshore is at 5450 Fort St., Trenton.

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services are penalizing two local hospitals for high rates of potentially avoidable mistakes known as hospital-acquired conditions.



Oakwood Hospital - Dearborn and Oakwood Hospital - Southshore will both have their Medicare payments reduced by 1 percent over the 2015 fiscal year. In total, more than 700 hospitals across the country were penalized.



Hospital-acquired conditions are defined by Medicare three ways: central-line associated bloodstream infections, catheter-associated urinary tract infections and a patient safety indicators score.



Scores were derived from hospital-acquired conditions data gathered July 2011 through June 30, 2013. Based on a scale of 1 to 10, the higher scores indicated worse performance. Any hospital with a total score above 7, which indicates it is in the 75th-worst performing percentile, was penalized.

Oakwood Hospital - Dearborn received a total score of 8.325. The hospital scored 8 on central-line associated bloodstream infections; 9 on catheter-associated urinary tract infections; and 8 on patient-safety indicators.



Oakwood Hospital - Southshore received a total score of 9.325. The hospital received an 9 for central-line associated bloodstream infections; 10 on catheter-associated urinary tract infections; and 9 for its patient-safety indicators.



By contrast, Oakwood Hospital - Taylor had a 5.25 total score. It received an 8 for central-line associated bloodstream infections; a 6 for catheter-associated urinary tract infections; and a 2 on patient-safety indicators.



“Our efforts to combat Hospital Acquired Infection have yielded phenomenal results over the years; however, the healthcare industry still has some work to do,” said Sara Atwell, Oakwood Healthcare’s chief quality and patient safety officer. “Our goal is to detect and then protect. While Oakwood has a well-documented history of exemplary performance in keeping patients from potential infection, our focus now is to build on our strong reputation by using new and innovative methods to address the root causes of Hospital Acquired Infections.



Atwell said Oakwood strives to provide continuous quality improvements across a variety of specialty areas and programs to improve the health outcomes of the patient populations we serve, but it’s also critical that we remain focused and committed to protocols such as hand hygiene and other infection prevention systems to protect our patients and shield them from the bacteria that causes hospital-acquired infections.



“We look forward to continuing to further improve outcomes and quality of care while reducing costs,” she added. Continued...