Rams: disappointing end doesn't define record-setting season

Daniel Bejarano (2) and Joe De Ciman (10) helpd the Rams win a program-record 27 games this season, but that wasn't enough to earn an at-large bid to the NCAA Tournament. (Isaac Brekken /AP)

FORT COLLINS — All seasons have their ups and downs. But the peaks the Colorado State men's basketball team reached in 2014-15 were so high, it made the valleys seem that much lower.

The first two months could not have gone much better. Despite a transfer-laden rotation that included more newcomers than returners, the Rams came together seamlessly and began the season on a program-record 14-game win streak, including a victory at rival Colorado for just the second time since 1979.

As one of the last unbeaten teams left in the country, the Rams garnered national recognition and became just the third squad in program history to be ranked in the AP Top 25.

The record setting continued into conference play when on Jan. 14 the Rams blew out visiting Nevada by 56 points, setting a mark for the largest margin of victory in a Mountain West conference game — despite leading-scorer J.J. Avila watching from the stands serving a one-game suspension.

There were some bumps along the way, getting swept by Wyoming, losing by 13 at New Mexico and blowing 12-point lead at Boise State, a game that as it turns out, would've given the Rams a share of the conference title had they hung on.

But for the most part the good times continued through February and into March. CSU finished the regular season on a six-game win streak, including road wins at Fresno State and Utah State, a rare feat for CSU considering those teams finished in the top half of the conference standings.

Advertisement

Then in the quarterfinals of the conference tournament, the Rams set another program record, this time for wins in a single season with 27, beating the mark set by the 2012-13 CSU squad.

Those are the moments — and everything that went into making them possible — that the team says it will remember when it reflects back on the 2014-15 campaign.

"It is not about the last game; it's about the last nine months. All the hard work this summer, the memories and stuff like that," said senior guard Daniel Bejarano, who ends his CSU career after being part of the most successful three-year run in program history. "Great year, 27-7 is not bad. Throughout the last nine months, that's how we are going to remember this season."

Rough ending

About that last game, though. Wednesday's home loss to South Dakota State in the first round of the NIT capped a most disappointing final week of what was an otherwise terrific season.

CSU may have rewritten the program's record books in the MW tournament quarterfinals, but the fate of the season may have also turned for the worse that night when Avila suffered a sprained ankle, the start of a tumultuous seven days for the team.

J.J. Avila, center, was sat out of Colorado State's Mountain West tournament semifinal loss to San Diego State in order to rest for what the Rams thought would be an appearance in the NCAA Tournament. (Isaac Brekken / AP)

Avila was sat out as a precaution the next night, a loss to San Diego State, a game that could've changed the course of the entire season. The Rams already had two RPI top 50 wins on their postseason resume, but they surely could've used a third.

Because despite the assurances of the players, coach Larry Eustachy and being ranked 29th in the RPI, the Rams were blindsided by the NCAA selection committee a couple days later when CSU was left out of the NCAA Tournament.

All the well-known "bracketologists" around the country projected the Rams safely in the field of 68, but they weren't even the first team out, passed over because of an inadequate non-conference schedule, a down year in the Mountain West and Wyoming's run to the MW tournament title.

In the days after Selection Sunday, the Rams said they had moved on from the shock and disappointment from falling short of their No. 1 goal all season. But three nights later, they were unable to bounce back as their season came to a sudden and unsatisfying end in a flurry of 3-pointers by the Summit League champion Jackrabbits of South Dakota State.

Some might say the Rams' first-round NIT exit proved the committee made the right decision. After all, the other top three seeds in the NIT — which along with CSU, comprised the first four teams left out the NCAA Tournament — each found a way to move on and win their first round games.

Eustachy, though, didn't see it that way.

"This is what's misleading is that now they can look back and say that we shouldn't have been in the tournament," he said following the NIT loss. "But it's like racing a tired horse. (San Diego State coach) Steve Fisher said that if (his team) had taken care of Wyoming (in the MW tournament final), there was a lot of different scenarios and they just weren't going to take four (teams from the Mountain West in the NCAA Tournament). We came so close.

"As I sum this season up, we were so close, just no cigar."

Looking forward

In seniors Bejarano, Avila and Stanton Kidd, who each received at least some sort of all-conference recognition, the Rams will have plenty to replace for next season. Along with being the team's unquestioned leaders, the trio were the team's top three scorers and rebounders, accounting for more than half of CSU's production in those categories this season.

But after that, the Rams do project to return the next five players in terms of average minutes per game.

It's a guard-heavy group of seniors-to-be that includes Joe De Ciman, who along with Kidd was the only Ram to start all 34 games this season; John Gillon, the conference's sixth man of the year; and Gian Clavell, the leading returning scorer.

Tiel Daniels, who shot a team-best 62.9 percent from the floor and averaged 5.7 points and 4.8 rebounds, is the lone returning frontcourt player, while the 6-foot-7 Fred Richardson III should also be more involved after playing just 11.6 minutes per game after missing the first 10 because of suspension.

Sophomore guard Carlton Hurst played in 31 games and started once, but he averaged just 1.8 points and 1.5 rebounds in fewer than 10 minutes a game. Senior Antwan Scott was originally supposed to be the team's starting point guard, but the transfer from Grambling State missed all but the first four games because of a foot injury. Eustachy said back in January that Scott will petition for medical hardship waiver this summer with hopes of returning for next season.

Freshmen Jeremiah Paige and Toby Van Ry redshirted this season. Paige, a 6-foot-3 guard, should be in the mix next season, while Van Ry might be more of a long-term project.

The team also signed four players to a National Letter of Intent during the early signing period in November, high school seniors Nico Carvacho, Prentiss Nixon and Anthony Bonner along with junior college big man Emmanuel Omogbo.

Omogbo, who has helped lead South Plains College to the NJCAA national title game, should provide an immediate and needed impact in the paint next fall after being named his conference's MVP this season. Nixon, Bonner and Carvacho, however, are unlikely to play major roles right away under Eustachy, who rarely uses true freshmen in his rotations.

The team also has one more scholarship spot to fill, which will likely go to a transfer big man who is eligible to play right away.

Sean Star: 970-669-5050, sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/seanvstar