Senators press for NAFTA auto rules in TPP — Vietnam ready for labor reforms — WH sees TPP deal in next several weeks

With help from Doug Palmer

SENATORS PRESS FOR NAFTA AUTO RULES IN TPP: Three senators from the auto producing states of Ohio and Michigan have urged U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman to insist that the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement contain “rules of origin” for autos that are at least as strong as in the 20-year-old North American Free Trade Agreement.

Story Continued Below

“The NAFTA rules of origin should be the starting point for the TPP agreement,” Sens. Sherrod Brown, Rob Portman and Debbie Stabenow said in a letter on Wednesday. “Undermining the NAFTA rules of origin would displace the U.S. auto supply chain and result in the loss of jobs throughout the country.”

The demand came as the United States is hosting Japan, Canada and Mexico for talks on the auto rules, which determine how much of an auto has to come from parts made within the TPP region to qualify for duty-free treatment under the pact. Efforts to wrap up the TPP deal in Maui in late July faltered partly because Canada and Mexico objected to a rules-of-origin deal reached by the United States and Japan that was more liberal than NAFTA. To read the full letter, click here: http://politico.pro/1XMQcaC .

IT’S THURSDAY, SEPT. 10! Welcome to Morning Trade, where we're looking forward to the Christmas Day premiere of The Revenant, a film adaptation of Deputy USTR Michael Punke's book. If the Doha round falls apart, at least he'll have that to look forward to over the holiday.

Any trade news we should be looking into? Let me know at vguida@politico.com or @vtg2.

VIETNAM READY TO MAKE TPP LABOR REFORMS: Vietnam is ready to allow workers greater freedom to organize independent labor unions for the first time in the communist country in order to ease its membership in TPP, Pro Trade’s Adam Behsudi reports. But don't expect U.S. labor groups to endorse the move.

Hanoi has expressed a willingness to allow workers to form unions at specific workplaces independent of the state-run Vietnam General Confederation of Labor, sources tell POLITICO. The development promises to help settle one of at least a half-dozen major obstacles to wrapping up the 12-nation Asia-Pacific trade deal in the coming weeks: getting both Vietnam and Mexico to comply with the trade agreement's labor rules.

There's one wrinkle, however, that U.S. labor leaders still find unacceptable. The workplace-specific unions would have to register with the state union confederation and would be restricted from organizing industry-wide.

Until Vietnam allows fully independent unions, Owen Herrnstadt, chief of staff at the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, said the country isn't meeting the principles of freedom of association laid out by the International Labor Organization. Click here to read the full story: http://politico.pro/1UC6WlK .

WHITE HOUSE AIDE SEES TPP DEAL 'IN NEXT SEVERAL WEEKS': An update on timing: A White House official on Wednesday said she could see the United States completing TPP negotiations "in the next several weeks."

"The negotiators have gotten very close to the end," said Caroline Atkinson, deputy national security adviser for international economics, during a discussion at The Brookings Institution. "We are committed to completing the negotiations. We expect that will happen in the next several weeks."

The White House has an incentive to close the TPP deal as quickly as possible to spare Democrats from making a difficult vote in the midst of next year’s presidential and congressional election campaigns. However, the debate over TPP already looks increasingly like it will take place in early 2016 because of the requirement that President Barack Obama give 90 days' notice before signing any trade agreement.

AUSTRALIAN ENVOY: TPP CAN WAIT UNTIL AFTER APEC: But not everyone at the Brookings meeting feels the need to rush the TPP talks. "We've got time," said Australian Ambassador Kim Beazley, noting how there is no chance that the U.S. Congress will vote on it this year. "We've got time to arrive at a reasonable conclusion on this."

Beazley suggested the 12 TPP countries could possibly wait until November, when leaders and trade ministers will be in the Philippines for the annual Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit. It would probably be hard to hold a ministerial during the APEC meeting, but one could happen before or after the event, he sa

Both Beazley and Atkinson agreed it was important that the next ministerial be the last one.

A spokesman for United States Trade Representative Michael Froman was noncommittal about when TPP ministers would meet again. "We are in the final stage of TPP negotiations, but the substance of negotiations will continue to drive the timeline. No date has been set for the next ministerial,” Matt McAlvanah said.

WHITE HOUSE AIDE PRODS CONGRESS ON CUSTOMS BILL: Also at the Brookings talk, Atkinson urged Congress to quickly wrap up work on a customs and enforcement bill she described as ripe for the picking. “We hope that Congress will move it forward very soon,” she said.

The bill to modernize the trade mission of Customs and Border Protection is a big piece of unfinished business left over from this summer’s debate on trade promotion authority. The House and Senate passed largely similar bills, but with some significant differences on various policy items.

One major sticking point involves House Republican concerns that have blocked renewal of another piece of legislation known as the Miscellaneous Tariff Bill, a source close to the negotiations said. The Senate package included a new process for deciding which products are eligible for temporary duty waivers under that legislation, which has been stuck in recent years by the House Republican ban on “earmarks.”

Another tricky issue involves a House provision that bars the White House from making commitments in trade agreements to combat global warming or climate change that require changes in U.S. law. Many Democrats strongly oppose that measure, requiring creative wordsmithing to find language both sides can accept.

FROMAN BRIEFS AG LAWMAKERS: Meanwhile on the Hill, Froman briefed members of the House Agriculture Committee on the controversial TPP issues of rice, dairy and sugar on Wednesday.

The U.S. is seeking access to Japan's rice and dairy and Canada's dairy markets, while Australia is trying to ship more sugar and New Zealand more dairy to the U.S.

“While I applaud USTR for their work, I am concerned about a lack of progress on market access for dairy and rice along with last-minute calls for additional sugar imports that could undermine U.S. sugar policy," Committee Chairman Michael Conaway said in a statement. "I remain hopeful that Ambassador Froman and his team will be able to resolve these issues and bring TPP to a successful conclusion.”

MULVANEY: DON’T CONFERENCE ON ME: Export-Import Bank supporters are running out of options for reviving the expired agency and are pinning their hopes in part on a long-term highway bill. But Rep. Mick Mulvaney, a Freedom Caucus member who opposes Ex-Im, said if the House passes a long-term highway bill and conferences it with the Senate-passed version that contains renewal for the export credit agency, that won’t fly.

“Going to conference on the Ex-Im would violate a promise that our leadership made,” he said at a press conference with fellow conservatives. “We were going to have the opportunity to bring amendments on the floor, so if they allow it to go straight to conference, we lose that ability, and that would violate that promise.”

Meanwhile, Rep. Jim Jordan said the highway bill is likely to be the battleground for Ex-Im. “The Ex-Im is dead,” he told POLITICO following the press conference. “Is it going to be resurrected in the highway bill or not? That to me is the thing.”

The Ohio Republican said the export credit agency has not come up in the context of spending legislation. "The whole CR is about, frankly, the Planned Parenthood question, and maybe potentially the Iran question," he said, adding that it was his understanding that Ex-Im's remaining funds would wind down naturally.

But he said during the press conference that Ex-Im opponents “grow more confident with each passing day” that the agency isn't renewed.

OBAMA, XI TO TALK CURRENCY, BIT: When President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping meet in Washington later this month, they will discuss a range of economic issues, including currency and progress on a bilateral investment treaty, Atkinson said.

Atkinson indicated the two leaders were likely to discuss China's decision in early August to devalue its yuan. “I think for the leaders, the understanding that it's important to avoid competitive devaluation [will be an important issue],” she said. “A stable and prosperous China is in the U.S. interest. It's also in China's interest to promote a stable and balanced and prosperous global economy.”

URUGUAY, PARAGUAY SAY SEE YA TO TISA: U.S. trade officials on Wednesday acknowledged Uruguay and Paraguay's decision to drop out of talks on the proposed Trade in International Services Agreement.

"TISA is an ambitious undertaking and we have always known that not everyone would make it over the finish line," Trevor Kincaid, a USTR spokesman, said in an email. "We greatly appreciate that Uruguay and Paraguay took the initiative to participate and we respect their decision."

The Buenos Aires Herald, one of several publications to report Uruguay's decision to withdraw from the negotiations, quoted the country's tourism minister Tuesday as saying President Tabaré Vàzquez made the move in deference to domestic opposition. There was no immediate word on Paraguay's reason for dropping out.

Uruguay joined the TISA negotiations in 2014, more than a year after the talks were formally launched in March 2013. The United States, the European Union and about 22 other countries are participating.

INTERNATIONAL OVERNIGHT

U.S. Ambassador to Australia John Berry said the administration is confident they can sign TPP before the end of the year, The Australian reports: http://bit.ly/1Lli24k.

Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Mozambique and Madagascar have agreed to work together to fight illegal timber trade, Reuters reports: http://bit.ly/1KbneLD.

THAT'S ALL FOR MORNING TRADE! See you again soon! In the meantime, drop the team a line: abehsudi@politico.com and @ABehsudi; vguida@politico.com and @vtg2; dpalmer@politico.com and @tradereporter; mkorade@politico.com and @mjkorade; and jhuffman@politico.com and @JsonHuffman . You can also follow @POLITICOPro.

** A message from The National Pork Producers Council: The Trans-Pacific Partnership, whose 12 countries account for nearly 40 percent of global GDP, is a high-standard, 21st century free trade agreement that eliminates barriers to trade. TPP will promote economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region, expanding demand for U.S. food and agricultural products among nearly half a billion consumers. The TPP also will strengthen trade rules and provide specific new market access commitments for U.S. exports.

Without the TPP Agreement, U.S. exports to Pacific Rim countries will be at a serious competitive disadvantage, and competitor countries – including other TPP nations and those such as the European Union that are negotiating free trade agreements with countries in the region – will leap at the opportunity to fill the void if the United States rejects the deal.

The United States needs to implement the TPP Agreement, which will significantly boost U.S. exports and create hundreds of thousands of U.S. jobs. http://bit.ly/1U51u4F **