Ready to race: Perpetual Loyal skipper Anthony Bell. Photo: Anthony Johnson

So strong is Anthony Bell's resolve to try to win a second Sydney to Hobart line hours title ahead of defending champion Wild Oats XI, he is willing to push his Perpetual Loyal yacht as hard as he can on the first night of the race.

Bell, whose former boat Investec Loyal beat Wild Oats XI for line honours in 2011, believes he can gain the early ascendancy in the 628-nautical mile race that starts on Friday if the forecast of a southerly later that day with winds speeds of 25 to 30 knots holds up.

Bell also said he would rather sail Perpetual Loyal as hard as he can in the southerly to try to gain a lead over the Mark Richards skippered Wild Oats XI, Comanche (Ken Read), Rio 100 (Manouch Moshayedi) and Ragamuffin 100 (Syd Fischer) than cautiously to secure a podium finish.

Asked if that was a gamble he was willing to take, Bell told Fairfax Media: "One hundred per cent. I'd rather come 11th than come second or third."

Advertisement

Bell, who first sailed Perpetual Loyal to a second-placed finish behind Wild Oats XI last year after having purchased her as the Speedboat christened Rambler, said: "We might go out and try and find some seaway. We're pretty tough and good in that stuff. We have had the boat tested and knocked around.

"We won't be doing anything stupid, but we will probably be more courageous than what some of the newer boats might be."

Bell, entering his sixth Sydney to Hobart, said it was agreed at a crew leadership meeting earlier this week that it was worth taking a positive risk approach in a race that forecast varying conditions that should provide all boats with opportunities to gain distance.

The meeting was led by two key members of Perpetual Loyal's racing brains trust - tactician Michael Coxon who was a scratching last year due to illness, and navigator Tom Addis who has joined the celebrity-laden crew from Wild Oats XI.

"We put together a playbook," Bell said. "It felt really good, the certainty around what we are going to sail like and what the conditions are like and how we are going to cope with that. But for me it was less of the unknown and more of the known …"

Bell, who says "our terrifying stuff is the light transitions," sees one of two scenarios for Perpetual Loyal by the time the southerly is passed.

He said his boat would either: "Stay in contact with Wild Oats XI through the light [conditions] … Or, if we can take some gambles and maybe get in front, then we will be defending our position knowing they will get up on us and try to get the next transition and take off again.

"We understand where our boat speeds are. We don't think we are too far from them. Navigation is going to be a major and chancing arms is going to be a big part of it."

However, Bell believes it is not imperative that Perpetual Loyal are ahead of Wild Oats XI or the other maxis after the southerly if Perpetual Loyal is to have any chance of winning a second line honours title.

"Not to win the race. We have two good shots at this," Bell said.

"If we can be in the lead after the southerly that would be awesome, but if we can't be, we get a reaching shot again in the next transition … Saturday morning for us."

Richards was unconcerned by Bell's plan to attack the race early on night one. He said the 10 year-old Bob Oatley-owned Wild Oats XI was suited to all conditions and was ready to make the best of all that comes their way.

"We are not in that position," Richards said. "Wild Oats is a great all-round boat. The forecast suits us pretty well. The first night is going to be tough.

"We will push the boat as hard as we know we can, but if we have to back off we will. It's all about being there on Saturday morning to continue the next phase of the race.

"Wild Oats is an amazing boat in rough weather - she is narrow, has very fine entry and doesn't slam off big waves like others do. We have a pretty big advantage there."