Stock art. (Photo: iStockphoto)

ALBANY State and federal authorities have ordered one of the largest health insurers on New York's public marketplace to shut down, warning the co-op was heading toward financial insolvency.

Health Republic Insurance of New York will have to close down its operations by the end of the year, leaving at least 150,000 customers — including about 83,000 individuals who enrolled through the state this year — to find new insurance policies for next year.

Since the New York State of Health exchange launched as part of the federal Affordable Care Act in late 2013, about one in five individuals and one in three small businesses that enrolled in private insurance through the marketplace had opted for a Health Republic plan.

Those plans will now be honored through the end of the calendar year, with enrollees able to opt for a new insurer next year once the marketplace's open-enrollment period begins Nov. 1.

The shutdown was jointly announced Friday by the state Department of Financial Services, state Department of Health and federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, who pointed to Health Republic's swiftly declining financial health.

"Given Health Republic's financial situation, commencing an orderly wind down process before the upcoming open enrollment period is the best course of action to protect consumers," Anthony Albanese, the state's acting superintendent of financial services, said in a statement. "Moving forward, we will work closely with New York State of Health and federal regulators to help ensure continuity of coverage for Health Republic's customers."

About 2.1 million customers have enrolled in health insurance through the state's exchange. Of those, more than 1.7 million enrolled in public plans, like Medicaid, according to New York State of Health's annual report.

Of the 415,352 who joined private insurance plans, about 83,000 enrolled with Health Republic. On its website, the Manhattan-based company boasts at least 145,000 total customers when including those who enrolled outside of the state's marketplace.

Health Republic's enrollees are spread across much of the state.

In the mid-Hudson Valley, 2,708 of the 6,428 Dutchess County residents who enrolled in private insurance through the state's marketplace opted for a Health Republican plan this year, or 42 percent, according to exchange's annual report.

In Ulster County, it was 2,839 of 4,939 individual enrollees in private coverage, about 57 percent.

Further south, Health Republic was the top private insurer of Westchester County residents through the marketplace this year, with 28 percent — 6,554 of 23,236 total individuals — choosing the co-op. In Rockland County, it was 1,413 of 7,443, while in Putnam County it was 1,806 of 2,574.

Out west, 3,632 Monroe County residents enrolled in individual Health Republic plans through the state this year, about 29 percent of the 12,737 who opted for private plans through the exchange.

In all, 16 private insurers participated in the state-run marketplace this year, with the open-enrollment period for 2016 to begin Nov. 1 of this year. Health Republic was not available in much of the Southern Tier.

Kevin Counihan, director and marketplace CEO at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said it was a "likelihood" that Health Republic would have soon become "financially insolvent."

In a statement, Counihan said the state and federal agencies "agreed that it was in the best interest of (Health Republic) policyholders and the overall health of the New York Marketplace to wind down operations of (Health Republic) at the end of 2015 and allow consumers to smoothly transition to a new plan."

JCAMPBELL1@gannett.com

Twitter.com/JonCampbellGAN

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1KBiHkG