Topics: AlterNet, aol_on, criminal justice reform, Koch Brothers, Elections News, Social News, Media News, Business News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

As the GOP-controlled Congress drafts a major criminal justice reform package to unshackle millions of poor and people of color from a predatory legal system, House Republicans are ensuring that corporate America also will get what it wants: tougher legal hurdles for prosecutors to go after white-collar crimes.

An early draft of one bill in the House Judiciary Committee’s package of reforms would raise the legal threshold needed to prove a person committed a white-collar offense. In most instances today, a person cannot claim he didn’t know what he was doing was illegal. But the House’s proposal would require government to “prove that the defendant knew, or had reason to believe, the conduct was unlawful.”

“The House language violates the basic precept that ‘ignorance of the law is no defense,’” Robert Weissman, the president of Public Citizen, told the Huffington Post. “There is absolutely no reason for the otherwise laudable criminal justice reform bill to contain any measure to weaken already feeble standards for corporate criminal prosecution.”

Actually, in the ways Washington works, there is every reason to expect that the GOP would include pro-corporate fine print in the reform package. This is legislation both parties want passed before the 2016 elections. Meanwhile, right-wing think tanks funded by corporate titans such as the anti-regulation Koch brothers have been doing what they’re paid to do—issuing papers urging Congress to toughen the requirements to get a white-collar conviction.

They argue, much like the civil rights community, that prosecutors have too much power and too readily abuse it. However, a key distinction between the racial justice agenda and the corporate agenda is that civil rights activists are primarily focused on police and prosecutorial abuses of the criminal justice codes, whereas the corporate community is primarily focused on government regulations of industry. They are shrewdly saying that people who make mistakes should be punished, but by fines or other penalities—not criminal convictions that last a lifetime.

“Some people or entities intentionally pollute our air and water or intentionally engage in other conduct knowing it will cause harm, in which case criminal prosecution may be entirely appropriate,” John Malcolm, Heritage Foundation’s judicial and legal studies director, wrote this fall. “However, if somebody or some entity unwittingly does something that results in harm, say, to the environment or to another person, there is no reason why it cannot be dealt with (even harshly) through the administrative or civil justice systems. This would help to remedy the problem and compensate victims without saddling morally blameless individuals and entities for life with a criminal conviction.”

Malcolm’s paper and argument reviews a range of varying standards of proof that would be required for a conviction. They range from the toughest on perpetrators to the loosest, starting with a person could be accused of “negligently” commiting a crime. The spectrum continues with “recklessly,” “knowingly,” “intentionally,” and finally, “willfully.”