Seven of 34 guns found by TSA agents this week. Almost every one of which the owner "forgot" was in their possession.

Seven of 34 guns found by TSA agents this week. Almost every one of which the owner "forgot" was in their possession.

Another week so rich in tales, you'd think I was making it up. Which is why I link to everything. This week in Georgia, a woman involved in a domestic dispute threw a rifle out the window (perhaps to prevent anyone from being shot in the dispute), only to have it discharge and wound two 17-year-old women shopping in a nearby store. Elsewhere in Georgia, a sheriff's deputy responding to a fire was shot when the heat set off a loaded gun stored in the home. In California, a firefighter responding to a medical alarm call was shot by the homeowner when he tried to gain entrance through a window. In North Carolina, a man showing his gun to his 11-year-old step-daughter was killed when she shot him with the bullet he forgot was still in the chamber, even after removing the gun's magazine. An 18-year-old Colorado woman was shot and killed by a friend after jumping out of a closet to scare him. In Houston, a man carrying a gun in his waistband accidentally shot a fellow passenger on a city bus. And in Chaska, MN, well, nobody's really sure how to explain it, but it sounds like the same family (and maybe even the same man) showed up at the hospital twice in the same week with accidental gunshot wounds, the second time accompanied by his wife, shot by the same bullet that inflicted the second wound.

The fall traditions continued, as well. First, this week saw two football games dedicated to players recently killed in accidental shootings: this time in Bowie, TX, and Carlsbad, NM. The second tradition: hunting accidents. Last weekend was the first weekend of dove hunting season in several states, and correspondingly, I found five hunting-related accidents that wounded six people, including a 10-year-old girl.

In what has become routine gun accident news, this week's compilation includes six gun cleaning accidents, two "home invasion" shootings, three accidents involving law enforcement officers, and one involving an active member of the armed forces.

This week's child victims of GunFAIL were aged 2 months, 8 months, 8, 10, 12, 14, 14, 16 and 16.

And in related news, itself quickly moving from fall tradition to routine weekly count, the latest Guns Found in Schools list: Dunkerton, IA; Des Moines, IA; Sumter, SC; Albuquerque, NM; Memphis, TN, and; Douglasville, GA.

Below the fold, this week's dishonor roll.