An artist’s rendering of the expanded Ingham County Medical Care Facility in Okemos. (Photo: Courtesy photo)

The Ingham County Medical Care Facility looks to embark on a $20 million renovation and expansion project to accommodate a growing senior population and an influx of patients covered the by the Affordable Care Act.

"Absolutely no taxpayer dollars" will be used, Administrator Mark Stevens said.

The facility, formally known as the Medical Care Facility and Rehabilitation Services of Ingham County, is housed in a 37-year-old building at 3860 Dobie Road in Okemos. The Board of Commissioners — Ingham County owns the property — approved the project on March 10.

The nonprofit group, also known as "Dobie Road," offers rehabilitation services, as well as long-term and memory care.

This preliminary drawing depicts the Ingham County Medical Care Facility in Okemos. The planned 55,609-square-foot addition appears at upper right. The current facility occupies about 110,000 square feet. (Photo: Courtesy Photo)

Plans call for the project to be completed in three phases. The first is the transfer of the 58-bed rehabilitation center into a 55,609-square-foot addition to be built on the southeast corner of the facility's 110-acre campus. The new building also will include private rooms, enhanced bariatric services, a therapy gym, an outpatient therapy clinic, therapeutic activities area, a restaurant and dining area, a beauty shop and spa, more office space and an additional driveway and parking lot.

Stevens estimates the addition's cost at $15 million to $15.5 million. He said a ground-breaking could be as early as October or November with completion in December 2016.

The second phase involves the expansion of the long-term care area — which now is at full capacity — into the section vacated by the rehab center. Many semi-private rooms will be converted into private rooms.

Buy Photo A $20 million renovation and expansion project is planned for the Ingham County Medical Care Facility in Okemos (Photo: Curt Smith/Lansing State Journal)

Also, 26 long-term care beds will be added, bringing the total to 204, and the hospital's overall capacity to 262 beds. Stevens said this project will begin toward the end of Phase I.

A third step calls for a new front entrance and more office space. Stevens expects work to begin in fall 2016.

The expansion will create 26 full-time jobs, Stevens said. About 375 people work at the facility now.

Although owned by the county, the now-110,000-square-foot facility is fully funded through Medicare, Medicaid and private payers, Stevens said. That enables the care center to cover $14 million of the cost through its own cash reserves.

The other $6 million will be funded by a bond that the facility will pay off. Arrangements for the bond need to be worked out with the county, Stevens said.

The Moore Trosper Construction Co., a Delhi Township firm, was awarded the project.

Meanwhile, Ingham County continues to work toward other health system improvements.

It's moving on a relocation of adult and adolescent care services into a former McLaren facility at 2316 S. Cedar St. in Lansing. Bids on the remodeling of the now-vacant building have been received, said Rick Terrill, director of the county's Facilities Department, and a vendor will be recommended this month.

Terrill estimated that project at $1.7 million to $1.8 million.

Renovations also are slated for the Human Services Building at 5303 S. Cedar, a low-income care facility that also houses the county Health Department. Terrill said the projected price tag is $1.2 million to $1.3 million.

Read or Share this story: http://on.lsj.com/1FPSMTu