Negative Underwear is designed for the contemporary definition of sexy. No unnecessary embellishments. ( Robert Massman / Courtesy photo )

Boulder native Marissa Vosper, left, and Lauren Schwab created Negative Underwear to try to make women happier about what's inside their underwear drawer. (Stephen Ewing / Courtesy photo)

No, those aren't udders or extra nipples. They're not body piercings either.

Those two extra breast bumps? They are bows. Bedazzled bows.

Fancy, adorned bras look so beautiful on the shelf at Victoria's Secret. But underneath clothes, they're bumpy and awkward and so padded they can literally stand on their own.

Maybe it was the bandeau and bralette trend, which evolved to complement trendy open-side "bro tanks," lace tops and sheer blouses — but increasingly more women have realized they don't need to bind, squeeze and fluff their ladybits to feel like a lady. Push-up has become passe. And now, they're looking for something a little more, well, less.

The angels have fallen. The negative is rising.

Negative Underwear is the anti-Victoria's Secret, but it's just as sexy and luxurious. This new approach to undergarments is making a major mark across the country — and it has Boulder roots.

In fact, reinventing one of our most private possessions has landed Boulder native Marissa Vosper in the public spotlight, on Forbes' esteemed 30 Under 30 list. The annual honor goes to young "prodigies reinventing the world" in 15 different fields.

Vosper, a 2002 Boulder High graduate who now lives in New York, and her friend Lauren Schwab launched Negative Underwear one year ago this month to fill a void in the lingerie market.

"We looked at the market and found there were really beautiful, expensive, luxury items that weren't functional for every day and not at a price point that was acceptable," Schwab says. "And the every-day category fell into two types: the super functional T-shirt-style bra that, if you love fashion, you won't be all that inspired by, and then the overly adorned push-up-lots-of-bling-big-padding type that didn't represent the contemporary version of sexy."

The women launched a Facebook poll of about 1,000 women and found some surprising results:

Most women feel neutral to negative about their underwear drawer. Most don't have a go-to bra that they love. The most important characteristic of undergarments is comfort. And most women wear black, white and nude undergarments on a daily basis.

Vosper and Schwab say they visited every apparel store in Manhattan and dissected every bra on the racks: what was essential, what was uncomfortable, what added clutter.

"Being confident in your own skin is the new sexy," Vosper says. "The collection we designed is all about celebrating women as they are instead of pushing them up into something they're not."

Negative Underwear's "anti-lace" black demi bra features tiny holes instead of frilly lace. (Negative Underwear / Courtesy photo)

This trend extends beyond undergarments, she says. You can see the less-is-more mentality in the growing demand for clean, simple food, smaller homes and an overall streamlined consumer lifestyle.

"We've also started seeing that in undergarments," Vosper says. "The girl wearing an Alexander Wang tee and Rag & Bone jeans is definitely not wearing a pink push-up bra, and we didn't think a line existed for her."

Schwab and Vosper spent four years designing their line. The results: soft, comfortable fabric and no unnecessary embellishments, including tags. Instead of frilly lace: perforated, open-hole, stretchy material that shows a little extra skin but is more durable and contemporary.

"The burden is to make it cool with textiles and the silhouette rather than embellishment," Vosper says.

Coming soon: a peach-pink "nude" collection, a non-wire bra, high-waisted briefs and seamless bottoms.

Find Negative Underwear online only at NegativeUnderwear.com — where the photos aren't overly Photoshopped and none of the "models" is of the professional ilk; instead, they are accountants, musicians and actresses.

"A huge part of our business is not only making a great product with great service but also selling it in a different way," Vosper says. "For a while, it was a specific way of viewing feminity and sexuality and body image. We're trying to take the approach that investing in your underwear is self-love. If you feel good in your own skin and wear things that make you feel good and confident, you are beautiful and don't have to look like someone else to feel great."

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay