The financial literacy of students at New Jersey City University is heading for an upswing after the school held a dedication ceremony yesterday morning for its new School of Business and Peter G. Mangin Real Estate Institute.

Keynote speaker Roger Ferguson, Jr., CEO of the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association – College Retirement Equities Fund, addressed the importance of improving financial literacy among youth and praised the university for its decision to enhance its business programs because “far too many people lack the skills to navigate the economy.

“I think it’s a real reflection of how the university is maturing and developing, as well as Jersey City,” Ferguson said. “The whole community can be proud of this expansion.

The School of Business will offer majors in accounting, finance, management and marketing. Before, the university only offered a general degree in business.

NJCU president Sue Henderson said she wants to target risk management and financial technology, and the school is in the process of hiring instructors who have extensive experience in those areas.

The real estate institute, backed by a donation from former U.S. Rep. Frank J. Guarini, will provide a minor to the new business program and offer yearly seminars in the real estate business.

The institute is named for real estate developer Peter Mangin for his business and community efforts.

“It’s an exciting time to be in real estate in Jersey City,” Mangin said before unveiling the sign for the new institute. “I’m glad to have my name on it.”

After the presentations, Henderson announced a scholarship for undergraduate business majors, named for Marilyn Ettinger, finance chairwoman, that will also boost the university’s business efforts.

“It’s news to me. I was so surprised and delighted,” Ettinger said. “My 25 years here have been great, but I have to acknowledge those who came before me.”

Amirose Ruge, a 28-year-old master’s student, was among those sitting in the first row of the nearly 200-person crowd in the university’s Gilligan Student Union multipurpose room.

“I was an undergrad here too, so it’s really exciting to see all of the changes,” Ruge said. “It’s nice to see how it’s now a school of business instead of a department and to see the first female president of the university present it.”