The United State Census Bureau released a report today showing the number of Americans without health insurance dropped by 8.8 million in 2014 after the full implementation of the Affordable Care Act, and the most significant decrease among states happened in Kentucky.

The Census found that while roughly 616,000 Kentuckians lacked health insurance in 2013, that number dropped by approximately 250,000 over the next year — as Kentucky set up its own private insurance exchange and full expanded Medicaid eligibility to those whose income was below 138 percent of the federal poverty rate. Kentucky’s uninsured rate dropped from 14.3 percent to 8.5 percent in 2014 — a decrease of 5.8 percent, which ranked first in the country.

Several surveys such as Gallup previously have found Kentucky to have one of the most dramatic uninsured rate decreases since the federal health care reform law, but the figures released by the Census are considered the most authoritative.

While Kentucky had the 18th highest uninsured rate in 2013, it now ranks 37. The overwhelming majority of those gaining health insurance in Kentucky are covered by Medicaid, which is being paid for in full by the federal government until 2017. At that time, Kentucky’s state government will have to kick in an increasing percentage for their coverage, topping out at 10 percent in 2020 — which is still far below the 30 percent the state contributes for those covered by traditional Medicaid.

Gov. Steve Beshear’s decision to expand Medicaid in 2013 has become a major issue in this year’s gubernatorial race, as candidates grapple with embracing or questioning its effect.

Though Democrat Jack Conway has been attacked in TV ads by outside groups for supporting Beshear’s move to expand Medicaid — attempting to tie him to President Barack Obama, who is mostly unpopular in Kentucky — he wants to keep it in place, as does independent candidate Drew Curtis. Conway has frequently cited Republican candidate Matt Bevin saying earlier this year that he would immediately repeal the Medicaid expansion. Conway has called such a move callous, saying it will throw half a million Kentuckians off of their insurance.

Despite video evidence of his remarks, Bevin has repeatedly denied ever saying he would repeal Medicaid expansion. He now says he is considering a “tweak” of the expansion and following the example of Indiana, which received a waiver to expand Medicaid to those who pay a small monthly premium. However, Bevin’s campaign website still states that he believes “The Medicaid expansion enacted under Obamacare is unaffordable for the taxpayers of Kentucky and should be repealed.”

Ashley Spalding, a research and policy associate at the progressive Kentucky Center for Economic Policy, says the new figures released by the Census are yet another sign that health care reform is working in Kentucky — in addition to an independent study by Deloitte and the University of Louisville’s Urban Studies Institute showing Medicaid expansion will create jobs and provide a large economic impact, all while saving the state money.

“This data confirms Medicaid expansion and Kynect are commonsense solutions for helping Kentuckians be healthy and more productive members of their communities,” says Spalding. “We already knew Kentucky was seeing huge benefits from those solutions, but the country’s official data on health insurance rates reaffirms the impact.”

The full chart from the Census showing the change in each state’s insurance rate in 2014 is below: