Flu Virus Evading Vaccine

This year's flu vaccine is ineffective against the current strain circulating in the United States, health officials are warning. Even though the most prevalent strain infecting Americans, H3N2, is one that’s included in the vaccine, it’s mutated into a form that the vaccine doesn’t protect against.

Researchers try to anticipate which flu strains will spread months before the season starts, but the virus can mutate rapidly and render part of the vaccine ineffective. Still, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends people get the vaccine because it may lessen the severity if you do contract the virus.

"Though reduced, this cross-protection might reduce the likelihood of severe outcomes such as hospitalization and death," the CDC said, according to NBC News. "In addition, vaccination will offer protection against circulating influenza strains that have not undergone significant antigenic drift from the vaccine viruses."

How to Prevent and Treat the Flu

CDC Director Tom Frieden Talks Flu Vaccines

8 Sneaky Symptoms of Stress

Are you losing hair? Gaining weight? Sprouting a rash? There’s a good chance that the culprit behind these seemingly unrelated physical maladies is nothing more than good, old-fashioned stress. While stress is a normal part of everyday life, it can sometimes trigger a range of unpleasant symptoms that we’re quick to attribute to other ailments.

The brain-body relationship is complicated, and researchers say they haven’t quite pinpointed why people manifest stress in different ways – headaches for you, but nausea for your neighbor. They do, however, tie these reactions to the body’s fight-or-flight system, which releases stress hormones such as adrenaline and cortisol that cause the body to stay alert and ready to react to potentially dangerous situations.

“The stress response prepares the body to be at war,” says Amit Sood, author of “The Mayo Clinic Guide to Stress-Free Living” and professor of medicine at the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine in Rochester, Minnesota. “The body shores up resources to enhance its survival. It increases blood glucose, increases blood flow to muscles, pushes the heart to work harder and predisposes [individuals] to inflammation.” [Read more: 8 Sneaky Symptoms of Stress]

8 Ways to Relax – Now

8 Common Digestive Problems and How to End Them

Calorie Counts Coming to a Menu Near You

Have you ever wondered how many calories are in some of your favorite restaurant meals, asks U.S. News blogger Bonnie Taub-Dix? Well, soon your curiosity will be satisfied, because calorie counts on menus could be coming to a restaurant near you!

On November 25, the Food and Drug Administration passed new regulations mandating that calorie counts be posted on menus or menu boards at chain restaurants and a variety of other food establishments with 20 or more locations, including movie theaters, amusement parks and in the prepared section of grocery stores. This long-awaited ruling is a continuation of the 2010 Affordable Care Act’s menu labeling law.

As a New York City resident, I admit that the salads I previously perceived as calorie-friendly took on a less welcoming look after the city mandated that chain restaurants post calorie counts on their menus in 2006. (I’m still not convinced that Chinese chicken salad is 1610 calories, but that’s a story for another time!) Now, just fewer than 20 states have similar rulings, and with the release of these new regulations, we’ll shortly be seeing a national expansion. The hope is that this information will significantly impact consumers’ food selections in the way they eat outside the home. In turn, better choices could lead to better health for adults and children suffering from obesity and its related diseases. [Read more: Calorie Counts Coming to a Menu Near You]

Eating Healthy on a Budget Starts at the Grocery Store

Pizza Anyone? How to Choose a Healthy Slice