Transcript for Obama 'Sorry' for Americans' Losing Insurance

The new apology from president obama on health care. And a possible breakthrough on negotiations to contain iran's nuclear program. Abc's jon karl and martha raddatz with more on that. Jon, I begin with you and the presidential apology for a broken promise. Reporter: You almost never hear a president say I am sorry. And barack obama is no exception to that. And this apology is not so much for the problems with the website. But for the millions of americans who have received cancellation notices from their insurance companies, despite his repeated promise over and over again that nobody would lose their insurance. I am sorry that they, you know, are finding themselves in this situation, based on assurances they got from me. We've got to work hard to make sure that they know we hear them and that we're going to do everything we can to deal with folks who find themselves in a tough position as a consequence of this. Reporter: Now, despite the apology, the president pointed out that those insurance policies being canceled are what he called sub par insurance. And he pointed out that once the website is up and running fully, people will be able to find better alternatives, many of them for less money. This was an apology. But it was an apology with caveats. The house is going to vote on a bill that would block any attempt to take away those policies from people who have them. White house reaction to that? Reporter: White house has made it clear they do not see a need for a legislative fix. They want no bill here. They say they will work within the current system. Let's turn to martha raddatz right now. Secretary of state john kerry, martha is, flying to geneva for nuclear negotiations with iran, ahead of this possible breakthrough. Reporter: George, this is a surprise trip. Kerry was in the region but was not scheduled to go to geneva where the very serious negotiations have been taking place. This could well mean an agreement is likely. Any agreement would be just a first phase. This is how it would work. The iranians would have to freeze their nuclear program for as long as six months, in exchange some of the sanctions that have crippled parts of the iranian economy would be lifted, freeing up some much-needed cash for the iranians. Martha, you're hearing opposition to this potential deal from the israeli prime minister and some members of congress. Reporter: Well, israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu has made very clear that israel utterly objects to this, saying iran would be getting the deal of the century. And that the u.S. Would be making a grievous mistake since iran would still have the capability to enrich uranium. And many members of congress are not happy about this, either. We're going to have all of the breaking news on this on "this week." And I go one-on-one, with chris christie after his big one on tuesday.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.