Call for WAFL umpires to wear cameras to stamp out on-field violence

FOOTBALL umpires in WA leagues should be equipped with tiny yet robust GoPro cameras to catch footy thugs in the act and stamp out on-field violence, experts and coaches say.

Department of Sport and Recreation director-general Ron Alexander has backed the calls.

He said there was “certainly benefit” in using cameras to stamp out on-field brutes.

WAFL games are already filmed but in most cases only one camera is used and a lot of altercations between players go unrecorded.

Unlike the AFL, there is little TV footage from most WAFL matches, especially of incidents away from the play.

IT experts say video technology is now so good and affordable it’s time for the WAFL to modernise and equip umpires with GoPros to capture audio and high-res video.

The AFL trialled the technology with umpires wearing cameras strapped to their chests during pre-season games this year.

In one case, footage from a GoPro worn by umpire Shane Stewart was examined when Essendon forward Jake Carlisle was reported for kneeing Richmond’s Steven Morris as the pair stood and grappled in an off-the-ball incident.

The shockproof and waterproof cameras – most famously worn by skydivers, big wave surfers and extreme sportsmen – are easily attached to the body and are the size and shape of a pack of cards.

GoPro founder and chief executive Nick Woodman sold his first GoPro in 2004 and 10 years later the American tech guru is a billionaire whose creation is officially the best-selling camera in the world.

Professional WA documentary maker and sports photographer and videographer Jim Frater, who often uses GoPros on shoots, said: “New GoPros are high definition, 50 frames per second, they’re light and the battery will last two hours. Because they don’t weigh a lot, you can put them on people and they don’t get in the way.

“They’re affordable and they’re tough – I’ve run them over and they still work. For sport, the cameras will capture a lot that normal TV cameras can’t.”

West Perth coach Bill Monaghan said the concept was worth investigating but he wanted GoPros used at every league game to ensure all WAFL clubs received the same scrutiny.

“It’s worth exploring. Generally the more video analysis you have, the better,” he said.

Mr Monaghan said GoPro footage could streamline the tribunal process.

“If they can see it on vision, they will offer a player a penalty. If there’s no vision, they’ve got no choice but to go to tribunal. It’d be great if every report had a piece of supporting vision with it,” he said.

WAFL umpire manager Darryl Sinclair said GoPro footage could benefit umpire training and coaching as well as catch out footy thugs.

“We’re certainly keen to embrace new technology,” he said.

“Any additional footage helps. This would give you another angle. It certainly could be handy.”

Mr Alexander said innovations such as specialised cameras and GPS are “already enhancing the spectator experience, providing real-time monitoring of athlete performance and, of course, helping officials with decision-making”.

“Sporting codes will make their own call about if and how the technology is applied (but) there’s certainly benefit on a number of levels, including the potential for improved overall player conduct,” Mr Alexander said.

The lack of WAFL footage came under the spotlight in 2011 when TV cameras covering West Coast Eagle Daniel Kerr’s return from injury with East Fremantle caught him striking Claremont’s Luke Blackwell.

Ordinarily, news crews would not have covered the game and there would have been little or no footage of the incident.