Findings could influence federal and state fracking regs

Boulder-based scientists on Monday are launching a study to determine how gas emissions from shale oil and natural gas basins in the western United States affect air quality.

Using over a dozen state-of-the-art chemical instruments, a team of seven scientists will measure trace gas emissions as they fly a research aircraft over production sites in various stages of development located across the West. The project, dubbed SONGNEX 2015, is expected to conduct 15 research flights out of Colorado and Texas between March and May.

The collaborative study is a joint project of the Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences at the University of Colorado and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Sites of interest in the study include the Bakken oil fields of North Dakota, the Niobrara shale formation of northern Colorado and Wyoming, and the Four Corners area.

"Some [hydraulic fracturing] areas are quite remote. But here in the Front Range, you've got major metropolitan areas right next to the oil and gas production region," said Joost de Gouw, a research physicist and lead scientist on the project.

"Denver has a long-standing air quality concern — everybody knows about the brown cloud."

Hydraulic fracturing, commonly referred to as fracking, is a technique that involves the injection of chemicals deep underground to fracture the rocks around oil and gas deposits. During the process, trace greenhouse gases are released to the atmosphere.

Advertisement

Of particular interest to researchers, de Gouw said, are methane emissions.

Natural gas, he explained, is mostly methane. Although CO2 is more abundant in the atmosphere, when compared molecule to molecule, methane is a more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide.

The SONGNEX research team will be looking for values in excess of methane's typical atmospheric concentration of 1.85 parts per million. Previous measurements in Colorado, de Gouw said, have shown that methane can go over 2 ppm.

"We'll fly upwind of the oil and gas producing regions, and then we'll fly downwind to see how much methane has increased. Using that information and wind speed data, we can come up with an estimate for the emissions from that region," explained Jeff Peischl, an associate scientist on SONGNEX 2015.

Another area of focus will be the release of volatile organic compounds and nitrogen oxide. When combined in the atmosphere, these trace gases form ozone and fine particles that affect air quality—that's what can cause hazy days in Colorado. Under the Clean Air Act, these particles are classified as pollutants and strictly regulated, as they can lead to health-related problems, like respiratory issues.

According to de Gouw, the chosen research sites have shown a large variability in these emissions, but scientists are unsure where this variability comes from.

"The Utah basin in particular seems to have higher emissions relative to its productions, and we'd like to know why," he said. "We're just starting to get an idea of what the differences are between regions and the reasons behind those differences."

Their findings, which will take over a year to synthesize once the experimental phase of the project is complete, could have important implications for federal and state regulations of fracking wells.

In order to reduce emissions, oil and natural case companies may be forced to replace loose pipe flanges or leaky storage tanks, and update inefficient pneumatic systems and compressors.

The Obama administration on Friday announced the nation's first major federal regulations on hydraulic fracturing, which is expected to issue rules designed to curb the release of methane from fracking wells.