Northwest Community Healthcare wants to slow the flow of rehab patients it sends to a rival northwest suburban health system by opening an inpatient rehab unit of its own.

The Arlington Heights-based health system proposes cutting 24 traditional medical-surgical beds at its lone hospital, 496-bed Northwest Community Hospital, to make way for a 17-bed physical rehabilitation unit, along with a gym, dining area and work station for those patients, according to a new application filed with the Illinois Health Facilities and Services Review Board.

Northwest Community CEO Stephen Scogna said the changing health care landscape, where providers are beefing up access to care to keep patients healthy, is the main driver behind the estimated $3 million plan. He notes that some people who need inpatient rehab, such as those who suffer strokes or spinal injuries, have had to wait up to three days to be transferred to another provider because of a lack of available services in the area.

SINGLES OUT ALEXIAN BROTHERS

The application singles out Alexian Brothers Medical Center, a 387-bed hospital in Elk Grove Village that's part of the Alexian Brothers Health System and is about eight miles south of Northwest Community. It's the closest hospital with an inpatient rehab unit and gets the bulk of the Arlington Heights hospital's inpatient rehab referrals. In 2013, Alexian Brothers treated 196 Northwest Community patients who needed inpatient rehab, but 31 others were not admitted, often because of a lack of beds, the application said.

“Our decisions that we're making here are really focused on what's best for the community,” Mr. Scogna said in an interview. “We see that there is an aging population that is going to require more and more and we have the ability and the space to provide (that care)." Asked about competition with Alexian, Mr. Scogna said, "Our focal point is not on any other provider and what they're doing.”

A spokesman for Alexian Brothers did not return messages yesterday seeking comment.

While Northwest Community's application argues that there is not enough inpatient rehabilitation services that could keep its patients close to home, it doesn't address the availability of outpatient services or skilled nursing facilities that might offer a similar level of care.

The state board, which decides the fate of health care projects to prevent duplication of services, must approve the proposal. If it's approved, the project is slated to be finished in September 2015.

LEAST-EXPENSIVE SETTING

The proposal comes as insurers and government payors, under pressure from the Affordable Care Act to reduce health care costs, want patients treated in the least expensive setting. That often is at an outpatient facility and not in more costly hospitals. Long-term care facilities have responded by bulking up their rehabilitation services and adding specialty services, such as wings specifically for patients with Alzheimer's, experts said.

“Basically rehab is a business that's left the hospital sector,” said Jim Unland, a Chicago area consultant and president of Health Capital Group Ltd.

Mr. Scogna said Northwest Community focused its analysis on Medicare patients whose care would match requirements established by the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services that require inpatient care. They include people who suffer a stroke or a spinal injury, or who have hip replacements and amputations.

In 2013, Northwest Community referred 217 patients to other hospitals for inpatient rehab, the application said. But an analysis of its patients showed that as many as 850 would have met federal requirements for inpatient rehab.

STILL WOULD REFER

In its application, Northwest Community estimates more conservatively that about 650 patients would meet requirements for inpatient rehab. Because its proposed unit would have room to treat only about 415 patients a year, the remaining 235 patients would continue to be referred to other hospitals, the application said.

Thus the proposed new unit would not strip patients from other hospitals with inpatient rehab units, the proposal said, a state standard that staff members of the facilities board commonly find is not met.

Northwest Community is partnering with RehabCare, a Louisville, Kentucky-based company with more than 1,800 locations nationwide. Rehab Care would set up and manage the hospital's inpatient rehab unit. A representative for RehabCare did not return a message yesterday seeking comment.