A big week ahead, as lawmakers look to fund the government

THIS WEEK: LET'S GET THIS DONE — Congress kept the government funded through this Wednesday, and it's going to be quite a race against the clock as legislators hope to finalize an omnibus spending bill before racing to the exits. Their new deadline is Dec. 16, after both chambers passed a five-day extension last week. Plenty of sticking points remain, largely over energy and labor issues. Democrats' efforts to lift a ban on gun control research may be fizzling — it doesn't seem to be a dealbreaker for House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, and Republicans are ready to push back on it. The Hill had an update on that this weekend: http://bit.ly/1J5xlhp

WHAT'S IN, WHAT'S OUT: A CHECKLIST — Folks on and off the hill have been whispering about the health care policy riders that might make it into the bill. Here's some of what we're keeping our eyes out for: first, a policy rider from Sen. Marco Rubio extending the requirement that CMS keep the risk corridor program "budget neutral" — a repeat of a 2014 win he's been trumpeting a lot on the campaign trail. Second, there's a potential policy rider that would protect hospitals currently constructing outpatient departments from the new site neutral payment rules passed earlier this fall — basically a form of grandfathering them. And there are a whole host of other potential issues on Medicare Advantage star ratings, women's health policies and perhaps on Planned Parenthood funding that are worth watching, too.

Story Continued Below

— Everyone's watching for how big a bump NIH will get, after appropriators in both chambers this year signaled they'd like to send the agency at least an extra $1 billion. And we're watching for AHRQ funding levels. The House had pushed to eliminate the agency entirely; the Senate wants to keep it, though maybe with less money. We'll have more as it comes.

HAPPY MONDAY and welcome to PULSE, where we are gearing up for this week's three crazy newsmaking events: tomorrow's Republican debate, Wednesday's budget deadline, and of course, the Thursday night premiere of the new Star Wars movie. Your PULSEr was born on May the Fourth, so I'll let you guess which of those has me most excited. My co-pilot Brianna is out this week, so send all those tips, comments and puns straight to me at emershon@politico.com and @eemershon.

"Just when you think that you're in control, just when you think that you've got a PULSE, just when you get on a roll, here it goes, here it goes, here it goes again."

RUBIO TALKS RISK CORRIDORS — The Republican presidential candidate was on "Meet the Press" this weekend and had a lengthy exchange with moderator Chuck Todd about his efforts to curtailthe risk corridor program. Rubio gave his usual speech, arguing that taxpayers shouldn't be asked to "bail out" insurers. But Todd pressed, saying that Rubio's work to eliminate the program would lead to higher premiums — "so you're hitting [taxpayers] in the pocket somewhere." They had quite a lengthy back and forth over that. Watch here: http://nbcnews.to/1O3grYi.

— Todd also got Rubio to talk a bit about his own health plan, and how it'd work without risk corridors. He answered that his doesn't need 'em, since it's only "a high risk pool for people that are uninsurable basically because they suffer from a condition that is chronic and no insurance company would touch them," he said. "I've always argued that there is a role for a federal safety net. It's limited to those people. But it's a safety net program."

CATCHING UP ON FRIDAY'S NEWS DUMP: GUARDRAILS FOR 1332 WAIVERS — HHS spelled out how it will evaluate the 1332 waivers that will allow states to deviate from core Obamacare requirements in 2017, as long as they meet certain standards. The guardrails outlined in the law areopen to interpretation — and Obamacare supporters have worried they could be drastically altered if a Republican takes the White House next year. Pro's Rachana Pradhan: "The administration's deficit neutrality provisions are likely to disappoint states and may limit how many end up pursuing the program. Federal officials wrote that when determining whether a state's 1332 waiver proposal increases the deficit, HHS won't also account for savings that might be realized under separate 1115 waivers for Medicaid and CHIP. The National Governors Association had asked HHS to interpret 'budget neutrality' as broadly as possible so that states can pursue comprehensive changes that might include Medicaid and other coverage."

— … "The administration also downplays the likelihood that states using HealthCare.gov would be able to pursue the broad Obamacare waiver because of 'operational limitations' with the federal website. Those states tend to predominately be Republican, but some blue states have switched to the federal platform, such as Oregon and Hawaii." The full story, here.

THIS WEEK: ARKANSAS TASK FORCE TO LAY OUT COURSE FOR MEDICAID — All eyes are on Arkansas again this week, as a legislative task force is set to make recommendations about the future of the state's Medicaid program. Last week, Gov. Asa Hutchinson called for new restrictions on the so-called Medicaid private option expansion model. Sources in the state expect a fight about whether managed care should be a part of the program, or whether the state should stay focused on efforts like patient-centered medical homes.

— Elsewhere in the states, California's three largest insurers are making millions on the ACA products. In Kentucky, over 72 percent want Medicaid to stay as it is, and over half want new Gov. Matt Bevin to keep the state-based exchange, which he vowed to scrap. Utah's Medicaid Director is stepping down, and Oklahoma's Medicaid agency wants to cut provider reimbursement rates. The skinny on all that, from Pro's Rachana Pradhan, here. http://politico.pro/1QgHkIE

** A message from PhRMA: For the last 100 years, heart disease has been the leading cause of U.S. deaths. But these numbers are slowly declining, thanks in large part to innovative new treatments. With nearly 200 medicines in development to treat cardiovascular disease, patients have never had more hope to live longer, healthier lives: http://onphr.ma/1mb2Dyv .**

REPUBLICANS WANT TO INTERROGATE HHS ON COST-SHARING — E&C and W&M Chairmen Fred Upton and Kevin Brady wrote to HHS earlier this month to complain about the administration's failure to turn over documents they requested in February on the Obamacare cost-sharing reduction program. The program is part of the House Republicans ACA lawsuit, in which they allege the administration illegally funded the cost-sharing subsidies without an appropriation from Congress. "The ongoing litigation is not a valid basis for refusing to respond to legitimate congressional oversight and does not in any way deprive the Committees of their respective oversight authorities and obligations," Brady and Upton wrote in the letter . They want to interview four HHS officials, including general counsel William Schultz and CFO Sheila Conley, and threatened to subpoena them.

— HHS RESPONDS: "We are working cooperatively with this Committee and others to respond to their inquiries about the progress we’ve seen under the Affordable Care Act," said spokeswoman Meaghan Smith. "We provided a detailed explanation to the Committee in response to their prior letter, and will respond to this most recent letter in due course."

WE'RE ON WATCH: FINAL 2016 ACO PARTICIPANTS, BENCHMARKING PROPOSAL — There aren't too many days left in 2015, so CMS doesn't have a whole lot of time to announce who's participating in its accountable care organization programs — including its fancy new Next Gen program, which has attracted the interest of several of providers with a lot of experience in coordinated care. That's the program with higher risk (and higher reward) that was borne out of CMS's initial experiences with both the Pioneer program and regular Medicare Shared Savings ACOs. But CMS is due to spell out who will participate in those other programs, too.

— Those MSSP ACOs, though, are waiting on a pending proposed rule on how cost and quality benchmarks will be set — a rule that CMS has suggested could affect even existing program participants. The rule is expected to set targets based on the relative costs and quality in a particular region. That will mean that programs performing well compared to their geographic peers won't be penalized as harshly for not meeting an arguably less relevant national standard. It'll apply to existing ACOs as well as those than join in 2017. How that will all play out is, of course, up in the air, since the rule isn't out yet. But it's at OMB for review, and we're expecting more intel soon.

YOU'RE INVITED! Playbook Breakfast year-end double-header TUESDAY: House Speaker Paul Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell. We'll discuss Ryan's 47 days with the gavel, McConnell's year-long plan to "restore the Senate," and look ahead to 2016 on the Hill and in the campaigns. Jake Sherman joins Mike Allen for the Speaker conversation; Anna Palmer will join for McConnell. Doors open at 7:30 a.m.; program runs 8 to 9. RSVP here; location will come with your confirmation: http://bit.ly/1NY66X2.

INTRIGUE ON CURES — It was a meeting straight out of Hollywood's version of Washington: the FDA met with AdvaMed to develop the device-related language of the 21st Century Cures Act, according to documents FOIA'd by Inside Health Policy. They write of an August meeting in which the agency and the trade association strategized on how to advance the Senate counterpart on the House-passed bill. A GOP aide says it's wise to discuss legislation with industry — but Public Citizen said FDA's participation in the legislative process "violates the most elementary ethical standards." Read more: http://bit.ly/1mfsEwD

JUST IN TIME FOR DEADLINE DAY, NEW HEALTHCARE.GOV TOOLS — Tomorrow's the deadline for folks who want health insurance to kick in on January 1st, as you may have heard one, two, or 30 times in the past few weeks. And CMS is rolling out a whole bunch of tools to help those last-minute shoppers, including its out of pocket cost calculator, a prescription drug lookup tool and another for looking up docs and other facilities. Those had all been in beta until Friday.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Darius Tahir

Could insurers sue to get their risk corridor payments? Maybe – but probably not yet, Paige Winfield Cunningham at the Washington Examiner concludes: http://washex.am/1Nr9daF

Clinical trials routinely fail to publish results, despite laws mandating they do so. Particularly egregious offenders include some of the country’s richest and most prestigious institutions. Indeed, of the institutions required to report results, only two – drug companies Eli Lilly and AbbVie – complied the majority of the time. An investigation from STAT: http://bit.ly/1mjw7KH

Valeant, under scrutiny, is hiring a coterie of PR and legal protectors, Reuters reports: http://reut.rs/1QgHMqi

Ted Cruz and Mike Lee released an interesting bill last week: the RESULTS Act, intended to provide for reciprocal approvals of drugs and devices. (For example, if, say, Canada approves Drug X for sale up north, FDA would have to consider doing so as well.) But Harvard scholar Rachel Sachs believes the law’s title is a bit of a misnomer: http://bit.ly/1NkDmut

Medi-Cal is changing its reimbursement rules to provide better care for patients suffering from drug addiction: http://bit.ly/1P1JuKy

HHS’s new Common Rule governing the workings of Institutional Review Boards – which oversee and approve clinical trials — has touched off a debate: how ethical are our clinical trials? Modern Healthcare’s Sabriya Rice examines the issue: http://bit.ly/1jXWJPv

** A message from PhRMA: The future has never been more promising for the more than 85 million Americans living with cardiovascular disease. Nearly 200 innovative medicines are in development to treat heart disease and stroke. These therapies have the potential to build on the progress made by existing treatments, reducing repeat hospitalizations and death. Learn more at http://onphr.ma/1mb2Dyv .**

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **