I learned in elementary school that the necessities of life are water, food and shelter. But surely somewhere in our list of necessities would be a health insurance policy. The Affordable Care Act has an individual mandate that all Americans must carry an insurance policy. So, I guess it would fall in line as number four on the list – thus, water, food, shelter and insurance.

But at Matthew 25 Health and Dental Clinic, a local clinic with the mission of free primary care for the uninsured and underinsured, we are not seeing much of a decrease in need.

How can this be? Today, we have universal health care. Everyone not covered by Medicaid must have insurance, and those who can’t afford it are eligible for low-cost coverage through Indiana’s HIP 2.0 program, yet our clinic for the uninsured is not seeing a decrease in the number of uninsured. From Matthew 25’s perspective, the number of uninsured today is the same as the number of uninsured before universal health care.

To answer this paradox, one needs to understand the history, mission and clientele of the clinic. Matthew 25 was started in 1976 as a safety-net medical clinic for Allen County residents without insurance. In 1978 dental services were added. In a typical year an army of 446 volunteer medical, dental and support staff led by a group of 35 paid staff members provide free health care for a total of about 24,000 visits a year. This number is not decreasing much (and what decrease that is seen from year to year is more due to fluctuations in provider availability than patient need).

Working as a volunteer for the last 15 years, it has become very obvious to me why universal health care is far from universal and probably never will be. The typical patient at Matthew 25 has no real earned income in the traditional sense. They are not the working poor – they are just the poor. Living paycheck to paycheck would be a large step up the socioeconomic ladder for most of them. The average patient is highly transient, changing addresses and living arrangements several times a year, sometimes even more. The average patient doesn’t file an income tax return; they have nothing to report. Many don’t speak English and, sadly, more then a few are displaced from war-torn countries, having personally experienced physical and mental trauma that I only read about. Many suffer from mental illness or drug and alcohol addictions. Almost all have one or more chronic illness with multiple co-morbidities.

It didn’t take me long volunteering at the clinic to realize how fortunate, sheltered and naïve I was. And I now realize why universal health care will never be universal. When one thinks about it, you really don’t own a health care policy as much as you maintain a health care policy. It starts with the original application process, but then you need to understand deductibles, co-pays and coordination of benefits. You need a stable home address to receive all those letters requesting “more information to process your claim.”

This point was driven home recently in my own life when my wife had a health scare. Several doctor visits, lab test, scans and a biopsy later and all is well. But from the first doctor’s visit with forms to fill out, cards to show, co-pays and deductibles to know about, all the way to the aftermath of seven bills, innumerable EOBs (explanations of benefits, which I’m told, is a bill before it becomes a bill. Ironically, I found the explanation of benefits to be neither an explanation nor a benefit). One of the bills actually said “this is not a bill” but the bottom line said I “owed” $127.34.

I consider myself an intelligent, well-educated guy. I speak, read, and write English. I have a permanent address. I’m well connected. I have a good health care insurance policy. I have great family support. I am even part of the health care industry. I guess I am pretty fortunate. But, honestly, I felt lost in the health care system.

If I were poor, transient, hungry, hurting, scared, living a rather chaotic or addicted lifestyle with limited resources, I really doubt using those limited resources to sign up for and participate in what is clearly a dysfunctional and complex system would make it very high on my list of necessities. If I were poor and had limited resources, my path of least resistance would be to avoid the whole system. What limited resources I had would mostly go toward the big basic necessities of water, food and shelter. I doubt I would have anything left to support an insurance policy.

You see, it is not the case that our poor simply don’t have an insurance policy and if we give them one then all will be well. It is that the poor usually don’t have the resources one would need to support having an insurance policy – even if the state gives it to them.

For me, my path of least resistance is to play the game, fill out the forms and pay the bills – even if I don’t understand them. The poor’s path of least resistance is just to avoid the whole process in the first place.

For the underprivileged, this minimalist path toward complex structures hasn’t changed – never has, never will. Mandates or even free insurance have not and will not change the paths we each need to take.

Matthew 25 was designed as a safety net on the path of least resistance for our underprivileged neighbors. I’m fairly certain the need is not going away anytime soon.

Interestingly, as I was leaving the clinic recently, I noticed a man adding a fresh coat of paint to the waiting area. I guess I’m not the only one who sees the clinic is not going away anytime soon.

Andy O’Shaughnessy is a Fort Wayne physician and a Matthew 25 volunteer. This piece originally appeared in the Fort Wayne Medical Society quarterly journal.