The Daily Signal reports that a new Heritage Foundation poll found that 78 percent of Americans agree that our country should not be funding organizations that sell aborted babies for research.

In fact, the poll revealed that the majority of Americans agree with the following statement: “Government should not be in the business of funding organizations that harvest and sell baby parts from aborted children.” Additionally, 72 percent of respondents agreed that “taxpayer dollars would be better spent directed to the more than 13,000 health centers and hospitals providing comprehensive women’s health care.”

In contrast, a recent CNN/ORC poll claims that 71 percent of adults believe it is more important for Congress to approve a spending bill to keep the government open than to de-fund Planned Parenthood. As LifeNews previously reported, there has been debate among pro-life Republicans regarding strategy to de-fund Planned Parenthood’s abortion business and some have agreed to shut down the government in order to get their mission accomplished.

SIGN THE PETITION! Congress Must De-Fund Planned Parenthood Immediately

However, Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) and other leaders in Congress have indicated that this might not be the best course of action.

The Hill reported that Boehner did not rule out targeting Planned Parenthood through a continuing resolution (CR) to fund the government, but he did tell Republicans that even if that was successful it would not stop the abortion company from collecting aborted babies’ body parts. Also, a report in Politico revealed that shutting down the government might not have any impact on the majority of Planned Parenthood’s funding since a lot of it comes from programs like Medicaid and Obamacare.

This week, the U.S. House of Representatives is planning to vote on The Defund Planned Parenthood Act of 2015 (H.R. 3134), which would halt Planned Parenthood funding for a year until Congressional investigations are complete. Then, on September 17, a Subcommittee on Health chaired by pro-life Rep. Joe Pitts (R-PA), is scheduled a conduct a hearing entitled, “ Protecting Infants: Ending Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Providers Who Violate the Law.”

ACTION: Help LifeNews raise $15,000 to expose and defund Planned Parenthood

Last week, a House committee conducted their first Congressional hearing looking into Planned Parenthood’s organ harvesting practices, and pro-life attorney’s testified that the abortion company may be breaking multiple federal laws. James Bopp, the general counsel for the National Right to Life Committee, told the House Judiciary Committee that, “Recorded conversations, released by the Center for Medical Progress reveal many legal issues with Planned Parenthood’s procedures and practices regarding fetal tissue procurement.”

He added, “These procedures and practices of Planned Parenthood, and their tissue procurement partners, show that federal laws when applicable, have been and are continuing to be violated during the procurement and sale of human fetal tissue.”