Officially, Louisiana still hasn't agreed to take more than $1 billion in extra money next year from the federal government to expand Medicaid and give health care coverage to almost 200,000 state residents. Gov. Bobby Jindal is still adamant that the state won't accept a penny of the Medicaid money included in President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act. He has stuck to that position for two years, despite the good the federal health care money could do.

But he will only be governor for seven more months. And the Legislature approved a resolution this week to make it easy for the new governor to accept the additional federal money.

The Senate voted 31-8 Monday (June 1) for House Concurrent Resolution 75, which OKs a financing process to allow private hospitals to help pay the state's share of the expansion. Because it is a resolution, it doesn't go to the governor's desk. And it can't be vetoed.

That is a savvy approach.

The Louisiana Hospital Association helped draft the resolution with House Speaker Chuck Kleckley, a Lake Charles Republican. It uses a plan approved by voters that allows hospitals to pool their money and use it to get more matching federal money to pay for uncompensated care for poor residents.

For the first three years, the federal government is paying 100 percent of the cost to expand Medicaid coverage to people at 138 percent of the poverty level. That period is running out. Starting in year four, states will have to pay for a small portion of the expansion.

Hospital leaders understand very well the value of the Medicaid money to their institutions and to individual families who can't pay medical bills.

The hospitals see those uninsured patients in emergency rooms. With Medicaid coverage, tens of thousands of people who aren't included in the federal program now and have no other insurance option could see doctors in their offices or clinics. That would let them better manage chronic conditions like diabetes and high blood pressure — and keep them out of the ER.

Paul Salles, president of the hospital association, has described HCR 75 as a pragmatic solution. "We think it helps patients. We think it helps the state budget situation," he said.

According to Rep. Kleckley, the hospital-backed plan could save the state as much as $200 million per year.

More than that, a White House report released Thursday (June 4) showed that Louisiana would lose out on $1.07 billion next year if it continues to opt out of the expansion.

That money would fuel health care jobs and keep ERs and health clinics running.

"At least it gives us some opportunity for the future," said Sen. Ben Nevers, the Bogalusa Democrat who has tried for two years to get lawmakers to accept the money for the state.

It's still not a sure thing, but there is hope. The major candidates for governor this year — three Republicans and a Democrat — all have said they would consider expanding Medicaid.

The White House report said that could provide health care to 193,000 Louisiana residents who are uninsured now.

Even as the Senate voted for HCR 75, some lawmakers were trying to make sure they wouldn't be seen as approving the expansion. They don't want to be tied to President Obama or his health care act.

It is sad to see people who are supposed to be leaders so afraid to do what's right for the people of Louisiana.

Refusing the federal Medicaid expansion "makes life that much harder and more brutal" for poor Louisianians, "who are struggling to hold their heads high and keep their families healthy," Sen. Nevers said last month. "I assure you people are dying and people are much more seriously ill today because we have refused to expand Medicaid."

Helping those people get care is all that should matter.