Kimberly Gibbs, plaintiff in the Gibbs v. Mile-Hi Skydiving holding a stack of letters of support at the Longmont Civic Center in May. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

Readers' picks 10. CU-Boulder hosts Republican debate 9. Omar Martinez stabs both parents, killing his father and self 8. New indoor pool and ice rink planned for Longmont 7. Longmont traffic stop leads to officer-involved shooting, standoff 6. Stores, theater begin opening at Longmont's Village at the Peaks 5. Longmont's Maddy Grayless, 'Maddy the Mighty,' passes away

In 2015, the two-year-old court case between Mile-Hi Skydiving and Citizens for Quiet Skies over how loud Longmont's skies should be finally came to a head.

Citizens, headed by Gunbarrel resident Kimberly Gibbs, alleged that Mile-Hi was being negligent and causing a nuisance with its especially loud purple-tipped Twin Otter plane. The Twin Otter, Citizens said, reached the necessary altitude for deploying skydivers by corkscrewing over a small area of land in southwest Longmont and in unincorporated Boulder County.

Mile-Hi and its owner Frank Casares, meanwhile, maintained that the skydiving planes were well within Federal Aviation Administration regulations, and the area they could use to get up to the right altitude is very limited by planes flying to and from other regional airports.

The lawsuit represented a conflict that had been boiling in Longmont since at least 2011. As part of the case, Boulder District Court Judge Judith LaBuda even paid a visit to some of the plaintiffs' homes on a Saturday in May to observe the airplane noise for herself. Both sides hired their own noise experts and real estate experts to weigh in on the impact of the planes, while supporters for both sides regularly packed the courtroom during a week-long courtroom trial.

In the end, LaBuda found overwhelmingly in Mile-Hi's favor, awarding them roughly $130,000 in damages total.

In her ruling, LaBuda urged both sides and the community as a whole to make peace.

"It is the Court's hope that following a week-long trial, in which both parties were given an opportunity to present their evidence, that the parties, as well as the community members, will accept the ruling of the Court and move forward in a manner that demonstrates courtesy, respect and consideration for one another," LaBuda wrote.

Gibbs said she and the plaintiffs have paid off the damages and are still moving forward with an appeal. She expects a ruling in the appeal case in summer 2016.

"Twenty-fifteen was definitely a very challenging year and the results of the lawsuit were very disappointing to us but we don't linger in that disappointment," Gibbs said on Wednesday. "We are really looking forward to 2016 ... We actually gained support and we will continue working in 2016 and asking for very reasonable regulations."

Casares, via his public relations representative, did not return a request for comment.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci