On Oct. 24, 2015, LIV Sotheby’s International Realty supported the fight against cancer through sponsorship of the American Cancer Society (ACS) 2015 Champions of Hope Gala. Along with the support of 270 guests, sponsors and volunteers, ACS exceeded its goals and raised over $213,000 for the fight against cancer, and the funding of groundbreaking cancer research.

“The Champions of Hope Gala is the premier annual event for the American Cancer Society’s Colorado Chapter, helping raise money for cancer research with a significant portion funding local research projects,” said LIV Sotheby’s International Realty broker Andrew Wasson. “I am proud to be a part of LIV Sotheby’s International Realty and truly appreciate that the brokerage takes such an active role in local charities that have such a positive impact in our community.”

Since 1946, the American Cancer Society has invested $4.3 billion in cancer research, funding more than 47 Nobel Prize winning researchers and performing a key role in confirming that cigarette smoke is linked to lung cancer. In addition to these findings, the American Cancer Society has had a hand in almost all major cancer advancements to date.

Today, U.S. cancer death rates are down 22 percent (more than 1.5 million lives saved), 49 percent of the nation is covered by a comprehensive smoke-free law, and 4.6 million women in need have been helped since 1991 through national early detection programs supported by the American Cancer Society.

“We celebrated life on October 24th, 2015, while helping cancer patients thrive in their fight,” said Cile Fisher, development manager of the American Cancer Society. “LIV Sotheby’s International Realty’s continued support of the American Cancer Society and its lifesaving mission makes a difference every day.”

For information, contact LIV Sotheby’s International Realty broker, Andrew Wasson, at 303-957-7689. To service all of your real estate needs, please visit LivSothebysRealty.com.

LIV Sotheby’s International Realty, the exclusive Board of Regent for the Who’s Who in Luxury Real Estate, has 11office locations in the Denver Metro and surrounding areas, including Boulder, Castle Pines Village, Cherry Creek, Clayton Street, Denver Tech Center, Downtown Denver, Evergreen and the resort communities of Breckenridge and Vail. For information, call 303-893-3200. To service all of your real estate needs visit LivSothebysRealty.com.