Happy Thanksgiving. Or if you're Martin Shkreli, Happy Thankstaking.

Because it's clear Shkreli doesn't give anything, including a damn.

You remember Shkreli, right? He's the 30-something former hedge fund manager who's founder and CEO of Turing Pharmaceuticals. He took heat this summer after his startup acquired the rights to Daraprim, a drug developed in 1953, for $55 million.

Suddenly a $13.50 pill commonly used to treat a parasitic infection that can cause brain damage in babies, AIDS patients and others with compromised immune systems cost $750 a pop, a 5,455 percent increase. Sorry, babies.

Shkreli is back in the news because Turing announced this week, after that summer heat died down, that it will not roll back the list price for Daraprim. So there.

Instead, it said it will offer hospitals discounts of up to 50 percent off the $750 list price and provide other discounts and/or programs, so patients' out-of-pocket costs should be held in check.

Turing says it will do things like make charity donations and offer free meds for certain qualified poor uninsured patients.

"We pledge that no patient needing Daraprim will ever be denied access," Nancy Retzlaff, Turing's chief commercial officer, said in a statement.

Great. But we're still talking about a $13.50 pill that even with the biggest hospital discounts still costs, if not patients then insurers or taxpayers, $375.

"A drug's list price is not the primary factor in determining patient affordability and access," Retzlaff said. "A reduction in Daraprim's list price would not translate into a benefit for patients."

Not charging an outrageous markup would not translate into a benefit for patients?

Keep that in mind when you're choking back the taste of vomit in the back of your throat while looking at what's happened to your health care prescription plan going into next year.

Even the most gullible Black Friday-sale patsy knows that paying a price $361.50 more than it was just a few months ago is no bargain, even if it's $375 less than the list price.

Shkreli is emblematic of how some in the pharmaceutical business, a once-burnished industry, seem to be doing their mustache-twirling best to invite contempt.

In some respects, this is a side effect of President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act, which unleashed an epidemic of mergers and other deals in and around the health care sector as companies look to profitably leverage the good-hearted impulse to keep Americans healthy.

Among these is the recently announced $160 billion deal combining Pfizer, the maker of Viagra, and Allergan, the maker of Botox.

Not content to simply profit from cornering the market on the Hollywood cocktail party crowd, the merger is being structured to avoid U.S. taxes while still benefiting from all the patent protections, federal research agencies and other taxpayer-supported perks that keep a pharmaceutical company on the cutting edge and profitable.

New York-based Pfizer — which provided painkillers to Union soldiers in the Civil War and has grown into a $200 billion company known for Lipitor, Lyrica, Celebrex, Xanax and Zithromax — is in a real sense taking over Allergan no matter what the paperwork says.

Allergan operates mostly from New Jersey but through a series of earlier mergers has its headquarters in Ireland, which means it is taxed at a lower rate than it would be if it were based in the United States.

When the deal is complete, the Pfizer combo will be based overseas as well, and over the next 10 years it's expected this will cost the U.S. at least $20 billion.

So we know what Pfizer and Allergan executives and shareholders are grateful for this holiday: Thanks to Congress, where efforts to close this gaping loophole have stalled.

Think back to the first Thanksgiving. Half the Pilgrims who sought refuge here almost 400 years ago did not survive the first year.

As they thanked God and prayed for a better future, who would have imagined the eventual nation and world power for which they had sown the seeds? Did anyone dare dream of a day when medications would be developed to treat and prevent the illnesses that were fatal to so many.

They had banded together for the common good in this strange new land so far from home.

Imagine what they would have made of someone in their midst claiming to still be based on the other side of the ocean to avoid the contributions expected of others who lived and worked in the colony.

What would they have thought of someone who held the secret of survival but saw it as merely some commodity?

There's nothing wrong with prospering. But it's one thing to stuff turkeys while continuing the annual tradition of giving thanks and quite another for turkeys to stuff their own pockets.

Margin call: "Casablanca," starring Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid Bergman, had its world premiere in New York 73 years ago Thursday. Then, as now: "We'll always have Paris."

philrosenthal@tribpub.com

Twitter @phil_rosenthal