Topics: Arrested Development, cheers, DAME, Family Ties, Girls, I Love Lucy, Lena Dunham, Seinfeld, snark, The Cosby Show, Entertainment News

This piece originally appeared on DAME

Where do you go in comedy when the “snarky tone” that was once so fresh in TV and film becomes the go-to fodder for mainstream American advertising executives? When all the actors in the commercials resemble some version of a “hipster,” wryly delivering their lines with unmasked sarcasm, with expressionless faces (save the imperceptible hint of an eye roll), and with arms decidedly hanging straight down and never moving? When comedy gets to that point, what is one to do? Where do you go when “fresh” becomes “overdone”?

You cut it open and watch it bleed.

There have been different styles of television comedy over the years, the major players being the Slapstick (think I Love Lucy), the “Intelligent,” and the Snark. Comedy styles usually enjoy long-term success, so when there’s a shift from one tone to another, it is often difficult to discourage everyone in comedy from using it. And overusing it.

More from DAME: “Renee, I Totally Get It. I’m About to Turn 48″

I’m not going to send you too far back; let’s just go to the 1980s. TV comedy of this era was generally of what I call the “Intelligent” type. These shows were not concerned with the standard “set-up/joke” pattern of sitcoms, where the punch lines could be delivered by anyone in the room, regardless of their character “type.” These shows instead relied upon long-tail character development and on the viewers’ understanding of these characters and of how they felt in any given situation. On these shows, “Judy” may deliver the joke’s set-up and when the camera cuts to “Bob,” the audience is so familiar with what he must be thinking that they burst into laughter long before he’s audibly responded. The Cosby Show, Family Ties (full-disclosure, I was….), and Cheers used this form of comedy—relied on it. This style continued on and this live-before-an-audience, multicamera comedic fare ruled the tube for some time.

And then in 1989, Seinfeld came along and essentially capped the era with a comedic tone with which few TV audiences were familiar: snark. The out-the-corner-of-the-mouth, sometimes purely observational, comedy. It’s generally devoid of actual engagement with the reality of the situation. It doesn’t care about you. It was fresh at the time and it was funny. Previously, the closest comedy TV had gotten to snark was late-night talk-show hosts like Dave Letterman and sarcastic teenage characters. Every TV teenager, from Beaver Cleaver’s big brother, Wally, to Roseanne’s kids, especially middle daughter, Darlene, had had their measure of angst-ridden, eye-rolling, “Oh my God, I can’t believe I’m related to you” soft-ball snark toward their parents, but it was always shot down like a drone at a Kings hockey victory party. Seinfeld, on the other hand, went ahead and filled an entire basket with it.

Though the show was hugely successful, the “full snark” didn’t take hold of comedy completely until the arrival of Arrested Development, which pulled all the snark from Seinfeld and fed it Miracle-Gro. They then poured it vigorously down our throats. By the time we had caught our breath, this tone had infected all of comedy.

And so it went on. And on. And on. And now that we were so damn smug and sarcastic in our comedy, where could we go? How could we proceed? Were we going to retreat and get “intelligent” again? Or start telling conservative jokes? Were we going to, instead, increase the sarcasm?

Enter Danny McBride and his HBO show, Eastbound and Down. McBride had the solution. Cut it open. Cut human behavior, human experience, human nature wide open and make you look at it. So, as you watch this train wreck of to-the-bone comedy, you’re laughing because it’s funny, yes, but also because it hurts so much. You’re looking at your species. You’re looking at you.

And then came Lena Dunham. Until Dunham came along, there was no “female answer” for the snark exit question. She entered the television-comedy arena (not incidentally, also on HBO) with knife in hand and full-vertical cuts on all limbs. But, while McBride allows us to see the evisceration of Kenny Power’s rash, boisterous, braggadocio persona, Dunham splits open, instead, a newly graduated college student in Girls, with her alter ego Hannah Horvath, a young woman. A person who has yet to establish financial freedom from her parents. A woman not sure what she’s doing. THIS she splits open and lets bleed. Fucking ballsy.