AmeriHealth New Jersey has become the third insurer in the state to decide against renewing individual and small group health plans next year that had been cancelled because they didn’t meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act.

“After much consideration about the impact on our members, we have decided to move forward with the suite of ACA-compliant health plans we have worked so diligently to create over the last several years,” Judith Roman, the insurer’s president and chief executive, said in a statement.

Last month, the state Department of Banking and Insurance gave insurers the option of renewing the existing plans of individuals and small employers whose coverage had been cancelled as a result of the health care law, something it was able to do only after a policy reversal by the Obama administration.

But in doing so, the department noted that the federal government still required the plans to meet certain of the law’s standards, such as removing caps on coverage. About 800,000 people get coverage through New Jersey's individual and small-group health insurance markets.

AmeriHealth’s decision follows announcements last week by Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield, the state’s largest health insurer, and Aetna that they would not extend cancelled health plans next year.

For its part, Horizon said it proved “impossible” to create essentially new plans in the short period before the end of the year, while Aetna said the plans it already developed for next year are competitively priced, and that reintroducing old plans now only would create consumer confusion.

Their decisions means that more of the state’s small employers and individuals will be in store for potentially significant changes to their health insurance next year – from expanded benefits to possibly higher premiums. The law’s major tenets – including the minimum essential benefits that insurers must cover and changes in factors they must consider when setting rates – take effect for plans sold after Jan. 1.

However, many individual purchasers, depending on their income level, will be eligible for either subsidized coverage through New Jersey’s federally run insurance exchange or for the state’s expanded Medicaid program.

AmeriHealth, which covers about 9,200 people in the individual market and about 92,000 people through small group plans, said it will provide customers with plan choices for 2014 that are comparable to their current plans.

“Our new plans provide a variety of options at various price points as well as more comprehensive benefits, which we believe will help further enhance the health and well-being of our members,” Roman said.

The only other major insurer in New Jersey that has yet to announce its decision on cancelled health plans is UnitedHealthcare. The carrier, which sells coverage under the Oxford brand in New Jersey, provides insurance to about 100,000 people in the state’s small group market and nearly 17,000 people in the individual market.