Saying that St. Cloud State is fond of spinning statistics, especially about their declining enrollment, is understatement. This article highlights how President Potter's PR office spins their declining enrollment. The way that St. Cloud State has spun their declining enrollment is by using headcount enrollment. For instance, the article says that "St. Cloud State University saw a slight uptick in enrollment compared to last year, putting a stop to four years of enrollment decreases. According to numbers released by the University on Friday, Fall enrollment is at 15,461 students, a 0.3 percent increase (28 students) from 2014."

The problem with headcount enrollment figures is that they don't always accurately portray a university's financial health. FYE (Full Year Equivalent) enrollments are what universities rely on to put together their budgets. Headcount enrollments only tell how many people are enrolled at a university. It doesn't tell people if 50% of the people enrolled are part-time students or 20% of the students are part-time students.

That matters when figuring out a university's tuition revenues.

In Fiscal Year 2010, which was School Year 2009-10, St. Cloud State's FYE enrollment was 15,093. That year, SCSU's dormitory occupancy rate was 98%. Tuition revenues and revenues from dormitories flowed into SCSU's accounts at unprecedented rates.

At the end of FY2015, St. Cloud State's FYE enrollment had dropped to just over 11,000. That's a 26% drop in FYE enrollment. That explains part of why St. Cloud State is experiencing financial difficulties. Last year, St. Cloud State ran a huge deficit of over $10,000,000. While Minnesota State Colleges and Universities, aka MnSCU, knows the FYE enrollment for each of their universities, those figures haven't been published yet. MnSCU's report on FYE enrollment at St. Cloud State will tell administrators whether St. Cloud State will run another multi-million dollar deficit in FY2016.

At this point, that appears likely.

The point is that the happy talk of a modest increase in headcount enrollment hides the serious financial difficulties St. Cloud State is facing. Simply put, when happy talk hits reality, reality wins.