ENLARGE Sally Miller's 'Memorial painting,' ca. 1811. The Metropolitan Museum of Art

In 1880, New Yorkers were captivated by the arrival of an ancient Egyptian obelisk known as "Cleopatra's Needle."

Some 9,000 Freemasons paraded up Fifth Avenue with its pedestal, before the 69-foot, 220-ton shaft was dragged across Manhattan from the banks of the Hudson River—a process that took 112 days—and installed just west of the recently opened Metropolitan Museum of Art building. Crowds thronged the museum for a ceremony marking the gift from the Egyptian government to the U.S.

The Met on Tuesday will open an exhibition on Cleopatra's Needle, charting the history of Egyptomania over the centuries, from Roman emperors and a Renaissance pope to 18th-century Europe and, finally, America.

ENLARGE Cleopatra's Needle on the East Side of Central Park, which is the subject of a new exhibit. Adrienne Grunwald for The Wall Street Journal

The exhibition coincides with an obelisk restoration project launched earlier this year by the Central Park Conservancy. The conservancy, with assistance from the Met's staff, have completed a laser scan of the 3,500-year-old granite monolith and an assessment of its condition. Conservation work to clean and stabilize the surface of the obelisk is scheduled to begin in the spring, pending city approval.

New York's obelisk is one of a pair erected by Thutmose III around 1450 B.C. at the entrance of a sun temple in the ancient Egyptian city of Heliopolis. Its twin is now in London.

In ancient Egypt, an obelisk—a column with a triangular, pointed tip—was a symbol of the sun god, connecting the earth to the sky and radiating protection, said Diana Craig Patch, curator-in-charge of the Egyptian art department, who organized the exhibition.

In later eras, the obelisk took on new meanings, used as a symbol of antiquity and eternity.

The exhibition, Ms. Patch said, explores a question that struck her as she was planning the show: "Why are obelisks so important to everyone?"

The Met's exhibition traces this fixation, starting in ancient Egypt and spreading to Rome and beyond.

ENLARGE 'The Apotheosis of Washington' by Henry Gardiner. The Metropolitan Museum of Art

Caesar Augustus, the first emperor of the Roman Empire, "was fascinated by obelisks," Ms. Patch said. After annexing Egypt, he moved some of them from Egypt to Rome. He moved the pair at Heliopolis to a temple in Alexandria built by Cleopatra VII to honor the deified Julius Caesar. Both obelisks—the one that ended up in New York and the one that went to London—would become known as Cleopatra's Needle.

In the Renaissance, as a symbol of his eternal papal power, Pope Sixtus V placed ancient Egyptian obelisks as focal points in public squares that served as hubs for a new system of arteries through the city.

The exhibition includes a 1586 etching detailing how an engineer hired by Sixtus V moved an obelisk to St. Peter's Square. (Nearly 300 years later, Henry Honeychurch Gorringe, an engineer hired by railroad magnate William H. Vanderbilt, studied the etching while devising his plan for moving Cleopatra's Needle to New York.)

In 18th-century Europe, the obelisk "just shows up everywhere," Ms. Patch said. Examples in the show include tapestries, paintings, a garden design and a blue-and-white Delft ceramic piece.

By the time Cleopatra's Needle arrived in New York, interest in all things Egyptian had swept across the Atlantic.

The exhibition includes an obelisk dip pen and mechanical pencil, a souvenir obelisk needle case, an Egypt-themed mantel piece by Tiffany & Co. (on loan to Yale University until January), and the baton carried by the leader of the Freemasons' parade up Fifth Avenue in 1880.

It is topped with a miniature replica of Cleopatra's Needle.

Write to Jennifer Maloney at jennifer.maloney@wsj.com