Home Page >> News Articles >> Debunking Harvoni Pricing



Debunking Harvoni Pricing Washington, DC While most While most Harvoni Denied Insurance Claim Lawsuits take issue with insurance companies that balk at approving Harvoni treatment for hepatitis C in spite of medical need, one must only look at the pricing strategy maintained by Harvoni manufacturer Gilead for clues that could lead to another smoking gun.



Los Angeles Times (7/28/15), the pricing for Harvoni and companion drug Sovaldi are similar - and prohibitively expensive. Sovaldi is described as running about $1,000 for a single pill, or about $84,000 for a full 12-week regimen. Harvoni is in the same ballpark. The two drugs are hailed by the medical community as miracle drugs, capable of eradicating hepatitis C without the grievous side effects that kept previous patients from seeking treatment in the first place.



There are now, by increasing numbers, 161,000 new hepatitis C patients in 2014 v. only 17,000 the year prior. With a 90 percent cure rate, doctors are favoring Harvoni and Sovaldi for the opportunity to treat hep C early and minimize damage to the liver.



However, insurance companies are with increasing frequency denying patients the opportunity to be treated early, citing liver disease is not sufficiently advanced to warrant treatment. Pundits observe that Harvoni and Sovaldi are designed to mitigate liver damage before it gets too far advanced. By denying treatment, insurance providers are promoting the advancement of liver damage, or so it is alleged.



Regardless of an insurer’s position and denial that often results in a Gilead Hep C Denied Insurance Claim Lawsuit, there is no denying that Harvoni is grossly expensive.



To that end, there are some interesting observations made by the LA Times. For one, the original developer of Sovaldi, Pharmasset, had planned on listing a full 12-week regimen of Sovaldi at $36,000 - less than half what Gilead now charges. Gilead acquired Pharmasset in 2011 for $11 billion.



Second, consider how much a full treatment of Sovaldi - similar to its companion, Harvoni - costs elsewhere in the world: $55,000 in Canada and $900 in Egypt. In the United States, as noted previously, it’s $84,000.



According to the LA Times, Gilead is making huge profit margins in the process. In the first half of this year, Gilead recorded a profit of $8.8 billion on $15.3 billion in sales, a net profit margin of nearly 58 percent. For the full year, the company projects gross profit margins of up to 90 percent.



READ MORE HARVONI DENIED CLAIM LEGAL NEWS Medicaid Patients Denied Harvoni Treatment

The Predatory Pricing Policy of Harvoni as a Modern-Day Scrooge

Harvoni Treatment Denied Lawsuit Accuses Insurer of ERISA Violations



Why the jump? Actuaries for Medicare say it’s “a result of expensive new treatments for hepatitis C.”



Harvoni Lawsuits will continue to flow as the result of denied insurance claims. However, a groundswell of questions are coming to the fore as to just why Harvoni and Sovaldi are so expensive - and if that expense is truly reflecting the costs associated with bringing the promising drugs to market or smacks of profiteering.



Plaintiffs filing Harvoni Denied Insurance Claim Lawsuits may consider looking to the manufacturer, as well as the insurer, for compensation. According to the(7/28/15), the pricing for Harvoni and companion drug Sovaldi are similar - and prohibitively expensive. Sovaldi is described as running about $1,000 for a single pill, or about $84,000 for a full 12-week regimen. Harvoni is in the same ballpark. The two drugs are hailed by the medical community as miracle drugs, capable of eradicating hepatitis C without the grievous side effects that kept previous patients from seeking treatment in the first place.There are now, by increasing numbers, 161,000 new hepatitis C patients in 2014 v. only 17,000 the year prior. With a 90 percent cure rate, doctors are favoring Harvoni and Sovaldi for the opportunity to treat hep C early and minimize damage to the liver.However, insurance companies are with increasing frequency denying patients the opportunity to be treated early, citing liver disease is not sufficiently advanced to warrant treatment. Pundits observe that Harvoni and Sovaldi are designed to mitigate liver damage before it gets too far advanced. By denying treatment, insurance providers are promoting the advancement of liver damage, or so it is alleged.Regardless of an insurer’s position and denial that often results in a Gilead Hep C Denied Insurance Claim Lawsuit, there is no denying that Harvoni is grossly expensive.To that end, there are some interesting observations made by theFor one, the original developer of Sovaldi, Pharmasset, had planned on listing a full 12-week regimen of Sovaldi at $36,000 - less than half what Gilead now charges. Gilead acquired Pharmasset in 2011 for $11 billion.Second, consider how much a full treatment of Sovaldi - similar to its companion, Harvoni - costs elsewhere in the world: $55,000 in Canada and $900 in Egypt. In the United States, as noted previously, it’s $84,000.According to theGilead is making huge profit margins in the process. In the first half of this year, Gilead recorded a profit of $8.8 billion on $15.3 billion in sales, a net profit margin of nearly 58 percent. For the full year, the company projects gross profit margins of up to 90 percent.Thanks in part to The Affordable Care Act, which opens up basic health care to more Americans, prescription drug costs were up 12.6 percent in 2014 when compared against the year prior, which increased a mere 2.5 percent over 2012.Why the jump? Actuaries for Medicare say it’s “a result of expensive new treatments for hepatitis C.”Harvoni Lawsuits will continue to flow as the result of denied insurance claims. However, a groundswell of questions are coming to the fore as to just why Harvoni and Sovaldi are so expensive - and if that expense is truly reflecting the costs associated with bringing the promising drugs to market or smacks of profiteering.Plaintiffs filing Harvoni Denied Insurance Claim Lawsuits may consider looking to the manufacturer, as well as the insurer, for compensation. READ ABOUT HARVONI DENIED CLAIM LAWSUITS MORE HARVONI DENIED CLAIM LEGAL NEWS ARTICLES or

Harvoni Denied Claim Legal Help If you or a loved one have suffered losses in this case, please click the link below and your complaint will be sent to a drugs & medical lawyer who may evaluate your Harvoni Denied Claim claim at no cost or obligation.

READER COMMENTS Posted by

Marcia

on January 13, 2016 Has anyone gotten harvoni through kaiser

In the San Francisco Bay Area?

If so name of ur kaiser doc Posted by

Peg

on November 29, 2015 I was approved for treatment only after I was in san Francisco getting a liver transplant evaluation. To the comments above that's what I do believe the article is about. Harvoni has knocked the virus out so far, but I still have to live with liver damage "decompensated liver" Posted by

Janet

on November 25, 2015 Many people have gotten Harvoni for a $5/bottle copay and there are several organizations that help with the difference of what insurance covers and the balance.

As far as the claim about the cost of expensive Hep C drugs and the jump in Medicare, I was told the price of Medicare has nothing to do with the increase in coverage for Harvoni or Sovaldi. These expenses are covered in the Prescription portion of medicare.

I think the writer needs to do more research before they start pointing fingers. Posted by

Bruce

on November 24, 2015 The writer needs to educate himself on the price of Sovaldi and Harvoni. With insurance, both cost less than 50k.

ADD YOUR COMMENT ON THIS STORY * are mandatory. Please read our Fields markedare mandatory. Please read our comment guidelines before posting.





Click to learn more about LawyersandSettlements.com

LawyersandSettlements.com is an online news and information site for the general public and legal community. As a LawyersandSettlements.com is an online news and information site for the general public and legal community. As a legal news resource, we have emerged as an independent & trusted voice. We provide detailed and quality information on various lawsuits filed including Drugs & Medical Cases