Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) addresses his supporters during a rally at the Grand Wayne Convention Center last month in Fort Wayne, Ind. (Ricky Carioti/The Washington Post)

We hope Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) learns the right lessons in defeat. As he labored to corral the not-Trump vote, we trust he recognized that he cannot lead a party in which he has sown dissension to advance his career. He perhaps now can comprehend that there is no majority even within the GOP of “very conservative” voters and no voter asks about his Heritage Action score.

Voters do not want an ideologue; they want someone who empathizes with them and speaks to real problems in their lives. They want someone to talk plainly, not sound like a televangelist or high school drama student. They will accept, if not demand, someone who is tolerant of gay marriage. They do not demand stale conservative orthodoxy; they want to know who can make their lives better.

Cruz also got a good look at the Laura Ingrahams, the Breitbarts and the rest of the Trumpkins who spew conspiracy theories, xenophobia and out-and-out falsehoods. Cruz came face-to-face with Fox “News,” which has become the junkyard of journalism. We imagine he has learned the shortcomings of the right-wing media echo chamber and will refrain from venerating talk radio and Fox personalities.

Cruz should also have noticed that for all his loyalty to the evangelical movement, it is populated by many hucksters whose loyalty is sold to the highest bidder. Only a small segment of self-described evangelicals is concerned about social issues or a candidate’s personal faith. Outside Iowa caucuses, the social conservative vote is not what it is cracked up to be. Building a political identity specifically to cultivate it — and at the expense of a much wider electorate — is an error.

In short, to succeed in future political endeavors, Cruz needs to see voters as they are, not as he would like them to be. He will need to let go of pretenses (e.g., only he is a pure conservative) and roles (bomb-thrower in the party, victim of the mainstream media) that he adopted under the misconception these things would make him popular. He needs to leave aside the myths that hobbled Republicans and led them into a political dead end. He should forget expedient tactics (e.g. fawning over Donald Trump, blaming fellow Republicans for Obamacare) in favor of — dare we say? — sincerity. Not to put too fine a point on it, but he needs to be more self-aware, gracious and receptive to information whether it fits within an ideological narrative or not.

Cruz took a good first step last night, both in laying out an argument for long-term optimism and refusing to endorse Trump. He can set a standard of integrity in refusing to accept an unacceptable candidate. In fact, he would do well to encourage the #NeverTrump movement, which as he exits the race remains very much alive. “Trump is an existential threat to not merely the Republican Party but the republic,” a veteran Republican operative told me. “If the Republican Party has to be sacrificed to protect the country from an unhinged demagogue then so be it.” Cruz’s reputation would be enhanced by his association with the effort — unlike quislings like Bobby Jindal, Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) and others who seem as though they will support Trump whatever he says or does.

After a grueling race, Cruz will return to the Senate. It would do him a world of good to make some amends with colleagues. The Senate, however, strikes us as exactly the wrong environment for him, one that cultivates precisely the wrong habits. He needs to get away from the artificiality, intraparty backbiting and grandstanding for which the Senate is famous, not wallow in it.

Cruz talks a lot and “fights” a lot but has not done a lot. He is an impatient young man with little to show for it. He could stay in the Senate and become a legislative dynamo or he could leave to start a business, head a foundation or run a city. Being responsible for accomplishing something concrete could be an eye-opening experience. Alternatively, a state supreme court appointment might launch him on a career doing what he loves, pondering and debating the law and without the need for glad-handing, for which he is ill-suited.

Cruz’s considerable intellect can be put to good use if he can manage to get out of his own way. His real contribution to the country, if he is to make one, will be determined by what he does next. He’s lucky in one respect: Americans love a comeback story.