If the Republican Party is really serious about tapping a governor as its next presidential nominee, it could be difficult to find one not trailed by a nagging investigation.

Two developments Thursday could mar the prospects of 2016 luminaries, Gov. Scott Walker, R-Wis., and Gov. Chris Christie, R-N.J.

[READ: Rush Limbaugh: Scott Walker a Blueprint for How to Win]

Court documents unsealed in the campaign finance investigation into Walker's 2012 recall show prosecutors believe the governor was at the center of a nationwide "criminal scheme" to violate election laws, by improperly coordinating with outside groups and GOP super strategist Karl Rove.

Though no charges have been filed against Walker or any of his staff, emails now show Walker was in direct contact with R.J. Johnson, an adviser who was also closely aligned with the Wisconsin Club For Growth, an outside group that vigorously supported Walker's re-election.

As TIME's Michael Scherer writes, yes, the laws surrounding campaign finance are Byzantine and not thoroughly understood by the general public. But:



Elections, after all, rarely hinge on legal technicalities. They are about voter impressions, and "criminal scheme" is quite a phrase to overcome in a contested primary."



In New Jersey, while the day-to-day drip of stories surrounding Bridgegate has slowed to a crawl, Esquire reports that a robust investigation continues to churn away. Two sources tell the magazine that the U.S. Attorney investigating why lanes were shut down on the George Washington Bridge last fall is eyeing indictments by as early as July.

[ALSO: Are 2016 GOP Presidential Candidates Rooting Against the Party in 2014?]

U.S. Attorney Paul Fishman is reportedly keenly interested in the testimony of former Port Authority Chairman David Samson, who resigned in March.



“They’ve got him cold,” says one source. “He got sloppy, arrogant, and greedy. Samson will want a deal. This way, he’d get one or two years. He’d have a future on the other side. He won’t want to die in jail.”

"But Fishman is really focused on Christie," says one source. "Ultimately, he believes he'll get to the governor."