Fuller Theological Seminary is proud to announce the award of a John Templeton Foundation grant to Professor of Systematic Theology Oliver Crisp. A three-year grant that began September 1, 2015, the award of $2 million will fund a major undertaking in Analytical Theology research.

Analytic Theology (AT) is an approach to theology that seeks integration between theological investigation, on the one hand, and the methods and results of progressive and truth-oriented disciplines such as the empirical sciences and analytic philosophy, on the other. Dr. Crisp (PhD, King’s College, University of London) and his team, including colleagues Dr. Justin L. Barrett and Rebecca Sok, will be joined by two postdoctoral research fellows, an administrator, and two doctoral students.

The project, titled Prayer, Love, and Human Nature: Analytic Theology for Theological Formation, hypothesizes that AT supplies an intellectual framework for the training and formation of church leaders. This hypothesis will be tested by working on three topics—prayer, divine love, and theological engagement with the science of human origins—with the tools of AT.

Visiting scholars will be invited to collaborate with the Fuller team on these case studies. By the end of the grant in 2018, Crisp and his colleagues hope to show that AT can make a vital contribution to these three areas in the form of seminars, conferences, seminary curriculum, and published research findings.

About Fuller:

Fuller Theological Seminary is one of the world’s most influential evangelical institutions and the largest multidenominational seminary. We offer 19 degree programs—with Spanish, Korean, and online options—through our Schools of Theology, Psychology, and Intercultural Studies, as well as 16 centers, institutes, and initiatives. More than 4,000 students from 80 countries and 110 denominations enroll annually, and our 40,000 alumni have been called to serve as ministers, counselors, teachers, artists, nonprofit leaders, businesspersons, and in a multitude of other vocations around the world.

###