July 24--Cigna Corp. has agreed to be acquired by Anthem Inc. for $48.4 billion plus debt, forming the nation's largest health insurer with more than 50 million customers.

In a joint announcement early Friday, the companies said Anthem will pay $188 a share, a 37-percent premium over Bloomfield-based Cigna's price at the end of May, before merger rumors surfaced.

Anthem CEO Joseph Swedish would be the combined company's CEO and David M. Cordani, the Cigna chief, would be president and chief operating officer.

The deal, part of a wave of consolidations in health care that includes the pending merger of Aetna and Humana, announced July 3, would end independence for Cigna, which formed in 1982 with the merger of Connecticut General and the Insurance Company of North America.

The combined companies will take the Anthem name and be headquartered in Indianapolis, the home of Anthem, a Cigna spokesman said Friday. But the company will keep a "significant presence at Cigna's Bloomfield facility," Spokesman Matt Asensio said.

Asensio said it was too soon to forecast an employee count for Bloomfield.

Cost savings as a result of the deal would total $2 billion, nearly 2 percent of the combined companies' revenues -- raising questions about the fate of employees, including the 4,200 who work for Cigna in Connecticut. Anthem has hundreds of employees at its Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield Connecticut unit, mostly in Wallingford.

The cash-and-stock deal, valued at $54.2 billion including debt, is expected to close in the second half of 2016 and will require shareholder and regulatory approvals. Anthem said it is "confident in its ability" to secure those approvals for a combination that is expected to draw close scrutiny on antitrust concerns.

"We believe that this transaction will allow us to enhance our competitive position and be better positioned to apply the insights and access of a broad network and dedicated local presence to the health care challenges of the increasingly diverse markets, membership, and communities we serve, Swedish said in a release.

Cigna shareholders would receive $103.40 in cash and the rest in Anthem stock.

Cordani's position in the company was among the issues in a courting process that was extraordinary because of a public volley of tense letters between him and Swedish. Cordani, 49, had initially insisted that he be the CEO, or that he be promised the job on the retirement of Swedish, who is 64, according to a June 20 letter from Swedish to the Cigna board, which Anthem released that day.

Cordani, in the announcement Friday, said both companies share "proud histories and an even brighter future," combining the complementary strengths of each company.

"Going forward our new company will deliver an acceleration of innovative and affordable health and protection benefits solutions that help address our health system's challenges and provide supplemental insurance protection, and health care security to consumers, their families, and the communities we share with them," Cordani said, in a release.

On July 3, Hartford-based Aetna Inc. announced it would acquire rival Humana, based in Louisville, in a $37 billion deal. That intensified pressure on Cigna and other big health insurers to pair off in order to cut costs, as Obamacare has triggered a race for new customers -- and promises to reward companies that manage the healthcare of large populations.

Cigna shares closed Thursday at $154.36, up $3.29, a sign that investors were skeptical that a deal would come together at the price Anthem had publicly offered, or at all.

The deal will draw close scrutiny over antitrust concerns and there has been some speculation that the U.S. Department of Justice will examine the Aetna-Humana combination and a Cigna-Anthem deal together -- although Aetna executives said in discussing their merger that they did not believe that would happen.

The combination of Anthem and Cigna would create a health insurance giant with 53.2 million customers across all lines of business -- catapulting Anthem to the No. 1 position ahead of UnitedHealthcare, which has 45.8 million customers.

Cigna appeals to Anthem because of its strong national accounts business, which is insurance offered to large employers; its stock of coverage from mid-sized businesses; and its specialty programs such as dental, vision and behavioral health. Cigna also was attractive for its wellness programs, Medicare business and its international business.

The deal would retire a corporate name that was launched in 1982 with the merger of two old-line insurers, Connecticut General and the Insurance Company of North America. Connecticut General, formed in Hartford by an act of the legislature in 1865, pioneered health insurance and financial planning through life insurance.

In 1957, CG moved its headquarters out of the capital city to a suburban campus, stirring controversy not only as one of the first large American companies to flee to the suburbs but also for the modernist, glass-and-steel architecture. In 1962, CG entered property-casualty through the purchase of an Aetna business.

INA was formed in Philadelphia in 1792, the year when corporate financial services was launched in the new United States with the creation of a banking system.

Cigna took Philadelphia as its headquarters, and over the following 18 years, exited property-casualty, life and other lines, focusing entirely on health insurance. In 2011, Cigna moved its headquarters to Bloomfield, two years after Cordani, a Waterbury native, took over the top job.

(c)2015 The Hartford Courant (Hartford, Conn.)

Visit The Hartford Courant (Hartford, Conn.) at www.courant.com

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.