DENVER — Just before midnight on Thanksgiving, Lizelle van Vuuren hit the green button on her computer screen and Wüf, a smart dog-collar under development for nearly two years, launched its Kickstarter campaign.

Within minutes, Wüf got its first backer. Sure, it was a good friend of van Vuuren’s. But that’s how many crowdfunding projects should start — with support from friends and family. Twelve hours later, the campaign was at 10 percent of its $50,000 goal.

“We’re taking a risk of launching on Black Friday. We know that. But people are in a buying state of mind,” said van Vuuren, Wüf’s enthusiastic co-founder and chief marketing officer.

She and cofounder Sean Kelly will be glued to their MacBooks for the next 30 days.

The GPS-enabled collar can help find a runaway dog, talk to a pet when you’re not near, and monitor nutrition and action with a mobile app. But this isn’t just any Kickstarter. Wüf has hordes of connections (van Vuuren founded Women who Startup and StartupDenver), expertise (graduated from Boulder’s Boomtown Accelerator last spring) and even some funding of about $50,000. But can that sort of pedigree guarantee a crowdfunding success?

On Black Friday, the two met at the collaboration space Galvanize in Denver, where van Vuuren rents office space. Kelly works out of the Boulder Galvanize.

It was a quiet day at Galvanize. The bar and cafe were closed. No one was milling around or sitting in a lounge chair punching their laptops. Occasionally, a few passersby peered through the glass front door, some came inside. Two guys who work in the building walked in with their dogs and promised to check out the campaign.

“Hopefully, there will be lots of excitement over the weekend with Monday giving us a huge boost,” van Vuuren said. ” We want to meet our $50,000 funding goal today. We would love to be the most successful pet tech (on Kickstarter). And if we could, we’d like to be the most funded project in Colorado,”

One of the largest pet-related projects was One Fast Cat, a hamster wheel for cats. It raised nearly $350,000.

“And we’re trying to save lives,” quipped van Vuuren.

The genesis came from Kelly’s own dog, Roxie, who ran after a squirrel but never returned. She was hit by a car.

“The technology is here, so why is this still an issue?” Kelly said.

Wüf built in features like an invisible fence, so if the dog goes outside a boundary, the owner is alerted. With a GPS chip in the collar, the Wüf app also tracks where the dog has run off to.

A 5 a.m. e-mail sent to people who opted in to Wüf’s news, was opened by 40 percent of its recipients by early afternoon. It had snagged the top spot for “Most Popular” on the Colorado page. It was also climbing up the popular technology projects page — quite a feat since it was competing with about 950 other technology campaigns.

Kelly continued to tweak the page and follow up with questions from potential supporters. The company also decided to drop the price, down from last year’s $250-plus price tag. Currently, the lowest price on Kickstarter is $99, which gets you a grey collar that ships next November.

“At $250, people who wanted it would know it’s a premium product. But that was counter productive to our plan to get this on millions of dogs,” Kelly said, adding that Wüf has four patents pending. “The idea was to make this at an affordable price point. We still make a margin on hardware, plus we have an open API and (developer platform).”

While at the early-stage Boomtown Accelerator last spring, Wüf got its team in the same city — Azmat Bilal flew in from Pakistan and Tyesha Snow from Portland, Ore. The experience included hands-on mentoring from CEOs like Fernando Cardenas of Talent Riot and Brian Baker of The First User. Plus, they got $20,000.

Boomtown’s program manager Shaw Lathrop said that for consumer tech products, crowdfunding is still a good way to gain traction.

“For early stage companies, crowdfunding can really show investors about the interest in a product. You can show there is demand,” he said. “With Sean, it really makes a lot of sense because he knows the interest is there. But instead of just telling (investors), you have proof.”

Boomtown ended in June and Kelly said he spent the time looking for investors.

“We probably should have done Kickstarter earlier,” Kelly said. “Coming out of Boomtown, we had a funding goal of $1.4 million. We had big fans from Demo Day and there was a lot of interest from venture capitalists.”

But a difference of opinion — an extremely interested investor wanted a simpler collar and Kelly wanted to build the smartest thing out there — made Kelly decide to try Kickstarter.

“We said let’s rethink our approach. Is $1.4 million the right raise for us right now? Is our valuation where it should be? Or can we bring it up higher by building more traction? We needed to build more traction and prove the market is here once and for all. And then we can go back and raise that million-dollar round,” he said.

This week, the company says it is closing on further funding that will more than double what they’ve taken in to date. But for the most part, the founders bootstrapped the effort, Kelly said.

“The Kickstarter aided us in (getting more funding) because it gave us a deadline,” Kelly said. “If the Kickstarter does well, our valuation increases. For investors with a little more appetite for risk, they get a better deal.”

Kelly actually tried crowdfunding the product 18 months ago on Indiegogo. Under the moniker Ridogulous Labs, the campaign failed to reach its goal, netting just $7,391 of its $40,000 goal. Returning to crowdfunding was something Kelly debated.

“I was hesitant. Should we put ourselves through this again? I experienced small successes but a failure of the funding goal. What happens if this screws up again? There’s this nervousness to it,” Kelly said.

“But what I keep reminding myself of is where I am now compared to back then. I had just finished business school and was living with my parents. I had no network, no team and no community to build into but my business school friends. But they’re not startup people. So I said, Okay, let me think about this from a mathematical standpoint. How much greater is my reach now compared to before. It’s easily 50-times. so times that by $7,000 and we’ve got a good chance to do something powerful.”

It’s already been 30 days of non-stop work, as the company created a video by hiring 27 Notch, a Hollywood-based studio.

By around 5 p.m. Friday, Wüf had raised $5,700. Twenty nine more days to go.

According to Kickstarter, projects that reach 20 percent of their goal are likely to to be fully funded. Not all reach 20 percent; 12 percent of projects don’t receive a single pledge.

“The whole point of today’s efforts is by the time we get around to Monday, we’re already at 10 percent of our goal,” van Vuuren said.

Tamara Chuang: 303-954-1209, tchuang@denverpost.com or twitter.com/Gadgetress

Cool tech products currently crowdfunding:

Bluesmart suitcase — A tricked-out suitcase that comes with a mobile app to keep track of your luggage. A built-in scale weighs the bag to make sure it’s within carry-on bag limits, plus the case’s battery can charge mobile gadgets. The app locks the case, tracks the bag’s proximity and location and tracks travel miles. Ships in August 2015. Currently funding on Indiegogo at bit.ly/bluesmartbag

GoGlovewearable tech — A glove with built-in Bluetooth becomes a remote control for smartphones. Just tap your fingers to turn up the volume, skip a song or pause. A matching mobile app will let users personalize settings. Ships June 2015. Currently funding on Kickstarter, at goglove.io

Maid smart oven — Smart ovens with an Internet connection aren’t that new. But Maid adds features that would come in handy for those who don’t necessarily like to cook. A touchscreen displays recipes and reads them aloud while you cook. It also users adjust cooking settings by voice, gesture or touch and will adjust time and temperature automatically based on number of servings. Funding on Kickstarter. Details at maidoven.com