WASHINGTON — House Republicans on Friday replaced the firm handling their lawsuit against President Obama after the lawyer representing them pulled out over what was said to be political backlash among his colleagues at the firm, Baker Hostetler.

The lawyer, David B. Rivkin Jr., had taken the case on behalf of House Republicans in August, right after they voted to sue the president, accusing him of overstepping the powers of the presidency. Two people with knowledge of the situation said Mr. Rivkin withdrew from the case under pressure after facing criticism that he had taken on an overly partisan lawsuit. Some members of the firm feared the case against Mr. Obama could drive off potential clients and hurt Baker Hostetler’s credibility, according to one of the people with knowledge of the case. Both people said they were prohibited from publicly discussing such a delicate case.

With Mr. Rivkin’s withdrawal, the House Administration Committee signed a new contract on Friday with William A. Burck, co-head of the Washington office of Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan. Mr. Burck had served as outside counsel for the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform when House Republicans sued Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. to produce documents related to the botched gunrunning investigation known as Operation Fast and Furious.

He also represented Maureen McDonnell, the wife of former Gov. Bob McDonnell of Virginia, in the corruption trial that ended this month with her conviction on nine counts.

Neither Mr. Burck nor representatives for Baker Hostetler returned calls for comment.

After Mr. Rivkin took the case, Baker Hostetler was parodied by Jimmy Fallon on the “Tonight Show,” which broadcast a fake commercial in which an ambulance-chasing lawyer tries to come up with Obama lawsuits and urges viewers to call a toll-free number.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“At Baker Hostetler, we specialize in one thing — suing the president,” the faux infomercial says. “For instance, have you ever been forced to pass Obamacare, even though you didn’t like it? We can help you waste thousands of dollars in taxpayer money to fight for what you sort of believe in.”

The measure to sue the president — which passed 225 to 201 along party lines — authorized the House to move forward with a lawsuit against Mr. Obama for his application of the Affordable Care Act, which they argued had been selective and intended to delay the law’s most undesirable aspects.

“No member of this body needs to be reminded about what the Constitution states about the president’s obligation to faithfully execute the laws of our nation,” Speaker John A. Boehner said from the House floor. “Are you willing to let any president choose what laws to execute and what laws to change? Are you willing to let anyone tear apart what our founders have built?”

One House Democrat, Louise M. Slaughter of New York, called it “a sorry spectacle of legislative malpractice” and “political theater.”

The lawsuit was Mr. Boehner’s way to send a signal that Republicans would fight the president’s efforts to revise laws Congress had passed while not going as far as impeachment, as many on the right would like.

Still, the lawsuit has done little to appease some of the most right wing members of his party. Sarah Palin, for one, responded by calling for Mr. Obama’s impeachment, stirring up the kind of intraparty fight that Mr. Boehner had hoped to avoid.

But other prominent conservatives ridiculed the lawsuit. Erick Erickson, the blogger and pundit, also called it “political theater” that wasted taxpayer dollars. Mark Levin, the popular radio host and former Reagan administration official, called it a “foolish move” that made him cringe.