New Service Enables Professionals in Work Market's Network to Compare Plans, Easily Access Health Coverage and Save Money

NEW YORK, NY--(Marketwired - Nov 5, 2015) - Work Market, the leading on-demand marketplace for independent professionals, today announced it is offering its entire network of independent professionals across the U.S. with access to affordable healthcare via a partnership with Stride Health.

Work Market users can now more easily find appropriate, affordable coverage typically reserved for full-time employees through Stride Health's personalized approach to managing health insurance, healthcare and compliance.

"For millions of Americans working in today's new economy, finding affordable healthcare without the support of an employer can be challenging," said Stephen DeWitt, CEO of Work Market. "Our partnership with Stride Health enables us to connect our growing network of independent talent with healthcare options that best meet the needs of them and their families."

With the Affordable Care Act (ACA) requiring all individuals to procure health coverage by January 31, 2016 or be subjected to government fines, the pressure for freelance workers to find affordable coverage has never been greater. By partnering with Stride Health, Work Market helps its growing network of freelance workers overcome this challenge and ensure they have access to the care they need to protect their health.

Through the partnership with Stride, Work Market users can now get health insurance through over 200 insurance carriers, and Stride's recommendation platform compares 38 factors across thousands of health plans to find which plan will save a freelancer the most money.

Each health plan includes free preventative care, such as flu shots, screenings, yearly check-ups and more. In addition, Stride Health will alert users if they qualify for government discounts, helping them maximize their healthcare savings, and Stride provides users with access to year-round support through its in-house health insurance experts.

"Affordable healthcare shouldn't be reserved for those with access to employer-provided plans," said Noah Lang, CEO of Stride Health. "Our goal is to help all workers understand the healthcare options available to them, and make the right decisions to protect their health -- and their wallets. We are thrilled to partner with Work Market and provide its extensive user base with easy access to the healthcare solutions they need."

The Open Enrollment Period for individual health insurance started November 1st, and Work Market's partnership with Stride Health provides freelancers with a timely solution to attain affordable coverage. Additional information about the Work Market and Stride Health partnership and the resulting benefits for freelance workers is available at Work Market's website.

About Stride Health

Stride Health delivers health coverage, care and compliance as a complete suite of benefits for independent workers. Stride's platform provides on-demand economy marketplaces, consumer finance platforms, and large organizations with a seamlessly integrated solution to protect independent workers.

Now available in all 50 states and Washington DC, Stride's coverage suite is bolstered by a dedicated advisory team and software that provides access to in-network medical practitioners, negotiated drug prices at 70,000 local pharmacies, and care delivery in your plan. Stride's product is available on any device -- mobile, tablet or desktop.

Based in San Francisco, Stride Health (www.stridehealth.com) launched in early 2014 and is venture-backed by the leading health and consumer technology firms Venrock, New Enterprise Associates, and Fidelity Biosciences.

About Work Market

Work Market is the #1 on-demand marketplace for independent professionals. Work Market automatically matches independent professionals with top companies and work based on their skill sets. Independent professionals around the country rely on Work Market every day to connect to thousands of reliable and well-paying freelance assignments. Join the largest network of independent professionals on the planet at www.workmarket.com.