Timber Tina's World Championship Lumberjills demonstrate old-time lumberjack skills in a modern-day competition

Lumberjills Katie Crecelius and Sarah Perry balance atop a log Saturday, kicking water at each other as they get rolling.

The two look like they are dancing as they take quick little steps with their arms swinging.

"You got to constantly move your feet. You have to be ready for the log to move underneath you," said Lumberjill Tina Scheer, as she explained their moves during the noontime half-hour performance by Timber Tina's World Champion Lumberjills - Chics with Axes during the Larimer County Fair & Rodeo.

Old-Time Lumberjack Skills

Four women wielding axes, handsaws and chainsaws demonstrated the old-time skills of lumberjacks in four shows Saturday as they competed against each other in log rolling, axe throwing, and wood sawing, chopping and carving. The other woman in the show, a first time for the fair, was Lindsey Leisenring.

Lumberjills Sarah Perry and Katie Crecelius try to make each other slip off a log in a rolling completion Saturday at the Larimer County Fair & Rodeo. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The four are female logger athletes with the first all-women's logging sports traveling exhibition founded in 1997 and based in Ellsworth, Maine. Scheer, who started log rolling at age 7, started the worldwide traveling show one year after opening the Great Main Lumberjack Show, a logging sports exhibition and facility in the Trenton, Maine, area.

"These are the old-time skills of the lumberjacks that helped settle the country," Scheer said, explaining that like rodeo, a lumberjack competition started from an occupation. "You get two guys doing an occupation like that, chopping and sawing, they want to race against each other."

The Competitions

Advertisement

Scheer and Leisenring competed in three rounds of hot sawing, using modified stock saws with stinger pipes and carburetors as they cut through each end of a log.

Scheer won by a few seconds, but when it came to axe throwing versus Crecelius, her game was a little off, she later said. She didn't make the target in three tries, while Crecelius threw her 2 ½ - pound, double-headed axe smack into the target two of three times.

"This is actually the hardest one. It's your mind, not your skill," Perry said as she took turns with Scheer as the emcee. "Who wants to see Tina hit a bull's eye? Who wants to see Tina hit the target? So does she. ... It's a perfect score."

A perfect score of O.

But Scheer wowed the crowd as she carved a log into an animal. She started with two ears on a stump, turning the log so the audience couldn't see what she was doing to create the face.

"Are you ready? Take your cameras out," Perry said.

Scheer proudly held up her carving of a rabbit with big eyes and rough-cut features, "the best she's ever done," Perry said.

"He's smiling because he's at the fair," Scheer said.

More Chopping and Sawing

The other two competitions included underhand chopping, where the Lumberjills stood on top of a log and used a 6-pound razor sharp racing axe to chop between their feet, and crosscut sawing, where they worked in teams of two to crosscut saw through a log using a double-handled saw.

"It's power, but it's a big mental game," Scheer said. "You need to have endurance. You have to be strong, but you have to be smart."

Leisenring, who learned how to chop wood in college, said wood chopping serves as an alternative to conventional sports.

"It's a great way to stay in shape," Leisenring said. "It's so much fun."

Perry described the sport as "all-in-one cross training."

"It gives you all-around training," she said.

The Lumberjills show will continue through the end of the fair Tuesday. The Lumberjills will perform every two hours from noon-6 p.m. Sunday and at 5 p.m. and 7:30 p.m. on Monday and Tuesday.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com; twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.