How does a business owner save for retirement? When you consider the new Affordable Care Act tax, increasing the Medicare tax to 2.35 percent from 1.45 percent, the additional 3.8 percent investment income tax, and over $14,500 a year for Social Security, it can seem a daunting task. But it is not impossible.

Usually the accountant, the financial adviser or the insurance agent recommends setting up a simplified employee pension or a solo 401(k). Although this works for some business owners, complications begin if you have employees. Not only do you have to contribute to the employees’ accounts, but the costs to set up and manage the accounts can quickly add up.

Until recently, most business owners have chosen one of two paths for putting money away: They either don’t save into a company-sponsored plan at all or save only a smaller amount into an individual retirement plan.

With recent governmental regulations, an old plan has re-emerged and become new again. This plan is called the cash balance plan.

The cash balance plan’s rules allow you to save up to $240,000 per year into a strategy that allows full tax deferral. Better yet, it is exempted from all the normal payroll taxes. The best part of this plan is its very low setup cost. And, because all contributions are free from payroll taxes, the savings alone on the business owners and employees contributions could be enough to pay for the entire setup and administration of the plan.

As an example, let us assume that Bill owns a successful medical practice and has been capped at the $52,000 per year in a SEP-IRA. Bill is also paying the full FICA (Social Security, Medicare) tax plus the Affordable Care Act tax which equals 16.2 percent (12.4 percent for Social Security, 2.9 percent Medicare tax, 0.09 percent Affordable Care Act tax). Setting up the cash balance plan lets Bill put $240,000 into his retirement plan. In his current tax bracket, this will save him $95,000 in income taxes, $6,960 in Medicare taxes and $2,160 elsewhere for a total of $104,120 or 43 percent in total taxation.

As a fee-based financial planner, one factor I like best about these plans is that the assets are 100 percent protected from lawsuits. In today’s litigious society, the idea of a fully protected plan has some merit. Many people think that an IRA or a SEP is protected from lawsuits but may be surprised when they learn they are either not protected or are protected only up to a limit. Very few states have unlimited protection of an individual retirement plan.

In the past 30 years, I have often wondered why some great programs fail miserably. There are often simple reasons that I have seen. The size of the commission payment or compensation a broker will receive has been a large component of why the financial institutions or brokers are not making these plans as accessible as they could be to consumers.

Another reason I have seen for the lack of knowledge among consumers is that for the cash balance plan to comply with Department of Labor rules and the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, the types of investments must be conservative and follow a strict formula. Although business owners may want this conservative investment, it is usually not a cash cow for the person selling it or the financial institution. Therefore, it is rarely presented as a viable option for the business owner.

I also find that a majority of business owners who have reviewed these plans and ultimately decide not to follow through with them do so because of the required conservative investment. On the whole, entrepreneurs are risk takers and by nature look for higher returns on their money. In the case of a cash balance plan, this conservative investment may only earn 5 percent to 6 percent. But what is often not taken into account is the payroll tax savings.

As an example, if you are already over the $117,000 Social Security income limit, there is still a 2.99 percent savings on Medicare and Affordable Care Act taxes. That turns the base return of 5 percent into a total return of 8.8 percent.

Sometimes saving money without risk is better than trying to make money with risk. I would also submit that getting an 8.8 percent total return on the money without risk could be a spark in our recent dark cloud of volatile markets.

People interested in exploring cash balance plans need to ask their financial planners to determine whether they are eligible and then whether it will save them tax. A calculation will need to be done to make this determination. No financial decision can or should be made without first calculating to ensure it works for you.

Kenneth Himmler has 30 years of experience as a financial planner and has written extensively on the topic. He is managing partner and founder of Anderson Wealth Management in Las Vegas. Reach him at ken@kenhimmler.com.