Concert to open with Dan + Shay

Logan County Fair Manager Todd Thomas, right, introduces Arlen Hershberger (center left) of East Cheyenne Gas Storage and entertainment chair Marilee Johnson to announce the 2015 Night Show performers at a Business After Hours Friday. ( Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Brett Eldredge will be the headline act of the 2015 Logan County Fair Night Show (Courtesy photo)

The much-anticipated moment for many Logan County country music fans finally arrived Friday night, with the announcement of the entertainment for the East Cheyenne Gas Storage Night Show at the 2015 Logan County Fair.

All eyes were on entertainment chair Marilee Johnson and Arlen Hershberger of East Cheyenne Gas Storage as they revealed the acts during a Business After Hours sponsored by the Logan County Fair Board at the Logan County Chamber of Commerce.

After warming up their audience, Johnson and Hershberger introduced the opening act, Dan + Shay, and the headliner, Brett Eldredge.

Johnson called Eldredge a "fast-rising up and comer." The baritone singer/songwriter was named the 2014 Country Music Association's "New Artist of the Year." He has signed with Atlantic Records, and his debut album, "Bring You Back," features two No. 1 hits: "Don't Ya" and "Beat of the Music." He has performed with country music stars such as Brad Paisley, Miranda Lambert, Trace Adkins, Willie Nelson and Taylor Swift, and was recently named one of People magazine's "Hottest Men of Country." According to his website, www.bretteldredge.com, Eldredge was performing before he was 15, but mastered the guitar after college following a move to Nashville. He was influenced at an early age by Ray Charles, Ronnie Dunn and Frank Sinatra.

Advertisement

Dan Smyers and Shay Mooney, the two artists making up the duo Dan + Shay, are "one of country music's most promising duos," Johnson said. The two were nominated for Vocal Duo of the Year by the Academy of Country Music Awards for 2014. Their debut album, "Where It All Began," released their hit single, "19 You + Me," which was the most added debut of 2013 on country radio. Learn more about the group at www.danandshay.com.

Dan + Shay was named the special guest act to open the 2015 Logan County Fair Night Show Friday. (Courtesy photo)

Tickets for the Aug. 8 Night Show will go on sale May 4 at lcfair.org or at the Logan County Courthouse. The "Go Hog Wild" 2015 Logan County Fair runs July 30 through Aug. 9.

The Business After Hours event also featured giveaways from 94.5 The Ranch, and free rodeo tickets to anyone wearing cowboy boots.

Sara Waite: 970-526-9310, swaite@journal-advocate.com