Last week, the U.S. Senate approved a resolution deeming April Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia Awareness Month before splitting on a two-week recess.

And you thought that America’s most august legislative body is guilty of under-performance?

Well, it did find the energy for an epic all-nighter even after that hernia vote. In fact, a Thursday-Friday session proved useless and improbably fascinating.

A group that rarely suffers from exhaustion engaged in 44 separate roll call votes on budget-related amendments until finishing at about 3:30 a.m. by passing a Republican-crafted budget resolution.

It was all typically decorous even during its virtually unwatched finale.

As America slept, Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) won audible bipartisan plaudits by suggesting saving time by no longer having the clerk repeat aloud the vote of every senator by name.

Bingo. I was soon gazing at a mostly empty Senate chamber on C-Span and beefy Budget Committee Chairman Mike Enzi (R-Wy.) both wrapping things up and praising one and all.

That prompted Democrat Sheldon Whitehouse (R.I.), by then the highest- ranking committee Democrat left, to thank Enzi (“a very courteous gentleman”) while acidly noting, “We think this is an awful budget.”

Yeah, it probably is. Still, this was classic legislative harrumphing, with hundreds of matters broached through nearly 800 proposed amendments, none of them having the force of law even if they passed.

“They mean everything and nothing,” said Sarah Binder, a government expert at George Washington University and former Capitol Hill staffer.

A so-called “Vote-A-Rama” (yes, they use the self-mocking term) was a chance for senators to stake out a position on issues important to them, constituents or party.

It was a policy potpourri even if it sometimes forced uncomfortable choices among competing interests.

So moderate Republican Susan Collins (Me.) pushed a bipartisan winner, namely to extend the period each year when Pell Grants can be procured.

But she then voted against Democrat Al Franken’s (Minn.) move to restore GOP cuts to the Pell program, which helps needy students. The GOP wants to freeze the maximum size of the grant for 10 years rather than grow with inflation.

Independent Bernie Sanders (Vt.) and Democrat Chris Coons (Del.) were vanquished in seeking to force Congress to actually raise revenues to pay for wars.

But at least war is a big deal. Other initially proposed amendments involved protecting the Northern long-eared bat, cutting Amtrak food service, forcing the Treasury Department to use dollar bills rather than dollar coins and somehow barring the United Nations from acting against the interests of Israel.

If there was a method to the eclectic madness, it involved forcing opponents to vote up or down on matters. In theory, those votes could at least be used for and against senators in future campaigns.

“Your senator voted to shaft little children!” might be the gist of an ad for anybody who dared to spurn amendments related to how Medicaid deals with kids.

That was true for Sanders attempting to raise the minimum wage. No sooner had his attempt failed than he had a press release out titled, “Republicans Oppose Minimum Wage Hike as Budget Debate Continues.”

It was the same with Sen. Mark Kirk (R-Ill.), who exploited animus toward Iran with a tough-guy amendment to impose new sanctions if it violates a nuclear deal not even negotiated. He won and instantly put out a press release.

Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), a likely GOP presidential candidate, ditched his Pentagon-wary libertarian ways by seeking a giant increase in defense spending. It failed.

By sunrise, amendments were passed to let married gays get Social Security benefits, gut President Obama’s new limits on carbon emissions at power plants and requiring Obama, Vice President Joe Biden and all political appointees to get health insurance through Obamacare’s individual health exchanges.

And six Republicans switched sides to pass a Democratic amendment to give workers the right to paid sick leave. Each may well have a competitive reelection race in 2016 and, presumably, doesn’t want to be portrayed as a meanie.

Of course, carrying the weight of such notoriety could conceivably even cause some organ to protrude through the wall of the cavity where it resides.

In that case, it’s probably lucky that we’ve got Hernia Awareness Month.