SPRINGFIELD ‒ Newton Mayor Setti Warren has joined more than 50 other African-American current and former mayors in endorsing Hillary Clinton's 2016 White House bid, the Democratic candidate's campaign announced Tuesday.

Pointing to his experience in working for the former first lady, Warren said he witnessed Clinton's commitment to important issues. He also praised her support for providing veterans with proper benefits, treatment and health care, among other things.

"As a mayor, I appreciate her attention to promoting policies that make a real difference on the ground, on our streets and in our neighborhoods, in the everyday lives of individuals and families," he said in a statement.

"It is her tireless work towards advancing these values, making sure people of all backgrounds in this country have the opportunity to meet their full potential, that I am supporting her for president."

Joining Warren in endorsing the former secretary of state were current and former mayors from South Carolina, New York, California, Georgia and several other states, including New Haven, Conn. Mayor Toni Harp.

The former Connecticut state senator contended that "our nation needs a leader brimming with intelligence, experience and compassion with a desire to boldly address long-standing issues."

"Hillary Clinton is that leader, who has honed her sense of American values in the U.S. Senate and as secretary of state, who has polished her ideas about solving America's challenges and who is now eager to engage those solutions," she said.

Columbia, SC Mayor Steve Benjamin, president of the African American Mayors Association, also threw his support behind the Democrat's campaign, saying "it's clear that Hillary Clinton is the best candidate to be our next president."

Clinton said she was honored to have been endorsed by more than 50 African-American mayors.

"As president, I'll always be a friend to America's mayors. I'll solicit their ideas and expertise at every step. And I'm proud to stand with them today, because mayors are critical to growing our economy and strengthening our country, one community at a time," she said.

The former secretary of state's campaign stressed that Clinton has fought to strengthen African-American families and communities and will continue to do so if sent to the White House. Specifically, it said, she will work to defend and expand the Affordable Care Act, improve college affordability, expand access to the ballot box and overhaul the criminal justice system.