This is the fourth of five articles on infant mortality in Indiana.

You would expect Karl Nichols to be thrilled that Indiana's top health official has adopted the state's miserable infant mortality rate as a pet cause.

After all, for the past several years, as executive director of the St. Joseph County Minority Health Coalition, Nichols has been attempting to push the issue to the forefront.

To be clear, Nichols isglad that the subject is finally getting the attention it deserves. But he also wonders what took so long. He remembers the terrible 2006 St. Joseph County statistics for African-American babies: 30 deaths per 1,000 live births (The 2012 African-American rate is 15.6.) He wonders why "nobody made a big fuss" over that.

He's also been skeptical of the state's commitment when it wouldn't accept Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act -- something that he has advocated for, because it would allow more low-income pregnant women to get prenatal care.

Gov. Mike Pence instead touts expansion of the state's Healthy Indiana Plan, under which the poor are expected to make small contributions toward their health care coverage. As of last week, 42,683 were enrolled in HIP, while more than 300,000 Hoosiers are uninsured. Pence prefers HIP's consumer-driven, market-based approach because it requires the poor to put more "skin in the game.''

Last week, Pence unveiled what he calls HIP 2.0, his proposal for providing health care for about 350,000 low-income Hoosiers.

Nichols said in an email that he's "very excited" to see the governor's plan to expand health care services to the uninsured. He notes, however, the importance of taking the next 30 days -- the formal public notice and comment period -- to thoroughly examine the plan. "Only then will we be able to see how impactful the expansion will be for the people who need the services the most."

Dr. Richard Feldman, a former state health commissioner whose column appears in The Tribune and The Indianapolis Star, has been a vocal critic of Pence's refusal to expand Medicaid. And he's no fan of consumer-driven health care plans such as HIP because he says they've never been shown to be a good way to engage the poor, who live paycheck to paycheck.

But on Monday, Feldman, director of medical education and family medicine residency at Franciscan St. Francis Health in Indianapolis, said he's "cautiously optimistic" about HIP 2.0.

He says Pence has "significantly compromised," especially on his "skin in the game" principles by backing away, in large part, from the health savings account concept. Feldman says that while there are some co-pays, they're minimal -- a few bucks for an office visit, for example.

This plan should be "more palatable to the feds and there's a reasonable expectation that they'll accept it with possible revisions,'' Feldman says.

Indiana's history on Medicaid expansion is just one area where critics say the state is talking the talk, but not walking the walk, on lowering infant mortality rates.

Legislative moves regarding tobacco are another sticking point. Seventeen percent of pregnant women in Indiana smoke; the national rate is 9 percent. Smoking during pregnancy causes health problems, including premature birth and infant death, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Last year, the director of the state's Tobacco Prevention and Cessation Commission reported that the state spends $28 million a year on health costs for infants born to mothers who smoke.

Feldman points out that smoking results in low birth weight, which is a big part of infant mortality.

Despite the statistics, the General Assembly has siphoned off money intended for smoking cessation programs. So far, tobacco prevention program dollars have been slashed by 86 percent. In 2011 the state's independent Tobacco Prevention and Cessation agency was abolished in a "cost-cutting" move.

Though difficult to quantify, the programs have surely played a role in lowering the state's smoking rate. Since 2001, when the state began receiving money after states' attorneys general sued the tobacco industry, the Hoosier adult smoking rate dropped from 27 percent to 21 percent in 2010. Smoking rates for high school youth dropped by 47 percent during that time.

Feldman says legislators have "destroyed" the tobacco prevention program. While the percentage of pregnant women who smoke is high, it's lower than it was in the past, which he attributes, in part, to state smoking cessation efforts.

"The program showed impressive results. We're in danger of reversing trends," he says.