Aurora is a vibrant and growing city. Its strength is in its diversity, with families from more than 100 countries, speaking just as many languages. The city boasts the foundation of a dynamic economy and a thriving community.

But great cities require great schools, and Aurora’s school district is falling dangerously behind. This poor performance threatens to dampen the city’s momentum and, more crucially, leave behind another generation of Aurora’s children.

We launched RISE Colorado in Aurora Public Schools (APS) in 2013 to empower families to improve our public schools for all of our children.

We contributed to a report, “If Not Now: Transforming Aurora Public Schools from Failing to Great,” issued by 17 civic and education groups, whose findings, though not necessarily new, are startling nonetheless and add a sense of urgency to what Aurora Public Schools is doing to improve:

• All students, but in particular low-income students and students of color, are performing worse in APS than in the rest of the state — and the gap between APS and the state is widening.

• Almost half of students in APS do not graduate high school, and only 40 percent of graduates go on to enroll in college. Half of the students enrolling in college need to take remedial courses because they are not prepared for college-level work.

• APS is in its fourth year of being on the state’s “accountability clock,” and faces losing accreditation if it doesn’t improve.

Yes, these challenges are daunting. But with them come opportunity. Struggling districts across the nation are using innovative strategies with impressive results. These strategies, outlined in the report, include high-quality, full-day early childhood programs; robust goal-setting; deep community engagement; development of exemplary new schools, including charter schools; refined curricula that meet the needs of all Aurora’s students; publicly communicated school quality ratings; and aggressive action in turning around the lowest-performing schools.

These challenges are felt deeply by the community. Two Aurora families, those of Sipinga Fifita Nau and Diana Castro, are prime examples of the types of families APS must better serve. Both are active members of RISE Colorado, and helped craft the report’s language and recommendations, along with other members of the If Not Now Coalition.

Nau, whose family is from American Somoa and the Kingdom of Tonga, graduated from Aurora’s Hinkley High School and now has three children in APS. One is a second-grader at Vista Peak; two attend Laredo Child Development Center.

“I hope that with this report, families will realize they have more of a say in their child’s education than they think they do,” Nau said. “I know there is room for growth and improvements. I ask that the district leadership work with families and the community to improve our children’s educational opportunities.”

Castro moved to Aurora from Mexico when she was a teenager. She graduated from Aurora Central High School, and now has two children: a daughter who attends Early Beginnings Zoom Site — one of only two full-day preschool classrooms in a district building — and an 11-month-old son.

Castro didn’t go to college and wants her children to have every educational opportunity possible. She helped start the Family Leadership Council at Jamaica Child Development Center, which her daughter attended last year.

“I hope this report helps the district make improvements,” Castro said. “As a mother of an APS student, it’s very difficult to see these numbers. When I think about the fact that my daughter could be one of the students that doesn’t graduate, it makes me feel sad and upset.”

The “If Not Now” report sheds light on the challenges, and also offers a clear path forward for APS. After all, there is really only one acceptable outcome: a school district that engages the community, and implements proven strategies that result in sustainable student growth, academic achievement and higher graduation rates. A district that holds itself accountable, one that is not afraid to ask the tough questions, challenge the status quo and take new approaches. A district that is the pride of the community.

We must do more to improve APS, and we must do it faster. The families and children of Aurora deserve nothing less.

Milagros Barsallo and Veronica Palmer are co-founders and co-CEOs of RISE Colorado.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.