Dr. Farzaneh Jimenez Shamsi is a Filipino-Persian dentist whose love for dentistry started when she was a child who used to spend her days at the dental clinic of her mom, Dr. Gloria Jimenez, a Filipino dental surgeon.

Shamsi completed her Doctorate of Dental Medicine at the Centro Escolar University and earned her second dental license as Doctor of Dental Surgery in Iran.

She completed numerous continuing education courses on dental surgery, dental implants, and dental cosmetics and aesthetics. In all these, Dr. Shamsi constantly thought of her patients as she wanted them to receive the most comprehensive and advanced dental care.

“What I enjoy about dentistry is coming up with a treatment plan, especially when it’s about giving a new smile to the patient. The most difficult part I find about dentistry is the physical pain it leaves behind after several hours of work, in my back or sometimes my hands,” shares Dr. Shamsi,who strives to keep up with the latest techniques and materials to provide her patients with the safest and most effective dental care and results.

Hundreds of hours of continuing education, including certification in cosmetic dentistry and restorative dentistry has brought Shamsi to where she is now, co-founder and co-owner of Fashion Smile Clinic in Makati established in 2010.

“I feel Filipinos need to be more conscious and aware about their dental and oral health. According to statistics I read early this year, more than 87 percent suffer from tooth decay, most of this could be the result of unhealthy diet, lack of awareness, or being afraid to visit their dentist,” says the doctor who teaches her clients overall oral hygiene, and how it is connected to the rest of the body and their overall health and wellbeing.

Shamsi is not only passionate about dentistry; she is passionate about life in general. She attends leadership seminars at the Purposeful Stewardship Institute for her personal growth and at the same time to give the best dental service to her patients. And because of her passion in helping people, she has also volunteered for dental missions.

Dr. Shamsi also takes time to relax and de-stress by meditating, engaging in massage therapies, and if she has the time, going on nature vacations.

She keeps herself fit by always including vegetables and fruits in her diet and exercising. The pretty dentist has also undergone facials and facelift massage at her own Aramesh Spa.

“I also like to meet new people, and love being surrounded by a crowd,” Dr. Shamsi.