This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... twenty fifteen was quite a thrill in the White House and Congress on Capitol Hill ... with polling and posturing in politics caloric ... and presidential candidates preparing for war ... and that is why I have decided to announce that I am a candidate I can is I announce I'm running for president on the the we are going to make ... our country great again ... with Republicans in control of the Senate and helps McConnell became leader Harry Reid was out ... with Obama decided he was not out of luck ... fifteen of the ... it's now up to us ... to choose who we wanna be over the next fifteen years and decades to come ... the president was set on a deal with the re and Republicans in response put together a plan Benjamin Netanyahu was invited to speak to try and paint Obama the Rand deal with the ... close is a bad deal ... in the end a nuclear deal was made Republicans rejected it they were not sway ... but John Kerry said the plan was quite super because it stops the ramp going nuclear ... the benefits ... of this agreement ... far outweigh any potential drawbacks ... then again Hillary Clinton and or e mail scandal for personal and work messages in a bit of a tangle ... I did not stand classified material and I did not receive ... any material that was MAR were designated as I've Republicans claimed she was hiding the true what Hillary said they have no proof ... the broader before a House committee Democrat said the GOP was being silly that Republicans are squandering ... millions of taxpayer dollars ... one is the use of effort ... eleven hour hearing that Clinton on the spot ... Republicans tried to uncover a plot ... the Supreme Court to hear the latest and ... twenty making their in school of law ... court clerks permitted gay couples to battle ... except for Kim Davis who would not allow ... the ... I am ... he is here ... the health care subsidies were deemed ok ... with reports of Obamacare is here to stay ... Republicans Barrow to repeal and replace ... the Affordable Care Act the wooden crates ... then the news the Pope Francis came through ... with the message of peace from the new ... Republicans and Democrats he called to unite ... with him for that day they did not fight ... yes ma'am and be willing to ... and to live on ... as you move ... the the the ... it was bigger painter who was move the most ... the very next day he resigned as those with more than double the fitness of my first ... as I was to ... the time the so the ... little that is limited ... a simple ... slap ... his announcement started an internal battle ... for who would inherit the speaker's gavel the inevitable leader was Kevin McCarthy ... until the political gap and there's the parties ... everybody thought Hillary Clinton was unbeatable right ... we put together a button gauzy special ... committee ... select committee ... what are her numbers today ... Republicans were left in a tough situation ... a new speaker Paul Ryan rose to the occasion ... people's name it is my graphics chip and this gap ... to the speaker of the House ... Congressman and honorable all ... Congress passed a bipartisan spending bill ... the rear success on Capitol Hill ... as politicians head home for some holiday cheer ... there's lots of work looming for the coming year ... and those twenty fifteen comes to a close what will happen next year nobody knows with the basin elections yet to be seen ... we gleefully wait for twenty sixteen ...