Revealed: The top ten jobs in the US with the biggest gender pay gaps

New study reveals the 10 professions registering the biggest disparity in pay checks between men and women

Insurance topped the list, with women earning only 62.5 per cent of the wage being taken home by their male counterparts

A typical woman working as an insurance agent earned $641 per week, compared to a typical man’s pay of over $1,000.

American women are only earning 82 per cent of what men get paid, as the gender wage gap continues to narrow.



Based on data compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ recent report and 24/7 Wall St, the 10 occupations where the median weekly full-time income among women was smallest as a percent of men's earnings have been identified.



The results have shown that workplace discrimination and the glass ceiling are still serious issues.



On average, women made a weekly media of $691, while men earned $894.



Female insurance agents turned out to be the most hard done by in terms of pay inequality.



Women in that field brought in just 62.5 per cent of their mail counterparts in 2012.



To put that in perspective, in 1979 women made an estimated 62 per cent of what men earned.



Glass ceiling: A new study has revealed the extent of pay inequality across the U.S. by identifying the 10 jobs that pay women far less than they pay men

On average, male wages are 18 per cent high than female wages, a new study claims

Many of the occupations with the largest gaps between men and women are in sales.



THE 10 JOBS PAYING WOMEN ALOT LESS THAN MEN

1. Insurance Women’s wage as pct. of men’s: 62.5%

2. Retail Women’s wages as pct. of men’s: 64.3% 3. Real estate brokers and sales agents

Women’s wages as pct. of men’s: 66.0% 4. Personal financial advisors Women’s wages as pct. of men’s: 66.3% 5. Education administrators Women’s wages as pct. of men’s: 67.2% 6. Physicians and surgeons Women’s wages as pct. of men’s: 67.6% 7. Marketing and sales managers Women’s wages as pct. of men’s: 67.7%

8. Security, commodities and financial services sales agents Women’s wages as pct. of men’s: 69.1% 9. Inspectors, testers, sorters, samplers and weighers Women’s wages as pct. of men’s: 69.2% 10. Claims adjusters, appraisers, examiners and investigators Women’s wages as pct. of men’s: 69.3%



Study director at the Institute for Women's Policy Research, Ariane Hegewisch, said this is because sales is such a broad industry.'



'For the wage gap in sales positions, commissions seem to be a factor,” Hegewisch said.



'Women tend to work selling clothes, men tend to work more selling cars and TVs.



'These higher price tag products tend to bring in much more in commissions, while items like clothing tend to bring in much lower commissions, if any at all.'



When it came to physicians and surgeons, women earned barely teo thirds of their male counterparts



Hegewisch explained that the majority of surgeons are men, while women physicians are more likely to be engaged in care-based or clinical work.



Surgeons are usually required to be available as many as 80 hours a week, and they are usually paid more as a result.



To identify the 10 jobs with the largest wage gap, 24/7 Wall St. reviewed the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ release of earnings data from the Current Population Survey for 2012.



The wage data are based on weekly earnings of both men and women working at least 35 hours a week year-round.



They only considered occupations that were not themselves broken out into more specific categories by the CPS.



They also excluded those occupations that the BLS considered too broad to define.

A typical woman working as an insurance agent earned $641 per week, compared to a typical man’s pay of over $1,000.



Disparities in pay and opportunity in the insurance industry extend beyond the sales force.



According to a 2012 study by St. Joseph’s University, just 6% of top executive positions across the insurance industry were held by women, and only 12.6% of board seats belonged to women.

When it comes to real estate, it is a female-dominated industry.



As of 2012, women accounted for the majority of such workers, roughly 60%.



Women who work as a surgeon or physician earned $600 less than their male counterparts in the US last year

Yet, the median income for women working full-time as brokers was just $680 a week, versus over $1,000 for men.



When it comes to teaching nearly 65% of education administrators were female in 2012.



However, pay for women was barely two-thirds that of men in these positions.



Women on average earned an average of $1,052 a week .

Men earned about $1,566 .



In the medical field, most male physicians and surgeons earned more than $2000 per week last year, which was over $600 than women.



Most male physicians and surgeons working full-time earned more than $2,000 per week last year, or over $600 more than the women in these occupations.

A male surgeon or physician can earn over $2000 a week

The number of women versus men working in marketing was more balanced than many other occupations.



The typical man working in this job, however, earned about $500, or 48%, more a week than the typical woman working the same job.



As of 2012, women accounted for just under 30% of the security, commodities, and financial services industry.



They earned a median salary equal to just 69% that of men.