Panic! at the Disco performs at the Rave on Friday night. Credit: Photo by Kiri Lin

By ,

When Panic! at the Disco played the Rave on Friday night, frontman Brendon Urie might not have been trying to represent his hometown of Las Vegas.

However, his showmanship was clearly inspired by the place.

Urie wore a darkly colorful sport coat that Tom Jones might have donned; sported a slick quiff that Elvis Presley might have given a nod to; and performed a back flip that Cirque du Soleil might have considered an excellent start for a trainee.

Most of all, he sang the way Vegas denizens — from Bobby Darin at the Sands to nearly anonymous crooners swinging by the dollar slots — have always sung: boldly and brassily, sentimentally and shamelessly.

Singers like that need music to match, and Panic! at the Disco's set didn't manifest any signs of struggling to keep up with Urie's enthusiastic emotionalism.

That last word is part of what goes into categorizing this particular band as "emo," a rock subgenre with pop tendencies as broad as anything Blink-182 ever applied to punk. Panic!, which actually began as a couple of teenagers playing Blink covers, might be even broader than its peers.

After all, the quartet openly used sounds triggered by sequencers, which are not uncommon at pop concerts nowadays, so the open use of sounds from pop itself made just as much sense.

So, "Nine in the Afternoon" filtered glam-rock's silly grandeur through the affectionate irony of Ben Folds Five, then cranked the entire messy thing up to maximum.

"Lying Is the Most Fun a Girl Can Have Without Taking Her Clothes Off" (an example of Urie and Panic!'s fondness for clever, or at least clever-seeming, torrents of words) had the feel of a mid-1980s Elvis Costello song — thin keyboards, thinner beats, etc. — handed to Nickelback on one of its rare good days.

And "Ready to Go (Get Me Out of My Mind)," although edging toward manic energy, celebrated youth for youth's sake with its hands just as high in the air as massive hits like Hot Chelle Rae's "Tonight Tonight" and Taylor Swift's "22."

There were also rock references: "Nearly Witches (Ever Since We Met...)" recalled Cheap Trick's brasher borrowings from the Beatles, while a new song, "This Is Gospel," measured up to most of fellow emo band Jimmy Eat World's catalog.

Urie's sense of showbiz let him unify the disparate elements and supposed contradictions, whether he was applying his full-lunged, open-throated delivery to "Miss Jackson," a song Rihanna could cover, or taking off his shirt before singing Pearl Jam's "Jeremy," as if it would help.

It certainly helped entertain the capacity crowd. Vegas, baby.