— It’s a vote that may have seemed impossible a decade ago, but last Wednesday Hillsborough commissioners unanimously agreed to follow the city of Tampa and Pinellas County by setting up a domestic partner registry.

They followed that decision with another unanimous vote to add protections in the county’s Human Rights Ordinances for gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender residents.

Equality Florida, the state’s leading gay rights organization, estimates nearly half of all Floridians live in communities that recognize domestic partnerships, either through registries or employee benefits. That leaves Pasco as the third-largest jurisdiction in the state (behind Duval and Polk counties) with no protections for unmarried couples.

“I can tell you every city and county in Florida is on our radar,” said Ed Lally, central Florida coordinator. “We’ve tackled the major metropolitan areas, but we’ve had good success in some rural areas as well. I don’t know if there is a game plan in the near future to bring it up in Pasco. That’s still a pretty conservative area.”

County commissioners who spoke with the Tribune didn’t say they oppose the idea of a registry, which provides legal protections in matters such as hospital visitation, end-of-life decisions, and custodial arrangements.

“It’s never been discussed,” Commissioner Ted Schrader said. “No one has ever approached me about it.”

Schrader said domestic partner registries have never been a pressing matter in Pasco. In fact, he knows so little about them he didn’t realize they protect heterosexual and same-sex couples. He also was surprised that business leaders in Tampa support the policies. “I’m certainly willing to sit down and listen if people want to raise the issue,” he said.

Schrader said he plans to reach out to Hillsborough Commissioner Mark Sharpe, a longtime supporter of the policy, for more details. “I have a lot of respect for him. We’ve served together for a number of years on Tampa Bay Water and TBARTA. I’d like to hear what he has to say about it,” he said.

Commissioner Kathryn Starkey offered a mild endorsement. “I’m OK with that,” she said. “I don’t know how it works or who does it. If you’re living with someone, you should be able to visit them in the hospital. I just wonder is that a role county government should play — to be purveyor of a list? I don’t understand why the hospitals just can’t maintain their own list. But loved ones should be able to visit and care for each other.”

In Pinellas County, the Clerk of Court maintains the registry, which is available online to any hospital. Couples must apply in person and pay $50 to register.

Erika Remsberg, a Democrat running to replace retiring Commissioner Pat Mulieri, is the only commission candidate with an opinion on the matter. “I abhor discrimination in any form at all,” she said. “I support it, and it’s nonnegotiable for me. A domestic partner registry is one of the things the county can do to remove barriers for people, and I think it’s a good first step.”

Remsberg, a social worker, said she also supports efforts to overturn the ban on same-sex marriage. She shared a story about a lesbian couple who took in four foster children whose married parents were drug addicts. At the time, state law prohibited gays from adopting children. It has since been overturned.

“Families look different and don’t come in a one-size-fits-all appearance anymore,” she said. “We have to understand that there are legal ramifications for people based on how they live as a family.”

Mike Moore, the Republican candidate for District 2, said he wanted to research the issue before forming an opinion. He said he wanted to watch the video of the Hillsborough meeting to better understand why four Republican commissioners who defeated the proposal in 2013 switched their votes.

“You’ll find that when I take office, my decisions will be very thoughtful and deliberate,” he said.

Commissioner-elect Mike Wells Jr. said he’s never been asked about domestic registries. “Wow, that’s a tough one,” he said. “No matter what my personal beliefs are, it comes down to what’s best for the residents of Pasco County. I’ve worked with a lot of people over the years who are in same-sex couples.”

lkinsler@tampatrib.com

(813) 371-1852

Twitter @LKinslerTBO