More options: Share, Mark as favorite

A bunch of Washington think tanks and foundations have put together a fiscal policy game, The Fiscal Ship. You get to choose various tax-and-spend policies with the twins goals of a) keeping the 75% debt-GDP ratio at current levels given current budget trends, and b) meeting three other priorities. Here are your choices: invest in the future, reign in entitlements, shrink government, protect the elderly, fight climate change, tax cutter, fiscal hawk, reduce inequality, strengthen social safety net, strengthen national defense.

For fun, I first decided to play as a sort of Donald Trump-type populist politician or candidate, choosing my priorities as follows: national defense, tax cutter, and protect the elderly. To be clear: The results are nothing like a comprehensive, CBO-like analysis of the Trump plan or that of any other specific candidate. Think of it more like an assessment of Generic Populist Candidate.

Despite its limitations, the Fiscal Ship does give a flavor for the challenge of trying to cut taxes, boost defense, leave entitlements as is, and also balance the budget. So, after choosing those three broad policy goals, the game immediately presented this warning:

Tell me about it. I nevertheless continued. I repealed as much of Obamacare as I could, block-granted Medicaid, cut investment taxes while raising them on hedge-fund managers, cut income tax rates and simplified the tax code, eliminated the EPA, increased infrastructure spending, spent more on law enforcement, and cut corporate taxes.

Here are my red-ink results, along with a few of the specific policy choices:

So fiscally, Populist Candidate has made things much, much worse. That said, these caveats from FiveThirtyEight’s Ben Casselman are worth nothing:

There is one huge difference between “The Fiscal Ship” and fiscal reality, however: The game has a single set of rules that everyone playing is bound by. In the real world, the fight over the rules is at least as intense as the fight over the policies themselves. To win the game, for example, players must keep the national debt to 75 percent of gross domestic product, roughly the level it’s at now. But plenty of liberals argue the debt can rise well above its current level without posing any serious economic threat; budget hawks, meanwhile, think it’s already too high. Or take the impact of the policies themselves: In the game, every proposal — raising taxes on the wealthy, cutting government benefits — has agreed-upon costs and benefits. In the real world, those impacts are the subject of vigorous debate. And the game completely ignores how policies would affect the larger economy, what’s known as “dynamic” effects. The game’s designers argue that estimating the effects of every policy would be impractical, which is probably true — but that doesn’t make those effects any less real.

Oh, and what if I played the game like a candidate who more resembled the Democratic frontrunner, Hillary Clinton? Maybe with a little bit of Bernie Sanders in there as well? A Progressive Candidate. Well, I tried that, too.

I increased infrastructure spending, raised investment taxes, added a financial transaction tax, boosted taxes on the superrich, added paid family leave, two free years of community college, and increased the corporate tax rate among other things. And as the results show, Progressive Candidate, just like Populist Candidate, has some fiscal fixing yet to do: