Buy Photo Wind turbine (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

What does the new U.S. Environmental Protection Agency standard to cut carbon pollution from existing power plants mean for Iowa?

Environmentalists say the standard should mean more green jobs from wind, solar and other renewable energy industries. And some business groups say it will costs jobs and slow the economy.

Gov. Terry Branstad is concerned EPA's "latest unilateral, ideological action" will "hurt Iowa consumers and cost Iowans jobs," said Jimmy Centers, a Branstad spokesman.

"First, the EPA attacked the Iowa farmer by slashing the Renewable Fuels Standard," a proposal that would reduce the amount of ethanol and biodiesel that must be blended in the nation's fuel supply, Centers said. "Now the EPA is set to mandate more government red tape that will lead to higher prices for Iowa consumers and make it more difficult to attract manufacturing jobs to our state."

An Iowa utility group also says the proposal will hurt consumers. "The proposed rules released by the EPA will likely lead to increases in our member-owners monthly electric bills -- the question is how much?" said Marion Denger, president of the Iowa Association of Electric Cooperatives. Electric cooperatives provide service to about 650,000 Iowans.

Among the electric cooperatives' main concerns: The costs to operate coal-fueled generation could be significantly increased, the association said. In addition, the standard could potentially force "the premature shutdown of certain electric generating facilities."

Denger said the association said supports "responsible environmental policies that balance the needs of the environment without significantly impacting power reliability or electric bills."

Here's what environmentalists and business groups are saying about jobs and the economy:

Cost jobs?

U.S. Chamber of Commerce: Seven states in the Midwest, including Iowa, would see an average annual $3.2 billion loss in economic activity through 2030, and a 27,400 loss in jobs, the group said based on a study that estimated the impact of a 42 percent reduction below 2005 levels by 2030.

The EPA proposal today calls for cutting emissions 30 percent by 2030 from 2005 levels.

Nationally, the group said the proposed standard would cost America's economy $51 billion and lead to 224,000 fewer U.S. jobs on average every year through 2030, according to the Washington, D.C. group's study.

Add jobs?

Environmental Entrepreneurs: The Washington, D.C.-based group says Iowa has added 1,600 clean energy and clean transportation jobs, and the new standard will "create thousands more."

"Iowa already is a national leader in clean energy," said Troy Van Beek, founder of Ideal Energy, a solar company based in Fairfield, Ia., and a member of Environmental Entrepreneurs. The group is made up of entrepreneurs, investors and professionals that promote sound environmental policies.

"If we want to remain a national leader and keep creating good, clean energy jobs in our state, we need our state officials to implement a strong plan to implement these new EPA standards. That's what will keep Iowa's solar, wind and energy efficiency businesses growing and adding jobs."

The Natural Resources Defense Council: Iowa could see 2,500 more jobs with a standard focused on increased energy efficiency, according to a study the group released last week.

The group looked at a nearly 25 percent reduction in carbon emissions from power plants by 2020 from 2012 levels.

The Washington, D.C., group said residential consumers would pay $103 million less annually -- about $76 per household -- and businesses would pay $134 million less annually.

Read or Share this story: http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/money/business/development/2014/06/02/environmentalists-businesses-disagree-epa-standard-job-creation/9866209/