Oklahoma has become known for a number of efforts recently to implement policy with the intention of promoting freedom in the delivery and payment of health care.

Oklahoma lawmakers have passed laws that protect the ability of medical providers and their patients to negotiate with each other and set up payment arrangements that benefit both parties.

Oklahoma lawmakers also began an extensive effort to bring the significant savings of transparency and bundled pricing to the state and education employees’ self-insured health plan, Health Choice. Patterned after the success experienced by community banks, municipal governments and Oklahoma County, the savings from the reform will likely exceed $100 million annually.

Lawmakers also embraced the savings that competition and options can bring in the Health Choice plan by removing barriers to delivery options for those using pharmaceuticals through the plan.

Oklahoma lawmakers also rejected the failed state-based exchanges as provided in the Affordable Care Act, saving Oklahoma taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars.

Some policymakers from other states have pursued mandates like that of Arkansas’ Act 900, choosing the select benefit of special interests and guaranteed profits by the force of government. Some of these measures have even been unconstitutional.

But Oklahoma lawmakers have generally leaned toward free-market-oriented cost-saving efforts in health care.

Oklahoma lawmakers should be wary of a recent attempt by select lawmakers to inappropriately interfere in the contracting of health care delivery. House Bill 2799 attempted to inappropriately interfere in the contract negotiations between a health plan and pharmacists by allowing pharmacists to break an agreed-to contract with the health plan and its pharmacy benefit manager.

While this helps guarantee greater profits for special interests, the costs are real. For example, such a change would cause the state health plan to spend up to $8 million more and cause private health plans to spend millions more. At a time when the state is facing the reality of $1.3 billion less for lawmakers to appropriate and our economy is suffering, now more than ever is not the time to raise health care costs for government employees and taxpayers.

HB 2799 died in a legislative committee but the language was added to Senate Bill 1150.

Policymakers should reject the bad policy prescriptions as proposed in HB 2799 and SB 1150 and continue to pursue freedom and not mandates.

This post was updated at 8:40 a.m., April 15, to correct a bill number.

Jonathan Small serves as president of the Oklahoma Council of Public Affairs (www.ocpathink.org).