MEMPHIS, Tenn. (AP) - The Pink Eagles are like a Girl Scouts troop created just for Memphis. For the past seven years, the nonprofit has helped area girls ages 5 to 19 build self-confidence, leadership skills and financial literacy. The weekly meetings and seasonal events are free for the participants thanks to the leadership of founder Loretta McNary.

Her efforts with Pink Eagles have shown more than 500 girls the way to soar. Every girl that has graduated high school while in the program has gone on to college, and none of them has become a teenage mother or been arrested.

“I have four boys, but I’ve always had a heart for girls,” McNary said. “I wanted girls to understand you don’t have to make bad decisions to get people to love you. You can love yourself and be awesome, valuable, incredible, strong and independent.”

McNary, a local TV talk-show host and producer, was inspired to highlight alternative narratives for at-risk girls. In 2009, she piloted the program while working with transitional families at Metropolitan Inter-Faith Association. The Pink Eagles’ tenets of self-esteem, effective communication, community involvement, academic engagement, financial literacy and entrepreneurship were duly tested by a group that needed the greatest support.

“They lived lives that I even as an adult couldn’t survive,” McNary said. “They were the most emotionally damaged, toughest girls who moved from home to home and took on a lot of responsibility at an early age. I walked out twice because they were not getting it.”

After the first six weeks, McNary called for an extension that eventually brought the program to a six-month tenure. By the time the 25 Pink Eagles graduated from the program, McNary and her girls were inseparable.

“They call me Momma,” she said.

In 2011, the Shelby County Sheriff’s Office came on board as an adopter. The department’s employees attended meetings, donated supplies and supported McNary as she got her Pink Eagles off the ground.

Since that time, the group has been housed everywhere from church meeting rooms to McNary’s television studio in the Hickory Ridge Mall. Girls from all over the city are invited to sign up for the six-week program or to drop in when it’s convenient. The current roster comes in at 90 girls.

On a recent Tuesday night, 15 girls gathered at a classroom in the National College campus at 2576 Thousand Oaks Blvd. to learn how to make their own lip glosses and fill out personal checks. As a self-made media personality, McNary puts special emphasis on teaching the girls how to make their way while uplifting each other.

“No one will have to take care of these girls. The government will not have to take care of these girls. They will be self-sustainable. They will know how to work for themselves outside of their careers if they have to. They’ve been taught and that’s what they see with me and our speakers.”

Recently, McNary has taken the girls into the entrepreneurial world. She launched a candle company, Candle Lights by L, to raise funds for the Pink Eagles.

The girls learn how to make soy candles and pitch a sale to their family members. When McNary buys supplies, she shares her receipts with the girls as an opportunity to teach how to keep a budget. She hopes to bring on single parents of girls in the program as commission-receiving sales consultants.

Funds raised from Candle Lights by L will go back into providing supplies for the weekly meetings and seasonal events like the Miss Eagles Pageant. At the annual showcase, the girls are outfitted with new evening gowns and practice speaking critically and clearly on stage. At the Pink Eagles Night Indoor Camping Retreat held at the Girl Scouts Professional Training Center, the girls prepare their own meals and design a fun, fulfilling evening. McNary also regularly schedules college tour visits for Memphis youth.

Next year, McNary is looking to add a Teen Girls Summit where girls can attend panels and teleconferences with successful women professionals. She’s also looking to organize the Blue Eagles, a boys’ empowerment group that bears a similar model.

“Their parents always tell me how the girls have changed. Most of my girls don’t want to be there at first. Those girls become my best ever advocates,” McNary said. “They realize that whatever happened to them, it wasn’t their fault, and they can do whatever they dream of doing.”

___

Information from: The Memphis Daily News, http://www.memphisdailynews.com