South San Antonio, where street signs for pawn shops and car-title lenders loom over strip malls and the ruins of a Spanish mission, should be fertile ground for Obamacare, a law built to extend health coverage to the working poor.

The population of the city, though, is 63 percent Hispanic. It is a demographic that enrollment workers and government officials have found hard to crack as they have set about signing up millions of Americans for coverage under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

Enrollment for year two of the law ends Sunday, and the proportion of Hispanics signed up is expected to rise, although not by much. The federal government reported in January that about 10 percent of enrollment at the time was Hispanic or Latino, 3 percentage points better than at the same point last year.

The stakes are high for the Obama administration, which is seeking to get more people insured under the law and to garner more support among Hispanics. The group is projected to represent almost a third of the U.S. population by 2060, up from 17 percent in 2013.

“We’re going to continue to work to figure it out and reach the community,” the U.S. health secretary, Sylvia Mathews Burwell, said in an interview today in Austin, Texas.

Hispanics say they are underrepresented in the law’s insurance programs both for reasons common to many Americans and particular to their community. Many don’t feel they need insurance, think the law’s offerings will be too expensive, or find enrollment to be too confusing.

‘It’s the Law’

“There’s some that don’t want to pay for insurance because they don’t need it because they’re healthy,” Irma Palos Diaz, 48, said in an interview before signing up at a clinic in south San Antonio run by CentroMed, a nonprofit health system subsidized by the federal government that serves mostly low-income people. “What can we do? It’s the law.”

More than 30 percent of the U.S. uninsured population was Hispanic in 2013, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation, a Menlo Park, California, research group. Yet only about 11 percent of people who used the federal healthcare.gov system in 2014 and chose to report their ethnicity identified themselves as Hispanic or Latino, according to the government.

Victoria Cortez-Casillas, 41, said many Hispanics find the law intimidating and “don’t know how to ask the question.” They need personal help, she said, which is in short supply nationwide.

“They haven’t had someone come to them and explain it to them very well,” she said in an interview after signing up at CentroMed.

English Memo

Enrollment workers say another concern, specific to Hispanics, is that by signing up they many put undocumented family members in danger of deportation. Federal officials took that concern so seriously that in October 2013 they published a memo promising immigration authorities wouldn’t use enrollment data.

“They first released it only in English,” said Jose Plaza, national director of Latino engagement for Enroll America, which organizes enrollment efforts in Texas and 10 other states. “It wasn’t making its way down to the Latino community.”

While the memo has since been translated into Spanish, its existence is still largely unknown outside Washington. Local officials in San Antonio were surprised to hear of it.

Culturally Competent

More than 94,000 people in San Antonio have so far enrolled for year two of the Affordable Care Act, and most of them are assumed to be Latino, given the city’s demographics. The city’s enrollment organization, called EnrollSA, has won notice in Washington for its work with Hispanics.

“You have to think first about being culturally competent with our population,” Andrea Guajardo, community health director at Christus Santa Rosa Health System and a co-chair of EnrollSA, said in an interview. The group is funded by Guajardo’s hospital system and another local health system, Methodist Healthcare Ministries.

One example: On March 31 last year, technically the deadline to sign up, 4,000 people showed up at San Antonio’s Alamadome at an EnrollSA event. Overwhelmed officials had to schedule many of them for follow-up meetings at CentroMed’s southside clinic.

“We created what we called a golden ticket,” Guajardo said: yellow notecards of no official value, numbered 1 to 1,000, given to people turned away from the Alamadome. Many people handed over their unnecessary tickets when they reported to their follow-up meetings at CentroMed, Guajardo said.

“It really did make them feel comfortable and assured they were going to be served,” she said.

Face to Face

The government isn’t likely to significantly dent the uninsured Hispanic population without pouring many more resources into contacting Latinos personally, Hector De La Torre, executive director of the Transamerica Center for Health Studies, a research group based in Los Angeles, said in a phone interview.

“They’ve done all the TV commercials; they’ve done all the stuff on the Internet,” he said. “That is not going to reach the audience they’ve left here. You really do have to go into those communities and see them face to face.”

About 1.1 million people had used the Spanish-language version of healthcare.gov by Feb. 6 and another 1.1 million called the federal government’s Spanish-language help line -- “a strong number,” De La Torre said.

“There were absolutely some improvements,” he said.

More Mobile?

Burwell said she would assess how her department can improve its work with Latinos after the close of enrollment this year, when the government learns more about the demographics of Affordable Care Act subscribers. The department knows that the group prefers personal assistance but is still trying to pinpoint how most Latinos sign up, she said.

“One thing we do know is -- so they use more mobile, the Latino population uses more mobile,” she said. “Is that because they don’t have access to other -- is their access to mobile? Is that because they’re younger people? We don’t actually know.”

Diaz, who said she earns about $400 every two weeks making tortillas for a local Mexican restaurant, emerged from her enrollment session with a plan from Ambetter, a Centene Corp. subsidiary, that she found affordable: $26.49 a month and a $500 limit on her annual out-of-pocket expenses, with $1 co-payments to see her primary care physician or fill generic prescriptions.

Sorting through options took her close to two hours, however, and she said she wasn’t thrilled about committing to the monthly payment. Without assistance, “I wouldn’t have signed up,” she said.