Yes, George Karl has watched the Nuggets. How could he resist? And yet, before he gives his opinion on what’s happening with the team, he wants you to know that he hasn’t seen every second of every game.

“I can’t be an expert on the last couple of games,” he said.

If there’s anything the former Nuggets coach, now an NBA analyst for ESPN, wants clear right off the top, it’s that.

But he has seen the Nuggets. And he has thoughts on what has happened during their rocky start. He shared some of those before Denver’s game Friday night against the Cleveland Cavaliers.

Karl’s thoughts start right at the top with the player he demanded the most from when he coached the team, point guard Ty Lawson.

“I don’t see Ty playing at a high level,” Karl said. “I think he’s their engine.”

Karl questioned how healthy Lawson is because of the point guard’s sluggishness through four games.

Lawson then sat out the Cavaliers game with ankle soreness, an injury he has been dealing with since late last season.

“He relies so much on speed and quickness and explosion,” Karl said. “He needs all three to get his stuff done, because he’s so small. I didn’t see the explosion as much. It seemed like one of his legs had some tenderness to it.”

Among the wrinkles the Nuggets are still ironing out include getting consistent offensive aggressiveness from their starters, execution on the offensive end from the entire team and having the proper intensity and energy level in every game.

They are issues, Karl said, that aren’t exclusive to the Nuggets.

“They don’t have a lot of guidance and direction on either end of the court, from my standpoint of it,” he said. “It doesn’t seem like there’s a plan yet. And I can say this about 10 other teams too, so don’t get me wrong.”

Want a surprise?

Karl, who championed the idea that a team can win big by throwing waves of good players out on the court just as well as one that has a couple of stars, thinks Nuggets coach Brian Shaw needs to pare down his rotation.

“One thing I think Brian is kind of caught up in a little bit is he’s playing too many players,” Karl said. “I don’t think he can play three centers. I don’t think he can play that many big guys on the court when your team plays well when it’s fast and small. I’m not saying you play 48 minutes at fast and small, but you’ve got to delegate some portion of fast and small. He has six big guys, and in the game of basketball right now, you don’t need six big guys.”

And yet Karl recognizes being able to win in multiple ways is key for any NBA team.

“You’ve got to be able to play both ways,” Karl said. “In that last year (with Denver), I think our record against teams that held us in the 90s or under 90 points … we won 75 percent of our games. You want to play a game that motivates and energizes the strengths of your basketball team. At that time, for me, I thought the strengths of our team were mostly our perimeter guys. And (Kenneth) Faried, of course, surprised by playing very well.

“But the strengths of our team were our perimeter players. So I ran a system that was magnifying those strengths. Brian’s got to evaluate what he thinks — they have a lot of big guys. Is that the strength of their team? Or is the perimeter the strength of their team? I don’t know what the team is, other than I’ve always felt that Ty is their engine.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost