Update at 8:45 p.m.: The flood warning issued for Dallas County has been canceled.

Update at 5 p.m.: The severe weather has largely passed out of Dallas and moved further east, said KXAS-TV (NBC5) Chief Meteorologist David Finfrock.

The storm is completely out of Fort Worth, but a tornado warning remains for Navarro County to Kerens, east of Corsicana. The storm also caused heavy wind and downed trees in parts of Van Zandt County, Finfrock said.

Some high water rescues have been reported in Terrell where people were trapped in their cars at intersections, he said.

A tornado watch for Dallas County that was set to expire at 6 p.m. has been cancelled, but a flood warning for Dallas County was issued until Tuesday at 9:53 a.m.

The bad storms are out of Dallas for the night, but there is a chance of thunderstorms and severe weather for Tuesday afternoon.

If there is severe weather, it likely won’t cover as large of an area as Monday’s storm, but anything that does develop will likely become severe with strong winds and the possibility of large hail, Finfrock said.

Isolated thunderstorms and the possibility of severe weather are also in the forecast for the next two to three days.

Update at 4 p.m. by Claire Cardona: A flash flood warning has been issued for Dallas County until 6 p.m.

Oncor is reporting a little more than 13,000 customers without power in the Dallas-Fort Worth area. Storms are still blowing through the area so that number can rise or fall, said spokesman Justin Ozuna.

The Trinity River in Dallas was cresting at 38.33 feet at 4 p.m.

A pickup pulling a small trailer for lawn equipment got stuck in the water in the 5800 block of CF Hawn Freeway and Lake June Road. Two people who were in the truck made it out without injuries, Dallas Fire-Rescue spokesman Jason Evans said.

The truck is still in the water.

Dallas Fire-Rescue crews also went to the 100 block of Cooke Drive to investigate a 911 caller’s account about “at least three individuals” floating in the water near the Bass Pro Shop at Lake Ray Hubbard.

No one was found for the incident, but crews did come across a stranded sailboat, which they helped to shore, Evans said.

Update at 3:35 p.m.: The storms have passed through Fort Worth, and are making their way through Dallas and Collin counties heading east. For now most of what we’ve seen have been just average springtime thunderstorms — heavy rain, some lightning and thunder with a few strong gusts of wind. And temperatures falling into the 60s. On May 25.

Update at 3:24 p.m.: So far these relatively quick-moving storms haven’t produced large hail or tornadoes — just gusty winds and heavy rain. So …

Update at 3:19 p.m.: Dallas’ severe thunderstorm warning has been extended until 4:15 p.m., and Collin County is also under one until then. Flash flooding is also a concern, again, as some of these storms are dropping rain at a rate of two inches per hour.

Update at 3:07 p.m.: From the FAA, there’s a ground stop at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport while these storms pass through.

“All inbound flights being held at their origin until Monday at 04:00PM CDT due to thunderstorms,” per the alert. Also: Expect “departure delays of 1 hours 1 minutes to 1 hours 15 minutes (and increasing) due to thunderstorms.”

Update at 2:56 p.m.: Dallas County, which is getting rain from the south ahead of the storms approaching from the west, is under a severe thunderstorm warning until 4 p.m. Tarrant County’s has also been extended to 4.

Update at 2:16 p.m.: Parker and Tarrant counties under severe thunderstorm warning until 3 p.m., Denton’s under a severe thunderstorm warning until 3:15 p.m., and Dallas is sure to follow — “likely within the hour,” says Lamont Bain of the National Weather Service’s Fort Worth office.

“Right now, damaging straight-line winds are the main threat,” he says, with sustained gusts clocked at 60-70 mph. But, he cautions, “there could be a brief spin-up tornado” embedded in the squall line expected to hit Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport just before 3 p.m. on the storms’ way into Dallas.

Meanwhile, the city of Dallas just sent out this update concerning the Trinity River and other flooding concerns:

The radar as of 2:16 p.m. For a more up to date version click here.

At this time, there are no significant issues. The Trinity River crested last night at 8:47 pm at 40.18 feet at the Commerce Street gauge. The river is currently in moderate flooding stage and gradually receding at about 0.12 of a foot every 30 minutes. We are currently pumping with 5 levee pumps. There are four “flooded roadway” active signs in NW Dallas and two in SE Dallas. Our Streets department crews are monitoring high water areas. We expect a few supercell thunderstorms to develop out ahead of a squall line of thunderstorms. The supercell thunderstorms will primarily be capable of tornadoes and very large hail (greater than golf ball size). The squall line of storms will produce mainly damaging winds and heavy rainfall. Since the system responsible for the storms tracks right over North Central Texas, all 46 counties effectively have equal chances of seeing heavy rainfall and/or severe weather today. Levees, floodway, and pumps are fine at this time. We are monitoring and operating pumps as needed. System is functioning as intended.

Update at 11:10 a.m.: It’s time to batten down the hatches …again.

Much of North Texas, including Dallas and Fort Worth, is under a tornado watch until 6 p.m. because of the severe storms heading this way from west. The storms, marching east at 35-40 mph and forming a pretty strong, solid squall line, are due in Dallas-Fort Worth around 2-3 p.m.

“Unfortunately that potential for tornadoes does exist,” says Ted Ryan at the National Weather Service in Fort Worth. “And pretty much everything else,” including heavy rain, large hail and strong, damaging winds.

The storms, which triggered severe thunderstorm warnings in Stephens and Young counties, are packing 70 mph winds.

“Usually when we talk about damaging winds we say it won’t affect everyone, but with this squall line heading in, it looks like it will affect a pretty wide area. It’ll be a good bet a lot of people will see strong winds this afternoon.”

One day after two tornadoes touched down in Dallas County, there’s yet another decent-sized shot at severe weather — “a little bit of everything,” in the words of meteorologist Matt Bishop at the Fort Worth office of the National Weather Service.

Meaning: “more heavy rain, which will only aggravate flooding conditions; more hail; more damaging winds — not everywhere, but it’s a good possibility — and even a few tornadoes.” The Storm Prediction Center’s so confident in our chances of big, bad weather this Memorial Day that just before 8 this morning it increased our chances to “moderate” — or 4 on the out-of-5 scale where “high” sits at No. 5. For days we’d been at “slight” to “enhanced” risk for severe storms.

“But that usually changes as confidence grows” that the storms will become severe, says Bishop. “This morning they’ll pulled the trigger on moderate risk.”

The reason: an upper-level disturbance moving now around Midland.

“It’s just going to keep on moving in this direction and should arrive here during peak heating hours, which should be enough to generate some severe weather,” says Bishop. “We should start seeing it around 2, but we’ll know better when it gets closer.” Some timelines have the storms arriving earlier, around noon; others, closer to evening. Long story short: Be alert, if you can muster the energy after weeks of flooding rains and four dozen tornadoes battering North Texas.

“Every day we’re getting slammed with this stuff,” says Bishop. “We grew accustomed to having quiet, drought conditions for a few years. We’re not used to this.”

And it’s not going anywhere, with more severe weather in your back-to-work Tuesday forecast.

“It looks that way,” Bishop says. “Wednesday might be kind of quiet, but then we get rain Thursday through the weekend.”

Hit it, Stevie.