By Sophia Kercher

On a recent weekday, a pregnant woman in yoga attire, a young bearded man and two 20-somethings with crystals around their necks settled themselves onto the floor of the Temple of Intuition next to the House of Intuition, a self-described “metaphysical shop” in the Silver Lake neighborhood of Los Angeles.

At the front of the room stood Dominic Moore, 47, before a blanket covered with crystals, bowls, chimes, tuning forks and a gong. These are the tools Moore uses to conduct a weekly ritual known as a “sound bath,” for which he charges $10 per participant.

“Find a space that calls out to you,” he told the half-dozen people reclining on yoga mats or amethyst-hued cushions.

He instructed his charges to relax and let the transcendental tones he was about to play wash over them; part of the challenge was the cacophony of noise from nearby Sunset Boulevard.

The “bathers” closed their eyes as he struck a bowl to begin the 60-minute session, which he said is meant to put an individual's body in harmony with the soundwaves, bringing peace and rest and enabling meditation.

Once found only at New Age retreats or the white-domed Integratron in the Mojave Desert, sound baths are now offered all over Southern California. Sound healers, sometimes called “sounders,” say the vibrations can relax brain-wave patterns, lower heart rate, reduce stress and pain, relieve anxiety and sometimes help with post-traumatic stress disorder.

Dr. Helen Lavretsky, a psychiatry professor at the Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, has practiced sound meditation for 11 years, using it for older adults with memory problems, among others. She said participants often fall into a state of profound relaxation and wake up refreshed.

“Deep mental and physical relaxation would decrease sympathetic and will increase parasympathetic autonomic nervous system tone and response, thus decreasing stress response,” she said, while warning that prolonged loud sounds could result in ringing in the ears (tinnitus), even hearing loss.

Jamie Ford, 38, who has been leading sound baths for almost a decade, said it wasn't until the past few years that people have shown more interest. She credits the popularity of the Integratron, near Joshua Tree, California, with young people rediscovering a mid-century aesthetic. The parabolic structure was built in 1959 by aeronautical engineer George Van Tassel, who believed that aliens had shown him how to do it. Now the Integratron has become a destination for sound baths and other methods of rejuvenation.

Ford sometimes conducts seven sound baths a week, often at a yoga studio.

“My goal with sound baths is to make it available to anybody, whether they practice yoga or meditation or not,” she said.

It's a time when “we are not on our phones. We are there just being.”