Conroe ISD probably will be among school districts across the nation feeling the rising costs of healthcare coverage.

At a workshop Tuesday night, the Conroe ISD Board of Trustees heard a proposal suggesting higher premiums, plan costs and an increase in the district’s contribution from Terry Brown with T. Ross Brown & Associates.

Brown said these price increases are a result of rising costs of healthcare felt by almost every other plan.

“The Board has been kind to the employees, but I think it’s time to bring costs closer to what the market rates are and start funding more of the reserves we need to have a healthy plan,” Brown said. “... With the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and the increase in the commercial market, folks are making plan changes as well as price increases in the medical plan in order to keep a plan in place and keep up with what’s going on in the market.

“This has naturally thrown a monkey wrench into the market and most employer plans are just trying to keep up not only with the costs and changes, but also with the regulations and requirements of the (ACA) as well.”

The proposed changes would include increasing the Aetna Whole Health Plan for each of the four categories. The employee-only plan will go from $104 to $128 a month; employee and children from $384 to $484; employee and spouse from $496 to $790; and employee and family from $808 to $908.

The benefit plan changes mainly affect those on the Basic Tier 2 plan:

• Individual deductible will increase from $1,200 to $2,000; family deductible from $2,400 to $4,000.

• Office visit copay will increase from $45 to $50; specialist copay increases from $75 to $80.

• The out-of pocket maximum will increase from $6,350 to $6,850 for individuals and from $12,700 to $13,700 for families.

However, both the Basic Tier 2 and ACO Tier 1 plans have the same changes to the prescription coverage:

• A new $200 deductible on prescriptions.

• Brand copay (formulary) will increase from $45 to $60; brand copay (nonformulary) from $75 to $120; and specialty from $100 to $250.

• Mail order prescriptions will also increase for both brand copay formulary and non-formulary from $90 to $120 and $150 to $240 respectively.

• The generic cost will remain $15 and $30 for in-person and mail-order prescriptions.

Brown said the jump in prescription coverage was because of the struggle in that coverage right now.

“Where (the current plan) isn’t doing well and where nobody is doing well is in the prescription drug coverage,” Brown said. “It’s exploding. … Everybody is scrambling nationwide trying to get a handle on the drug cost; this is our attempt to do that.”

Spousal coverage

One issue problematic for at least one trustee was a proposed policy for spouses of district employees.

Brown recommended the district require spouses that have available coverage through their work to take that plan rather than be on the district’s employee’s plan.

Brown said this was a commonplace policy now that helps keeps costs lower, but that in the end it’s a Board decision.

“Forget about the family unit; it’s about business now right?” Trustee Datren Williams asked. “… I don’t know how common it is, but I don’t like it.”

Costs for CISD

In addition to the increase in plan costs, the district is proposing to increase its contribution from $428 to $440 per plan. The premiums listed earlier are after-district-contribution costs.

The plan changes will reduce the burden on the district from about $6.15 million to $4.47 million, about a $1.6 million savings to the district.

The insurance costs will total $44.9 million for the district in the 2016-17 school year, up from $40.5 million for this school year.

The remaining $4.5 million shortfall will be made up through the plan and premium cost changes, as well as the district’s additional contribution.

Brown said he believes the benefit costs to employees will increase again in the future due to rising costs.

Comparative coverage

CISD is not a part of the Texas Retirement System used by many districts to fund employee insurance and retirement. CISD never opted into the program, which comparatively saves employees a lot of money in monthly costs.

The TRS plan has an expected shortfall of $1.6 billion in the next year statewide.

“You (the Board) strongly agreed not to (join TRS) and, as a result, a lot of TRS plans have gone up,” Brown said. “… The numbers we are looking at here are grossly underfunded for the TRS plan. I congratulate you for not following the siren’s call of the TRS idea.”

Superintendent Dr. Don Stockton said he’s fielded calls from other districts to see “how (the district) got out of TRS.”

“I said, ‘We never got into it,’” Stockton said.

The TRS 2 Average premium costs to employees at other local districts — including Humble, Spring, Cy-Fair, Klein, New Caney and Montgomery — are as high as triple the costs as Conroe ISD’s non-TRS plan. The TRS Select Average plan is closer to par with CISD’s plan, but still ranges from $42 to $220 a month higher than CISD’s plans.

Board President John Husbands said CISD’s shortfall is comparable to the TRS shortfall, but on a smaller scale.

“We’ve experienced the exact same thing, but it’s just not as impressive a number,” he said. “… It’s all for the same reason and certainly nobody’s fault. … $1.6 billion is a big number, but when you multiply it by the number of people that are in TRS, we’ve encountered the same thing.”

The Board still has to approve any changes to the plans before they go into effect.