Contribution

Wayne Allyn Root is a bestselling author. His latest book is: “ The Power of RELENTLESS! ” Dubbed by the media as “the Capitalist Evangelist,” Wayne is a former Libertarian Vice Presidential nominee, international business speaker, serial entrepreneur and conservative media personality – appearing on over 5,000 interviews in the past five years. Wayne’s web site: ROOTforAmerica.com .

My how the mighty have fallen. I was going to report on all the lies in Obama’s State of the Union last night. But it appears he’s more than a pathetic liar, he’s actually a thief too. Obama started out his career at the Brandenburg Gate in Germany with thousands watching. Now he plagiarizes George W. Bush’s speeches? That’s a pretty long fall.

Large swaths of this speech appear to have been lifted directly from Bush’s 2007 State of the Union. So say Bush’s speechwriter- and he should know his own words.

Now from plagiarism, we move to the original lies of Obama. The question is does he believe this stuff? Obama actually reported the U.S. economy is in “recovery.” Bernie Madoff has nothing on this guy. In Obama’s economy the food stamp rolls are growing 75 times faster than the job rolls!

Obama said there are 8 million new jobs. Maybe he’s counting people who have stopped looking for work forever, as “getting a job?” I have news for you Mr. President: They didn’t get a job. They went on disability, food stamps or welfare…probably all three. There are almost 100 million working-age Americans not working. That’s almost exactly how many Americans are on entitlements. Coincidence?

Obama said the unemployment is the lowest in 5 years. Another whopper. The fact is the amount of working age Americans without a job has increased by almost 10 million in Obama’s first five years as President. That means each and every year of Obama’s Presidency, 2 million more Americans just disappear from the workforce. That’s a neat trick. I’m sure David Copperfield is impressed.

Obama says every business owner should give a big raise to our employees. With what? The economy is in freefall. Business is dramatically down for every business owner I know. We can’t make payroll. We can no longer afford health insurance. Inflation is running rampant- our gas bills have doubled, electricity is at all-time highs. Because of you Mr. President our health insurance bills have doubled or tripled. And he wants us to give our employees a raise? We’re lucky if we can keep the doors open.

Obama introduced some pizza parlor owner that gave his employees a raise. I don’t know where you found him…perhaps he’s an actor you rented for the day. But I know a pizza parlor owner too. His four sons work for him. He paid $800 per month for health insurance for his family until Obamacare came along. His new bill? $2,400 per month. He’s dropping all his insurance. I guess he didn’t make the cut to be introduced at the State of the Union?

Of course your Obamacare law helped a few people that you introduced in the audience. It wasn’t easy finding them, was it? But for each person your healthcare law has helped, thousands have been hurt or ruined. They’ve lost their policies, doctors, life-saving drugs, or had their cost raised to unaffordable levels, or had their deductibles raised dramatically. It wouldn’t have been hard to find one of those victims. Senator Tom Coburn was sitting in the audience. He has cancer. He just lost his doctor because of Obamacare.

You said you “saved” the auto industry. Another whopper. You stole tens of billions of taxpayer money to save auto union pensions. It was pure theft. Anyone could “save” any industry by stealing billions from taxpayers and handing the money to your biggest campaign donors.

Obama said he is ordering Treasury to create some new savings bond IRA for working class people. Great. Where will they get the money? Will they cash in their food stamps for the savings? Even if working class Americans did have any extra money, this is just a new scheme to steal their retirement money. Now instead of throwing your Social Security money away to a program going broke, working people can give the government even more retirement money to steal. Obama will “borrow” it to pay more food stamps and welfare bills, and leave you with another worthless IOU.

Obama said that the NSA is not violating the privacy of ordinary Americans. Of course not, the NSA is only violating the rights of Republicans and leading critics of the President. The rest of you can go about your business.

Obama says we support Ukrainian citizens’ fight for free speech. Unfortunately he doesn’t support Dinesh D’Souza’s right to free speech here in America. He’s the conservative filmmaker who created the documentary “2016: Obama’s America.” He was just indicted.

In Obama’s America, critics are either persecuted, intimidated, or indicted.

But perhaps the biggest lie of all was Obama crooning about solar power. Spain is the green energy capital of Europe. Their whole economy is based on green energy. The result is over 27 percent unemployment, over 56 percent youth unemployment. I can’t wait to replicate the Spanish economy!

Finally Obama ended with a sweet tribute to an injured war vet. Obama loves and honors our vets…while he purges the military of any officer that disagrees with him…and cuts pensions for military vets, so he can spend more on food stamps, disability, welfare, and of course to give a billion dollars to foreign companies to build and fix the defective Obamacare web site.

But the highlight of the night was Obama getting a standing ovation from Democrats for promising to violate the Constitution; ignore checks and balances; and bypass the people, Congress, and the law of the land to pass radical and extreme parts of his agenda by Executive orders. Save that video of Democrats cheering wildly for Obama to break the law- it will make for one heck of a GOP television advertising campaign this Fall. I’d be sure to show them cheering in slow motion.

This folks is the state of our union…and the state of delusion and deception in Obama’s America. Disgusting. Embarassing. Misleading. Criminal. And even a little plagiarism thrown in for good measure.

I guess outside of the nonstop lies and fraud, Obama just didn’t have any original material.

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.