Rep. Doug Cox, R-Grove: "Family values are still important. People who can work are expected to work, rather than depend on the government to support them. If you know how many guns you have, you don't have enough.:)

"Policemen, firemen and teachers are still 'looked-up-to' and respected as authorities. People walk up to soldiers in uniform and thank them for their service. Folks live within their means and think the federal government should too."

Joe Wanenmacher, operator of the Tulsa Arms Show for 60 years: "I don't think people in Oklahoma have changed that much. Over time, people have gravitated toward the Republican platform because they are dissatisfied with the Democratic platform.

"We take religion seriously, we take gun ownership very seriously. I'm not a politician and can't say what else tends to make people vote or what drives voting habits. For a lot of my friends, the Second Amendment is one of their main issues."

Ronda Vuillemont-Smith, founder of the Tulsa 912 project, a conservative grassroots movement: "We should always be a state to champion the conservative platform - smaller government, less taxes and accountability of our elected officials. It's about liberty. Being a red state goes beyond voting for the Republicans or Democrats."

Gloria Reeves, member of the Pittsburgh County GOP Women: "We're able to be more flexible to show patriotism. We go into the schools to celebrate Constitution Day and are able to do that without rejection by the schools. We're encourage to help kids understand that. We encourage people to register to vote, whether for Democratic or Republican. The Second Amendment is also important."

G.T. Bynum, Tulsa City Councilor: "I think Oklahoma's identification as a Red State is a legacy of the pioneers who settled here in the 20th Century - risk takers who wanted the opportunity to do things their way and either reap the rewards or pay the price for the outcome. Let the chips fall where they may. If they wanted a more structured approach to existence, there were plenty of other states to go to that were older and more developed. Personal freedom was the driver. And because we are a young state largely settled by pioneers, personal freedom was and remains a key value."

Juan Miret, chairman of the Greater Tulsa Hispanic Affairs Commission: "We live in a very unique state and city. Statistics bears this out, even in politics. Tulsa has a face that reflects both old traditions and new memories. The diversity and multiculturalism of our city is a fundamental part of its history.

"Walking through Tulsa reminds one that today's immigrants come from all corners of the planet, bringing a range of ethnicity and beliefs, loving their families and defending their new home loyally. Some people are embracing it, learning and enjoying the new horizon. Some people will never do it."

Mike McCutchin, chairman of the Republican Party of Tulsa County: "What makes Oklahoma one of the reddest states is the fundamental beliefs and character attributes of the bast majority of Oklahomans. They are hard-working patriots who love their country and don't agree with the extent to which the federal government has expanded its influence and interference in the daily lives of people with little regard for the constraints on power our Founding Fathers provided in our Constitution."

Michael Whelan, chairman of the Democratic Party of Tulsa County: "I love Oklahoma. We may be one of the reddest of the red states, but I have found a stark contrast between the people and the politics. I have found Oklahomans to be open-minded, kind, friendly and generous people who share many of the same beliefs that I do. It has always struck me as strange that the 'every man for himself' policies of our state’s elected leadership are oftentimes such a stark contrast to the 'We’re all in this together' attitude I see in the people I meet.

"There has been a culture shift in Oklahoma over the past decade. Many cite being the buckle of the bible belt as the root cause. I disagree. While there are many churches in the state that preach politics from the pulpit, I think the cause has more to do with the growth of the state’s concededly right leaning chief industries."

Toby Jenkins, executive director of Oklahomans for Equality and the Dennis R. Neill Equality Center: "For too long and too many times the divisive tone at the Oklahoma capital has made us look like bigots and hate mongers. The rest of the country mocks us and roles their eyes and wonders 'Why would anyone want to live there?'

"The truth is that most Oklahoma legislators, even the Republicans are embarrassed by the hatefulness and wish it would stop. It is not always popular being rainbow in a red state but this is my home. It is my duty to work to make sure every political party and elected official remember we are all Oklahomans."

Sonny Branham, assistant professor of government at Oral Roberts University: "For me, to live in what the media labels as a 'red state' means there is a sense of permanence and strength here. In particular, it means stability of honor for principles of the Christian faith and for the Constitution of the United States. This veneration results in less of the societal mores attrition that plagues many other states.

"It also results in a culture that is more respectful to individualism. As the old saying goes, 'If you don't stand for something, you will fall for anything.' Red-staters like Oklahomans stand for the tried and true things that they believe in, and I have confidence this stabilizes our state and our nation."

Imam John Ederer, Tulsa Islamic Society: "Being in a red state means we will have a society governed by people who feel a deep pride in America, its Constitution and traditional values. Being a red state means people will struggle with balancing the free secular American foundations of a mass majority Christian society.

"Unfortunately the red state mentality in our modern world doesn't think for itself on said lofty foundations. Rather it allows corporate lobbies, the military-industrial complex, Fox News and other often immorally bias and deceptive outlets to puppeteer them in interpreting it. This creates serious problems for our society limiting and hindering our potential in living up to the good foundational values of the Republican Party."

T.C. Ryan, Republican Party Tulsa County committeeman: "Living in a red state means one word — opportunity. Oklahoma was predominately Democrat for its entire existence. Now we have an opportunity to show how the Republican policies and principles are enacted."

Susan Savage, Tulsa mayor from 1992-2002 and former two-term Oklahoma Secretary of State: "I do not think in terms of red/blue ideological distinctions, however, I am dismayed by the strident and partisan rhetoric which does nothing to build the confidence of the public in government or to build the relationships necessary to move Tulsa and Oklahoma forward.

"I remain optimistic, though, because I sense the public has grown weary and longs for statesmen and women like Henry Bellmon who did what was difficult but what represented long term benefits....regardless of red or blue. As citizens, we have an obligation and a responsibility to use our history and legacy of strong and decisive leadership to invest in policies which benefit the greatest number of people over the long term."