Sex is a normal, happy part of life for millions of married and unmarried people in America today. For this we have modern, effective birth control to thank. Why is it so hard for the pro-choice movement to celebrate this openly?

It's true that birth control has other important uses. Condoms protect both partners from many sexually transmitted infections. Emergency contraception (Plan B) is crucial if you are raped. Hormonal contraception — the Pill, ring, patch, and so on — can control a range of health problems, from painful periods to acne to endometriosis. But come on, people! It's time to acknowledge that for most women, birth control is about having sex — voluntary sex — without getting pregnant. We need to say that having a sex life is a good thing, part of what makes us human and lets us enjoy the rich possibilities of our brief time on earth.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

It's not as if those who oppose women's sexual freedom haven't figured out that birth control is what makes it possible. When Sandra Fluke testified in Congress about the suffering caused when her Catholic university, Georgetown, denied coverage for contraception, she chose her examples carefully: a married couple, a rape victim, a lesbian with polycystic ovarian syndrome. No wild cavorting there. That didn't prevent Rush Limbaugh from calling her a slut and a prostitute, and demanding that she post "her sex tapes" online. An unmarried law student in her late 20s wanted her insurance to cover birth control? Outrageous. Oddly, Limbaugh seemed to think you need to take a pill every time you have sex — the more action, the more burden on the taxpayer. (Perhaps he was thinking of Viagra, which has always been widely covered in government and private insurance, with no fuss or controversy. We don't seem to have a problem at all helping men have sex.)

Most Popular

Why does it matter that we talk about sex when we talk about birth control? Well, the most effective methods — long-acting devices like the IUD — don't really fit the other, non-sexy reasons: The only reason to use them is to prevent pregnancy. It's wonderful that the Affordable Care Act covers these methods, because they are too expensive for many women to pay for out of pocket; although cost-effective over the long-term, the IUD costs about $1,000 up front. But it's hard to argue for them without conjuring up the image of a woman who wants to have sex without pregnancy for a fairly long period of time. If we let that image be a negative one — promiscuous "coed," slutty twentysomething — we make it harder to fight against employers who want to exclude those methods from coverage.

Another reason: We need to defend the rights of teenagers to get birth control in privacy. Right now two states, Utah and Texas, require that to access state funds for contraception, teenagers get parental consent (and no, teenage boys do not require mom and dad's permission to buy condoms at the drugstore, don't be silly). In effect, those states are doing their best to say a girl's sex life is up to her parents, and if they believe the best way to keep her a virgin is to make her risk pregnancy, so be it. In Missouri, a state representative is trying to prevent his three daughters, two of whom are adults (!), from getting birth control through his plan. If this seems wildly eccentric to you, consider the enormous flap over emergency contraception. Even President Obama said that "as a father of two daughters," he supported keeping it prescription-only for girls under 17, against the findings of the government's own experts. It took a judge to force the government to make it available over the counter to teenagers.

The pro-choice movement has done so much for women and men. Our lives are healthier, happier, freer, and more prosperous because we can control our fertility and enjoy sex without fear of pregnancy. We mustn't let the slut-shamers keep us from saying that out loud.

Birth control: It's about having sex without getting pregnant. There, that wasn't so hard, was it?

Katha Pollitt is the author of Pro: Reclaiming Abortion Rights.

RELATED:

Why This Writer Says Everyone Should Be Pro-Choice

Follow Katha on Twitter.