Queen (Photo: File photo)

The outlying counties of Western North Carolina have several important legislative races on the Nov. 4 ballot. The Citizen-Times recommends Jane Hipps in Senate District 50, Chuck McGrady in House District 117, Dean Hicks in House District 118 and Joe Sam Queen in House District 119.

The lines are clear between Democrat Hipps, of Waynesville, widow of longtime District Attorney Charles Hipps, and incumbent Republican Jim Davis, of Franklin.

Hipps believes "it is a travesty" that North Carolina refused to expand Medicaid eligibility under the Affordable Care Act, while Davis supports that decision. Hipps opposes fracking in North Carolina; Davis supports it.

Hipps points out, correctly, that while education funding was increased by the Republican-led General Assembly, the increase is not enough to keep up with inflation and population growth.

Davis has worked hard for jobs in his district (Haywood, Jackson, Macon, Swain, Clay, Cherokee and Graham counties), but his views on most issues are not those needed to keep North Carolina moving ahead.

McGrady, a Hendersonville Republican whose District 117 includes most of Henderson County, is somewhat of a maverick. While the GOP as a whole has not been distinguished on environmental issues, McGrady has. Among other things, he is a former national president of the Sierra Club.

He fought unsuccessfully this year for a stronger coal-ash bill than the one passed by the General Assembly. In 2013, he voted twice against fracking bills. He has been endorsed by the North Carolina League of Conservation Voters.

McGrady's only opposition is Libertarian Shelby Mood.

Hicks brings to the race in District 118, which includes Yancey and Madison counties and part of Haywood, the experience gained in three terms on the Yancey County Commission. As a retired teacher and coach, it is not surprising that he stresses public education.

"I want to be a voice for public education in North Carolina," he said in a campaign statement. "My goal will not be accomplished until the school systems and teachers in this state are ranked No. 1 in the nation. Our children deserve no less."

Incumbent Michelle Presnell, also a former Yancey County commissioner, has on occasion made national headlines in an unenviable manner, such as when she equated Islamic prayer with terrorism and supported a bill that would allow establishing a state religion in North Carolina.

District 119 covers the rest of Haywood County and all of Swain and Jackson. Democrat Queen, of Waynesville, a former state senator, is completing his first term in this House district and is once again running against Republican Mike Clampitt, of Bryson City.

Nothing sets the two apart more dramatically than their responses when asked during a debate about their top legislative priority. Queen said it was expansion of the Medicaid program while Clampitt said it was getting money for the Road to Nowhere along the North Shore of Fontana Lake.

Expansion of Medicaid is vital both for the 500,000 North Carolinians now uninsured and for the health-care providers forced to care for them without compensation. The Road to Nowhere, by contrast, is an issue between Swain County and the federal government.

Republican Sen. Ralph Hise of District 47 (Madison, Yancey, Mitchell, McDowell and Rutherford counties) and Rep. Roger West of District 120 (Macon, Clay, Cherokee and Graham counties), are unopposed. Their names will not appear on the ballot.

Endorsement lineup

Monday: Buncombe School Board

Tuesday: Buncombe DA & Sheriff

Wednesday: 10th and 11th Congressional districts

Thursday: WNC House/Senate races

Friday: Buncombe N.C. House/Senate races

Saturday: Buncombe Commission

Sunday: U.S. Senate

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1pcti8T