Two weekends ago, Roseville High School hosted the Roseville Google Summit, an event similar to the Google Festival it hosted almost exactly a year before.

Like last year’s Festival, the Summit featured 480 educators from around the state, all of whom came to RHS to learn strategies for integrating technology into an educational setting. Like last year, sessions ranged along the spectrum of instructional technology, covering everything from tried-and-true plans for professional development to the apps students have found most useful in the classroom. Like last year, it rained.

Unlike last year, though, RHS wasn’t shocked by the “firehose” one organizer calls the Google events. It’d been a year since the Festival, and it’d been a growing year for the school. Teachers began to catch up, and technology started to appear more and more frequently in RHS’ classrooms.

Here’s an in-depth look at what went on during that year.

From Festival to Summit

When the Google EdTechTeam (the group that runs Google Summits) visited RHS last year, it visited a campus very new to the concept of instructional technology.

RHS began its major foray into the world of classroom tech at the beginning of the 2013-14 school year, when Marie Criste, then RHS’ site technology coordinator, worked with RHS administrators to purchase 272 Chromebooks for the school using Title I funds.

By the time the Festival rolled around in February, RHS and the Roseville Joint Union High School District had also tapped into Common Core funding, and that site Chromebook number had increased to more than 800. The school also hosted several hundred Apple iPads and a beefed-up Wi-Fi system capable of handling the demands of both the Festival’s attendees and RHS’ juniors when they took the mock Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium (SBAC) exam that April.

What RHS didn’t have was a staff well or consistently trained in using technology in their classrooms. Most teachers had only used Chromebooks a handful of times, if ever, by the time of the Google Festival, and many went into the event with only a limited knowledge of what the devices were capable of.

This year, though, most attendees walked into the Google Summit with a pretty good idea of what they could and wanted to get out of it.

“Last year, I was just kind of, like, hit-and-miss,” RHS psychology teacher Mark Andreatta, who attended both events, said. “This year, I was like boom-boom-boom. I pointed out a couple weeks in advance which sessions I was going to.”

Criste, who now serves as RJUHSD’s coordinator of instructional technology, said Andreatta’s experience is not unique. Since moving into her district position a month after the Google Festival, she has worked with leadership teams at the site and district level to incorporate technology training into almost all phases of professional development.

At RJUHSD’s first two professional development days this year, Criste had administrators model different uses of Google’s Apps for Education, which include programs like Google Hangouts and Google Drive. She has also worked to orient the District Technology Team (DTT), which has historically had a technical bent, toward professional development and established an Instructional Technology Team (ITT) at each site.

“Really, it blows me away when I stop and think about how far and hard we’ve gone,” Criste said. “The next piece to this now is keeping that momentum going and following up with what they learned here and how they can be powerful leaders at their sites.”

Part of that will involve the continuing development of exemplar lessons plans, which site and district leaders began to develop this year as models for teachers just learning to use instructional technology. Criste and her tech staff also used the past year to further push paperless strategies and give each site minor upgrades in the way of additional Chromebooks and Windows hardware.

At RHS, the year also brought a new allocation system for the school’s Chromebooks, which now number more than 900. Though RHS initially operated under the static model, in which carts are assigned to teachers and don’t move from room to room, RHS now uses a sharing system that lets teachers sign up to use the devices whenever they plan to use them in class.

This new system was engineered by Mike Purvines, who took over as RHS’ site tech coordinator when Criste moved to the district office.

“I didn’t want it to be ‘those who have’ and ‘those who are starving for it on the outside, even if they had the training and wanted to use it,’” Purvines said.

According to Purvines, the check-out model has increased accessibility to the devices, putting them in the hands of more teachers and more students. This, in turn, he said, has resulted in a greater comfort level for both groups, and he said demand for the carts has been consistently rising since the first Google event.

However, though teachers are now getting more comfortable and better at using the devices in their classrooms, the past year of instructional technology growth has not come without some challenges for RHS and RJUHSD.

Growing pains

As more and more teachers are beginning to feel the effects of the district’s tech investment, two needs have become clear: one, for more professional development, and two, for more devices.

According to Criste, though many teachers are now becoming proficient at incorporating technology into their lesson plans, many still need a significant amount of professional development to get up to speed.

“We have a long way to go,” she said. “You can have all the devices in the world, and if you don’t have the teachers getting the training… We have a lot of teachers that still need to see how to use it.”

One of the biggest issues, Criste said, is teachers being able to find time to fit learning how to use tech into their day. Many are busy keeping up with the minutiae of daily classes, and deviating from a curriculum they believe to be tried, true and easier is a stopping point for many of them.

To get around this, Criste has begun working with the site ITTs to develop model lessons to show teachers examples of how instructional technology can be meaningful.

“Last Google Fest, there were a handful of people that got super inspired and just, like, ran with it, and then there were people who, like, took it in and got into their classroom the next day and were like, ‘Eh, okay – back to my old ways,’” said RHS government and economics teacher Dana Dooley, who serves on RHS’ ITT. “We’re trying to figure out right now how we keep that motivation going.”

Though RHS’ ITT, on which Purvines and teachers Bradlee Crockett and Levi Fletcher also serve, is still working to solidify its goals for the school, Criste and Dooley both referenced the development of a set of basic tasks all teachers should be able to complete as a starting point. Dooley said these could be reinforced with refresher sessions during Collaboration time and staff meetings, beginning with the one taking place after school today.

The other major issue RHS faces involves the physical limitations of its technology. Though the school now hosts more mobile devices than it ever has before, demand is outpacing supply, and RHS’ sharing system, though “generally effective,” according to Purvines, means teachers sometimes have to wait to get devices in their classrooms.Criste, Purvines, Dooley and Andreatta agree that a future one-device-per-student set-up may be the only way to fix that particular shortage problem.

“I think, to really, really transform things, we do have to get to 1:1, where you can count on the device being there for everybody at all times,” Purvines said. “I think that’s when the most transformation will occur.”

However, according to Purvines, the purchase of that many devices is a long way off. He’s currently more concerned about the ability of RHS to maintain the technology it already has.

RHS receives about $55,000 a year in tech funds, which Purvines said is not enough to cover the upkeep of the approximately $1 million worth of equipment the school hosts. Though he works on maintenance and delegation during his daily release period, the only other support comes from Tiger Tech, a student-tech program that started just this year, and a district technician who has other responsibilities.

“Honestly, it’s a full-time position, and no one has full time for it,” Purvines said. “We really don’t have a good support system, and I think we need to find ways of making a support system better with time, finances and training.”

What’s next

Though RHS and RJUHSD’s jump into the world of instructional technology hasn’t come without hiccups, the tech staff interviewed for this article expressed a belief that both the school and district have bright futures ahead.

“We are still in our infancy,” Criste said. “We know we have lots of advanced, amazing talent in our district, but it’s now, how do we team to train the rest of the folks, the rest of the teachers, to get them moving forward?”

Neither Criste nor her staff is sure of the exact path RHS and RJUHSD will take in the coming months, but common goals include increased tech proficiency for all teachers, the development of a portal of exemplar tech lesson plans, the incorporation of social media and digital citizenship into classes and the exploration of mobile devices besides Chromebooks.

Major projects like achieving a 1:1 ratio districtwide are still likely years off, but Criste is confident that major changes can still take place before next year’s Google event, which the district now plans to host annually.

“I just want to change the culture to be more of a risk-taker,” Criste said. “That, to me, is a challenge, but a very good challenge – a goal of, ‘Let’s change the culture.’ Let’s get some more risk-takers. Let’s get some more disrupters.”