The Note's Must-Reads are a round-up of today's political headlines and stories from ABC News and the top U.S. newspapers. Posted Monday through Friday right here at www.abcnews.com

Compiled by ABC News' Jayce Henderson, Amanda VanAllen and Will Cantine

OBAMACARE ABC News' Isabel Markham: " Rep. Tom Graves Defends Obamacare De-Funding Effort" With the threat of a govenrment shutdown looming, Rep. Tom Graves defended his effort to defund President Obama's signature health care law on "This Week" Sunday. "We are united around a very simple goal, and that is keeping the government open while protecting our constituents from the harmful effects of Obamacare," Graves said. "We have eight days to do that." LINK

Politico's Carrie Budoff Brown and Glenn Thrush: " Barack Obama's health-care conversion" The most important red line of Barack Obama's presidency was scrawled hastily in January 2007, a few weeks before he even announced he was running for president. Soon-to-be-candidate Obama, then an Illinois senator, was thinking about turning down an invitation to speak at a big health care conference sponsored by the progressive group Families USA, when two aides, Robert Gibbs and Jon Favreau, hit on an idea that would make him appear more prepared and committed than he actually was at the moment. LINK

GUN LAWS USA Today's David Jackson and Kelly Kennedy: " Obama calls for 'transformation' of nation's gun laws" President Obama called Sunday for a "transformation" of the nation's gun laws, saying last week's deadly shooting at the Washington Navy Yard echoes too many other killings across the United States. "Our tears are not enough," Obama said during a memorial service for the victims and their families. "Our words and our prayers are not enough. … We are going to have to change." LINK

IMMIGRATION REFORM The Wall Street Journal's Laura Meckler: " Immigration Advocates Consider a Compromise" Frustrated by inaction in the House, advocates of a broad overhaul of immigration law are considering whether to compromise on a core demand-that the nation's 11 million illegal immigrants be offered a pathway to citizenship. For those open to it, the idea marks a strategic retreat aimed at moving legislation through the Republican-led House. LINK

NAVY YARD SHOOTING MEMORIAL The Washington Times' Ben Wolfgang: " At Navy Yard Memorial, Obama Renews Call For Gun Control" Making perhaps his strongest case to date for gun-control, President Obama on Sunday said the U.S. cannot continue to accept mass shootings like the one seen at the Washington Navy Yard last week. Speaking at a memorial service killed in last week's shooting spree, the president again played the role of comforter-in-chief, a duty he's assumed multiple times during his time in office. LINK

The Los Angeles Times' Becca Clemons: " Obama Calls For New Action On Gun Violence" President Obama was both consoling and stern Sunday as he called out the names and favorite pastimes of the 12 victims of the Washington Navy Yard shooting before demanding that the U.S. overcome its "frozen" politics to make guns less accessible to those who would commit mass murder. "Our tears are not enough," Obama told a memorial attended by about 5,000 people at the Marine Barracks Washington, a few blocks from the Navy Yard in southeast Washington where a gunman killed 12 people last week before he was fatally shot by police. LINK

The Hill's Kevin Bogardus: " Obama Tells Families Of Navy Yard Victims: 'We Can't Accept This'" President Obama delivered a somber speech on Sunday at a memorial for the Navy Yard mass shooting's 12 victims, saying "we can't accept this" and must address gun violence. Speaking at the Marine Barracks in Washington, Obama said he too often has had to comfort grieving families from mass shootings. The president said he is worried that there is "a creeping resignation" among Americans that nothing can be done in response to tragedies like the shooting last Monday. LINK

The New York Times' Michael Shear: " Honoring Navy Yard Victims, Obama Asks: 'Do We Care Enough' to change?" President Obama on Sunday eulogized the 12 victims of the Navy Yard shooting and lamented what he called a "creeping resignation" in America about the inevitability of gun violence. In remarks to service members and their families who packed the bleachers in the barracks about two and a half blocks from where the killings took place last week, Mr. Obama vowed that he would not accept inaction after the latest in a string of mass shootings during his presidency. LINK

FBI The Washington Post's Michael Doyle: " New FBI director dogged by budget problems" Big budget woes worry the FBI's new director, James B. Comey, a mere two weeks into the hassle-filled job of a lifetime. The training pipeline for special agents is empty, curtailed by prior economizing. By Oct. 1, Comey must find about $800 million in savings out of an annual FBI budget of about $8.1 billion. Layoffs and furloughs appear inevitable. "I'm not playing a game," Comey told reporters Thursday. "I'm not crying wolf." And budget problems are not the only ones to confront the new director since his swearing-in Sept. 4, after a breezy 93 to 1 Senate confirmation vote. LINK

HILLARY CLINTON The New York Daily News' Adam Edelman: " Hillary Clinton Running For In 2016, Friends Say - And Huma Abedin Will Have Tough Choice" Hillary Clinton has decided to run for president in 2016, close friends say - and that would force long-time aide Huma Abedin into making a tough decision of her own, between her career and her disgraced husband, Anthony Weiner. Several Clinton confidants tell New York magazine that that the former secretary of state will jump into the 2016 presidential race. LINK

BUDGET BATTLE The Los Angeles Times' Lisa Mascaro: " Shutdown Threat Reveals Split In Republican Party" With one week left before a possible government shutdown, congressional debate has exposed deep divisions within the Republican Party, pitting tea-party-backed conservatives against their colleagues. Budget moves orchestrated by tea party leader Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas have encountered outright hostility from fellow Republican senators who say his strategy does not appear to have an endgame. LINK

BOOKMARKS The Note: LINK The Must-Reads Online: LINK Top Line Webcast (12noon EST M-F): LINK ABC News Politics: LINK| George's Bottom Line (George Stephanopoulos): LINK Follow ABC News on Twitter: LINK ABC News Mobile: LINK ABC News app on your iPhone/iPod Touch/iPad: LINK