Members of Congress are currently back in their districts, where the consequences of inaction on our nation’s aging infrastructure are all too evident.

As temperatures rise, the highways that lawmakers shortchanged through patchwork funding will crack under the hot August sun. The bridges they neglected through temporary “solutions” will bottleneck with hardworking Americans stuck on the way to well-deserved vacations. And when elected officials return to Washington in September, they will travel over the same roadways, railways and runways that depend on long-term funding they can’t seem to provide.

ADVERTISEMENT

It’s time for Washington to accept responsibility for the worsening state of our nation’s infrastructure—and take steps for robust investments necessary to increase U.S. competitiveness and secure our economic leadership. Short-term extensions are not enough to grow our economy at home and go head-to-head with our competitors abroad.

Just how bad is the situation? According to a recent report by the National Association of Manufacturers, 70 percent of manufacturers believe U.S. infrastructure is in fair or poor shape. In addition, 65 percent do not believe that infrastructure, especially in their region, is sufficient to respond to the competitive demands of a growing economy over the next 10–15 years.

While other nations continue to invest in modern pathways for commerce, the United States is stuck in a decade-long period of decline in overall infrastructure spending, as evidenced by an annual 3.5 percent decline in highway, road and bridge investment, from 2003 through 2012.

This is not only unacceptable but also unworthy of the country responsible for creating an infrastructure system that empowered us to achieve the greatest period of prosperity in history. Another short-term extension is the 35th time in six years that Congress has failed, when faced with the need for any new transportation funding measure, to take decisive action to build a world-class transportation system required to attract and keep business.

What a tremendous disservice to the hardest working, most innovative and most productive workers in the world.

As manufacturers, our ability to move parts from suppliers to shop floors—and finished goods from shop floors to customers—relies on the highways, railways, aviation and seaports of America. If we cannot move goods quickly and consistently, we cannot provide the advantage of efficiency to our customers, and we cannot be competitive.

That’s why manufacturers and all Americans need a real answer. A targeted, long-term investment from public and private sectors in our nation’s infrastructure would increase jobs, grow GDP, return three dollars for every one dollar invested and provide Americans an increase in take-home pay after taxes.

For our part, manufacturers are doing everything in our power to drive attention to this crisis and motivate lawmakers to act. We’ve partnered with traditional and nontraditional allies, such as the Laborers’ International Union of North America and the AFL-CIO, to rally support for investments that will help fuel economic growth and create thousands of jobs.

Creating a modern infrastructure system is a responsibility that brings us together to strengthen our economy and improve lives. Legislative gridlock in Washington is holding us back and obstructing the path to sustained progress and prosperity. It’s time to move forward, put partisan politics aside and accept responsibility for funding and building our future.

Sherrill is the chairman and CEO of Tenneco Inc. and chair of the NAM Board of Directors.