By MAX TYLER

JOURNAL STAFF WRITER

For a rowing program born just 4 1/2 years ago, St. Peter’s Prep has quickly established itself as a premier power - not only in New Jersey, but also across the country.

Need proof? Check out the Maraudres’ trophy case, which is already filling up.

This spring, the Marauders took home the top prize for the first time at the Passaic River Sprints, besting Don Bosco, Nutley, Belleville, Kearny, Ridgewood, North Arlington, and St. Benedicts, programs which have been around for decades.

In 2013, the Marauders took first place in the Stotesbury Cup, the largest high school race in the country. That same year, they won the Scholastic Rowing Association of America National Championship.

This year, the Marauders placed second in both competitions.

“I remember going to the Stotesbury Cup my sophomore year and being told it was an unwinnable race,” said Chris Kuczynski, a senior who will captain this year’s Prep team. “One year later we ended up winning that race, as well as nationals. That was a big confidence booster for us.”

Kuczynski joined the Prep team as a freshman with no rowing experience. That’s not uncommon among the Marauders.

Despite all of their success, the Marauders do come from humble beginnings. In 2010 the program consisted of roughly 20 rowers with no experience.

Yet, next season they will boast a roster of 55 rowers. According to head coach Alex Canale, the key to their rapid success has been twofold — a robust mixture of dedication from the athletes and steadfast support from parents.

“The students we have are really driven and are a close knit group,” Canale said. “They work together and take care of each other. It leads to a team mentality that you can’t really teach.”

The Marauders ability to learn quickly on the water may not come as a surprise given that last year’s graduating class boasted 12 National Honor Society members. It's a team that certainly prides itself on being scholar athletes.

2014 graduate Hank Forsythe will be attending the U.S. Naval Academy this fall as a member of their rowing team. In addition, over the last four years the school has sent rowers to Hobart, Marist, William & Mary, Ohio State, Delaware and Virginia Tech.

Rowing is perhaps one of the most expensive high school sports in the country, with a single oar costing roughly $400. This certainly hindered St. Peter’s Prep in the early stages of its program.

That’s where the parents stepped in.

Since the program’s inception, parents and the Prep community and have raised $130,000 towards team equipment.

“We had a boat lose by .15 of a second,” said former Prep Crew Parents Association president and current Prep Crew Parents Association senior board member Mike Lyons. “Equipment makes all the difference.”