RUN, NEWS INTERNS, RUN.(Photo by Alex Wong/Getty Images)

You probably missed it on Friday, but the news of the Supreme Court ruling in favour of same sex marriage were delivered in quite an interesting way.

See these people running in the picture, looking like there’s probably a very angry bear just out of shot?

(shout out to that guy on the right pulling *that* face, by the way – you gotta do what you gotta do)

They are interns from TV channels, literally sprinting to give the news to their bosses.

Because all recording devices are banned inside the building, they have to deliver Supreme Court decisions to their team as quickly as possible, so the broadcasters can announce it live.

For most rulings, interns just have casual stroll back, but on major rulings – like the same sex marriage one, or Obamacare a few days ago – they need to get there first, and get there FAST.

They’re all really well prepared, because this is no joke:

PIC: The intern sneaker squad is ready for action at the Supreme Court! #SCOTUS pic.twitter.com/Qjz5oeTi7R — Ali Weinberg (@AliABCNews) June 22, 2015

You see, the run is actually quite intense.

It’s about a quarter of a mile between the press room and the broadcasters pen – and summers in DC are really warm, humid and overall quite gross.

The interns also have to fight their way through tourists, people protesting, and Washington staffers taking pictures.

It’s basically a high-speed obstacle course.

Once they arrive, they have to somehow slither between all the other networks’ teams, to find their own, so they can hand over their precious, precious notes.

Here, we have a natural delivering a ruling in 2013, like it’s no big deal:

It shouldn’t be a big deal, but…it kind of is a big deal.

It’s always definitely up to whoever can get there first, which, in the King v. Burwell case (aka Obamacare) was…

…Lauren Langille, from CNBC!

Everyone there is really proud of her:

Your intern may be fast. But not as fast as ours. @CNBC @lauren_langille #SCOTUS (via @dubois) https://t.co/LtOWjED0dv — Carl Quintanilla (@carlquintanilla) June 26, 2015

Congratulations to Lauren and all the others!

You keep on doing you, running interns! Journalism needs you!

Run, run, run (Photo by Mark Wilson/Getty Images)

MORE: Flying the flag! Facebook celebrates LGBT Pride with rainbow profile picture function

MORE: London is getting a rainbow train for Gay Pride