As mental health clinicians — psychologists, therapists, social workers, and psychiatric nurses — we have an ethical obligation to advocate for our patients, whose conditions often make it difficult, even impossible for them to advocate for themselves. For four years we have done everything we can to persuade Kaiser Permanente officials to correct ethical and legal violations in its mental health services that often have severe consequences for Kaiser patients.

Kaiser simply does not staff its psychiatry departments with enough mental health clinicians to handle the caseload. Our schedules are booked weeks, even months in advance, forcing patients in dire need of care to endure lengthy and illegal waits for appointments. For patients suffering from depression, anxiety, and other debilitating mental conditions, these delays can be insurmountable obstacles.

In 2013, California’s Department of Managed Health Care fined Kaiser $4 million for systemically understaffing its psychiatry department, falsifying patient records to conceal long wait times, and providing patients with misleading information regarding the care available to them — a situation nearly identical to the scandal that engulfed the Veterans Affairs Administration last year.

Yet Kaiser’s systemic violations of state law continue. Kaiser did not hire more staff but instead merely shifted its resources, directing staff to see more first-time patients at the expense of returning patients. It may be easier now for a new patient to get in the door for a diagnostic appointment, but treatment is a long way off. Here in Vallejo and Vacaville, our patients frequently must endure waits of four to eight weeks for an appointment, making effective, ongoing therapy nearly impossible.

And the situation is only getting worse. This year, under the Affordable Care Act, Kaiser’s California enrollment has increased by a quarter million members. Staffing levels, already way too low, are not keeping pace with enrollment. Withholding services while increasing membership is an effective way to score record profits — Kaiser has made more than $14 billion since 2009, and this year’s profits are up 40 percent over last year’s record — but it has led to woefully inadequate care, as well as four class-action lawsuits filed by patients and families who say Kaiser’s violations contributed to tragic outcomes, including suicides.

In contract bargaining in December, we presented Kaiser with a commonsense solution: clinician–management committees in each facility that can work together to determine adequate staffing levels, with help from a neutral, outside expert if the two sides cannot agree. It’s a simple and effective solution already in place in other health care systems. But once again, Kaiser failed to act.

That’s why Kaiser’s 2,500 California mental health clinicians are on strike, here in Vallejo and Vacaville and throughout the state. Mental health clinicians hate to strike, but Kaiser is letting our patients down every day. Every day we are forced to apologetically explain to Kaiser members why they cannot get the timely, appropriate care they pay for with their monthly premiums and that Kaiser is required by law to provide.

Advertisement

With soaring profits and a $30 billion cash reserve, Kaiser needs to step up and lead the way in finally making mental health care a priority in this country. The law requires it and our ethical obligations as health care providers demand it.

— Horace Beach, Ph.D./Staff Psychologist, Kaiser Vallejo

• Writing us

Letters to the Times-Herald must contain the first and last name of the letter writer, as well as contact information to reach the letter writer. The contact information will not be published by the Times-Herald.

The Times-Herald advises letters to be 400 words or fewer and based on one topic. Longer letters will be considered for separate publication in an op-ed format.

The Times-Herald encourages letters to be sent via email. Those letters are more likely to be published in a timely fashion.

Letters can be emailed to opinion@timesheraldonline.com, or sent via mail to: Letters, Vallejo Times-Herald, 440 Curtola Parkway, Vallejo, CA, 94590.