Helped by strong name recognition from voters familiar with her compelling personal story, U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth has an overwhelming lead in the Democratic U.S. Senate primary, a new Tribune poll shows.

The survey showed Duckworth with 72 percent support compared with only 8 percent for former Chicago Urban League CEO Andrea Zopp and 4 percent for state Sen. Napoleon Harris, of Harvey, with another 16 percent undecided ahead of Tuesday's primary.

Duckworth, a two-term congresswoman from Hoffman Estates, racked up huge margins throughout Illinois and among racial and ethic groups. She held a 3-to-1 advantage among African-American voters, a sizable force in an Illinois Democratic primary and one her two rivals have counted on as a base of support.

Nine out of 10 voters knew Duckworth, while about half said they were unfamiliar with Zopp or Harris. What's more, nearly 7 in 10 Democratic voters have a favorable view of the congresswoman.

The results show Duckworth well positioned to emerge from the primary to take on Republican U.S. Sen. Mark Kirk, of Highland Park, who faces nominal primary opposition in his run for a second term. The general election campaign is expected to be one of the most expensive and combative Senate races in the nation.

Duckworth has been on the political stage for a decade, making a bid for Congress in 2006 and falling just short against heavily favored Republican Peter Roskam, of Wheaton, in a seat once held by conservative icon Henry Hyde. It was in that campaign that Duckworth gained national attention as a U.S. Army helicopter pilot in the Iraq War who was shot down and lost her legs.

The state's senior senator, Democrat Dick Durbin, and Mayor Rahm Emanuel, who formerly headed the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, have been among her chief political supporters. And then-Gov. Rod Blagojevich and President Barack Obama named her to high-ranking state and federal veterans affairs posts before she got elected to Congress in 2012 in the favorably drawn, Democratic-leaning 8th District.

(Tribune graphics)

All of which has given Duckworth name identification with voters far beyond those of Zopp, a former state and federal prosecutor who entered the corporate world, and Harris, a former NFL player who owns pizza franchises in the south suburbs.

The poll of 600 likely voters in the Democratic primary, which was conducted March 2 through Sunday and has an error margin of 4.1 percentage points, bears this out.

Only 11 percent of Democratic voters statewide had never heard of Duckworth, compared with 44 percent who had not heard of Zopp and 53 percent who didn't know Harris, the survey found.

A politically troublesome issue for Zopp and Harris, both African-American candidates, was a lack of familiarity among black voters. More than 4 in 10 African-Americans had never heard of Zopp and half of black voters had never heard of Harris, the poll showed.

U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth, an Illinois Democrat, wants to serve in the U.S. Senate.

Duckworth was viewed favorably by 69 percent of the state's Democratic primary voters, including 74 percent of white voters, 58 percent of African-Americans and 59 percent of Latinos. She was viewed unfavorably by only 4 percent of Democratic voters statewide, only 6 percent of African-American voters and just 4 percent of white voters.

Among the 56 percent who had heard of Zopp, 13 percent viewed her favorably and 7 percent had an unfavorable impression of her. Another 36 percent didn't know enough to offer an opinion.

It was even worse for Harris, a member of the state Senate since 2013. Mounting a low-visibility campaign concentrating on what he has called his "leadership" abilities, of the 47 percent who had heard of Harris, only 6 percent of voters statewide viewed him favorably and 5 percent unfavorably while 37 percent didn't know enough about him to form an impression.

Former Chicago Urban League President and CEO Andrea Zopp makes her first bid for public office.

The poll results underscore the Duckworth campaign's decision to limit engaging her primary rivals. Duckworth met face to face with Zopp and Harris before two Chicago newspaper editorial boards and in a TV debate in Chicago. Zopp had pushed Duckworth to hold further debates in the black community and Downstate but was rebuffed. Duckworth did not attend a WTTW "Chicago Tonight" televised debate Tuesday.

Support for Duckworth was widespread statewide. In her congressional base of the collar counties, she led Zopp 84 percent to 8 percent with no support for Harris. In Cook County, Duckworth had 69 percent to 13 percent for Zopp with 6 percent for Harris. In the 96 remaining counties, Duckworth was backed by 68 percent, Harris 4 percent and Zopp 3 percent.

Among white voters, Duckworth had 77 percent to 5 percent for Zopp and 3 percent for Harris. African-American voters backed Duckworth 58 percent to 18 percent for Zopp and 9 percent for Harris. Hispanic voters supported Duckworth 73 percent to 8 percent for Zopp and no support for Harris.

State Sen. Napoleon Harris of Harvey is one of three Democratic candidates for U.S. Senate.

Duckworth also did equally well with male and female voters. Among men, she was backed by 73 percent, while 71 percent of women supported her. Among the swing voting group of white suburban women, Duckworth had the backing of 78 percent. Among those three groups, Zopp had 8 percent support and Harris had 4 percent or less.

Far and away, the issue of the nation's economy was of most concern to Duckworth voters, at 46 percent, with 17 percent listing gun control, 13 percent the Affordable Care Act, 12 percent national security and 6 percent criminal justice reform.

During her campaign, Zopp has highlighted criminal justice issues, including changes to how police-involved shootings are handled. But only 6 percent of her supporters named criminal justice reform a top issue. Instead, 34 percent cited the economy, 23 percent gun control and 15 percent each for the Affordable Care Act and national security.

rap30@aol.com

Twitter @rap30