The Morning Ledger from CFO Journal cues up the most important news in corporate finance every weekday morning. Send us tips, suggestions and complaints: david.hall@wsj.com. Get The Morning Ledger emailed to you each weekday morning by clicking here. Follow us on Twitter @CFOJournal.

THE WEEK AHEAD:

The Fed and retailers are the stars of the show this week. J.C. Penney’s earnings—out Wednesday—will offer some clues on the struggling department-store chain’s prospects. Investors will be zeroing in on whether profit margins were hurt by the heavy discounting Penney resorted to in order to boost sales, as well as how fast the retailer is burning through cash, the WSJ’s Suzanne Kapner writes. Analysts are expecting Penney to burn through as much as $3 billion in the current fiscal year. Investors will also be paying close attention to Penney’s outlook for the holiday season. CEO Mike Ullman has said he expects comparable-store sales to stay in positive territory during the all-important fourth quarter. Bernard Sosnick, an analyst with Gilford Securities, said Penney likely experienced strong sales over the Veterans Day weekend, and that the company plans to aggressively go after sales on Black Friday.

But this holiday season is likely to be tough for a lot of retailers. The government shutdown in October and the political gridlock in Washington have hit consumer confidence, particularly among wealthier Americans, the Journal’s Shelly Banjo writes. And that’s raising questions as to whether better-off consumers will fuel holiday sales to the same degree as they have in the past. “Retailers were counting on higher-end consumers to carry them through the holidays,” said RBC Capital Markets economist Jacob Oubina. “Since the government shutdown, that cohort has retrenched, and that doesn’t bode well for holiday sales.” We’ll get more evidence of the impact of the shutdown on Wednesday when the government reports retail sales for October.

Turning to the tech sector, Salesforce.com is expected to post healthy fiscal Q3 earnings today. The company is in the vanguard of a shift toward cloud-based computing and away from the traditional model of installed software, the WSJ’s Dan Gallagher writes in this Ahead of the Tape column. Salesforce’s growth should receive a boost from the acquisition earlier this year of ExactTarget. That was meant to help Salesforce expand in a new area, cloud services to automate corporate-marketing functions. This presents an opportunity, but may also signal that the company’s traditional, core business is slowing. And chasing new business means rising costs, for R&D as well as Web-hosting. What’s more, cloud marketing isn’t being ignored by rivals. Adobe, for example, is strong in the area and sells its own package of cloud-based services.

The Fed is also in focus this week. First, Chairman Ben Bernanke delivers a speech on Tuesday to the National Economists Club in Washington, D.C. And on Wednesday, economists will be scouring the minutes from the Fed’s October meeting. Fed officials say they are close to easing off their campaign to stimulate the economy, and the minutes will show how close they came at their most recent meeting, the NYT notes.

Markets flash: Shanghai surged as investors cheered a government reform plan released on Friday that aims to open the financial sector and relax restrictions on investment. European shares are slightly lower and DJIA futures are up.

EXCLUSIVE ON CFOJ:

Minority investors bring partnership, cash, counsel and growth. Owners considering outside investors often wonder, “Will our business wind up in a chop shop, or will our legacy live on?” writes Paul Schaye, a managing director of Chestnut Hill Partners, in this CFOJ guest piece. The relationship between a company and its minority investor is often like a marriage. With a minority partner, both parties are “investing” in a long-term relationship, Schaye writes. Before approaching minority investors, companies should consider the “ideal partner characteristics.” Are you looking for investors familiar with your industry? Do you want investors with a hands-on or hands-off approach? Schaye offers some general guidelines for transactions, and says if personnel changes are needed, companies need to “address the issue upfront and determine how much time should pass before there are major shifts in management.”

CORPORATE NEWS:

Wal-Mart fears health-insurance costs could hit consumer spending. Wal-Mart says it is watching to see if the insurance mandate under the Affordable Care Act will dent its customers’ disposable income and hurt its sales, the WSJ reports. “While it is not coming through in customer research, we do know that some of our customers are concerned about the impact of the Affordable Care Act,” said Carol Schumacher, vice president of investor relations. True Value was more emphatic about the potential impact. “This has been a massive concern for us,” True Value CEO John Hartmann said. “Discretionary spending will certainly be impacted by the changes in the contribution Americans will have to make for health care.”

Outsider takes CFO reins at Takeda. New Takeda CFO François-Xavier Roger tells the WSJ’s Kana Inagaki that his status as an outsider at the Japanese drug maker has advantages. “It’s certainly a challenge because there aren’t many non-Japanese in executive positions in Japanese companies,” Mr. Roger said. As finance chief, a new post for Takeda, Mr. Roger is charged with carrying out a program aimed at generating ¥100 billion ($1 billion) in annual cost savings by fiscal 2017. Because he’s an outsider, Mr. Roger says that he’s not a party “to the history of any original part of the company, so I don’t have any specific interest in trying to protect something that happened in the past.” Mr. Roger said tensions can be avoided once employees can see that the company is growing. “The objective is for us to be more efficient and to reach a profitability ratio which is in line with the industry. I am confident about the delivery of the objective,” he said.

NYSE and Nasdaq planning backup of data streams. The committees that control consolidated data feeds for Nasdaq and NYSE Euronext are nearing agreement on a plan to back up their data streams, CIO Journal’s Steve Rosenbush reports. The collaboration would strengthen one of the stock market’s common points of failure. The committees are also discussing other ideas that could stabilize the infrastructure of the financial exchanges. “I think that what is unprecedented here is that the exchanges need to help one another. They have similar headline risk from the ongoing glitchapalooza. They have been gradually losing out to alternative trading methods, and they need to turn the tide on that,” said E. Paul Rowady Jr., a senior analyst with TABB Group.

REGULATION:

Fed considers delay to Volcker rule. The Fed is considering a delay in the compliance date for the Volcker rule, giving banks additional time to conform with its provisions, the FT’s Gina Chon reports. Banks are currently required to comply with the rule by July 2014. But regulators are still putting the final touches on the proposal, and the final rule will probably not be released until December—giving banks less than a year to make changes to comply. The Fed has the option of delaying the compliance date in one-year increments. It is considering pushing out the timing to July 2015 to allow for a phased implementation.

HEALTH CARE:

High-risk patients fuel more health-law worries. So-called high-risk pools for people rejected by commercial health-insurance companies are gaining a brief second life in some states due to the problems with the federal health-insurance exchange, the WSJ reports. That could be short-term good news for the law, because it would keep some people with costly medical conditions out of the new policies, at least temporarily. But it adds to the uncertainty for insurers, analysts say, increasing concerns that could cause rates to rise for everyone next year.

CFO MOVES:

Tiffany, the high-end jeweler headquartered in New York City, said Chief Financial Officer Patrick McGuiness is resigning, effective Nov. 27. Chief Operating Officer James Hernandez, a 30-year Tiffany veteran and its CFO from 1998 to 2011, will take over the post on an interim basis while the company searches for Mr. McGuiness’s successor. He will receive $899,000 in severance, plus accelerated vesting on stock options covering 38,250 shares that would have vested next year, and 7,500 previously awarded restricted stock units will convert into common stock. Mr. McGuiness’s departure comes nearly two months after the jewelry retailer named Frederic Cumenal as its new president and appointed him to a newly created seat on the company’s board.

Western Union, a global payment-services company based in Englewood, Colo., said Scott Scheirman will leave the company at the end of February. He will remain CFO until the end of the year and then advise the company while it looks for his successor. Raj Agrawal, president of Western Union’s business-solutions division, will serve as interim CFO beginning in January. Mr. Scheirman received total 2012 compensation valued at nearly $2.5 million, including a salary of $581,600, equity awards valued at $1.6 million and a $133,500 bonus, according to its most recent proxy statement.