From the beginning, it has been our goal to provide industry leading software built to accommodate the complex needs of any organization. We are committed to meeting the evolving needs of our clients... - David Rhodes, CEO WORKTERRA

WORKTERRA, a leading provider of Human Capital Management software solutions, announces that Prime Healthcare Services has selected WORKTERRA BenAdmin as its benefit administration and enrollment platform. Headquartered in Ontario, CA, Prime Healthcare owns and operates 27 acute care hospitals and employs more than 30,000 people throughout the United States. With a widespread workforce, Prime Healthcare was in need of a solution that would promote employee self-service, provide year-round administrative support and help with compliance concerns. WORKTERRA was chosen as the best fit for their continuously growing organization.

The WORKTERRA solution enables Prime Healthcare administrators to mange their employee data, new enrollments and life events in one place, in real time and in compliance with Affordable Care Act (ACA) regulations. Understanding that a one-size-fits-all application does not work, WORKTERRA BenAdmin is built to accommodate the requirements of any organization’s unique benefit plan, no matter how simple or complex. Prime Healthcare administrators are provided real-time insights into their workforce through the interactive admin dashboard. Advanced reporting capabilities provide instant access to any data allowing for the creation, scheduling and automation of custom or standard reports ready for immediate download in any desired format.

“From the beginning, it has been our goal to provide industry leading software built to accommodate the complex needs of any organization. With Prime Healthcare we are able to showcase why WORKTERRA is the most configurable benefits administration software on the market today. We are committed to meeting the evolving needs of our clients and look forward to a long partnership with Prime Healthcare Services.” – David Rhodes, CEO WORKTERRA

Employee self-service is encouraged and made simple through various decision support tools, help modules, plan comparison tools and more. The easy-to-use interface guides employees seamlessly through the enrollment process. Employees are always connected through WORKTERRA mobile applications. Prime Healthcare can better manage employee information, while offering their workforce a more convenient way to complete the benefit enrollment process, manage personal information and view enrollment summaries on a wide range of mobile devices.

Our proprietary, flexible approach supports automated integration to carriers and payroll systems, creating a single-key, paperless environment for clients. The WORKTERRA platform is designed to greatly reduce the cost commonly associated with benefit administration and enrollment activities by eliminating the paper process and reducing errors from manual entry. The increased efficiency created through the implementation of WORKTERRA BenAdmin frees HR staff to focus on more important and strategic activities within an organization.

About Prime Healthcare Services - Prime Healthcare Services and the non-profit Prime Healthcare Foundation employ more than 30,000 people and own and operate 27 acute care hospitals in California, Kansas, Michigan, Nevada, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island and Texas. Prime Healthcare was recognized as a Top 15 Health System in the nation in 2013, the third time in six years. Eight Prime Healthcare hospitals in California were recognized among the 100 Top Hospitals in the nation in 2014. West Anaheim Medical Center has earned the honor five times. Centinela Hospital Medical Center, Chino Valley Medical Center and Garden Grove Community Hospital were also recognized, each for the third time, in 2014, as well as San Dimas Community Hospital and Shasta Regional Medical Center, for the second time, and La Palma Intercommunity Hospital and Paradise Valley Hospital, their first time being recognized on this list. For more information, please visit http://www.primehealthcare.com

About EBS - WORKTERRA Founded in 1987, Employee Benefit Specialists, Inc. (EBS) provides state-of-the-art online enrollment and benefit administration services. In 2005, EBS used its considerable experience in benefits administration and technology knowledge to create its proprietary WORKTERRA™ online eligibility system. WORKTERRA is a HIPAA compliant, SSAE16 certified, cloud based platform that utilizes the latest technology to bring together all functions of benefits administration into one application. Our proprietary, flexible approach supports automated integration to carriers and payroll systems, which creates a single key, paperless environment for our clients. It allows clients to manage their human resource functions more smoothly in an easy-to-use, technologically forward system.

For more information about EBS and WORKTERRA, please visit us at http://www.workterra.com

Copyright © 2012 Employee Benefit Specialists, Inc.