Monetary policy surprises can have a big impact on commodity markets, but the exact nature of the price movement depends on the direction of the change in monetary policy and the raw material in question.

AFP

New research from the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta finds that when the central bank surprised markets with tighter policy between 1990 and 2008, gold and platinum prices rose the most. When policy went the other way–when the Fed surprised with growth-stimulating rate cuts–prices for crude and heating oil were the biggest beneficiaries.

The paper notes that some of the differences in reaction may relate to the nature of the commodities. For example, a surprise lowering in rates makes it easier for speculators to get into commodities contracts, while making it cheaper to hold inventories of a given commodity. Also, the direction of the unexpected change in monetary policy signals something about the economic outlook, which has different influences for different stripes of commodities.

The time frame under consideration makes it challenging to apply the paper’s findings to a world where the Fed’s traditional policy tool, the overnight fed funds rate, has been essentially at zero percent since 2008.

The funds rate is widely expected to stay at rock-bottom levels until some time until 2015, if Fed forecasts prove accurate. What’s more, much of the stimulative power of current Fed policy is now driven by the central bank’s $85-billion-a-month program of bond buying, which targets longer-term rates. Fed bond buying wasn’t a feature of the central bank tool kit in the period under consideration.

That said, the influence of monetary policy on commodity prices continues to be a big issues for policy makers as well as political leaders. At various points in recent years, Fed stimulus has been tied to big swings in energy and food prices, which have had complicated impacts in other nations, as well as on American economic performance.

The paper’s findings may stop at the point the financial crisis took hold, as the Fed began to shift towards nontraditional tools to aid the economy, but its authors say it nevertheless remains one of the first studies to make sense of monetary policy shocks and changes in specific commodities.

“The response of individual commodity prices to monetary policy shocks has not been thoroughly investigated in the literature” until now, paper authors Nikolay Gospodinov and Ibrahim Jamali write. “This is unfortunate given the increasingly important role that commodity prices play for aggregate inflation and output, asset allocation and investor sentiment.”