Buy Photo Tara Veazy, right, the governor’s policy adviser for health and family, joins Sen. Ed Buttrey, R-Great Falls on Friday to discuss how Medicaid expansion was passed in Montana in 2015. (Photo: Tribune photo/Phil Drake)Buy Photo

HELEN – A lawmaker on Friday called for a plan to be developed in the state to deal with growing mental health issues, costs and challenges, saying it will likely take a bigger chunk out of Montana’s budget as time goes on.

“We don’t have a good Montana plan, and we do not know in the state of Montana where we are headed,” Rep. Ron Ehli, R-Hamilton, told nearly 150 people attending the 2016 biennial Mental Health Policy Summit at the Best Western Premier Helena Great Northern Hotel.

Ehli, Sen. Mary Caferro, D-Helena; and Sen. Roger Webb, R-Billings; all served on the Health and Human Services Committee during the 2015 legislative session. Rep. Carolyn Pease-Lopez, D-Billings, served on the Human Services Committee. They participated in a panel discussion on mental health issues in Montana.

Dan Aune, executive director of Mental Health America of Montana, said the groups at the summit would list priorities for the 2017 legislative session. The groups favor transitioning mental health services from institutions to community-based services.

He said there were 20,000 Montanans with serious, disabling mental illnesses.

Ehli said Health and Human Services makes up $4.5 billion of the state’s $10 billion biennial budget, but yet it’s rarely discussed on the campaign trail.

Rep. Ron Ehli, R-Hamilton (Photo: Photo courtesy state of Montana)

“If you just listen to the rhetoric, how much do you hear about Health and Human Services?” he asked. “It’s not even on the the radar of discussion. At some point it will hit the radar screen.”

“We have to find a way to make the best use of those dollars,” he said.

Ehli said as a businessman he knows that a growth plan is helpful, and he said there is a lack of planning.

“We need a plan. The debate is do we go top down or bottom up,” he said. “How do we find the answer to that question?”

He asked if that comes from the governor’s office, the Legislature or public groundswell.

Webb noted during the last legislative session that several bills passed bringing more funding to mental health.

“We didn’t dip our toe into the water, we jumped in,” he said.

Webb and Caferro talked about growing concern over the rise of Alzheimer’s and dementia cases in the state.

Caferro called it “a real fear that is the tip of the iceberg,” noting that 20,000 Montanans are living with Alzheimer’s and dementia. She said a group outside of government is working on a state plan for dealing with those diseases.

Webb said that by 2030 one in four Montanans would be subjected to Alzheimer’s and dementia.

During a morning session, Sen. Ed Buttrey, R-Great Falls, and Tara Veazy, the governor’s policy adviser for health and families, spoke about how the state expanded its Medicaid program that 32,000 Montanans now use as part of the Affordable Care Act.

The plan adopted by the state Legislature has a four-year sunset clause.

She said no matter the success of the current program, “there is going to be a fight in 2019.”

Buttrey said he realized in 2013 something would have to be done to meet mandates of the Affordable Care Act.

“We knew that with any solution, we didn’t want it to result in a huge growth in government,” he said.

It was then determined to come up with a uniquely Montana solution.

A plan was devised that included tying health care to economic development, focusing on personal responsibility and creating an oversight committee.

“But we needed a solution that would cross the finish line and (get approval from) a federal government that was not all that friendly with states coming up with their own solutions,” he said.

Montana’s plan was approved in November.

Veazy said the process was “not all rainbows and unicorns, it was really, really tough.”

And as a result, 32,000 Montanans are getting benefits today.

“The importance of the results is hard to estimate,” she said. “Thirty-two thousand is not just a number, but it’s 32,000 whose lives have changed.”

Other event sponsors included American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy, National Association of Social Workers and the Montana Licensed Clinical Professional Counselors Association.

Read or Share this story: http://gftrib.com/1XCRgMW