Dawn Morton-Rias

September 2, 2015

When I started work as a certified physician assistant (PA-C) 30 years ago, I provided health care for the homeless as the medical officer for an outreach mobile health team in Brooklyn, N.Y. I literally treated patients on the street, and patient satisfaction was measured by having them simply tell me they felt better.

Today patient satisfaction is being dissected and analyzed many different ways by physician offices, hospitals, and Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs), driven largely by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and a policy to tie reimbursement to patient perceptions and compliance with clinical performance guidelines.

My question is this: Where are PAs, who are on the front lines of patient care, in this discussion and effort? My concern is that our profession is often overlooked by health leaders in patient satisfaction surveys. Yet we are major contributors to efforts to improve satisfaction goals. Increased awareness on the part of health leaders, a stronger commitment to health care teams, and recognition of the value and service provided by PAs is needed to change this paradigm.

Satisfaction Measured In What Patients Feel

The Hospital Consumer Assessment of Health Care Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) Survey is intended to measure the patient experience with the aim of translating results into financial incentives (or disincentives). Much has been written about the pros and cons of tying reimbursement to patient satisfaction. Hospitals have hired “chief experience officers;” updated decor; installed high quality sound, TV, and wireless Internet systems; and added more private rooms in the quest to please patients.

However, in the end it is about how patients feel about the way they were treated, the respect they received, the degree to which their questions were answered, and their understanding and buy-in to follow-up treatment and health maintenance.

CMS itself recently published a CAHPS report that states: “Patient experience surveys focus on how patients experienced or perceived key aspects of their care, not how satisfied they were with their care. Patient experience surveys focus on asking patients whether or how often they experienced critical aspects of health care, including communication with their doctors, understanding their medication instructions, and the coordination of their health care needs. They do not focus on amenities.”

Becoming Part Of The Solution

Although that makes sense, I do wonder how we can have payment models based on patient experience without including certified physician assistants (PA-Cs) as part of the discussion. I see the focus on value-based care, but I don’t see an acknowledgement that certified PAs are integral members of the teams that are measured on these things.

PAs are not even mentioned in the HCAHPS survey, which separately asks discharged patients if physicians and nurses treated them with courtesy and respect, listened to their concerns, and explained things clearly. Yet PAs are working throughout the hospital, including in the surgical specialties and as hospitalists where they communicate with patients on a daily basis and prior to discharge. They are key players in patient education.

PAs have been on the health care scene for 48 years. Today’s PAs are highly educated at the Master’s degree level and graduate with 2,000 or more hours of clinical training. We are also educated to practice collaboratively with physicians and other members of the health care team. However, we do practice autonomously, which means a physician is not looking over our shoulder but is available for consultation if needed. As we are now 100,000 strong and work in every specialty and clinical setting, we need to be included in any provider discussion, since we provide direct patient care and counsel both the patient and family members.

Even the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid states: “A substantial body of research examining the quality of NP and PA primary care shows that these clinicians perform as well as physicians on important clinical outcome measures…and patients report high levels of satisfaction” with their care. Since we all have been and will again be patients in this health care system, it’s time we:

recognize the pervasive presence of PAs in health care and the roles PAs play in keeping Americans healthy, working, and contributing to society;

include certified PAs in leadership positions where policies and clinical roles are being defined;

understand that the PA profession is founded on team care and certified PAs are educated and trained to work with physicians and other medical staff in a patient-centered environment; and

review state laws that restrict PAs in unnecessary ways.

We should enable PAs scope of practice to be determined at the practice level, including full prescriptive authority and chart co-signature requirements tailored to the particular treatment setting. The supervising physician is in the best position to evaluate the PA’s experience and abilities. State laws that list specific services that PAs can provide, or those that require the scope of practice of each individual PA to be approved by the state medical board, restrict the ability of medical facilities and supervising physicians to optimize physician-PA teams. These restrictions limit access to care.

PAs On The Forefront Of Innovation

Although there are many layers of complexity in any discussion of patient satisfaction and quality outcomes, team care is certainly a major component of health care delivery in the age of the Affordable Care Act.

Team care is at the core of the PA mentality, as by law PAs are aligned with physicians, collaborate with them, and are supervised by them. This does not mean they work side by side. Rather they can perform autonomously but have a “supervising” physician who is available to review their diagnosis and treatment plans when needed or required, answer questions, and consult on highly complex cases.

Physician assistants are trained in the medical model and are the only providers other than physicians who are licensed by state medical boards. Also like physicians, they are the only providers who recertify throughout their career by fulfilling ongoing and robust certification maintenance requirements and passing a national recertification exam every 10 years.

The increasing demand for access to care has pushed PAs to actively develop and manage innovative care models. The successful experience that physicians, employer groups, and most significantly, patients have had with PAs makes it probable that they will continue to be solicited for ways to improve quality and patient satisfaction while reducing cost.

Many in the industry believe that as the need for services increase, so will the scope of practice guidelines for PAs, enabling new programs and a seat at the leadership tables for the 104,000 and growing certified PAs in the U.S.

The addition of specialty credentials—including the NCCPA Certificate of Added Qualifications (CAQ) in seven specialties—brings further credibility to the experience and value PAs bring to multiple disciplines within the health care team. PAs can earn a CAQ by acquiring specialty-focused experience, continuing medical education (CME), and a physician attestation, along with passing a national specialty exam administered once a year.

The CAQ has only been available for four years in emergency medicine, cardiovascular and thoracic surgery, orthopaedic surgery, nephrology, and psychiatry. This is the second year the CAQ has been available in hospital medicine and pediatrics. While it is a relatively new credential, interest is growing as over 78 percent of consumers are more likely to trust someone with additional certifications and credentials, according to a 2014 survey conducted by the National Commission on Certification of Physician Assistants (NCCPA).

What Patients Say About PAs

Quality outcomes and patient satisfaction, in the end, go hand in hand. Many organizations use consultants to develop surveys to measure satisfaction with providers but few, including HCAHPS, measure PAs specifically.

NCCPA’s survey showed that access to good and affordable health care is the number one concern of Americans today. It also showed that:

Over 40 percent are concerned about being able to get appointments when they need them

Over 41 percent experience long wait times in the doctor’s office

20 percent of patients are treated but not educated about their health care.

PAs are receiving wide public acceptance, with 94 percent willing to be seen by a physician assistant instead of a physician.

Anecdotally, we are often told about PAs who rank at the top of providers with the highest patient satisfactions scores. After all, it is in our DNA to meet patients at their level of understanding and explain to them what they need to do to stay healthy. PAs welcome a greater level of transparency that shows how they perform in terms of quality outcomes and patient engagement.

How PAs Help Improve Patient Satisfaction Scores

PAs do not want to be physicians, but they do want to be valued for their contributions, especially since most patients will be seen by a PA at some point in their life. Research documents the impact of PAs and other nonphysicians in areas such as primary care and oncology, where they often deliver outcomes similar to physicians on a range of metrics.

PAs have many opportunities to influence the patient experience, whether at an initial office encounter or handling post-op care. For example:

Increasing Access to Care and Reducing Wait times: Many physician offices are able to offer walk-in appointments because they have PAs on staff who will see patients sooner than a physician, resulting in faster treatment and relief of symptoms. PAs may also have a full schedule of their own panel of patients, who will probably not even see a physician on this visit, unless their overall health is compromised by a highly complex issue.

Many physician offices are able to offer walk-in appointments because they have PAs on staff who will see patients sooner than a physician, resulting in faster treatment and relief of symptoms. PAs may also have a full schedule of their own panel of patients, who will probably not even see a physician on this visit, unless their overall health is compromised by a highly complex issue. Implementing Preventive Health/Wellness Programs: Prevention and wellness programs can be costly and time-consuming, but they also have the potential to improve long-term health. Since CMS is paying for wellness programs, they are now a “must have” in medical practice. PAs are highly qualified to develop and run these programs.

Prevention and wellness programs can be costly and time-consuming, but they also have the potential to improve long-term health. Since CMS is paying for wellness programs, they are now a “must have” in medical practice. PAs are highly qualified to develop and run these programs. Managing At-Risk Populations: PAs are perfectly suited to address the needs of chronically ill patient populations. They play a vital role in determining and following protocols and managing patients in accordance with evidence-based medicine. By focusing on those most at risk, PAs help prevent emergency room visits and hospitalizations, so patients can follow a treatment plan in the comfort of their own home.

PAs are perfectly suited to address the needs of chronically ill patient populations. They play a vital role in determining and following protocols and managing patients in accordance with evidence-based medicine. By focusing on those most at risk, PAs help prevent emergency room visits and hospitalizations, so patients can follow a treatment plan in the comfort of their own home. Helping with Care Coordination: PAs participate in health promotion and coordination of care across transitions including the ER, hospital, and long-term care facilities.

PAs participate in health promotion and coordination of care across transitions including the ER, hospital, and long-term care facilities. Performing Home Visits: Particularly for patients who need special attention or monitoring, as part of the implementation of Patient Centered Medical Homes, PAs have the opportunity to provide primary care where it is most convenient. In the surgical area, a New York hospital developed a program for patients who underwent cardiac surgery. Physician assistants made house calls

Particularly for patients who need special attention or monitoring, as part of the implementation of Patient Centered Medical Homes, PAs have the opportunity to provide primary care where it is most convenient. In the surgical area, a New York hospital developed a program for patients who underwent cardiac surgery. Physician assistants Providing Care in Remote and Underserved Areas: PAs make economic sense for a health care system that cannot afford a physician in these areas. PAs allow patients to be cared for in their own communities, avoiding the hardships and cost of travel to major medical centers.

PAs make economic sense for a health care system that cannot afford a physician in these areas. PAs allow patients to be cared for in their own communities, avoiding the hardships and cost of travel to major medical centers. Delivering Specialty Care: Two-thirds of PAs now work outside of primary care, with over 19 percent of certified PAs working in surgical specialties, almost 14 percent in emergency medicine and almost 3 percent in the growing field of hospital medicine.

The goal of measuring the patient experience is obviously performance improvement. Transparency is a noble goal for our health care system. A recent report from Press Ganey shows how three major health systems used their online physician review websites to improve patient care.

As PAs, we deserve the same opportunity to validate our contributions. We want to help shape and govern our future, and we need the same qualitative data that other clinicians have been able to cite in order to do so. With our rigorous certification and recertification process, we believe certified PAs are practicing a level of care that will light up the numbers.