Now, it's your turn to ask the questions. Townhall Media teamed up with Change Politics to bring you Conservatives Speak!, an online form that allows our reader to ask their questions to the Republican presidential field. Here are 10 of some of the most interesting submissions so far, with a full list available to view in the forum.

Upvote your favorites before midnight on Feb. 19 for a chance to see them answered by the participating GOP candidates.

"This is important to me because every president that I have witnessed, walks in the front door of the White House with smiles and promises and is remembered existing through the back door with excuses not accomplishments."

"Americans are tired of politics becoming the power of elite, corporate lobbyists, and politicians excusing themselves from laws they pass in congress. Politicians vote themselves pay raises, but fail to pass a balanced budget. Lobbyists have become big business in Washington. While in any other private sector, these lobbyists would be seen as illegal bribes. The American people are tired of the shrinking middle class, and an unlivable minimum wage."

"Some people don't seem to have a clue as to what the limits of Presidential power are and why. I want to hear our candidates explain what they are, why they are, and do it in a way that doesn't use the constitution as a talking point while skipping an actual definition of what they can't do if they become president."

"I don't care what the answer is, just that the candidates can answer with enthusiasm. One who can not relax will crack under the strain. ex. Carter & Nixon."

"The GOP has been labeled archaic, even by those within it. Over the years we have seen different kinds of republicans, and I think many people do wonder what it means to be conservative."

"Because government has literally been stopped when Democrats and Republicans will not put the issues of this country first."

"I don't think our side effectively communicates why socialism is ultimately destructive to an individual's potential and our economy's robustness. The left uses some very powerful emotional arguments, such as "fairness" to rationalize their policies. There is a powerful emotional case to be made for the liberty, independence, and self reliance of capitalism. We should get better at explaining it."

"The need for an Electoral College is long past. A popular vote is the most fair, yet no one brings up the subject."

"Our Federal Government continues to cede power from States, which is entirely opposed to the intent of our founding fathers. An Article V convention would be a big step in the States' ability to regain this power. For example, an amendment which limits the terms of both Senators and Congressmen would pass easily in such a convention. Limiting the time these individuals are in office would serve to limit their power."