Topics: Affordable Care Act, Arlen Specter, Donald Trump, Elections 2016, Fox News, Glenn Beck, John Berman, John Phillips, Obamacare, Sean Hannity, Tea Party, Elections News, Media News, Politics News

Reaction to protests and violence at Donald Trump’s rallies has been largely partisan. The leftmost end of the political spectrum is championing the protesters’ successful silencing of the “Mussolini part 2″; their opposites on the right are arguing that the protesters — “Bernie’s pawns” — are denying the candidate his Constitutional right to freedom of speech. Perhaps Trump himself — as the soon-to-be official voice of the Republican party — tweeted it best:

The organized group of people, many of them thugs, who shut down our First Amendment rights in Chicago, have totally energized America! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 12, 2016

The tweet is rife with hypocrisy. How is it that the protesters’ First Amendment right to assemble is infringing upon your First Amendment right to indoctrinate the poorly educated? But to call protesters “thugs” simply because they disagree with your politics is next-level, even for Donald J. Trump.

Conservative media are using similar rhetoric to somehow reframe the guy who said of a protester, “I’d like to punch him in the face,” into the victim of collective liberal bullying.

“Blaming Donald Trump even in part for the violence that has broken out at his rallies is nonsense,” wrote the New York Post editorial board. “This is the same left-wing agitation that has plagued the nation for decades now, a rage that fixes on one target of opportunity after another.”

“We live in a free society with a First Amendment,” conservative columnist John Phillips told CNN’s John Berman. “People should be able to meet peacefully. If you have a problem with it, you have every right to protest. Just do it outside and don’t be violent.”

During his Fox News show Friday, Sean Hannity called the Chicago protesters “violent agitators” who “hijacked what was to be a peaceful campaign rally.”

The list of conservatives pinning blame on protesters for violence at Trump rallies is unreasonably long — especially considering the same conservatives’ incongruous response to protests that align with their politics.

During the August 2009 congressional recess, representatives returned to their home states to host town hall meetings detailing the Affordable Care Act. Prompted by an extensive mobilizing effort by conservative lobbying and media groups, right-wing protesters derailed several of these events. In some cases, violence erupted and people wound up in the hospital.

The series of protests is widely considered to mark the dawn of the Tea Party movement. What ensued was a domino effect whereby Democrats lost their majority in the House, and a filibustering obstructionist and a pandering racist can viably compete for the GOP nom this coming July.