Sen. Vince Hughes, D-Philadelphia, minority chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, signed six contracts for up to $98,000 with five firms in 2013, even though he had 25 office and committee staffers, some with the same expertise as the consultants Hughes hired. (STEVE ESACK, THE MORNING CALL)

Sen. Vince Hughes, D-Philadelphia, minority chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, signed six contracts for up to $98,000 with five firms in 2013, even though he had 25 office and committee staffers, some with the same expertise as the consultants Hughes hired.

One PA lawmaker used public dollars to promote his acting gig as a dead body.

The Pennsylvania Legislature has 2,447 employees who work directly or indirectly with lawmakers to craft bills, offer policy advice, crunch budget numbers, manage offices, write press releases and coordinate constituent service. But that level of taxpayer support hasn't been enough for state Rep. Jim Roebuck. The Philadelphia Democrat has needed his own public relations firm. To tout his acting debut — as a corpse. In 2013, Roebuck paid a firm run by a campaign contributor $600 in taxpayer money to publicize his role as "a dead body" in a stage production, billing records show. "Services include the following: called director of 'The Real Inspector Hound' for information on Rep. Roebuck's acting debut, sent item to [Philadelphia Daily News columnist] Dan Gross about Roebuck's playing a dead body in the play at Calvary community center … shared Roebuck's 'acting debut' information at PA Society weekend in New York," read the Jan. 7, 2013, invoice from Bonnie Squires, president of Squires Consulting Fundraising and Communications in Wynnewood, Montgomery County. SPENDING ON SPECIALISTS That bill was one of 11, totaling $6,600, Roebuck paid the firm as part of an overall $56,187 in expenses in 2013, according to the representative's reimbursement expense records. Consulting contracts like Roebuck's and many other unchecked expenses uncovered in an investigation by The Morning Call happen because of lax rules that allow Pennsylvania's 253 lawmakers to spend with little or no oversight. While critics say it is a practice that is wasteful — especially with the state facing a $1.9 billion deficit next fiscal year — it is completely legal. Under the House's and Senate's internal spending rules and the state Ethics Act, lawmakers can hire consultants for their own personal needs, despite already having access to a pool of employees and experts. The Morning Call's investigation shows only 9 percent of the Legislature used consultants of some kind in 2013. But the contracts show the House and Senate, as well as respective caucuses, have no rules governing when consultants are hired and for what purposes.. "These contracts are a symptom of a greater ill — government run amok," said Eric Epstein, an activist with Rock the Capital, a good-government advocacy group in Harrisburg. Roebuck, a state representative since 1985 and minority chairman of the House Education Committee, said the publicity for his acting role was a legitimate expense. "I'm promoting cultural activities throughout my district," he said. Announcing a play is not a legislative activity and not a justifiable expense, countered Ellen Mattleman Kaplan, then-interim president and CEO of the Committee of Seventy, a government watchdog group in Philadelphia. "Even if he was the star of the show, taxpayer money should not be spent on describing extra-curricular, non-legislative work," she said. On top of covering lawmakers' normal operating costs, such as office rents, taxpayers pay their per-diem expenses for hotel rooms and meals. They pay for breakfasts, lunches and dinners for lawmakers and their staffs. They pay for candy, bottled water and water coolers in district offices. They pay for constituent mail, equipment rentals and repairs, mileage, flags, funeral flowers, congratulatory messages, organizational dues, parking, tolls, senior fairs, community shredding events, student trips to the Capitol and more. In 2013, the Legislature charged taxpayers $13.7 million for those items, including several dozen consulting contracts collectively worth up to $508,176. That total is based on The Morning Call's analysis of lawmakers' 2013 spending records obtained from the House and Senate chief clerks' offices under the Right-to-Know Law and contracts culled from the state Treasury's website. The House's accounting system includes representatives' payments to consultants as part of their overall expenses. The Senate's does not. Consultant contracts are paid by the chamber's chief clerk's office and records are posted on the Treasury's website. The Morning Call included the Senate's 2013 consulting contracts in the overall expense records to make them comparable to the House's accounting method. The Morning Call built a searchable database of all 2013 expenses, themorningcall.com/expenses. Aside from Roebuck, 15 representatives spent $23,610 on "clerical/professional service," which is how the House labels consultants in its expense reports. Some of the House contracts also covered help to set up district events, sign-language specialists, maintenance personnel or part-time clerical help. No representative spent more than Roebuck on consultants. Six senators signed consulting contracts capped at a total of $415,066. Former Senate Majority Leader Dominic Pileggi, R-Delaware, hired a retired Senate aide for up to $40,950 to provide public relations services for himself and GOP Sens. Lisa Baker of Luzerne County and Lloyd Smucker of Lancaster County. As majority leader in 2013, Pileggi had a chief of staff and 82 other employees under him, including the entire GOP caucus public affairs staff. Baker and Smucker had their own chiefs of staff and another eight and six employees, respectively, plus access to the public affairs writers. Democratic Sen. Anthony Williams, a Philadelphia mayoral candidate, paid a former representative-turned-consultant up to $39,996 to be a liaison with local government officials. Williams had 16 employees in four offices, including Harrisburg. Sen. Vince Hughes, D-Philadelphia, minority chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, signed six contracts for up to $98,000 with five firms. Hughes had 25 office and committee staffers, many with expertise in topics the firms tackled: public relations, transportation, business, and Medicaid funding. Hiring outside consultants instead of using government employees can result in paying twice for the same service, said Tim Potts, a retired House aide who founded the government reform advocacy group Democracy Rising PA. The House and Senate have staff who serve on 48 topic-specific committees that help lawmakers conduct public hearings on issues pertaining to education, transportation, labor and industry, and human services, among others, he said. "The whole point of holding the committee system in the Legislature is to assemble the resources to deal with those issues, and the staff either have or should have expertise in all of those issues," said Potts, also a Carlisle School Board director. Using outside consultants can save taxpayers money, countered Erik Arneson, spokesman for Pileggi. Consultants relieve some of the pressure on a legislative staff that has shrunk by 17 percent to 820 in the Senate and 15 percent to 766 in the House in the last eight years, he said.

"The number of staff we have today is significantly down to where it was in 2006," he said. "And as part of that, occasionally — rarely, but occasionally — we do contract with some people on the outside." Bill Patton, spokesman for the House Democratic Caucus, defended the use of consultants. Staff do a good job, but sometimes lawmakers decide they need extra help, especially for public relations work, he said. "One thing we commonly hear from Philadelphia members is that the media environment of the city is distinct from Harrisburg and the rest of the state," Patton said. Roebuck said Squires Consulting, the firm he hired to promote his local theater stint as a corpse, has a better understanding of Philadelphia's media market than many who work in Harrisburg, and therefore is more effective in getting the word out about his involvement in his local district. Squires does such a "good job of getting the information out," Roebuck said, he pays the firm an additional $600 from his own pocket instead of charging taxpayers the full monthly rate of $1,200. "We could argue what taxpayers should and should not pay for and I don't think we would agree," he said. Chuck Ardo, who was a spokesman for Democratic Gov. Ed Rendell, said charging taxpayers to promote an acting role as a dead body is not an appropriate use of tax dollars. "That doesn't have a ghost of a chance of being legitimate," Ardo quipped. Bonnie Squires did not return a call for comment. The Morning Call attempted to contact all consultants who donated or worked on campaigns. The comments of all who agreed to be interviewed are included. Already on the payroll There are justifiable reasons to hire outside consultants for highly technical issues, said Barry Kauffman, executive director of Common Cause, a good-government think tank in Harrisburg. But there is little reason to hire consultants when lawmakers can more easily turn to salaried policy, financial and legal experts on their own payroll and in other government agencies, he said. Not only do lawmakers have individual staffers, Kauffman said, some have committee staff who specialize "in various issues and have expertise from both Democratic and Republican perspectives." When lawmakers hire consultants to improve their own image, Kauffman said, they should use campaign money, not taxpayer-funded expense accounts. Lawmakers sometimes do dip into campaign money for public relations. In the 2012 and 2014 campaign cycles, Roebuck paid the Squires firm $6,500 from his campaign accounts for election work. And Bonnie Squires individually donated $500 to his campaign, Department of State campaign finance records show. In 2012 Roebuck used his taxpayer expense account to pay the Squires firm $1,800 for other work, House expense records show. The state Ethics Act does not preclude lawmakers from simultaneously hiring consultants with taxpayer money and campaign proceeds as long as there is no quid pro quo, said Rob Caruso, executive director of the Pennsylvania State Ethics Commission. Kauffman said concerns arise when campaign donors get consulting or other government contracts. "The public has a right to be fully confident at all times that the best quality people are being hired [as consultants] and it's not being given out as rewards," he said. Roebuck is not the only lawmaker to turn to a taxpayer-funded consultant for campaign work, too. Baker, the GOP senator from Luzerne County, hired DAA Consulting — a Dauphin County firm founded by former GOP Senate aide David Atkinson upon his retirement — as her taxpayer-funded public relations consultant in 2012 and 2013. This year, using campaign money, she hired the firm as a campaign consultant. The taxpayer-funded DAA contract, which Smucker and Pileggi also used, ran from Dec. 12, 2012, to Dec. 11, 2013, Treasury records show. DAA was tasked with four jobs for the senators: formulate a communication platform to constituents and media; draft communications to include speeches, letters, press releases, media copy, talking points, etc.; assist in identifying legislative priorities and policy initiatives; provide counsel on legislation, votes, committee activity and policy issues. When the taxpayer-funded contract expired, Baker used her campaign account to keep DAA's services. Between January and October, Baker paid DAA $10,000 out of her campaign accounts for "communication consulting services," Department of State campaign finance records show. Baker said she liked Atkinson's services so much she opted to retain him with her campaign money. The Senate contract with the firm was "a cost-effective way to continue receiving quality communications and policy work from a trusted individual with 35 years of experience, without paying a full salary and benefits," Baker emailed in response to a question. Paying Atkinson with tax money in one year and campaign money in another blurs the ethical and legal lines between promoting public service work and seeking re-election, Epstein said. "The use of taxpayer dollars for political promotion is a bad idea," he said. "It's a shell game." Arneson defended the DAA contract, saying Atkinson worked with scores of lawmakers in his decades of service in the Senate and his speech-writing ability is second to none. "Dave Atkinson's skill set, experience and demonstrated excellence of work product are unquestioned and unmatched," Arneson said. "He's a consummate professional who worked for the Senate over several decades, and we were very pleased to be able to have him continue in this capacity at a much-reduced cost." In the last two years of his Senate employment, Atkinson said he primarily worked for Baker and Smucker. The consulting contract was conceived so he could continue to help the senators. Atkinson founded his firm March 1, 2012, seven days before he retired from state government. Former lawmakers also get consulting work. Former Democratic state Rep. Harold James was hired by Williams as a $56-an-hour consultant. Williams hired James for up to 60 hours a month between Jan. 1, 2013, and Nov. 30, 2013, as a liaison "with local officials from political subdivisions" in Williams' district, which encompasses parts of Philadelphia and Delaware County. After that contract ended, James donated $275 to Williams' Senate campaign fund in 2014, Department of State records show. Potts, the former House staffer-turned-reform activist, said local government officials should be angry that Williams is having a consultant work directly with them. "It's the legislators' job to be the liaison to local government," Potts said.

Hugh Baird, Senate Democratic caucus spokesman, said James' experience as a representative gives him an extra level of expertise and deep contacts with local government officials. Like all consultants, James helps staffers meet the needs of constituents, added Stacey Witalec, another Senate Democratic spokeswoman. Hiring donors Hughes, of Philadelphia, has needed the most help in the Senate. He hired five firms, some operated by campaign contributors or people who worked on his campaign. Some of Hughes' contracts appear to overlap, rehash research produced by other government agencies, or cover generic constituent outreach. On April 15, 2013, for example, Hughes signed a three-month contract for up to $25,000 with Mercator Advisors, a Philadelphia-based public financial advisory firm. The firm is owned by David Seltzer, who donated $1,000 to Hughes' campaign Oct. 31, 2012, Department of State records show. The campaign contribution did not affect Hughes' decision to hire Seltzer's firm, said Hughes' spokesman, Ben Waxman. The contract had a legislative purpose, he said. According to the contract, Mercator was to advise the Democratic Appropriations Committee "on technical aspects of legislative proposals, research and analysis of potential funding and finance mechanisms, maximizing the use of public-private partnerships, [and] transportation policy developments at the federal level and in other states." But much of that research had been in the public domain through government studies. Democratic Gov. Ed Rendell issued reports in 2006 and 2010. Another report was done in 2011 by Republican Gov. Tom Corbett, who called on lawmakers to increase transportation funding in his 2013 budget address. Those studies were commissioned by the executive branch, Waxman noted. As a member of the Legislature, Hughes wanted an independent firm to re-examine the state's transportation needs, Waxman said, pointing out the government needs checks and balances. But by the time Hughes signed the contract, the Senate Transportation Committee was in the midst of a bipartisan push to approve Corbett's plan. On Feb. 13, 2013, the committee, chaired by Sens. John Rafferty, R-Montgomery, and John Wozniak, D-Cambria, held its first public meeting on Corbett's proposal. Then on April 17 — two days after Hughes inked the Mercator contract — Rafferty and Wozniak held a news conference in the Capitol to announce the $2.5 billion transportation bill. The proposed bill used ideas offered by Rendell's and Corbett's commissions and was endorsed by state Transportation Secretary Barry Schoch, union leaders, business owners and community activists at the news conference. On May 7, three weeks after Mercator set out on its three-month exercise, the Senate committee passed the transportation bill, which moved swiftly through the Senate. Less than two months into the Mercator contract, the Senate gave final approval to the bill and it moved to the House. While the House did not approve a $2.4 billion version of the bill until the fall of 2013, the final bill Corbett signed contained substantially the same tax and fee ideas offered in Rafferty's original bill. Waxman claimed Mercator helped develop key parts of the final bill, including offering changes to a so-called bridge-bundling plan, which relies on private companies to fix scores of bridges under one contract. But the bridge bundling program had been discussed among Corbett's administration and lawmakers as part of a 2012 law that allowed the state Department of Transportation to turn over more construction projects to private industry. In fact, PennDOT did not know Hughes had retained Mercator. "We were not aware of this contract," said PennDOT spokesman Rich Kirkpatrick. "The Legislature is free to engage outside help to explore such issues as transportation for purposes of legislative drafting without sharing that information with us." Waxman also claimed Mercator was instrumental in helping Hughes develop Senate Bill 201, which would redirect natural gas well fees to pay for bonds and tax credits that would be used under a new job-creation program. The bill never passed. "It's not law yet but the legislation was introduced and it will be reintroduced in the next legislative session," Waxman said. But Senate records show Senate Bill 201 was already in the works before Hughes contracted with Mercator. Hughes wrote a memorandum seeking co-sponsors for Senate Bill 201 on March 5, 2013, and the bill was moved to the Senate Finance Committee on April 3, where it never got a hearing or a vote. The Mercator contract was signed April 15. Although the contract was for up to $25,000, Mercator, on Aug. 20, 2013, submitted only a $10,562 bill for work done between May 1 and June 30, 2013, records in the Senate chief clerk's office show. Mercator was not the only firm Hughes hired with ties to his campaign. Between June 1, 2013, and Nov. 30, 2013, Hughes retained for $15,000 Pine Street Partners, of Philadelphia, to provide "consulting advice and policy advice" on state and national health-care issues. Dorothy Mann, owner of Pine Street Partners, donated $1,350 to Hughes' campaign in 2012. In an interview, Mann said she has been a supporter of Hughes' for two decades and the campaign donations did not factor in the contracts. Mann said Hughes has retained her services as an HIV expert since she retired from a nonprofit that worked with local, state and federal authorities on HIV initiatives. As part of her state contract, Mann said, she meets with state and Philadelphia Health Department officials and Hughes' staff. Waxman also said the campaign contribution did not play a role in Hughes' hiring Pine Street Partners. "It's like any business; you don't bring in any consultants unless you think there is a need for specialized [services]," Waxman said. On April 1, 2013, Hughes signed a six-month, $12,000 contract with Creative Focus Media of Laverock, Montgomery County, to "provide public relations advice and consulting" on budget proceedings and his caucus' legislative agenda as it relates to Philadelphia and to help with "constituent outreach issues and events" in Hughes' district. When the contract expired Oct. 1, 2013, he signed a second contract that paid the firm up to $21,000 through March. Creative Focus was well known to Hughes. He used it in his 2008 re-election bid, paying the firm $8,000 for television commercials and public relations, Department of State records show. In defending the Creative Focus contracts, Waxman said, the firm is used to help set up large-scale events Hughes hosts in his district, such as his annual "Breaking the Silence" conference on behavioral health issues affecting African-Americans.