I wanted to kick off today's Friday Files with some long-awaited praise.

In the past week, both Orlando police Chief John Mina and Orange County Sheriff Jerry Demings have pledged to make wearable cameras standard-issue gear for their officers and deputies.

This is good news — and something we have been talking about for years in this column.

Other departments are already using this technology. But with these two forces joining the effort, Orlando and Orange County will be ahead of the curve for America's major metro areas.

Mayors Teresa Jacobs has been urging this for a while. And Buddy Dyer recently got vocal about it as well. Good for their leadership.

But the good news doesn't stop there. Volusia Sheriff Ben Johnson and Seminole County Sheriff Don Eslinger say camera acquisition is under way there as well.

In other words, we are going to be seriously wired.

Prosecutors will have more evidence. Cops will be protected from bogus accusations. And citizens will be assured they are getting the full story when guns or force is involved.

Chief Mina said the 50 OPD officers already equipped with the video-recording devices as part of a pilot program "absolutely love wearing the body cameras."

Cameras aren't perfect. They don't catch everything. And it's essential that departments develop sound policies when the cameras should be running and how the footage is stored.

But committing to get them is the first step — and something leaders do when they care about both the officers they hire and the citizens they serve.

So that's worth celebrating.

Health-care change of heart?

For 2014, Florida's biggest failure (and, boy, that's quite a contest) was probably the Legislature's rejection of more than $50 billion in federal health-care money.

It was moral failure, since sick and uninsured citizens didn't get help. And it was an economic failure, since Florida missed out on $5 billion the first year alone — money that would have created jobs and stimulated the economy.

The politicians' decision wasn't based on economic sense. Instead, it was fueled by a hatred of Obamacare. They hated the program. So while other states — including those led by Republicans — took the money they were awarded, Florida legislators stomped their feet and left citizens uninsured.

Finally, however, it looks like legislators may be realizing they made a mistake. They are now contemplating taking the money in years ahead.

There are two main reasons for this potential change of heart:

1) Legislators are now being lobbied by hospitals and big-business execs — whose opinions (and donations) they value more than pleas from the sick, the poor and their advocates.

2) They may structure it differently than President Obama did — and give it a name that sounds completely different from the Affordable Health Care Act. The potential title? "A Healthy Florida Works."

Frankly, I don't care whether House Speaker Steve Crisafulli wants to call it CrisafulliCare, ConservativeCare or Obama-Is-Evil-and-We-Hate-Him-Care. If it means Florida taxpayers can finally access money they already paid into the system to heal the sick and insure the needy, then bring it on.

That's one costly lake

This week the state adopted a plan to clean up and protect Florida's largest freshwater body of water, Lake Okeechobee — at a whopping cost of $750 million over the next 10 years.

Sure, the restoration is good news for our state's ecosystem, especially since the giant lake is at the headwaters of the already-suffering Everglades.

But the massive spending is also more proof that Florida has a backward and costly approach to the environment.

We foul the land and then spend gobs of tax dollars trying to "restore" it — when it would be a whole lot safer, cleaner and cheaper not to foul it in the first place.

smaxwell@orlandosentinel.com