Avid hiker Jim Franckum enjoys the health benefits he gets while out in nature

Jim and Margie Franckum pose for a photo while on a hike on Deer Mountain in Rocky Mountain National Park. Franckum, who has Parkinson's disease, says he still loves to hike and does it or some form of exercise five to six times a week because exercise has been shown to slow down the disease. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald )

Jim Franckum, 66, a retired Loveland dentist, has been an avid hiker throughout his life. "I remember first hiking the summer I was a counselor at Boy Scout Camp," said Jim. "I was in charge of taking boys just a few years younger than me on hikes. I enjoyed it and kept doing it."

When he was younger, hiking was mainly for enjoyment and to get out in the beauty of nature. That's still a big factor now, but Jim understands other benefits of hiking as well.

Two years ago, he was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease, but it hasn't stopped him from hiking. "Exercise has been shown to slow down the disease," said Jim.

"I do some type of exercise five or six times a week," he said. At least two of those times are spent hiking.

Jim and his wife, Margie, both feel that his hiking and other exercise are now his "job." His goal is to stay in shape and remain independent. "In the past, I often said, I'd like to go for a hike today, but I'd better stay home and be productive." The perspective that this is now his job has made a significant difference for him.

There has also been a positive emotional effect from hiking for Jim. "Instead of thinking, 'My body doesn't work as well as it used to, I have to give it up,' I just say 'no.' I may not go as far or as fast, but I can still do it."

Hiking has many physical benefits including, but not limited to, helping to lower blood pressure and blood sugar levels, as well as lowering one's risk of heart disease. It builds strength in muscles and in the body's core.

Advertisement

The American Heart Association notes that "the best and safest types of exercise are aerobic activities." The group includes hiking among its examples.

For someone who has never hiked before, Jim suggests, "Start off with something easy and pleasant. Go with a group or with your family. Take pictures. Learn about ecology."

Ready to get started? To learn more about trails within Larimer County, visit the county's Department of Natural Resources website at larimer.org/naturalresources/parkareas.htm. For trails and hiking information within Rocky Mountain National Park, visit rockymountainhikingtrails.com. The city of Loveland also offers information about recreation trails in the city at ci.loveland.co.us/index.aspx?page=242.

Variety is one of the positive things about hiking. "You can hike fast or slow. Your hike can be short or long," said Jim.

"Sometimes I'll hike by myself for thinking time and spiritual enrichment. Often, I will hike with Margie or friends. I enjoy the fellowship, but I also enjoy solitude."

If you are going to hike alone, be sure to let others know where you are planning to hike and how long you expect to be gone. Always carry sufficient supplies for unexpected weather changes.

Hiking became a family event for the Franckums, when their five children were younger. "Our first hike was up Lily Mountain and it was difficult," said Margie. "The children didn't think they could make it. They struggled, but they made it to the top. It gave them a great feeling of accomplishment. It's fun to go now with our grandchildren. Kids hike much faster than we do now."

She points out an added benefit — "It's free." Many local trails are accessible at no charge. Parking fees may be required at others.

"There are many great hikes in Rocky Mountain National Park, but we also have several nice ones closer to home," said Jim. "There are three local trails that I really like just because they're close: Devils Backbone, Bobcat Ridge (by Masonville) and Coyote Ridge (between Fort Collins and Loveland)." And they're free.

"Up the Big Thompson Canyon is the Round Mountain Trail and the Nature Trail (across from Viestenz-Smith Mountain Park). The nature trail is wide enough to walk side by side, making it good for families or adults wanting to talk while hiking. Farther up the Big Thompson, there are many trails on Crosier Mountain."

Jim also likes the numerous trails around Horsetooth Mountain. Parking fees are required, but the area offers a diverse range of trails.

One of his all-time favorite trails is near Glen Haven, along the North Fork of the Big Thompson. "It was wiped out in the floods last year," Jim said, "but efforts are going on to restore the trail."

Hiking can be a great adventure for those seeking time in the outdoors, better health and personal insight, as well as a positive experience for families and friends to share.

More than a century ago, naturalist John Muir shared, "Climb the mountains and get their good tidings. Nature's peace will flow into you as sunshine flows into trees. The winds will blow their own freshness into you, and the storms their energy, while cares will drop away from you like the leaves of autumn."