David Briley (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights The Tennessean editorial board endorses David Briley to preside over Metro Council.

The vice mayor presides over the council, breaks ties and assigns councilors to committees.

This person can serve as a counterbalance, adviser or supporter of the mayor's initiatives.

While the Nashville mayoral race has dominated local politics this year, another vital position is up for election: vice mayor.

The vice mayor is the presiding officer of the 40-member Metro Council, has the power to assign councilors to committees, appoints committee chairs and casts tie-breaking votes.

This individual will be able to set the tone for how council members debate legislation and comport themselves on the council floor.

He or she can also help the mayor's proposals get through or act as a loyal adversary who can slow down proposals that need further consideration.

The vice mayor should act to keep the mayor in check and support the balance of power in Metro's strong-mayor form of city government.

While the current Metro Council has been criticized for having rubber-stamped much of Mayor Karl Dean's second-term agenda, last month a majority of council members revolted and rejected three priorities: a flood protection system for downtown, a new police headquarters on Jefferson Street in North Nashville and moving the Davidson County jail from downtown to Antioch.

Still, some of the most important work of Metro Council involves zoning decisions and building or maintaining Greenways, for example, and the vice mayor can influence that debate.

Editorial board endorsement

In 2015 two men are contending for this post, which is elected by voters countywide: David Briley and Tim Garrett.

While Nashville will benefit from either of these individuals, The Tennessean Editorial Board recommends David Briley.

Briley would best serve as a partner to the new mayor helping him or her move the city forward.

The Tennessean endorsed Councilman Megan Barry for mayor, and their styles would complement each other for the good of Nashville.

Briley, 51, an attorney who resides in downtown, served as an at-large councilman from 1999-2007. He ran for mayor unsuccessfully in 2007 and is the grandson of Metro's first mayor, Beverly Briley.

Garrett, 64, a funeral director who lives in Goodlettsville, has served as an at-large councilman since 2007. His previous elective office includes district councilman from 1983-1999 and state representative from 1984-2004.

Both men are intelligent, capable and talented. However, they possess different leadership styles.

Briley told the editorial board that his approach focuses on listening and consensus building.

Garrett told the board that his approach focuses on being the chief advocate of the council and a counterpoint to the mayor, when necessary.

It's a soft power versus hard power approach that each would be able to execute effectively because of his personality.

About Briley

Briley said his platform is focused on three issues: inclusion, transparency and accountability.

He said he favors engaging the public early and making sure everyone understands the process to avoid rejection of mayoral priorities in the future.

He wants to work with the mayor in a collaborative manner.

"It's not about being adversarial, but about being persistent," he said.

Briley wants to meet with every council member to figure out their priorities and place them on the committees that best suit their talents.

He also wants to provide members of the council "more latitude" when it comes to making their points on the council floor.

About Garrett

Garrett sees the vice mayor's role as a "cheerleader for the council" but also as someone having a "say-so" in what the mayor is doing.

"The last mayors have been able to do whatever they wanted," said Garrett, referring to large projects such as arenas and convention centers.

His experience in the council has taught him the value of having committee chairs with a few years of experience and keeping members on those committees to avoid creating an unnecessary learning curve.

He also criticizes what he says is the current lack of debate on the council floor.

"We have no debate on the floor," he said.

His residency in Goodlettsville has made him especially empathetic to the voices of neighborhoods that have felt slighted by the city's focus on downtown economic development.

All candidates for countywide seat, from the mayor to vice mayor to at-large council members, should model this sentiment.

Endorsement process schedule

Tuesday: Publication of Nashville vice mayoral endorsement

Tuesday: Release of Ready to Serve assessment of mayoral, vice mayoral and Metro Council candidates on Tennessean.com

Tuesday: Live chat on Tennessean.com at 7:30 p.m. with Opinion Editor David Plazas on the endorsement decisions

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1IXjnl6