Health Nurses Say They Shouldn’t Have To Help Force-Feed Prisoners CREDIT: AP Photo/Charles Dharapak,File U.S. Navy medical personnel displays an enteral feeding tube, used for force-feeding detainees at Guantanamo Bay

Leading medical organizations are coming out in support of a Navy medical officer who refused to force-feed Guatanamo Bay prisoners on hunger strike this past summer, saying that health professionals should not be punished for carrying out their ethical obligations to their patients.

This past July, reports first came to light about a nurse who asked to be reassigned to other duties at the prison camp so he did not have to manage the force-feeding of prisoners who were participating in a hunger strike. At the time, that refusal was described as “the first known rebellion against Guantanamo’s force-feeding policy.” The nurse’s commander has called for an internal inquiry into the incident.

In response to the ongoing investigation, the nation’s largest nursing organization is now taking a public stance against requiring nurses to participate in force feedings. “It is incumbent on all leadership to recognize the code of ethics under which nurses and other professionals must practice,” the president of the American Nurses Association (ANA), Pamela Cipriano, said at a press briefing on Wednesday.

The ANA is also publicizing the private letter that the group, which represents 3.1 million registered nurses across the country, sent to Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel last month. In that letter, the nurses’ association argues that “ethics and human rights issues emerge in health care settings where individuals are unable to assert their rights,” like prisons.

In general, health professionals believe that competent patients should be allowed to refuse medical intervention, even if that intervention would save their own lives. ANA’s official Code Of Ethics stipulates that nurses should be able to make their own independent judgment about these issues.

The ANA’s stance refocuses the spotlight on what has been an extremely controversial practice within Guantanamo Bay during prisoners’ 18-month-long hunger strike. Detainees there have described the process of being force-fed through a tube as “painful.” One prisoner said it feels like having a razor blade shoved down your throat. Top Democrat lawmakers have called for an end to the practice, which they say may be considered a form of torture.

Other professional medical organizations — including the American Medical Association and the World Medical Association — have also publicly opposed force-feeding, and have written letters to President Obama asking him to end the practice. Physicians for Human Rights in particular has been forcefully critical of the practice, saying that it’s “inhuman and degrading.” And last year, the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine published an editorial by three doctors arguing that force-feeding is incompatible with informed consent, and “actions violating medical ethics, taken on behalf of the government, devalue medical ethics for all physicians.”

The government’s treatment of prisoners conflicts with medical ethics in other ways, too. Because doctors are not allowed to end a patient’s life against their will, major medical associations have refused to participate in the executions of death row inmates — something that’s left U.S. officials scrambling to figure out how to find other, potentially less qualified, people to administer lethal injections.