Incumbent Buddy Caldwell and fellow Republican challenger Jeff Landry advanced to a Nov. 21 runoff for Attorney General, as neither was able to secure a majority in the primary race Saturday (Oct. 24).

With 87 percent of precincts reporting, Caldwell led with 35 percent of the vote and Landry captured 34 percent. Three other challengers were eliminated by the primary results: Democrats Geri Broussard Baloney and Isaac "Ike" Jackson, and Republican Marty Maley.

The runoff promises to be a bitter fight between Landry, a former one-term Congressman and Tea Party favorite, and Caldwell, who took office as a Democrat in January 2008 but switched to Republican in 2011. Caldwell ran unopposed for his first re-election in 2012. This year, the 44-year-old Landry earned the endorsement of the state GOP over Caldwell, 69.

"(Caldwell) is in for a real difficult race," Landry said earlier this month. "We're going to end the cronyism, the nepotism and the corruption going on in that office."

Caldwell, for his part, said Landry lacks enough legal experience to do the job.

The race has been dominated by negative attacks and criticism between Caldwell and Landry. The former congressman has accused Caldwell of playing favorites and rewarding some of his largest campaign donors with lucrative contracts for state legal work. Landry said if elected he would "unplug the ATM machine that Buddy Caldwell has up there for his friends."

Caldwell also has drawn criticism from Democrats. They fault him for suing to try to block President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act and for opposing same-sex marriage in a federal court in Louisiana. The U.S. Supreme Court ultimately ruled favor of Obamacare and same-sex marriage.

But Caldwell has defended his record and staffing decisions, saying he saved the state money by enlisting specialized expert attorneys who could win mammoth cases. He said their legal fees were paid by losing parties in lawsuits that won the state an $8.8 billion settlement from BP in the 2010 oil spill. He also cited cases that recovered more than $238 million from 114 pharmaceutical firms found guilty of overcharging the state's Medicaid program.

"All of my lawyers have delivered record recoveries for the state without costing the taxpayer a dime," Caldwell said. "The 'Buddy's Buddies' system is working."

Caldwell said Landry is unqualified to be attorney general, saying he has never tried a case.

"What in the name of goodness would we want to have running the state's largest law office and they hadn't had any experience at trial?" Caldwell said.

Landry said he worked in the Lafayette office of Galloway, Johnson, Tompkins, Burr & Smith, and that he "argued and participated" in cases in state and federal court, "handling complex litigation dealing with millions and millions" of dollars. But when a reporter earlier this month asked him to cite some of his most significant court cases, he said he could not immediately recall them.

Landry said "the only truth" to the criticism of his legal experience is that he has never been a government prosecutor. But he said that's not needed to be attorney general. "If I was running for district attorney, maybe that might be important," he said.