CHICAGO — Catcher Nick Hundley, shaken up on a foul tip Wednesday night at Coors Field, landed on the seven-day concussion disabled list Saturday. The move is retroactive to Thursday.

Hundley had hoped to skip a trip to the DL, and tested himself in the batting cage and by doing some sprints Friday. But he made it through only four of his 10 scheduled sprints before stopping his workout.

“I started feeling a little bit woozy,” he said. “I just shut it down and said, ‘Let’s take it back a notch.’ So now I’m resting and making sure everything gets back to normal as soon as it can.”

Hundley said he hadn’t suffered a concussion since 2012, when he was with San Diego.

“That’s been a long time,” he said. “Fortunately, I haven’t taken shots like that before. This one was different. I couldn’t shake it off. I’m usually good to go. But this one, even after the game, it wouldn’t go away.”

Right-handed pitcher David Hale took Hundley’s spot on the roster, getting called up from Triple-A Albuquerque to provide bullpen depth. He pitched 1 innings Saturday in Colorado’s 6-2 loss to the Cubs, giving up a three-run homer to former Rockies center fielder Dexter Fowler in the seventh inning.

Time for Trevor Story to have a rest?

Rookie shortstop Trevor Story, who began the season in historic fashion by hitting six home runs in his first four games, has struck out 20 times in 48 at-bats this season. He has walked only twice.

Story hit a double off reliever Travis Wood in the ninth inning Saturday and scored on Carlos Gonzalez’s homer. But he is struggling, and a day off in the near future is a possibility.

Asked if he was pleased to see Story produce a solid hit in the ninth, manager Walt Weiss said, “It’s a long season. There are ups and downs, but I haven’t seen Trevor get away from his approach at all. He stayed on that ball and shot it down the right-field line. It was a nice piece of hitting.”

Day off for DJ LeMahieu

Second baseman DJ LeMahieu was stretching intently on the infield just before the ninth inning of Colorado’s 6-1 victory over the Cubs on Friday. He was not in the lineup Saturday because of groin tightness. Weiss said it’s considered a minor problem, but he gave LeMahieu the day off and started Cristhian Adames at second base and in the leadoff spot.

Jon Gray update

Right-handed starter Jon Gray, on the 15-day disabled list because of an abdominal strain, pitched four innings, gave up three runs and four hits and struck out eight Friday for Single-A Modesto against Stockton. Gray is expected to rejoin the Rockies soon, most likely for an April 22 start against the Los Angeles Dodgers at Coors Field. However, it’s possible he will make one more minor-league rehab start.



Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post

Rockies RHP Tyler Chatwood (1-1, 4.38 ERA) at Cubs LHP Jon Lester (1-0, 2.77)

When: 12:20 p.m. Sunday

TV/Radio: ROOT; 850 AM

Chatwood was just so-so in his last start, losing to the Giants at Coors Field. He gave up five runs on 11 hits in six innings. He might have come out of it OK had he not served up two costly home runs. Chatwood has never pitched at Wrigley Field. Rockies fans might remember Lester as the pitcher who earned the win in Game 4 of the World Series in 2007. He has made two regular-season starts against the Rockies, going 1-1 with a 1.93 ERA. Last season, on July 29, he struck out 14 Rockies and allowed two runs on five hits over eight innings.

Monday: Rockies RHP Jordan Lyles (0-1, 11.25 ERA) at Reds RHP Alfredo Simon (0-1, 12.15), 5:10 p.m., ROOT

Tuesday: Rockies LHP Jorge De La Rosa (1-1, 8.80) at Reds RHP Raisel Iglesias (1-1, 3.24), 5:10 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Rockies RHP Chad Bettis (2-0, 2.95) at Reds RHP Tim Melville (0-1, 9.00), 10:35 a.m., no TV; 850 AM

Thursday: Off