Secretary Sylvia Burwell on Meet the Press late last year (photo: Getty)

When Sylvia Burwell took over the role of Secretary of Health and Human Services from Kathleen Sebelius in 2014, she knew she'd have her work cut out for her—the launch of President Obama's signature legislation, the Affordable Care Act, had not gone well. Secretary Burwell needed to show that it would be possible for millions of Americans to easily enroll for government-facilitated health insurance. That alone is a big job, even if you ignore all the political fighting about the law. But then world events added a few more things to her to-do list: There was a surge of unaccompanied immigrant children crossing the Texas border, creating a humanitarian crisis; live smallpox was found at the National Institutes of Health; and Ebola became an epidemic, with four cases in the United States. Secretary Burwell is just the type that you'd want tackling those issues; she's calm and compassionate, the type of woman you'd turn to for advice on how, exactly, you're supposed to explain the tough news making headlines to your own kids. I sat down with her before the third open enrollment for the ACA began to hear how she thinks sign-ups will go this year—and how every woman can make sure that her birth control is covered.

GLAMOUR: Your mother was the mayor of Hinton, West Virginia, and you interned in Congress. Have you ever thought of personally running for office?

SECRETARY SYLVIA BURWELL: My mom didn't run for mayor until she was 65 years old—it was like a second and third career…. The way I've always thought about it is that I don't believe you run for office because you want a job. I believe if you run for office, it's because you have a vision for change. And if I ever came to that point, that's what would lead [me to run]. And right now I'm happily in a position where I believe I can work to deliver impact and work for change.

GLAMOUR: And before your current role, you were director of the Office of Management and Budget. It was your job—when Congress couldn't agree on a budget—to shut down the government. In what was sort of a hallmark sign of the dysfunction, you even had to shut down the panda cam at the National Zoo.

SECRETARY BURWELL:Yes, I had to be the implementer. I had to sign the paper to shut down the government. It's terrible…. [But] what the shutdown showed many, many people is the importance of the role of government. And as frustrated [as people get with] Washington, there are so many things [the government does] that are so important to people's lives every day. The panda cam, paying small businesses their loans—these are all things that shut down. At OMB you have to decide, is it essential? Is it life and limb? Somebody in the Coast Guard passed away on duty, but our ability to move the body and help the parents with the funeral: "No, there's a shutdown." And it's not like that can wait, right? We got through the shutdown—17 days—but it's essential to have regular order.

GLAMOUR: You joined the department of Health and Human Services in 2014. What has surprised you most about your current role?

SECRETARY BURWELL: I have been fortunate to work in places where people have a passion for their work. At HHS the passion sort of exceeds passion—it's a vocation…. I obviously knew that there were certainly some challenges that I would be taking on both with the work and the politics. [But] I probably did not have the right expectation level with regard to the number and volume of crises that would occur. Certainly there was the Affordable Care Act part, then unaccompanied children [there has been a surge of children entering the country illegally and without parents, particularly in Texas], and things like, we find smallpox in an NIH lab, after 50 years? Why didn't you find it, like, five weeks ago or three years ago? There was thing after thing. But the big ones were [dealing with] the Ebola [outbreak], the unaccompanied children. [It was] perhaps a bigger challenge than I had calculated on my yellow pad as I was thinking about this role.

GLAMOUR: And how do you deal in a moment of crisis like that? How do you even learn what you need to know about smallpox or Ebola or unaccompanied children? And what advice would you have for anyone facing any kind of work crisis?

SECRETARY BURWELL: First of all, women inherently, I think, are quite capable of having lots of balls in the air. And so, like, it's all those skills you use; you analyze the problem, figure out your tools, and then go at it piece by piece…. It's like what you have to do in the morning to get your kids out the door [if you're a parent]. The skills are, I believe, the same. The patience issues are the same.

GLAMOUR: You have a seven- and a five-year-old. When you're dealing with these kinds of crises, how much do you share with them?

SECRETARY BURWELL: When they found out they wouldn't see me this morning [because I was traveling to New York], they asked, "I won't see you in the morning? Why do you have to go?" It keeps the whole thing real. But my children would play superheroes, and the superheroes would be fighting Ebola. They didn't know prevent, detect—but their little Lego knew how to fight Ebola. [And] when I went to the border, my daughter made a picture for the children [there]. She understood that there was a situation where those kids didn't have toys. So they know and understand [the issues].

GLAMOUR:The Affordable Care Act had a bit of a bumpy start. But now the enrollment process is much simpler, and millions of Americans are enrolled. Yet it's still coming under a lot of attack in the Republican primaries.

SECRETARY BURWELL: With regard to the Affordable Care Act, I think it's important to kind of reflect on a year ago. A year ago at this time, there was a fundamental question about whether or not the marketplace was a place that could function for the consumer. And that question has been asked and answered—the consumer had an experience and a product that they wanted. And then, can the marketplace exist? And yes, we saw a 25 percent increase in the number of plans last year. That was an important question a year ago that's not a question now.

Another important question was, Would it actually reduce the number of uninsured? And we know now that [there has been a] 17.6 million reduction in the uninsured. Another question that was on the table is, What happens to the economy? There was a lot of criticism that it was going to cause part-time jobs [to disappear], and we haven't seen a change in our mix of part-time and full-time [workers]. So I think the big questions that are out there have been asked and answered.

GLAMOUR: And so what would you say to any of the Republican candidates who are still calling to repeal or overturn the law?

SECRETARY BURWELL: What I would say is, Can we have a conversation about the substance? That's what I welcome. We're happy to have those conversations if there are places where people think there can be improvements. We want competition in the system, so let's talk about that. We know there are states, like Alaska, where there are not a lot of providers. How do we work on issues like that? How do we work on making sure that the small-business part of this works better?… And if people have [alternate] plans, let's compare them and see. Access, affordability, and quality—that's what this is about. [But] "repeal" is a symbol of something that I don't think is connected to the substance of what's happening. Do you want to take away care from people who have preexisting conditions? [Repeal] takes you backward.

GLAMOUR: What do you think the biggest barrier is for people who have not signed up for insurance?

SECRETARY BURWELL: As we go into this next step of enrollment, that's front of mind for us right now. While we've made progress with our numbers, this will be a harder-to-reach group, and we have less money to do it…. Many people don't know or understand about the tax credit that they can receive. And so affordability is a barrier. We know that a disproportionate number of those who are still uninsured are young—

GLAMOUR:And feeling invincible.

SECRETARY BURWELL: Exactly…. So we want to make it easier to shop and understand products because many people aren't educated about what's offered—do you know your premiums? Do you know your copays? Do you know your deductibles? And so figuring out ways that we help people understand what this is, how it works, and that they can shop to get what they need.

GLAMOUR: Birth control is covered under the act. What should a woman do if her insurer doesn't cover it? How should she report a problem?

SECRETARY BURWELL: You know, Senator Claire McCaskill told me this story. She got on the phone [for] her daughter, and the insurance company said, "No, we don't cover it." And she said, "It's in the legislation." And they said, "No, we don't cover it." And she said, "I wrote the legislation!"… So know that it's covered. Call your insurer and tell them it's covered. … Maternity care is covered. It's built in that you're not going to be discriminated against because you're a woman.