Zenefits Insurance Services, a startup that automates human resources tasks for small and medium-sized businesses, has raised a $66.5 million Series B round led by Andreessen Horowitz.

Zenefits Insurance Services

The financing came at a valuation of about $500 million, according to a person familiar with the deal.

The funding round was raised in less than two weeks, said co-founder and Chief Executive Parker Conrad, despite the recent lack of enthusiasm in the public markets for cloud tech stocks.

Andreessen Horowitz also led Zenefits’ $15 million Series A round in January, in what General Partner Lars Dalgaard described as “a Halley’s Comet moment for us.”

While the firm rarely leads two rounds in a row for the same company, Mr. Dalgaard said, “there are a lot of things that all of us [at Andreessen Horowitz] with our different backgrounds found to be spectacular about the company…These new cloud companies are growing much faster than the originals.”

The company seems to hit several different areas of growing interest to VCs–cloud computing, health administration software and human resources. The number of investments in HR software companies has been increasing since the 2009 recession, according to Dow Jones VentureSource, with 45 investments worth $230.3 million occurring in 2013.

Mr. Conrad discovered the frustration and difficulty of HR–administering payroll and benefits for employees while at the same time complying with increasingly burdensome government regulations–at his last startup, the investment management company SigFig Wealth Management LLC.

After his experience at SigFig, he told VentureWire in January, the Obama administration’s 800-page Affordable Care Act, which employers will have to comply with by next year, looked like “a whirlwind coming down the pike.”

He designed Zenefits to comply with that act. When an employee is hired or leaves, the software enables the employer to check a few boxes, letting the software do the work of connecting to back-end payroll, insurance and other systems, gather information and file whatever’s needed.

The company is on track to grow revenue this year by 1,300%–revenue in April exceeded forecasts by five times–and it claims more than 2,000 customers serving more than 50,000 employees. In the last three months, more than half of new customers have come from outside California and outside the tech industry–new customers include a steel mill and a church, which implies a large market for the software.

Zenefits is headquartered in San Francisco and must comply with regulations state by state.

“The unique and defining thing about Zenefits is that we’re an integrated, all-in-one approach to this stuff,” Mr. Conrad said. “I believe some of these compliance complexities will drive the entire market toward that. You can’t really roll your own stuff any more.”

On the cloud computing front, Zenefits is one of several young companies that’s growing much faster than the earlier generation of cloud companies, Mr. Dalgaard said, including Salesforce.com and SuccessFactors Inc., which Mr. Dalgaard himself founded in 2001 and later sold to SAP AG for $3.4 billion.

Zenefits’ software is free to users–the company makes money on commissions and referral fees from insurance companies and other services–and it’s also attractive, easy to use, cheap to make and obviously useful, which makes sales easier, he said.

“Whatever we’re seeing now [in the downturn of public tech stocks] is a blip in the valuation of cloud apps companies,” Mr. Dalgaard said. “They will be an extremely valuable category over the next decade or two.”

Other investors participating in this round–which takes Zenefits’ total funding to $84 million–include Institutional Venture Partners, SV Angel, Hydrazine Capital (a firm co-founded by entrepreneur Sam Altman, who’s also the president of Y Combinator), former Twitter and Google executive Elad Gil, and actor/musician Jared Leto.

Mr. Leto was introduced to Zenefits by Box Inc. Chief Executive Aaron Levie and is expected to help with connections to the media and entertainment industries, Mr. Conrad said. There are no board seats with this round.

Write to Deborah Gage at deborah.gage@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @deborahgage