A few years back, many predicted that requiring businesses to offer their employees health coverage or pay a penalty would be ruinous for companies across the nation.

The provision, often called the Employer Mandate, reached full implementation on New Year’s Day with little fanfare or protest, along with a raft of changes to plans offered by Covered California, the state’s health insurance exchange.

As of Friday, companies with the equivalent of 50 to 99 full-time employees must offer their workers health insurance that meets the Affordable Care Act’s affordability and adequacy requirements. If they don’t, those businesses risk thousands of dollars in fines if their workers end up receiving subsidized coverage through government-run exchanges.

While this mandate has been widely derided, Xiomara Peña, Southern California outreach manager for the California chapter of the Small Business Majority, said there was not a large number of businesses crying out in protest as 2016 arrived.

“Most businesses — 96 percent — have less than 50 full-time equivalent employees, so they are not impacted,” Peña said.

The provision has been on the books since Obamacare passed in 2010 and was supposed to take effect in 2014, but Congress delayed the requirement until this year. The law defines full-time employees as those who work at least 30 hours per week.

For several years, employers have worked to bring down their full-time-equivalent totals to below 50 or limit the number of full-time workers they would have to cover if their staffing surpassed the government threshold. In other words, the delayed financial pain produced by Obamacare might have been built into the affected companies’ long-range planning.

That could be the case, or it could simply be that the requirement was never as onerous as business owners thought, said Larry Levitt in Menlo Park, senior vice president for special initiatives at the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.

“I think it just hasn’t been that difficult for the vast majority of employers to comply with the mandate,” Levitt said.

That is especially true, he added, for businesses with the equivalent of 100 or more full-time employees. They had to comply with the mandate beginning in 2015, and this year must offer coverage to 95 percent of their employees, up from 70 percent last year.

“The vast majority of employers in that category already offered health insurance to their workers. They may have had to increase offerings in some areas, but most did not have to start from scratch,” Levitt said.

Penalties have also increased for individuals in the new year.

In 2016, the fine for not being insured increases to at least $695 per adult and $347 per child or 2.5 percent of household income, whichever is greater. However, there are also new benefits available for those who buy exchange plans. A new cap on specialty drug costs for patients with chronic conditions, and available dental coverage for adults, top the new-in-2016 list.

While plans for businesses and individuals started at the first of the year for millions, there is still time to sign up.

The open enrollment period for Covered California is Jan. 31, and anyone who signs up by Jan. 15 will have their policy start on Feb. 1.

Open enrollment for businesses is continuous. Companies that decide to offer coverage can buy on a small business exchange operated by Covered California or from other marketplaces, including California Choice, a popular private exchange that caters to businesses and offers plans from some carriers who do not sell through the state’s marketplace.

Determining which plan to get and calculating whether a business is truly at risk of a penalty can be complicated. For example, companies end up getting penalized only if one of their employees applies for and receives subsidized coverage through the exchange.

Peña, the Small Business Majority representative, said employers are well advised to seek the help of a local health insurance broker rather than going it alone.

“Brokers are great because they’ve been studying every wrinkle of this for years. We love brokers because they can save a lot of time and frustration,” Peña said.