Nonprofit hospitals get tax exemptions in return for providing care to the poor, but only a sliver of Michigan nonprofit hospitals’ spending goes to charity care.

Most of the uncompensated care costs reported by nonprofit hospitals in Michigan stems from Medicaid losses and from bills that patients with private insurance failed to pay.

A Watchdog.org review of 2012-13 IRS filings from 66 nonprofit members of the Michigan Health & Hospital Association found that charity care costs averaged just 1.4 percent of total expenses.

Unreimbursed Medicaid — the portion of costs for Medicaid-enrollee care the government program doesn’t pay — averaged 3.4 percent of expenses, while bad debt from patients who didn’t pay their bills averaged 5.5 percent of expenses.

Of the 66 nonprofit hospitals and hospital networks, 24 had insufficient revenue to cover their expenses. But 10 of those 24 nonprofits reported charity care costs that were less than 1 percent of expenses, indicating that was not the main factor in keeping them in the red.

On average, the 66 MHA members reported revenue $7.8 million greater than their expenses. Spectrum Health Hospitals, based in Grand Rapids, had $171 million in revenue less expenses — what would have been reported to the IRS as profit if the hospital network was a for-profit business. Charity care costs at Spectrum equaled 1.1 percent of total expenses in 2012.

Beaumont Health System reported $78 million in revenue less expenses and charity care costs equal to 0.9 percent of total expenses in 2013. In 2012, Borgess Medical Center reported $59 million in revenue less expenses, with charity care costs equal to 2.4 percent of expenses.

Medicaid, while a major revenue stream for most MHA members, is also a strain on care providers because the program pays such low reimbursement rates. The 66 nonprofits reported a total of $2.1 billion as their cost for care of Medicaid patients and $1.7 billion in Medicaid reimbursements, leaving about $400 million in unreimbursed Medicaid costs.

Michigan’s 2014 Medicaid expansion under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is expected to reduce charity care costs while increasing unreimbursed Medicaid costs.

Ruthanne Sudderth, MHA vice president of public affairs, told Watchdog.org the limited hospital data available show “a wide range of changes in their uncompensated levels since 2014.”

“On average, we are encouraged by these early results given that Michigan hospitals will forgo nearly $7 billion in reduced future Medicare payments in exchange for expanded health care coverage under the Affordable Care Act,” Sudderth said.

State and federal taxpayers bear the cost of Medicaid reimbursements. The feds pay for 65 percent of traditional Medicaid benefits and 100 percent of Medicaid expansion benefits, for now; the Obamacare expansion match rate is scheduled to gradually drop to 90 percent by 2020.

Medicaid expansion shifts responsibility for care for Michigan’s poor from Michigan hospitals and taxpayers to federal taxpayers by bringing billions in new federal spending to the state. MHA and other expansion advocates emphasized the benefit of this cost-shift in their 2013 campaign for Medicaid expansion.

“Michigan will receive about $2 billion a year from the federal government to pay for the expansion,” Expand Medicaid asserted.

“Currently, Michigan hospitals end up providing more than $880 million a year in uncompensated care to patients unable to pay, costs that end up being shifted to people who have insurance, employers who pay for it for their workers, and taxpayers,” campaign materials explained.

MHA has pointed to Obamacare cuts in Medicare as a reason for expanding Medicaid, but Congress has repeatedly signaled Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion reimbursement rates will be cut to help slow the growth of the $19 trillion national debt.

President Barack Obama vetoed a bill in January that would have repealed Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion. And hospitals appear to be counting on Medicaid expansion staying in place permanently.

“The MHA is confident that the U.S. Congress and the next president will maintain affordable, comprehensive health care coverage for millions of Americans – 600,000 in Michigan alone – and move beyond discussions surrounding the repeal of Medicaid expansion,” Sudderth told Watchdog.org.

Details of nonprofit MHA members’ uncompensated care costs are listed in the following table, for calendar year 2013 or for tax year 2012 from hospitals whose calendar year doesn’t begin Jan. 1. All data come from IRS 990 forms available at GuideStar.org.