Sen. Ted Cruz — a vocal opponent of President Barack Obama’s signature healthcare law, the Affordable Care Act — compared Obama’s exemptions of certain parts of the law to a dictatorship.

“One of the most disturbing aspects of the Obama presidency is the willingness of this president to disregard the law, to ignore the law,” the Texas Republican said in an interview with Fusion on Wednesday. “You know, we were talking a few minutes ago about Obamacare. And you mentioned it’s the law of the land. If it’s the law of the land, the president shouldn’t keep ignoring the law.”

Cruz gave several examples of the delays and exemptions Obama has established.

“He unilaterally granted an exemption for big business for one year,” Cruz said. “The law says big business doesn’t get an exemption and the president just waved his hand and said, ‘I am granting them an exemption.’ He unilaterally granted an exemption for members of Congress. The law says that members Congress have to be on the exchange without subsidies just like millions of Americans. The president just waved his hand and said, ‘Ignore that part of the law, I don’t want to enforce it.'”

Cruz was one of several key members of Congress to influence the shutdown of the federal government in October in a fight to defund the healthcare law.

“A president under a constitutional system doesn’t have the ability to pick and choose which laws to follow,” Cruz said during the interview. “And that’s the same pattern you see in dictatorial societies, where a leader says ‘ignore the law, go with the power of the president instead.’ That’s not the way our constitution is supposed to work.”

Cruz also clarified a comparison his father, Rafael Cruz, made previously, in which he compared Obama to Fidel Castro.

Rafael is originally from Cuba, was involved in the Cuban revolution and was once a supporter of Castro, but later fled to the United States.

“Obviously there are enormous differences,” Cruz said. “The United States is not imprisoning or torturing dissidents. But the point my father was making — he was focusing on a sentence that President Obama used in the last two state of the union addresses where he said, ‘If Congress doesn’t act, I will.'”