Denver concert could hurt turnout at Night Show

Marilee Johnson shared the names of some of the country music artists who won't be coming to the 2015 Logan County Fair at Thursday's Fair Board meeting.

Johnson, the Entertainment chair, said she had "bad news" to share during her update to the board: a concert featuring Kenny Chesney, Jason Aldean, Brantley Gilbert and Cole Swindell is scheduled in Denver for the same night as the 2015 Night Show, Aug. 8. She expressed concern that the Denver concert could draw some of the crowd from Logan County; however, she noted that tickets are expensive.

She also said she has put out offers for some artists for next year's fair, but has not heard anything back yet.

Johnson added that the contract for the stage, lights and sound for the Night Show is up and will have to be renegotiated this year.

The board also spent some time discussing board positions. They approved applications from current board members whose terms have expired — Sarah Matthews, Bill Dolan, Theresa Bartlett, Johnson and Ken Meis — although the Logan County Commissioners had already approved the applications. They also officially accepted the resignation of Brandee Gillham from the royalty coordinator position; Gillham submitted a letter of resignation at November's board meeting, but there weren't enough members present to take any action.

Advertisement

The board agreed to advertise the position, and also discussed the possibility of forming a sub-committee to assist the coordinator with running the program. They decided to advertise the position and see if they get any applicants, then move forward with the idea of forming a sub-committee.

The bull riding chair on the board also remains vacant, after two months of advertising the position's availability. Board members suggested the names of a couple of individuals who might be willing to apply for the position, and also discussed putting out a request for proposals for a "turn key" operator who would run the bull riding competition.

Fair Manager Todd Thomas told the board he had heard from a company that was interested in providing ATMs on trailers during the fair. He said he didn't have all the details, but that it could be done at no cost to the fair, and wondered if the board was interested in exploring that option further.

Commercial exhibits chair Julie Sonnenberg said she would like to go back to Sterling Federal Credit Union, which provided an ATM last year, and offer them the opportunity to come back first. Board members said they heard positive feedback about having the ATM available during the 2014 fair, and felt it would be used more as more people learned it was there. They agreed to take up the matter at a future meeting.

Sonnenberg also told the board that she is running out of room for vendors for next year's fair, which led to a discussion about the parking spaces in front of the Exhibit Center. The board agreed that traffic from cars parking in those spaces has become a problem and potential safety hazard, and voted to consider eliminating parking in those spaces during the fair.

Sara Waite: 970-526-9310, swaite@journal-advocate.com