Flight cancellations

Storms on Sunday delayed flights at D/FW International Airport and Dallas Love Field.

About 50 planes bound for D/FW and 15 for Love Field were diverted Sunday afternoon, FAA spokesman Lynn Lunsford said.

Sunday’s weather also caused a temporary ground stop for planes headed to and from D/FW and Love Field, he said.

Airlines canceled more than 700 flights to and from D/FW and about 50 to and from Dallas Love Field on Sunday.

The Dallas Cowboys team charter was also detoured to Houston because of inclement weather at D/FW, KDFW-TV (Channel 4) reported.

Hail in North Texas

There have been several reports of hail ranging from penny-sized to golf ball-sized since about 2:30 p.m. Sunday. Hail was reported in North Richland Hills, Northlake, Arlington, Mansfield, and north Dallas near White Rock Lake, said meteorologist Lamont Bain with the National Weather Service.

Dallas street closures

Fourteen streets have been closed as a result of weather as of 5 p.m. Street Services is monitoring the areas.

Street closures due to weather. Street Services is monitoring the areas. pic.twitter.com/2z1RgWdmKl — Emily Black PIO (@EmilyPIODallas) December 27, 2015

4 additional road closures. 14 total as if 5pm. pic.twitter.com/FIFSYbW6Un — Emily Black PIO (@EmilyPIODallas) December 27, 2015

Measuring tornado speeds

The National Weather Service in 2007 began using what’s called the Enhanced F-Scale to measure tornado speeds. Like the previous Fujita Scale, it classifies tornadoes based on estimated wind speed.

According to the National Weather Service, the old F-Scale’s wind speeds were never scientifically tested or proven and often didn’t take into account different building strengths, wind direction or other factors.

“These limitations have led to inconsistent rating of tornadoes and, in some cases, an overestimate of tornado wind speeds,” Texas Tech researchers wrote in a 2004 report on the guidelines for the new scale.

The new methodology, or EF Scale, uses damage classifications for 28 different types of buildings or objects. That includes everything from softwood trees to strip malls and single-family houses.

The EF Scale then uses the strength of structures and the amount of damage done to them to estimate the speed it would take a three-second wind gust to produce that amount of harm. A tornado event’s eventual rating is an estimate of its highest wind speed, even though its intensity could vary over a geographic area.

Weather watches and warnings

The National Weather Service has issued a wind advisory for North Texas that expires at 8 p.m. — one more thing atop the list of watches and warnings piled up this devastating holiday weekend.

Matt Bishop, a meteorologist in the National Weather Service’s Fort Worth office, says winds are blowing out of the north 20-30 mph, with occasional gusts of 35-40.

The advisory now pairs with the flash flood watch that extends until Monday morning as rain continues to fall over most of North Texas.

Forecast

Jamie Gudmestad, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service, said the Dallas Fort Worth area was seeing a break from the rain about 5 p.m. but showers should return to North Texas on Sunday night, bringing another half-inch before tapering off early Monday morning.

Some of the precipitation could turn to snow, but it won’t be anything more than a few flurries in Dallas-Fort Worth and is not expected to accumulate.

Dallas-Fort Worth may experience a “light dusting” of snow between 1 and 8 a.m. Monday, said KXAS-TV (NBC5) meteorologist Remeisha Shade.

By 10 a.m., the rain will taper off giving way to a sunny and dry week. For the first time ever, Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport has collected more than 60 inches of rain in a single year — 61.72 inches, as of 8:50 p.m.

Since midnight Sunday, 1.44 inches of rain fell at D/FW. Less than a half inch is expected overnight, said meteorologist Jesse Moore with the National Weather Service.

Flooding is “absolutely” a concern today following last night’s catastrophic storms that killed 11 in Garland, Copeville and Blue Ridge.

Dan Shoemaker of the National Weather Service says most of the heaviest rains should be just east of Dallas, but “some spots in the area could exceed two inches.”

The reason: The upper-level low that caused last night’s devastation in conjunction with a cold front remains to the west of Dallas-Fort Worth. And, says Shoemaker, there’s still considerable moisture streaming in from the Gulf Coast just above the surface.

“So we’ll see showers and storms and still have potential for flooding concerns throughout the day,” says Shoemaker.

And it will be cold: Highs will not top the mid-40s Sunday, winds will be strong out of the north, and lows will drop to near freezing, complicating rescue and recovery efforts.

There’s the chance for some light snow north and west of Dallas overnight and into early Monday; anything we see in Dallas will be light and fleeting around daybreak Monday. It will stay cold throughout the rest of the week, below normal — highs in the 40s, lows in the 20s and 30s — thanks to reinforcing shots of cold air.

But that’s then, and this is now: “Today, it’s essentially 100 percent chance of rain,” Shoemaker said.

Staff writers Claire Cardona and Brandon Formby contributed to this report.