In middle school, I navigated earning my first “D” and getting demoted in math. I had a knack for choosing overly dramatic and bossy friends, and I accidentally dyed my hair brassy orange.

Overall, it was the typical junior high experience, one I relive frequently as a middle school counselor and as the parent of kids in seventh and eighth grade.

There is no manual to develop “soft” skills like perseverance and resilience. Just as I did, most kids learn through trial and error. Here are my top skills, and ways parents can help without getting in the way.

Make good friend choices: Kids figure out quickly which friends instill a sense of belonging and which ones make them feel uncomfortable. It can be helpful to ask your children these questions: Do you have fun and laugh with this person? Can you be yourself?

Work in teams and negotiate conflict: I don’t think many students get through middle school without feeling like they had to carry the load on at least one group project. Maybe they didn’t divide the work effectively. Perhaps they chose to take ownership to avoid a poor grade. Help them understand what happened and what they might have done differently.

Manage a student-teacher mismatch: Unless there is abuse or discrimination, don’t bail them out by asking for a teacher change. Tell them they still can learn from a teacher they don’t like.

Create organization systems: Make sure they are the architects of this process. Encourage them to come up with solution-oriented plans and tweak them as needed. If they say they don’t care, remind them that they don’t have to be invested in order to change their behavior.

Take responsibility for grades: If you care more than they do about their grades, why should they worry? Let them monitor their own grades, and if they don’t do well, don’t step in to advocate for assignment extensions or grade changes.

Learn to self-advocate: By middle school, they should be learning how to ask teachers for help or clarification. Unless there is no other option, try not to reach out on their behalf.

Self-regulate emotions: Help your kids identify any physical symptoms that accompany their stressors. This may help them know when to take a breath or hit the “pause” button before reacting. In real time, point out when they handle an emotional situation well.

Cultivate passions; recognize limitations: When your children are fired up about something, run with it and encourage exploration. Get books, go to museums and be supportive even if the subject does not excite you. On the other hand, it is OK if they struggle in a specific area. That, too, is useful information.

Make responsible choices: Teach them to respect their bodies, and to make safe and healthy decisions. Have open conversations; try not to be overly reactive if they ask shocking or distressing questions.