Early voting started Saturday in Lee, Collier and Glades counties, and voters were out in full force.

The Florida primary is March 15, but you can cast your ballot early until the 12th.

ABC7 went to the Lee County Elections Center to catch up with voters.

"I'm voting for Donald Trump," said Lynn Hardey of Fort Myers.

"I'm voting for Hillary Clinton," said Carlos Sierra of Cape Coral.

"Ted Cruz," said Alice Hull of Fort Myers.

Who they're voting for may differ but why they're voting is the same.

"I want my vote to count," said David Schock of Fort Myers.

"People want change and I want change. I'm tired of our government at a standstill and I want things to happen," said Louise Robbins of Fort Myers.

Most people say they like voting early because it's convenient and usually there are smaller crowds.

"I'm older and I don't want to stand in lines when the other polls open," Hull said.

But a lot of people hit the polls Saturday afternoon.

Florida's large and diverse population has turned it into an important swing state - 99 Republican delegates all go to the state's winner, versus the Democrats who award a total of 246 delegates on a proportional basis.

For Florida Senator Marco Rubio, who launched his campaign in the Sunshine State, a loss here could make or break his presidential run.

But Donald Trump is dominating the early preference polls.

"He's got charisma. I think he knows what he's talking about," Hardey said.

On the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton is favored in the Sunshine State.

"I think she has a lot of experience," Sierra said. "Regardless of who you're voting for, I think it's important to vote."

Polls are open from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. daily at 10 locations in Lee, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. at eight locations in Collier, and 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. at the Glades County Supervisor of Elections Office.

If you want to vote in person, make sure you bring a valid photo ID, such a driver's license, state ID card or a U.S. passport.

Early voting started Feb. 29 in Charlotte, DeSoto and Hendry.