Super Tuesday is a pretty big deal. Three days from now, 12 states and one territory hold primaries and caucuses for Democratic and Republican nominations for president. More delegates will be claimed Tuesday than any other day. This alone makes the date significant.

Making Super Tuesday all the more super is the fact that a man who, until recently, was an avid Democrat, a supporter of Planned Parenthood, an admittedly proud backer of Hillary Clinton and who still advocates bedrock Democratic Party ideals such as import tariffs and Obamacare mandates, is threatening to run away with the Republican nomination, while doing a good impersonation of a crackpot.

Even casual observers realize Donald Trump is pulling the wool over Republicans’ eyes with his rants and outrageous, undeliverable promises by appealing to the frustration and anger of constituencies too long taken for granted by the GOP establishment. He appears to be getting away with his charade, the ultimate reality show played out on the political stage. Tuesday may tell the tale in toto.

Beware. This fellow isn’t merely a wolf in sheep’s clothing. He’s Godzilla in sheep’s clothing.

What is a lover of small, limited government to do? Vote for Rand Paul? Well, that ship has sailed.

First, take a step back and realize that the wild man with the wild hairdo is a fraud. He’s no more a solid conservative than he is a door knob. His authoritarian approach – doing what he wants when he wants and to hell with those who object – is not a conservative approach to governing. It’s the modus operandi of Attila the Hun.

Speaking of hell, many evangelical voters inexplicably have flocked to the vulgarian, ad hominem-spewing Trump, despite the presence of at least three other bona fide Christian evangelicals in the race. How do these believers choose the self-professed “Christian” Trump, whose favorite Bible verse isn’t even in the Bible, over Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz and Ben Carson? If this were a TV miniseries, the plot is too ridiculous to get airtime.

It’s noteworthy that Trump’s appeal has steadily hovered at just below a third of the Republican electorate. It’s even more noteworthy that Trump is the Republican candidate most disliked by the Republican electorate. As candidates have dropped out, he has not picked up their backers. Clearly, Trump has peaked in sheer numbers of support, and is unlikely to gain much, if any, should remaining candidates drop out of the race.

Republicans once followed Ronald Reagan’s advice and were loath to speak ill of one another. Curiously, in this race more than any in recent memory, GOP candidates for president are attacking and wounding one another with their circular firing squad. But notice how relatively few potshots are taken at Trump. Could it be because Godzilla doesn’t play nice? Is it because when you criticize Attila, he responds with a scorched-earth attack? To ask the questions is to answer them.

It seems Trump’s dwindling Republican opponents are content to deride one another while giving the Wild One plenty of room, lest they become the next focused target of his merciless wrath. It’s no secret that Cruz avoided months of Trump’s harsh assaults by making nice at the podium during debates. Beware whom you cozy up to. Cruz is learning that he may have bought a temporary calm in the campaign storm, but he now must face Trump’s wrath while simultaneously defending himself against charges that he was Trump-friendly only weeks ago, the worst of both worlds.

It is as if innocents have been manipulated by a far shrewder malevolent, and now find themselves at a great disadvantage at the most critical time.

If the GOP is to rise above the Trump challenge, it’s not likely to be the other candidates who pull it off. He’s already won that battle, neutering them, turning them on each other, at first fearful to take him on, and now impotent to do so.

If the Trump express to oblivion is to be derailed, it must be done by those who have flocked to him out of anger, frustration and hatred for politics as usual. A reawakening of those misguided by Trump is what is needed. They must realize that backing a demagogue is short-term pleasure followed by immeasurable misery.

Republican voters – and delegates, for that matter – must step back and measure The Donald by timeless republican (small R) principles, and not be swayed by his emotional appeals to vengeance, pride and outrage.

Anger is not a platform. Venting is not a strategy. Pretending to be a Republican is not a solution.

Unless the GOP wants to nominate its version of a narcissistic, unaccountable, vengeful Obama-like candidate, voters need to reassess Trump in light of timeless values, not fleeting outrages. Besides, Trump may be the only Republican left in the race that Hillary Clinton can beat.