A student spoke to fellow protesters as students and other groups prepared to march in support of Oaxaca's striking teachers in Oaxaca, Mexico, in early October. The march became violent when protesters clashed with riot police. Michael Toolan for The Wall Street Journal …

Protesters carried signs shortly before violence broke out between protesters and riot police in Oaxaca in early October. Michael Toolan for The Wall Street Journal …

Students and other groups protested in front of the governor's office in favor of striking Oaxaca teachers. Michael Toolan for The Wall Street Journal …

Riot police in Oaxaca ran to block protesters after violence broke out in a march in support of striking teachers. Michael Toolan for The Wall Street Journal …

Teacher Liliana Toledo attended to her students at the Rosario Maza preschool in Oaxaca. Ms. Toledo is a member of union Section 59, which didn't go on strike. She works in a house that has been turned into a school. Michael Toolan for The Wall Street Journal …

Parents from the community of El Manantial worked to finish building a primary school. Many of the parents make their living foraging through garbage at a nearby dump. Michael Toolan for The Wall Street Journal …

Carmen Lopez, a six year old, worked at her desk at a primary school in El Manantial on the outskirts of the city of Oaxaca. The school, which is made from metal sheeting, is unfinished and lacks electricity. Michael Toolan for The Wall Street Journal …

Adriana Garcia, a primary schoolteacher, taught reading to one of her students at a school in the community of El Manantial. Unlike most of Oaxaca's teachers, who belong to union Section 22, Ms. Garcia, a member of the much smaller union Section 59, didn't go on strike. Michael Toolan for The Wall Street Journal …

Parents at the Benito Juarez primary school in Milpa listened to speeches at the opening of the school, which had been shut down by a strike of teachers belonging to union Section 22. Frustrated parents forced the school to open and brought in teachers from union Section 59. Michael Toolan for The Wall Street Journal …

Students at the Benito Juarez primary school in Mitla played hangman during their first day of class. Michael Toolan for The Wall Street Journal …

Amado Morales, the president of the parents association of the Benito Juarez primary school in Mitla, talked to parents. Mr. Morales, a lawyer, said parents would run striking teachers out of town 'with sticks, stones, and fists' if the teachers, who are returning to class on Monday, try to take back the school, which is now being staffed by teachers who didn't go on strike. Michael Toolan for The Wall Street Journal …