The Republic | azcentral.com Thu Dec 12, 2013 9:42 PM

The battle over Medicaid expansion in Arizona moves to the courtroom today, less than three weeks before the expanded program is scheduled to take effect.

Hanging in the balance is whether an estimated 71,000 additional low-income Arizonans will be able to receive health coverage under the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, which is Arizona’s Medicaid program.

The lawsuit continues the fight from June, when a bipartisan coalition of lawmakers approved Gov. Jan Brewer’s request to expand AHCCCS eligibility to people who make up to 133 percent of the federal poverty limit, which is $31,322 for a family of four. The current cap is 100 percent of the poverty limit, which is $23,550 for a family of four.

Led by Senate President Andy Biggs, R-Gilbert, and House Speaker Andy Tobin, R-Paulden, all but two of the lawmakers who were on the losing side of the June vote sued to challenge one of the biggest public-policy changes in Arizona in decades.

They are joined by two residents and the director of the Arizona branch of the limited-government advocacy group Americans for Prosperity.

The case revolves around whether the Legislature had the authority to approve the funding plan that would be used to pay the state’s share of expanded Medicaid coverage.

Lawmakers approved a “provider tax” to be levied against hospitals, over objections from most Republican lawmakers that the vote violated the state Constitution.

The provider tax is designed to cover the state’s match to the federal dollars that will allow AHCCCS expansion.

The GOP lawmakers and allies argue that because the tax vote fell short of the two-thirds supermajority needed to approve a tax, the move was unconstitutional.

They also argue that Brewer’s plan violates the separation of powers because it allows an executive-branch agency, AHCCCS, to set that rate, rather than the Legislature.

Opponents dubbed the bill “Obrewercare” because the federal Affordable Care Act gave states the option to expand their Medicaid programs. Brewer shocked many in the GOP when she announced early this year that she would pursue expansion, urging skeptics to “do the math” and see that it would help not only uninsured Arizonans but also the state’s health-care industry, at no cost to general taxpayers.

Brewer, along with her supporters, is asking Judge Katherine Cooper to dismiss the lawsuit, arguing that none of the plaintiffs have proper legal standing to challenge the policy move.

Hospitals have such standing, but they are not suing. In fact, many of Arizona’s hospitals and health-care providers are strong supporters of Brewer’s plan, which they believe will ease the crush of uninsured patients who crowd their emergency rooms.

In court filings, attorneys for Brewer and the state’s AHCCCS director argue that their opponents are turning to the courts to settle a political dispute.

“Courts cannot, and should not, become involved in internal, legislative disputes,” they wrote.

The lawsuit followed after opponents failed to gather enough signatures this past summer to refer the matter to the ballot.

The case, Biggs vs. Brewer, will be heard at 3 p.m. in Maricopa County Superior Court.

Regardless of Judge Cooper’s decision, which is not expected immediately, both sides anticipate appeals, prolonging the legal battle.