Pin Getty Images

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Public distribution of birth control has long been a heated political issue. The recent Hobby Lobby case unleashed a fresh wave of moral indignation from supporters and protestors alike. What's more, the clear gender divide in the Supreme Court justices' ruling seems only to have strengthened pop-culture claims that female contraception is controversial precisely because it is attached to women's health. As the saying goes, "If men got pregnant, we'd have gumball dispensers for birth control"—or something like that.

Most Popular

Leaving morality aside, the male justices' ruling for Hobby Lobby raises the question: Just how much does the average man know about female contraception? Moreover, are men actually aware of its financial cost? Former legislator Rick Santorum's 2012 gaffe comes to mind, when he claimed birth control "costs a few dollars."

While the price tag for unsubsidized female contraception is readily available—news organizations have repeatedly publicized it—its everyday impact seems to be somehow lost on most males. So many moral fissions are attached to female contraception as to remove it entirely from the realm of consumer items. Perhaps it is time to reinstate birth control as a product—something that, yes, can contribute to an individual's health and well-being, but also requires a substantial financial commitment from women.

To break down how much birth control actually costs in terms of the items themselves, we translated the prices into tangible (and yes, stereotypical) "guy stuff," comparing the prices to other everyday items to make it more relatable.

This is what it means for a woman to purchase unsubsidized birth control. The yearly price of the pill could cover 3-15 months of energy bills. A birth control implant is roughly the price of 7-14 tanks of gas. Staying within the category of contraception products, an IUD1

is equal to approximately 900-1,800 condoms. That is 2-4 years of sex daily.

Birth control is a prescribed item, a surgical procedure. Its status as such ought to warrant the security of insurance coverage. Its price-points certainly make it necessary.

1. One of the forms of birth control taken off The Affordable Care Act's required provisions by the Hobby Lobby ruling.

2. Contraception prices.

3. Includes unsubsidized price of doctor's visit, device, insertion, and follow-up care

4. Includes doctor's visit, device, and insertion

5. Emergency contraception price.

Related: 10 Medical Reasons Why a Woman Might Be Prescribed Birth Control

Related: Lena Dunham Opens Twitter Discussion About Why We Use Birth Control

Related: The Birth Control Pill Has Become a Widely Prescribed Cure-All...But What About the Drawbacks?