Massachusetts’ largest nonprofit health plans lost millions of dollars on operations last year as they covered expensive new drugs and paid to roll out the federal Affordable Care Act.

The biggest loss came at Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts, the state’s largest commercial insurer, based in Boston. Blue Cross reported an operating loss of $119 million, up from a $17 million loss the year before. The insurer, however, ended 2014 with a net gains of $8 million, thanks to income from investments. Blue Cross controls 40 percent of the state’s commercial market.

Advertisement

“Our taxes and fees went up by $109 million from one year to the next,” said Allen Maltz, chief financial officer at Blue Cross. “This is part of the revenue that they’re taking to cover the cost of Obamacare.”

Harvard Pilgrim Health Care of Wellesley, the second-biggest insurer in Massachusetts, also cited the Affordable Care Act costs in reporting an operating loss of $18 million, reversing a profit of $1 million in 2013. Fallon Health’s operating loss increased to nearly $12 million in 2014, from a loss of less than $3 million the year before, the Worcester insurer reported.

Watertown-based Tufts Health Plan was the sole large Massachusetts insurer to report an operating profit. Tufts said it earned $7 million, up from $4 million the year before, but said the gain came from business that was phased out and no longer exists

Like Blue Cross, the other major health plans ended 2014 with net gains because of income from investments or other sources.

In addition to new taxes and fees, the insurers said they faced unanticipated costs because of problems with Massachusetts’ online health insurance exchange, the Health Connector. The connector website was broken for many months, forcing state officials and insurers to scramble to place people in appropriate plans.

Advertisement

Additionally, smaller health plans that manage care for patients on Medicaid, the government program for people with low incomes, struggled with losses because of what they said was inadequate state funding.

Another factor contributing to operating losses were pricey drugs — namely, Sovaldi, a breakthrough treatment for hepatitis C that costs $1,000 a pill, or $84,000 for a full regimen. Another hepatitis C treatment, Harvoni, is priced at $94,500 per treatment.

Industry specialists said they expect more costly medicines to hit the market in the years ahead.