Record flooding left damage to the Forest Acres community, Columbia, S.C., Oct. 5, 2015. The South Carolina National Guard has been activated to support state and county emergency management agencies and local first responders as historic flooding impacts counties statewide. Currently, more than 1,100 South Carolina National Guard members have been activated in response to the floods. (U.S. Air National Guard photo by Tech. Sgt. Jorge Intriago/Released)

COLUMBIA The South Carolina House Ways and Means Committee will meet this afternoon with several state agencies to discuss flood recovery and assessment.

The departments of Health and Human Services, Mental Health, Health & Environmental Control, Disabilities and Special Needs and Social Services will meet with the Ways and Means Healthcare Subcommittee.

The meeting will be held after a press conference from Gov. Nikki Haley where she is expected to make a “flood relief announcement,” according to a press release sent Sunday afternoon.

Agencies have not yet tallied up the total amount of damage done during the October floods. Some estimates have put state Department of Transportation still damage to state roads and bridges upward of $1 billion.

Also today, subcommittees of the Education Oversight Committee will meet to discuss the budget request for improvement mechanisms tools for improving accountability and public awareness.

The Judicial Merit Selection Commission will hold meetings all week to screen eligible judges for the state Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, Circuit Court, Family Court and Administrative Law Court.

Chief Justice Jean Toal will retire next month and incoming Chief Justice Costa Pleicones has announced he will retire in December 2016.

The commission will vet five men and women for a seat on the Supreme Court on Monday, as well as candidates for seats on several other courts.

Headlines making news this morning:

Charleston given the cold shoulder by most GOP contenders (The Post and Courier)

More S.C. voters support deputy than student in Spring Valley incident (The State)

Pension problems: South Carolina officials hope to get retirement fund investments back on track (The Post and Courier)

Environmentalists, S.C. coastal Republicans agree on Atlantic drilling — don’t (The Post and Courier)

S.C., U.S. should honor La’Darious, Chester’s boy hero (The Herald of Rock Hill)

Joe Riley: No regrets, no endorsement (The Post and Courier)

Free rides to the polls offered on Tuesday (WCSC)

Myrtle Beach attempting to increase diversity among city staff (The Sun News)

Bill Murray Shows Anthony Bourdain the Beauty of Charleston, South Carolina (The Daily Beast)

Presidential race 2016:

Cruz tells crowd he has big plans for the first day as president (The Sun News)

Syrian refugee policy takes focus in US 2016 politics (The Associated Press)

Clinton and the other Democratic presidential candidates in debate decline to use term ‘radical Islam’ (FOX News)

Analysis: Paris highlights Clinton’s foreign policy record (The Associated Press)

Sen. Lindsey Graham losing support in home state polls (The Greenville News)

With no lake view, what happens to home values? (The State)

Bob Jones University returns to the presidential political scene (The Greenville News)

Ryan Favors Legal Status for Immigrants Trump Wants to Send Home (Bloomberg News)

Can Bernie Sanders get his mojo back? (CNN)

Reach Maya T. Prabhu at (843) 509-8933.