Vice President Joe Biden and his wife, Jill, are celebrating St. Patrick's Day today in Northeastern Pennsylvania.

Biden and his wife landed at Wilkes-Barre/Scranton International Airport early this afternoon and began a tour of the area.

Jill Biden spoke at a Dress for Success event in Scranton this afternoon.

Pointing to several empty seats at her table, Clarks Summit resident Louise Powell McLafferty joked that she was saving spots for Joe Biden.

"He can sit right here," she said, patting the seat next to her.

The Vice President did not join the Second Lady, but the hundreds gathered at the Radisson at Lackawanna Station Hotel, were not disappointed.

"We are our sisters' keepers," Jill Biden said during her address, describing a women's mentoring program she started at the community college where she teaches.

The program is impacting that community the way Dress for Success Worldwide and the local branches have helped others with clothing, as well as career training programs.

"Dress for Success Lackawanna is making such a difference," she said.

Her husband is speaking at the Greater Pittston Friendly Sons of St. Patrick dinner tonight at the Woodlands in Plains Township.

Biden visits Moosic diner

Vice President Joe Biden arrived at Terry's Diner in Moosic, Pa., about 3:15 p.m. Monday. He greeted customers at the front of the dinner and worked his way to the back room, shaking hands and posing for photographs. He then met with seven people working to sign up others for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act before the March 31 enrollment deadline. "Hey Dianna," Biden said to Dianna Ashford, a certified application counselor with the Rural Health Corporation of Northeast Pennsylvania, shaking her hand. "Thanks for taking to time to do this," Biden said as he sat down a the table with the seven participants. "So far, things are moving pretty well after getting off to a slow start with the website." Biden said he wanted to talk about "what it is that has worked and hasn't worked" and "what you think we should be doing." He noted more than 4 million Americans have enrolled in health insurance plans through the federal and state exchanges since Oct. 1. After March 31, Americans without health care plans will have to pay a penalty. The cost of health insurance for most young adults is probably less than what they pay for cell phone service, Biden added. The others at the table were: Laura Long, Certified Application Counselor, Wayne Memorial Community Health Centers Belinda Opeil, Certified Application Counselor, Scranton Primary Health Care Center, Inc. Dr. John Szarek, Professor and Director of Clinical Pharmacology, The Commonwealth Medical College Danae DiRocco, Student, The Commonwealth Medical College Kristina Zimmerman, Student, The Commonwealth Medical College Tom McHugh, Navigator, The Advocacy Alliance

On Twitter:

@rbrownTT Rebekah Brown is covering the Dress for Success event:

is at the airport and has background on Biden's fondness for his home region: @BorysBlogTT Borys Krawczeniuk

@cvmikebuffer Mike Buffer is with the vice president this afternoon and at the dinner tonight:

Jim Halpin is covering the dinner: @cvjimhalpin

Tweets from https://twitter.com/CitizensVoice/biden-visit