For a second year in a row, U.S. Rep. Lynn Jenkins has introduced legislation granting Medicare beneficiaries more leeway in choosing an audiologist.

H.R. 2519, the Audiology Patient Choice Act of 2015, will allow seniors with a suspected hearing disorder to seek treatment directly from an audiologist under Medicare. Currently, Medicare users must receive a recommendation from a physician before seeking treatment from an audiologist.

“Common sense says that everyone, seniors included, should be able to choose their audiologist,” Jenkins, a Republican, said in a statement.

Jenkins argues that the legislation will expand the number of audiologists seniors can choose from and alleviate a burden on the nation’s shrinking number of physicians.

“This bill would expand the available pool of audiologists without reducing the quality of care available, and is important to helping tackle the healthcare professional shortages we see around the nation,” Jenkins said.

The bill is co-sponsored by U.S. Rep. Matt Cartwright, a Democrat from Pennsylvania.

"This bi-partisan, common-sense legislation will ensure that older Americans have the same freedom of choice and access to safe audiologic care," Cartwright said in a statement.

On July 31, 2014, Jenkins and Cartwright introduced the Audiology Patient Choice Act of 2014. The legislation was referred to several committees, including the House Energy and Commerce Committee and House Ways and Means Committee, but didn’t make it out of either panel.

“Congresswoman Jenkins will continue to build support this Congress and hopefully this important, sensible legislation will receive the attention it deserves to expand access and choice for seniors,” Tom Brandt, Jenkins’ communications director, said Friday.

H.R. 2519 has been referred to the Energy and Commerce Committee, in addition to the Ways and Means Committee.

If signed into law, the 2015 legislation would apply to audiologic care after Jan. 1, 2016. The bill has the support of several audiology groups, such as the Academy of Doctors of Audiology.

“This legislation will foster exceptional patient outcomes within Medicare, and it will do so in a manner that is fiscally responsible and functionally sustainable,” ADA president Kim Cavitt said in a statement Friday.