Photo: Associated Press The flurry of activity surrounding fall enrollments and the accompanying benefits for January 1 has died down, and it’s time to step back for a moment and consider issues to address this year. How will your organization address these 16 issues for 2016? 1. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is a gift that will not stop giving, and this year will be no exception. A cottage industry has sprung up surrounding compliance and reporting requirements. Are your clients in good shape there? Additionally, the Cadillac tax is beginning to loom large as even the most cost-controlled employer plans project to be into tax territory within 10 years. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

2. Non-retiring boomers are staying in the workforce beyond their “normal” retirement age due to various factors. But the benefits we provide have diminishing value after 65, and need to be made more relevant.

4. Building voluntary expertise is an issue for brokers whose focus has been on medical benefits. As emphasis on voluntary grows, so grows the need to build or partner to gain expertise.

6. How can nontraditional voluntary services add value for us? A diverse employee population demands a diversity of voluntary options, not all traditional. Remember, a smart phone is more important to many millennials than a car.

8. Why do employees too often “dis” disability protection? Many of us believe that disability protection is the most valuable benefit and yet many employees overlook purchasing disability income protection in favor of products with a much lower potential value. How can we make a better business case for this essential product?

10. How will the election affect our business? ‘Nuff said on this by the talking head news folks. Discuss among yourselves.

12. The economy continues to offer challenges and uncertainty to both employer and employee customers. This affects the benefits an employer offers, and how they are funded.