Brewers outfielder Gerardo Parra reacts after striking out Thursday against the Cardinals. Credit: Associated Press

Now that the Brewers finally put to bed their ugly and damaging nine-game losing streak, they will try to avoid joining some not-so-select company.

Since divisional play began in 1969 in Major League Baseball, only four teams failed to make the playoffs after leading their division for at least 150 days: the 1969 Chicago Cubs, 2007 New York Mets, 2008 Arizona Diamondbacks and 2009 Detroit Tigers.

Should that fate also befall the Brewers, who had been in first place since April 5 until a skid that saw them losing nine in a row, you have to wonder what the consequences would be for the decision-makers in the baseball operations department.

Would general manager Doug Melvin's job be in jeopardy? Would the blame fall more on manager Ron Roenicke? Recent club history suggests a head or two might roll.

While watching the Brewers implode, it was difficult not to think about the final weeks of the 2008 season. On Sept. 1, the Brewers were flying high, coming off a 20-7 August that gave them a five-game lead in the National League wild-card race. At that point, Ned Yost was a candidate for NL manager of the year.

Two weeks later, Yost was out of a job. He paid the price for a two-week tailspin in which the Brewers went 3-11, the final straw being an ugly four-game sweep by the Phillies in Philadelphia. Team principal owner Mark Attanasio wasn't about to let the team's first playoff berth in 26 years slip away via a continued meltdown.

Under interim manager Dale Sveum, the Brewers battled through injuries in their starting rotation to go 7-5 over their remaining 12 games to claim the wild-card berth, getting a big assist on the final day of the season when the Florida Marlins beat the New York Mets. We'll never know how it would have played out had Yost remained at the club's helm.

It's one thing to put your wild-card status in jeopardy. It's another to lead the division for five months and then not even claim what wasn't available in 2008 — the second wild-card berth. Should that happen with the Brewers, it's difficult to believe everyone's job would be safe.

All of which makes the final three weeks of the season critical to the future of the franchise. If the Brewers manage to regroup and make the playoffs — even the less-palatable second wild-card berth that puts you in a one-game showdown on the road — it would ease the pain of watching the division title slip away.

What made the collapse more alarming is that it was team-wide. The starting pitching slipped badly, an overworked bullpen further frayed, the offense vanished and — here's the real head-scratcher — defensive gaffes became commonplace.

"It takes a lot of components working to win," Melvin said. "It's not just one thing. We haven't played well overall.

"We've put ourselves in the position of having to win head-to-head matchups but it was going to come down to that anyway. It's still going to come down to the final week. It usually does."

We interrupt the speculation about consequences for failing to make the playoffs to ask these questions: What if this whole 150-game thing was a mirage? What if the Brewers merely were a decent team that got off to a fantastic start? What if the only reason they led the NL Central for so long was because the Cardinals took longer than usual to get their act together?

Since opening the season on a 20-7 burst, the Brewers have been a losing team. Entering Saturday, they had gone 54-60 since tearing through what was expected to be a difficult early season schedule.

The Brewers have managed only two extended stretches of winning since that hot start. From June 16-28, they won 10 of 13 games to improve to 51-32 — the high-water mark for the season. From Aug. 5-19, they won 10 of 14 to move to 71-55.

The first surge was followed immediately by a horrible stretch going into and out of the all-star break in which the Brewers lost 13 of 16. The second surge also was followed by a prolonged slide during which the Brewers lost 12 of 14 games, including nine in a row.

It is extremely difficult for a team to be so erratic and win its division, no matter how long you occupy first place. After going 18-10 in June, the Brewers slipped to 9-16 in July, 13-14 in August and 1-4 in September entering Saturday.

The team that blew by the Brewers — the Cardinals — never seems to run out of gas in the late going. Once the calendar flips to September, they find another gear and start cranking out victories.

One of the oldest adages in baseball is you can't cheat the 162-game season. The schedule eventually separates contenders from pretenders. The Brewers have three weeks to show on which side of that fence they belong.

Looking for heroes

Roenicke constantly said during his team's skid that somebody needed to step up and do something big. When the Cardinals were foundering in late August, veteran slugger Matt Holliday, the team's No.3 hitter, got hot and lifted the team on his shoulders until others joined in and got things headed in the right direction.

The Brewers' offensive issues started right at the top of the batting order, where Carlos Gomez, Jonathan Lucroy and Ryan Braun have held the first three spots for most of the season. After strong first halves that landed Gomez and Lucroy on the NL all-star squad, those three players suffered drops in production.

At the break, Gomez was hitting .304 with 14 home runs and 48 RBI, with a .370 on-base percentage and .510 slugging percentage. Now sidelined with a sprained wrist, Gomez has batted .234 since that point with 7 home runs, 17 RBI, a .299 OBP and .411 slugging percentage.

Lucroy was batting .315 at the break with 9 home runs, 44 RBI, a .385 OBP and .494 slugging. Since then, he has hit .268 with four homers, 18 RBI, a .328 OBP and .440 slugging percentage while paying a physical toll for catching a ton of innings.

Braun fought through a chronic thumb issue in the first half to bat .298 with 11 home runs, 52 RBI, a .348 OBP and .515 slugging percentage. Since the break, he is batting .233 with seven homers, 25 RBI, a .286 OBP and .411 slugging percentage while continuing to deal with the ailing thumb.

The Brewers aren't getting anything out of the bottom of the batting order, either. But Gomez, Lucroy and Braun are counted on to be dynamic offensive performers and it would be a huge lift if any or all of them get hot again over the final three weeks.

Bleeding Brewers blue

As the Brewers' amateur scouting director, Bruce Seid had high hopes every year for each of his draft picks, whether selected in the first round or 33rd round.

"He would say every player in the draft is going to play in the big leagues," Melvin said.

"We used to joke with him and laugh about it but he'd say, 'I want to think that way. I want to think that every player that we draft is going to play in the big leagues. That's what my scouts think and that's what I think.'"

You can't buy that kind of dedication, optimism and loyalty, and that's what the Brewers lost when Seid died unexpectedly last week at 53. Seid breathed and bled Brewers blue, spending endless hours seeking talent with the sole purpose of helping the big-league club at some point.

Seid had big shoes to fill when he replaced Jack Zduriencik, the Brewers' former amateur scouting director who left in 2008 to become general manager of the Seattle Mariners. Seid's first draft in '09 had issues at the top, with No. 1 pick EricArnett — taken one spot below Mike Trout — quickly flaming out and others such as Kentrail Davis, Kyle Heckathorn and Max Walla spinning their wheels.

But Seid and his staff found leftfielder Khris Davis in the seventh round that year, second baseman Scooter Gennett in the 16th round and right-hander Mike Fiers in the 22nd round. All three have been solid contributors for the Brewers this season.

Seid died hours before Jason Rogers, a 32nd-round draft pick in 2010 out of Columbus State University, collected his first big-league hit, a double at Wrigley Field.

"I was really emotional about it," said Rogers, who was told by Melvin after the game that Seid had passed away. "I saw him about three weeks before I got up here in Colorado. He was a big part of my success. He was a dedicated, loyal man."

The Brewers' farm system has been ranked low for several years by those who grade such things, citing overall lack of depth of highly rated prospects. Well, there were good reasons for the system being a bit thin. Prince Fielder, Rickie Weeks, Corey Hart, Yovani Gallardo, Braun and Lucroy all advanced to the majors within a few years of each other — a haul that any big-league club would have coveted.

Other top prospects were dealt away in trades for CC Sabathia, Zack Greinke and Shaun Marcum. Still, the Brewers were not given much credit for the prospects they did have — nobody gave good marks to Davis, Gennett or Fiers — and Seid took that slight personally. It even took awhile for Jimmy Nelson to be rated a top minor-league prospect.

"He took the criticism very hard whenever rankings came out and said we had the 28th-best organization or whatever. That hurt him," Melvin said. "He never got a lot of credit and he took it very personal. We used to have to talk him off the ledge all the time.

"Every team misses on some guys in the draft, but Bruce found a lot of good ones. He would never give up on players. I was a scouting director. You live and breathe with those guys you draft. Farm directors, too.

"Bruce loved the game and the people he worked with. And he loved his players. He worked very hard at his job. He was a good person, fun to be around. He loved the game."

And he will be missed.

PLAYERS OF THE WEEK

MLB: Phillies LHP Cole Hamels and others

Hamels and three relief pitchers combined to no-hit the Atlanta Braves on Monday at Turner Field. Hamels went the first six innings and Jake Diekman, Ken Giles and Jonathan Papelbon pitched an inning each to finish off the gem. It was the 12th no-hitter in Phillies history.

BREWERS: RHP Mike Fiers

Fiers was a stopper in every sense of the word Friday night, making a strong start to help the Brewers end a horrific nine-game losing streak. Fiers allowed only two runs in 62/3 innings in a 6-2 victory and is 5-1 with a 1.94 ERA in six starts since joining the rotation.

WEEK AHEAD

Royals at Tigers: Monday-Wednesday. Clash atop the AL Central.

Braves at Nationals: Monday-Wednesday. Big chance for Atlanta.

A's at Mariners: Friday-Sunday. Mariners in wild-card hunt.

Dodgers at Giants: Friday-Sunday. Giants keep pressing Dodgers.

BREWERS THIS WEEK

The Brewers' final long home stand of the season continues with four games against the Miami Marlins and MVP candidate Giancarlo Stanton. The Cincinnati Reds then come to town for a three-game weekend series.

DID YOU KNOW?

Chicago Cubs rookie Javier Baez had four-strikeout games four times in his first 30 games in the majors. During 22 seasons and 2,992 games in the majors, that's how many four-strikeout games Willie Mays had.

YOU FIGURE IT OUT

In what might be a preview of the American League wild-card game, Seattle's Felix Hernandez squared off against Oakland's Jon Lester on Wednesday at O.co Coliseum. Hernandez out-pitched Lester in a tense 2-1 victory.

"I felt good today. I was pounding the strike zone, and that was the difference," Hernandez said.

"I knew going in against Lester it would be tough. It was special. It was a big game."

King Felix always seems to have big games against the A's. He improved to 6-0 with a 1.98 ERA in his last 11 starts in Oakland, and for his career he's 19-7 with a 2.35 ERA in 35 career starts against the A's.

QUOTABLE

"I gotta tell you, hearing 'Hells Bells' again gave me a charge." — Trevor Hoffman, after being inducted into the Padres' Hall of Fame

MINOR LEAGUE REPORT

CLASS AAA NASHVILLE

RHP Taylor Jungmann went 3-1 with a 1.80 ERA in six starts in August. In 35 innings, he struck out 42 batters while holding opponents to a .181 batting average.

CLASS AA HUNTSVILLE

RHP Drew Gagnon went 11-6 with a 3.96 ERA in 28 starts with only 135 hits allowed in 1542/3 innings. Gagnon walked 62 and struck out 118 hitters.

CLASS A BREVARD COUNTY

INF Nathan Orf became the latest minor-leaguer to play every position in the Manatees' final game Sunday. He began behind the plate as the catcher and worked his way around the diamond to finish at pitcher against Dunedin. Orf retired the only batter he faced in the 7-3 loss before leaving to a standing ovation.

CLASS A WISCONSIN

C Clint Coulter finished with a .287 batting average, 22 home runs and 89 RBI with a .410 OBP and .930 OPS.

ROOKIE HELENA

In the final game of the season, 3B Dustin DeMuth went 2 for 5 with two RBI to finish with a .333 batting average and .396 on-base percentage.

ROOKIE ARIZONA

C Matt Martin, a 27th-round draft pick in June out of Wake Forest, batted .311 in 28 games with a .427 OBP.

Send email to thaudricourt@journalsentinel.com