Ted Cruz warms the holiday hearts of his young daughters with a heart-warming tale of Obamacare in this still from a recent campaign video.

The Washington Post published this cartoon depicting Sen. Ted Cruz as an organ grinder and his daughters as trained monkeys -- then later conceded it was out of bounds.

Ted Cruz warms the holiday hearts of his young daughters with a heart-warming tale of Obamacare in this still from a recent campaign video.

The Washington Post published this cartoon depicting Sen. Ted Cruz as an organ grinder and his daughters as trained monkeys -- then later conceded it was out of bounds.

This feedback forum is designed to give readers a way to voice criticisms and compliments or ask questions about The Californian's news coverage.

This week we’re skipping readers’ questions.

I guess I’m in good company today. Two weeks after fielding complaints about a political cartoon we published earlier this month depicting the NRA as a bunch of terrorists -- a reference to the San Bernardino jihadists’ easy access to AR-15 semi-automatic rifles -- the Washington Post is taking a beating for a cartoon depicting Sen. Ted Cruz’s daughters as organ-grinder monkeys.

Regular readers of this column will know that political cartoons are often a target of criticism because they boil down arguments into images that necessarily lack much nuance or context. They simply hit you over the head. The good ones do, anyway. The misfires often do, too, now that I think about it.

The Post cartoon in question was one of those misfires. The animated cartoon, by Pulitzer Prize winner Ann Telnaes, put the Republican presidential candidate from Texas in a Santa suit and had him turning a jack-in-the-box-style crank. “Ted Cruz uses his kids as political props,“ read the caption. The reference was to a campaign video in which Cruz, snuggled on the sofa with his family, reads his young daughters such timeless classics as “How Obamacare Stole Christmas” and “Rudolph the Underemployed Reindeer.” It’s actually funny and pretty well done.

Telnaes seemed to be saying -- and she spelled it out later, in response to criticism -- that if candidates choose to use their children in campaign advertisements or other appearances, they relinquish the kids-are-off-limits protection that the media usually afford them.

And one can understand that logic.

The problem is, Cruz is not the first politician to parade his adorable family in front of cameras. Virtually everyone does it at some point, and there’s a good reason for it: It has a humanizing effect. Americans aren’t just electing a president, they’re electing a leadership package that includes family. Barack Obama has allowed us to glimpse his girls, as has George W. Bush, and Hillary Clinton is doing something similar now in a new ad featuring husband Bill and their new grand baby. It’s part of a campaign called “7 things Hillary Clinton has in common with your abuela.” We won’t hold our breath waiting for the Clintons to take heat over that one.

The reason the off-limits rule is usually honored -- and should be honored -- is that children are completely without culpability in these matters, and they can’t fight back.

I’m a great believer in fair comment, but I can’t fault the Post for retracting the cartoon. It singles out Cruz for something everyone else gets away with, and does so in an unnecessarily unkind way. Monkeys?

The ironic side plot here is that Cruz has been one of the most vocal critics of “the liberal media.” That sorry excuse for a debate in November, hosted ham-handedly by CNBC, provided great fodder. Now we’ve got the Post’s controversial cartoon. Cruz has played this theme expertly, so it’s no wonder he’s closing fast on Donald Trump.

•••

Thanks to everyone who purchased (or asked for) a copy of my new book, “The Bakersfield Sound: How a Generation of Displaced Okies Revolutionized American Music.” I was expecting a good response but nothing like this.

It’s the No. 1 seller at the Bakersfield Barnes & Noble -- and apparently by a pretty substantial margin. Management tells me it’s outselling the likes of Bill O’Reilly and Stephen King, both of whom have relatively new releases in the local top five, by a margin of roughly 15 to 1 each.

I had a book signing at B&N Wednesday evening. When I walked in 15 minutes before the scheduled 5 p.m. event and saw the line I assumed the baristas at the in-store Starbucks were having trouble with the espresso machine. Nope. B&N is already deep into its fourth shipment of the book.

Last I checked, “The Bakersfield Sound” was No. 1 on Amazon.com in the country-music genre. It tops even Colin Escott’s new “I Saw the Light,” a repackaged re-release of his excellent Hank Williams biography of 2004. “I Saw the Light” has been made into a major motion picture set for release in March. That’s fast company.

“The Bakersfield Sound” is also available at The Bakersfield Californian, Russo’s Books, Crystal Palace, Bakersfield Music Hall of Fame, Kern County Museum -- call first because they might be sold out -- as well as Boo Boo Records in San Luis Obispo and the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum in Nashville, or at www.bakersfield.com/TheBakersfieldSound online.

Thank you to everyone for the incredibly generous and warm reception. I'm bracing for the post-Christmas reviews. And accepting pitches for the screenplay version.

Executive Editor Robert Price and The Californian welcome your comments and suggestions. To offer your input by phone, please call 395-7649 and leave your comments in a voice-mail message or send an email to soundoff@bakersfield.com. Please include your name and phone number. Phone numbers and addresses won’t be published.