Recently an article by the Associated Press was published in our Daily Camera entitled “Blacks wary of University of Colorado dental school.” An internal review committee of the climate at the Dental School believes that there is an unwelcoming climate for underrepresented minority groups (URM); and faculty do not treat these minority groups equal to the white majority.

As an associate clinical professor in surgical dentistry since 1991, I strongly disagree with their interpretation of that investigation. I am writing this as an individual; not representing the school.

The review alludes that our student body does not mirror the college graduate pool from where our students are chosen. The present number of minority students currently at CU stands at 28 percent up from 13 percent in 2004. The CU School of Dental Medicine attracts and accepts minorities at a higher rate than averages found at other Dental schools.

Claims made by Dr. Eugene Brooks, an associate professor, contain inaccurate numbers with regards to numbers of minority students at the school. It appears that he was the person who brought these claims to The Denver Post in February of this year and last Thursday became front page ‘news.’

Advertisement

I know hundreds, both professors and students alike, who have not experienced, nor seen, racism here at the school. The faculty does not treat individuals differently, except for those that are unprepared for the tasks at hand. The faculty enjoy working with those better prepared, in contrast to those that barely try. I doubt that at the school that has anything to do with ones race.

The report admits there was no calculation of so-called unprofessional behaviors or disparaging remarks nor did they poll the entire school; nor did they seek to verify students reported accounts. The Student Climate Survey was not assessed school wide; nor did it determine how respondents were affected by previous media reports which lacked documented findings and in some cases published inaccurate data.

Apparently to some at the University of Colorado it is more important to chose candidates that represent a state or national demographic (URM), rather than their past academic achievements. I find it interesting that these criteria do not seem to be a necessity for some brought to the university to fill our athletic teams.

Boulder