By Paul Schwartzman

To the catalogue of anxieties her patients explore during therapy — marriage, children and careers — psychologist Alison Howard is now listening to a new source of stress: the political rise of Donald Trump.

One patient talked at length about being disturbed that Trump can be so divisive and popular at the same time, said Howard, who practices in Washington, D.C.

“He has stirred people up,” she said. “We’ve been told our whole lives not to say bad things about people, to not be bullies, to not ostracize people based on their skin color. We have these social mores, and he breaks all of them and he’s successful. And people are wondering how he gets away with it.”

Hand-wringing over Trump’s rapid climb is now palpable among everyday Americans, growing ever more anxious over the prospect of the billionaire reaching the White House. A recent Washington Post/ ABC News poll showed that 69 percent of Americans said the idea of “President Trump” made them anxious.

Trump-inspired angst is apparently sufficient that on Super Tuesday, as he was piling up victories, Google recorded a 350 percent increase in users submitting the question, “How can I move to Canada?”

Amanda Long, an Arlington, Virginia, massage therapist, is not among those fantasizing about escape. But she has grown accustomed in recent weeks to clients lying down on her table and bellowing, “Can you believe this guy?”

Long allows her clients to vent for a few minutes before she tries to quiet them, if only so they can relax and she can attend to their aches.

“It stresses me out to listen to it,” she said. “I can’t give you a good massage if I’m grabbing your shoulders like Donald Trump’s orange face.”

The assassination of Abraham Lincoln. Pearl Harbor. The rise of Joe McCarthy in the 1950s. The Cuban missile crisis. The slaying of John Kennedy. Richard Nixon’s resignation. The Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Americans are not unacquainted with anxious moments.

What makes Trump distinct is that he’s “a demagogue who has become a vessel for peoples’ anxiety and anger,” said Michael Kazin, a Georgetown University history professor.

Judith Schweiger Levy, a Manhattan psychologist, has noticed a recent uptick in Trump references among her patients, including a middle-aged businesswoman who blurted out this week that her sister is supporting the billionaire.

“She was so upset and worried that she could have a sister — someone so close to her — who would have zero problem with Trump,” Levy said. “Another patient — also a woman — all she could talk about was Trump and how he’s crazy and frightening.”

Ruminating on Trump’s effect, Levy said: “Part of the reason he makes people so anxious is that he has no anxiety himself. It’s frightening. I’m starting to feel anxious just talking about him.”