EASTVIEW, TN (WCBI)-This year’s lottery is more than half a billion dollars.

The 900 million dollar jackpot is drawing in large crowds at convenient stores where tickets are being sold.

However, according to powerball.com, Mississippi is one of four states that does not participate in the Powerball drawing.

But, that isn’t stopping Mississippians from crossing the state line to get their hands on a ticket, just ask Jeffrey Anderson.

Anderson made a two hour drive to Tennessee, and then stood in line for over an hour just to get his tickets.

“I thought about it all last night,” he said. “I woke up at 5 this morning to get an early start on it, because I feel like I’m going to be the next big winner right here in Tennessee, coming from Columbus.”

But Anderson wasn’t the only Mississippian in Tennessee on Saturday.

According to powerball.com, Mississippi is one of four states that doesn’t sell powerball tickets.

And that isn’t sitting well with most people.

“I wish they did, I wouldn’t have to drive so far,” Aberdeen resident Jovoni Jones said.

“I wish they would, because look at the money that everybody is bringing to Tennessee to buy them, that money Tennessee is making off of us, it seems like it’d be better,” Baldwyn resident Brad Gann said.

“Tennessee is getting all of the tax revenue,” Baldwyn resident Ryan Way said.

However, that still didn’t stop Jones from making a trip across the state line.

“Yea, I got to take my chances, everybody else taking there’s, might as well take mine too,” he said.

In fact, Jones said this is his second time this week making the trip.

“I bought 10 yesterday, I’ll try my luck with another 10 today, and cash in on my scratch off and buy 10 more,” he said.

However, the chances of winning the big jackpot is slim.

According to CNN, the odds of winning are one in 292 million.

But those chances aren’t stopping these Mississippians from playing or making the trip.

“Somebody came to me and told me I was gone win, so Ima take the number’s they gave me and run with him,” Jones said.

And some already have plans if they do hit the lotto.

“Take care of my family first, might take a good vacation, then find myself a pretty woman,” Way said.

This year’s prize of 900 million dollars is the biggest lottery jackpot in U-S History.

The drawing to announce the lucky winner will take place tonight at 11P-M eastern time.