Humana (HUM) and Cigna (CI) shares rose Tuesday on expectations that Aetna (AET) may make an offer, amid a broad trend toward consolidation in the health sector.

Following an investor meeting with Aetna, Leerink Partners analyst Anagha Gupte said a deal is likely and that “cheap debt” makes either an Aetna-Humana merger or an Aetna-Cigna pairing “meaningfully accretive possibilities and imminent,” according to reports, with Aetna potentially offering $200 per share for Humana.

Shares of Humana were up 3% on the stock market today. Cigna was up 2.5%, and Aetna 0.8%. Among other managed health care providers, Molina Healthcare (MOH) advanced 2.5%, hitting an all-time high, and Wellcare Health Plans (WCG) climbed 2%.

Leerink also raised its price target for Aetna to 135 from 130 and maintained an outperform rating on the Hartford, Conn.-based company, which reaffirmed its 2015 operating EPS forecast of $7.20-$7.40, largely below consensus for $7.38, and said it’s targeting low double-digit operating EPS growth long-term. The company also believes it can achieve at least $10 in operating EPS in 2018. Analysts see $10.12.

Consolidation has been sweeping across the health industry as insurers, hospitals, pharmacy benefit managers and other providers seek scale and pricing power as the government becomes a bigger player.

In March, UnitedHealth (UNH) announced a $12 billion acquisition of pharmacy benefit manager Catamaran (CTRX). In February, Rite Aid (RAD) announced it would buy independent PBM EnvisionRx for $2 billion.

Last August, Walgreens (WBA) agreed to pay $15.3 billion for the part of European pharmacy giant Alliance Boots that it didn’t already own.

Hospitals are also looking to expand their services to help cut costs and bring in higher-paying patients. In March, Tenet Healthcare (THC) agreed to form a joint venture with United Surgical Partners International.

Their combined short-stay surgery and imaging-center assets will create the largest U.S. provider of ambulatory surgery.

Follow James DeTar on Twitter: @IBD_JDeTar .