Reprinted from REPORT ON MEDICARE COMPLIANCE , the nation's leading source of news and strategic information on Medicare compliance, Stark and other big-dollar issues of concern to health care compliance officers. Sign up for a $92 two-month trial subscription today .

A wave of settlements with the HHS Office of Inspector General (OIG) over excluded employees is a cautionary tale for health care organizations, even as they face stumbling blocks in their exclusion screening. In the last four months of 2015, 21 health care organizations resolved civil monetary penalty (CMP) cases for employing people who had been thrown out of federal health care programs, with settlement amounts ranging from $24,128 to $21 million (see box, p. 3). OIG has intensified its enforcement of CMP and exclusion cases with its “litigation team” (RMC 7/27/15, p. 1), and state Medicaid agencies are cracking down on exclusions. But there are still imperfections in the screening process that are exacerbated by the fact that sometimes employees are oblivious to their exclusions or try to pull the wool over their employers’ eyes, lawyers say.

Exclusion screening “is the painful cost of doing business, but it’s important that you do it and not take shortcuts,” said attorney Mary Malone, with Hancock, Daniel, Johnson & Nagle, at a Jan. 25 webinar sponsored by the Health Care Compliance Association.

The implications of billing for services provided by excluded employees and contractors were set out by OIG in its 2013 bulletin on exclusions (RMC 5/13/13, p. 1). According to OIG, no federal health care program payment will be made for goods or services provided by an excluded person or entity or at the medical direction or on the prescription of an excluded person, regardless of payment methodology (e.g., DRGs, cost reports, fee schedules, bundled payments, capitation). This includes direct care, such as physicians’ services, and indirect care, such as preparing surgical trays and reviewing treatment plans. Excluded persons also are forbidden to furnish “administrative and management services that are payable by the Federal health care programs,” the bulletin says. That means excluded people can’t serve in executive or leadership roles, such as CEO, CFO, general counsel, director of health information management or physician practice office manager.

Ensuring excluded people and vendors are kept at bay can be harder than it sounds, Malone said. Sometimes it’s because the employees didn’t know they were excluded. OIG is required by law to notify people and entities they have been excluded by sending letters to their last known address, but OIG is not obligated to confirm they were received, said attorney W. Clay Landa, with Hancock, Daniel, Johnson & Nagle, who also spoke at the webinar. What an excluded person doesn’t know can hurt future employers, he said.

For example, Malone represented a hospital that settled a CMP case over a certified coder who worked there for nearly a dozen years before her exclusion came to OIG’s attention. Neither the hospital nor the coder was aware of it. The exclusion was unrelated to the employee’s work as a coder, but resulted from a plea deal the coder entered into at the urging of her attorney when she was working in a clinical position in another facility years earlier. The coder was unaware the plea would affect her license or cause Medicare exclusion. The coder lived with her parents at the time, and they all said they never got an exclusion letter. After “reinventing herself” as a coder, she got married and took a job in the hospital’s billing office, Malone said. Years after the criminal case, the hospital was surprised to learn she was persona non grata with Medicare, although OIG wouldn’t reveal how it found out, Malone said. Even though the hospital has a screening program, it didn’t detect the coder’s exclusion. “She was screened every month for 11 years, and it never came up because” she was excluded under her maiden name and screened with her married name. To arrive at a CMP settlement amount, OIG had the hospital look at payer mix and determine how much time the coder spent working on federal health care payer claims. The hospital then paid the corresponding amount of her compensation multiplied by 11-plus years.

Try Searching LEIE With Three Letters

The hospital’s missing the exclusion because of a name change underscores the importance of looking more than skin deep at OIG’s exclusion database, the List of Excluded Individuals and Entities (LEIE). There are two ways for health care organizations to search the LEIE, Landa said. One option: Download the entire database every month, merge it with your employee and vendor list and see what pops out. “The downloadable files don’t have Social Security numbers or employee identification numbers, but they have dates of birth,” Malone said. “Any potential matches have to be verified.”

The second option: Health care organizations enter employee and vendor names on the OIG website, five at a time, to see if any match, although this approach “is not operationally possible” for larger organizations, according to Malone and Landa. They tend to hire screening vendors, Landa said. “It’s helpful but won’t protect providers from liability if the vendor makes mistakes and doesn’t identify an excluded employee working within the health system,” Malone noted.

Whichever route health care organizations take, they can’t assume they’re home free with searches based on one version of the name. Malone advised running variations of the name — maiden, married and hyphenated — through the LEIE. Keep in mind that employees who know they are excluded may try to evade detection. “Consider entering only a few letters of the [last] name to get an accurate result,” such as “Smi” instead of “Smith,” Landa said. When you have a possible match, use the Social Security number to nail it down.

The LEIE is not foolproof. One Virginia nursing home client got an OIG repayment demand because it had an employed nurse on the exclusion list. Although the nurse was, in fact, on the LEIE, she shouldn’t have been. While working in New York state, the nurse had a board of nursing hearing, but it went well, and her license was intact, Malone said. Loss of license is a driving force behind exclusions, but in this case the exclusion was a mistake, and Malone said it all ended well. The experience was a wake-up call for the nursing home to screen employees for exclusions, she noted.

Sometimes health care organizations are duped by employees who know they’re excluded. That was the case with a certified coder who was brought into a hospital billing department through a staffing company that was responsible for exclusion screening, Malone said. As it turns out, she was a paroled felon. The coder was good at her job, but she was perceived as a troublemaker, clashing with her supervisor, who felt the coder insinuated the supervisor had compliance problems. The charade ended when someone who knew the coder called the hospital and spilled the beans about the coder’s stint in prison for fraudulent billing in a previous job and her subsequent exclusion. She managed to conceal it from the hospital in terms of tax forms and the background check by changing one digit of her Social Security number, but it’s inexplicable why the billing company didn’t detect the exclusion, Malone said. “This woman was a professional criminal,” she noted. “She knew how to work the system and how to avoid detection.”

Hospitals have more than OIG to worry about when it comes to exclusions. Many states require providers to screen for Medicaid exclusions, and 39 states have their own lists to check for excluded employees/vendors, Landa said. “Providers may just be checking the LEIE, but states can have exclusions, and OIG is not required to exclude a person from Medicare based on a state exclusion,” Landa said. However, under the Affordable Care Act, it’s all for one and one for all in terms of Medicaid: When one state excludes, they all must exclude, if providers are “excluded for cause,” he said. What “cause” means is a little fuzzy, although CMS has indicated that “cause” includes adverse licensure actions, fraud, billing for services that were not furnished or medically necessary, misusing a billing number and falsifying information on applications or medical records, Landa said.

CMS told states in 2009 to require Medicaid providers to screen for exclusions monthly, and the majority of states followed suit, Malone said. “But there is still confusion and a lack of consistency in the frequency,” she noted. “Our suggestion is, whether the state requires it or not, screen every 30 days to ensure you are catching updates.” That’s consistent with the recommendation in OIG’s 2013 exclusion guidance.

When health care organizations identify an excluded employee or vendor, they don’t necessarily have to spill their guts to OIG, Landa contended. “There is no affirmative obligation to report an excluded provider” under the CMP law. They are obliged, however, to return overpayments stemming from exclusions within 60 days of identification, according to the 60-day Medicare overpayment refund rule, he noted. Some health care organizations take that route. “We know facilities that adjust their cost report and state, ‘we are removing the salary associated with the excluded provider,’” Landa explained. Of course, if OIG finds out about exclusion, it may levy a CMP, with the health care organization losing the benefits of self-disclosure.

According to the Self-Disclosure Protocol (SDP), which OIG updated in 2013 (RMC 4/22/13, p. 1), health care organizations that come clean about potential misconduct probably avoid corporate integrity agreements and settle CMP cases for reduced amounts — generally a 1.5 multiplier on damages. If it’s an exclusion matter, Landa said, submissions to the SDP should:

Explain how the exclusion was discovered by the health care organization and why it was overlooked initially.

Describe the screening program. “Don’t fall into the category where OIG thinks you stuck your head in the sand,” he advised.

Show how the employment of an excluded person was an anomaly.

Update policies and procedures to ensure exclusions are identified.

© 2016 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Read insightful articles and strategies on inpatient and outpatient billing, Stark, physician documentation, and other big-dollar issues of concern to health care compliance officers each week with your own subscription to Report on Medicare Compliance. Get more information and sign up for a $92 two-month trial subscription today!