Yahoo CEO Marissa Mayer at a conference in June. Bloomberg News

Yahoo announced shaky earnings on Tuesday. The company posted a loss for the period, as the cost of acquiring traffic jumped sharply to $200.2 million from $43.8 million in the year-earlier period.

But there were some positive signs in the company’s effort to turn around its ad business. Here are a few points from Yahoo’s earnings call marketers should note.

Mobile, video and native ads are a growing part of Yahoo’s business.

Revenue from “Mavens”, or mobile, video, native and social ads, is growing. Mavens revenue made up about 32% of the company’s total during the second quarter, growing 60% year-on-year to nearly $400 million. (Overall revenue, minus commissions paid to partners for Web traffic, edged higher in the second quarter.)

“We believe these areas are the future of Yahoo, and we remain committed to their growth,” said Yahoo CEO Marissa Mayer.

Programmatic sales are hurting Yahoo’s ad business less.

The average price-per-ad on the display side of Yahoo’s business was up 10% during the quarter. According to Ms. Mayer, that’s because it sold fewer ads through automated, or “programmatic” channels. “We saw great participation across our homepage, sponsorships, and high-priced ads that aren’t sold programatically,” she said.

In addition, the ads that were sold through Yahoo’s programmatic ad tools had more stable pricing, Ms. Mayer said. And finally, Yahoo has begun handing unsold ad space to third-party exchanges to sell on its behalf.

Yahoo expects to pay more money to ad partners.

Thanks to its ad network businesses including BrightRoll, Flurry and Gemini, the company expects to increase the amount of money it pays out to partners for space on their sites and apps. It expects its overall traffic acquisition costs to reach between $230 million and $270 million during the third quarter, up from $200 million during the second quarter.

Search is still a focus for the company, especially in mobile.

New formats such as video and native ads are of growing importance for Yahoo, but search still represents a significant part of its business. Ms. Mayer said the company would continue to invest in mobile search specifically, however, noting that rival companies already seem to have desktop search figured out.

“There’s not a lot of room left for innovation [in desktop search]. We think search innovation is going to come on the mobile side,” she said.

Yahoo has a large and growing mobile user base.

Internet users are rapidly migrating to mobile, and Yahoo thinks it’s well positioned to capitalize. Its sites and services now attract 600 million monthly active users through mobile devices, Ms. Mayer said, and its mobile user base grew 14% during the second quarter on a year-over-year basis.