Southeast Polk district office employees joined school kitchen staff in serving Thanksgiving lunch Nov. 19. The lunch menu included creamed turkey, mashed potatoes, stuffing, green beans, jello mix, a roll, and pumpkin pie. (Photo: Mark Davitt, www.davittphotography.photoshelter.com)

Before we rush to the supermarket and give thanks for the bounty, let’s vow to waste less of what we put in our shopping carts and on our plates.

Food waste is a global problem. It occurs all along the food chain. But each of us can do our part, and solving it can help alleviate other problems such as hunger and environmental destruction.

This fall, Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack and other federal officials announced the nation’s first national food loss and waste goal, calling for a 50 percent reduction by 2030. The numbers are staggering. The USDA says 30-40 percent of the food supply is wasted, the equivalent of 1,249 calories per American per day.

The impact is huge. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that 21 percent of all municipal solid waste is food. The cost includes the wasted water, soil, gasoline and other resources used to grow, ship and store that food. And rotting food produces methane, a greenhouse gas.

The USDA and the EPA are recruiting farms, food manufacturers, grocery stores, restaurants, schools, local governments and others to join the effort to reduce, recover and recycle food. The EPA is offering organizations technical assistance to help them achieve food waste goals and incentives to donate food to the needy.

Such efforts are laudable, but really solving the problem will require something as monumental as Norman Borlaug’s Green Revolution, which boosted wheat yields and saved Asian nations from widespread famine.

The problem is different now. Per Pinstrup-Andersen, a former World Food Prize laureate, notes that many developing nations have surpluses of grain. The problem often occurs in getting that grain from farm to market to mouths.

Yet efforts at solving global hunger continue to focus first on producing more. The priority should be on wasting less.

Experts have proposed several recommendations to cut food waste, including:

Doing audits to identify where the losses and waste are happening in the food chain.

Investing in on-farm storage and other infrastructure.

Increasing tax deductions for farmers or processors to encourage them to donate food to the needy.

Eliminating confusing labels. Many “sell by” and “best by” dates are guidelines. Some are aimed at retailers, some at consumers, and they aren't necessarily connected to food safety. Retailers could sell products approaching date limits at a discount, instead of throwing them out.

Changing consumer behavior. Retailers encourage waste through practices such as 2-for-1 discounts or bulk discounts, which entices consumers to buy more than they can use. Retailers and consumers can also embrace the ugly apple — or at least less-than-perfect-looking produce.

Clearly, the answer requires more than just being creative with leftover turkey and stuffing. But that’s a great, and delicious, way to start.

HOW TO REDUCE WASTE

Fighting food waste is an old battle for some generations. The USDA launched food-waste campaigns during World War I and II, and some of the advice still applies: “serve just enough, save what will keep.” The agency has also adopted new tools, including a smartphone app called FoodKeeper that offers cooking and storage tips, sends expiration reminders, and a 24/7 virtual expert to answer questions. Food Tank, a think tank that focuses on the food system, has compiled a list of 13 other apps that connect farmers, retailers, consumers and donors to reduce food waste.

Here are other tips from the EPA on reducing food waste:

Shop your refrigerator first. Cook or eat what you already have at home before buying more.

Plan your menu before you go shopping and buy only those things on your menu.

Buy only what you realistically need and will use. Buying in bulk only saves money if you are able to use the food before it spoils.

Be creative. If safe and healthy, use the edible parts of food that you normally do not eat. For example, stale bread can be used to make croutons and beet tops can be sautèed for a side dish.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1HlvTwa