Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now . All rights reserved.

The Tucson Police Department released new reports Friday about its ongoing massage parlor investigation.On April 9, Tucson News Now first learned of alleged illicit activity that led to the suspension of four Tucson Police officers, plus a fifth who ultimately resigned before being terminated.Since then, the story has grown considerably.A lot of people and outside agencies such as the Arizona Department of Public Safety have joined the investigation.Friday evening, we learned even more: 14 people identified in these reports as quite possibly paying for sex at illegal massage parlors in Tucson.The latest round of documents are graphic, lewd and extremely disturbing.They speak to a four-year sting surrounding unlicensed parlors, described by city officials as a criminal enterprise investigation."This is a much more sophisticated operation which we are seeing across the country now," Tucson Police Chief Roberto Villasenor said Monday.What makes this investigation a little different, however, are the people potentially involved on both ends.Not only the pimps and prostitutes who advertise their services online, oftentimes through websites such as Backpage.com , but also the alleged Johns receiving sex for money.Many of them, these documents suggest, work for some of the most respected employers in Tucson.That includes the U.S. Air Force, agents with the Border Patrol, at least two local fire departments, one pastor from a local church and an employee from a private school in Oro Valley.Monday, TPD Chief Villasenor spoke publicly about the topic for the first time, an investigation that includes at least four of his own officers on paid leave, pending the outcome of an ongoing DPS investigation."They're supposed to be upholding the law, not breaking it," said Frank Collins, a concerned local resident. "That's what we expect of them. We are paying them (public servants) for that."Earlier in the week, Tucson News Now talked to the lawyer of the woman accused of running unlicensed massage parlors in at least three locations.She emphasized no charges have been filed against her client. And in her opinion, this entire investigation is a waste of time and taxpayer money."Spend those resources and get every hooker off the street," Tucson attorney Cornelia Honchar said. "When you have willing participants all around, what is the enormous social harm?"But those who live close to the suspected brothels see things differently."Well it's prostitution like they say ... it's illegal, period," Collins said, shaking his head. "Paying for sex is prostitution. It's not a massage."We'd like to point out, once again, nobody has been charged with a crime. That's why we're not identifying anybody by name in these reports.According to one city attorney, who said he will not bring forth charges based on the evidence he's been presented with, "The men interviewed provided circumstantial corroboration of the suspected criminal activity."However, the city attorney added, "Crucial specifics of their involvement," (such as who, when, where and how much?) "were often vague or entirely absent."The investigation continues.