Eleventh congressional district U.S. Rep Michael Grimm visited with Diana Petrone, left, owner at Not Just Bagels on Staten Island earlier this month. Kevin Hagen for The Wall Street Journal

U.S. Rep. Michael Grimm is set to roll out a new campaign ad Friday featuring a Superstorm Sandy survivor, placing a bet that the endorsement will resonate with voters in his hard-hit Staten Island district.

The emotional television ad, “There for Us,” comes almost two years after the October 2012 superstorm and touts Mr. Grimm’s hands-on approach to the disaster as he fights to hold onto his seat against Democratic challenger Domenic Recchia.

At the heart of the 30-second spot is Patricia Dresch, a Staten Island resident whose teenage daughter and husband were killed in the storm.

“Congressman Grimm was at my bedside,” Ms. Dresch says in the ad. Ms. Dresch, 53, was also the first in the city to receive a federally funded buyout of her home last year, and is well known on Staten Island.

“If he says he’s gonna go out there and fight to get the money to help these people on Staten Island, he’s gonna do it,” Ms. Dresch says in the ad. “And he did.”

Mr. Grimm, who represents the 11th Congressional district encompassing Staten Island and parts of Brooklyn, was indicted in April on tax fraud and other charges related to an Upper East Side restaurant he once owned. He has pleaded not guilty and vowed to fight the charges.

The campaign ad works to highlight Mr. Grimm’s constituent services in the tightly knit Staten Island district. The congressman said Ms. Dresch “symbolized all the victims of Sandy.”

“The Pat Dresch story is just so profound,” Mr. Grimm said in a phone interview Thursday.

“When I made her a promise, that really was what I kept thinking of when I was fighting for the money,” he said of the federal Sandy-relief funds.

Mr. Grimm added that he and his staff regularly “drop in” and have dinner with Ms. Dresch and gifted her with a rescue dog “so she wouldn’t be lonely.”

Ms. Dresch couldn’t be reached for comment Thursday.

The Recchia campaign released an ad Wednesday attacking Mr. Grimm over his criminal indictment and noted he may have to step down if convicted.

“Which do you want?” the voice in the TV ad asks. “Someone who will be stepping down, or someone who will be stepping up?”