The kids would come in late at night to the emergency room where I worked, their breath frighteningly short, the eyes of their parents wide with fear. It was an asthma attack, more often than not, another child fighting to breathe because the family ran out of medicine when they lost their insurance.

Those were the nights that pushed me, and many advocates like me, into asking for change through the All Kids Covered Coalition. We fought for better insurance coverage for children living in poverty in Colorado. And our political leaders listened. Our state emerged as a leader in ensuring access to medical care for our poorest residents.

In 2005, 15 percent of children in the state were uninsured. Since then, the number has dropped to 2.5 percent. The percentage of children among our growing immigrant population enrolled in Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program grew from 70 percent in 2008 to 84 percent in 2013.

Sadly, child poverty continues to spread — in our cities, in isolated rural pockets and, increasingly, in suburbs. And poverty is toxic. In Denver County, 22 percent of children live below the federal poverty line.

Every day, physicians see kids hacking with asthma in emergency rooms, kids with mouthfuls of cavities in too much pain to do well in school, babies failing to gain weight because of inadequate nutrition. We understand the sad truth: Poor kids on average get sicker than other kids. This week, the American Academy of Pediatrics issued a report detailing the effects of poverty on children’s health, and the overwhelming evidence that, unless they are given tools to mitigate their poverty — like government-provided health care — many of them will likely be sick for the rest of their lives.

That is why we must finish what we started in Colorado. Getting all kids insured — and keeping them insured — is one of the most important first steps we can take to keep them healthy. Once a parent knows they can get to a clinic without fear of financial disaster, they receive dental care, regular checkups, and vaccines. Additionally, we can get them other supports we know improve health, like affordable preschool, better housing, mental health services, and family counseling. The key is to get them in the door.

There are several ways to ensure those doors remain open for all of Colorado’s children. First, we need to address fears among immigrants that enrolling in these programs could expose them to deportation. Second, we need to standardize the maze of forms and requirements across the state’s 64 counties to enroll in Medicaid.

Lawmakers should continue state funding, due to expire at the end of this fiscal year, that keeps Medicaid reimbursements for primary care providers aligned with Medicare rates. The Affordable Care Act raised Medicaid reimbursements, greatly enhancing the likelihood that children could receive services, including vaccines and annual well-child checks, according to the Urban Institute. Colorado lawmakers did the right thing by approving state funding to sustain that payment for primary care services, after the federal funds ran out. If those fair payments disappear, the ability of physicians to serve low-income families will be significantly impacted.

Additionally, Colorado lawmakers can help families by moving the Hospital Provider Fee from under the TABOR cap to a constitutionally allowable enterprise fund. This would allow for all the programs that help children and families rise out of poverty to grow and expand while protecting and reimbursing all health care facilities for their uncompensated care.

If we continue to work together to cement the gains we have made in Colorado in combating child poverty, we will see fewer children in our emergency rooms and many more growing up healthy at home.

Steve Federico is a pediatrician in Denver and a past president of the Colorado chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.