By Marilyn Tavenner

Fall is a wonderful time of year. Changing leaves. Cooler weather. It’s also the season for people with Medicare to review their current Medicare coverage, as Medicare open enrollment has begun.

As we manage Medicare open enrollment, which ends Dec. 7, Medicare wants everyone to know that quality continues to improve both in the Medicare Advantage and in the Part D prescription drug programs.

Each year, plan costs and coverage can change. During open enrollment, senior citizens and people with disabilities across the country have the opportunity to review their current Medicare coverage and see if they want to make any changes for the next year. It’s important for people with Medicare to take the time to make sure their current health care coverage still meets their health care needs best.

To help people choose a plan, Medicare calculates plan “star ratings” for Medicare health and prescription drug plans. Each plan gets a number of stars, on a scale of one to five — with five being the best — based on quality and performance. These ratings are designed to help people with Medicare, their families and caregivers to compare plans, premiums and benefits.

This year, people with Medicare who choose to enroll in a Medicare health or prescription drug plan will have access to more high-rated, four- and five-star plans than ever before.

Approximately 60 percent of Medicare Advantage enrollees are in a Medicare Advantage plan that earned four or five stars in 2015, compared to an estimated 17 percent back in 2009. Likewise, about 53 percent of Part D enrollees are enrolled in stand-alone prescription drug plans with four or five stars for 2015, compared to just 16 percent in 2009. Since the Affordable Care Act has passed and is now law, enrollment in Medicare Advantage will increase to 42 percent, to an all-time high of more than 16 million enrollees and Medicare Advantage premiums will decrease by 6 percent.

For people with Medicare, this is good news in how they receive care. Plans that are rated higher deliver a high level of care, such as improving the coordination of care, managing diabetes or other chronic conditions more efficiently, screening for and preventing illnesses, making sure people get much-needed prescription drugs or get appointments and care quickly. A high rating also means these plans give better customer service, with fewer patient complaints or long waits for care.

People who have Medicare and need assistance can visit Medicare.gov, call 1-800-MEDICARE (1-800-633-4227), or contact their State Health Insurance Assistance Program (SHIP). People who have Medicare health care coverage should have received the 2015 “Medicare & You” handbook and important notices from their current plan, Medicare or Social Security about changes to their coverage. People who are satisfied with their current coverage don’t need to do a thing.

Better quality in Medicare health and prescription drug plans isn’t the only good news for people with Medicare. For most senior citizens who have Original Medicare, the 2015 Part B monthly premium will stay unchanged for a second consecutive year at $104.90. This means more of senior citizens’ retirement income and any increase in Social Security benefits will stay in their pockets. The Part B deductible will stay the same, as well.

Medicare is working hard to make sure this good news continues so that senior citizens and people with disabilities will continue to get the health care coverage they deserve.

Marilyn Tavenner is administrator for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, an agency of the United States Department of Health and Human Services.

Follow The Times of Trenton on Twitter @TimesofTrenton. Find The Times of Trenton on Facebook.