McKee Medical Center hosts Loveland Community Day of Dance for Your Health with a Dr. Seuss theme

Members of the Bohemian Caravan Dance Company dance with several audience members during the Loveland Community Day of Dance for your Health fair Saturday at Loveland High School. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Zakiyah Zeiter wanted to get her Who-hair.

The 8-year-old Loveland girl got the beauty salon treatment in the Loveland High School cafeteria Saturday that started with a plastic cup with her hair piled on top and a few ribbons and pipe cleaners adding in color.

"I thought it would be cool how it's all high up," Zakiyah said.

Breezy Matthews, 12, of Fort Collins got the same hair treatment with some face painting.

"It feels like I'm balancing something on my head," Breezy said.

The Who-hair was one of nine Whoville children's activities during the Loveland Community Day of Dance for Your Health fair, hosted by the McKee Medical Center at the school cafeteria and gymnasium. The Dr. Seuss theme and focus on movement and exercise changed up the annual health fair, which combined with the Spirit of Women Day of Dance event, centered on heart health.

Shaylee Spears, 8, right, and Genevieve Karpiel, 8, bottom left, play a miniature golf game with other children at the Horizon Laboratory booth during the Loveland Community Day of Dance for your Health event Saturday at Loveland High School. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The four-hour health fair had a turnout of more than 1,000 people and included dance demonstrations and lessons, games and give-aways, hands-on exhibits and information booths. The demonstrations and lessons were in yoga, tai chi, Zumba, country line dancing, square dancing, jazzercise and belly dancing.

The venue changed from the hospital's conference center to the school to provide more space for the booths and dance demonstrations.

Unlike in past years, the event featured fewer screenings with more of an emphasis on prevention and healthy lifestyle changes through diet and exercise. The screenings that were available were for topics like hearing, balance and spinal and lung function.

Advertisement

"It's really aimed at lifestyle — a lifestyle focused on exercise and movement," said Paul Matthews, public relations director of the McKee Medical Center. "It gives people an incentive and inspiration to live a healthy lifestyle."

At the booth for Dawson Chiropractic: A Creating Wellness Center, staff, dressed in Cat in the Hat top hats and as Thing 1 and Thing 2, took photographs of people's posture for a spinal assessment.

"Posture is a good indicator of how your overall spinal health is," said Ericka Joiner, chiropractic assistant. "How you carry yourself indicates how your spine and nervous system are able to handle stress."

Connect Hearing conducted free hearing screenings to determine if a complete hearing test and evaluation is needed.

"A lot of people don't think they have hearing loss," said Myra Camarena, patient care coordinator at Connect Hearing, adding that adults should have their hearing checked every two years.

Over at the booth for Touchstone Health Partners, Chris Fine had cutout mood bears that children could color with a strip of paper containing different facial expressions to slide through each bear's face.

"It's a good way for kids to express themselves," said Fine, development specialist at Touchstone. "It's a good way to say I'm not feeling great right now, or I'm feeling awesome."

The Loveland Public Library had a booth with Who-related activities that promoted movement, in addition to reading. One of the activities called Horton Hears a Who? required wearing safety glasses and with a few head movements getting a slinky to stack up in one pile.

"It was way harder than I thought it was going to be," said Lance Baatz of Windsor, who finished the exercise in three minutes "while my kids looked on in embarrassment."

The Who activities emphasized fitness and coordination, Kathleen Dowd, library aide, said.

"Since we're not dancing here, we'll do other things to get them moving," Dowd said. "Reading is great, but we need to move."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm