WASHINGTON — Backed by both Oklahoma senators, Suzanne Mitchell and Scott Palk sailed through a hearing Wednesday before the Senate Judiciary Committee on their nominations to be federal judges for the western half of the state.

Mitchell, now a U.S. magistrate judge in Oklahoma City, and Palk, an assistant dean at the University of Oklahoma law school, answered questions about legal issues and their professional experience.

The two, who were nominated by President Barack Obama in December to fill two vacancies in Oklahoma's western district, were part of a panel of five U.S. district court nominees — all of whom are noncontroversial and would likely be confirmed quickly in a nonpresidential election year.

Sen. James Lankford, R-Oklahoma City, who introduced Mitchell and Palk to the committee on Wednesday, said later that he thinks the two will be advanced by the committee and confirmed by the full Senate this year.

Republicans, who control the Senate, have been slow-walking all judicial nominations, and have refused even to hold hearings for U.S. Supreme Court nominee Merrick Garland.

Sen. Mike Lee, R-Utah, who presided over the hearing on Wednesday, gave no timetables or assurances that the committee would vote on whether to send their nominations to the full Senate.

Sen. Christopher Coons, D-Del., told the nominees, “I know that all of you have been waiting for months for your nomination to be considered by this committee. I regret that the Judiciary Committee has not convened for a nominations hearing since January.”

There are currently 79 judicial vacancies in the United States, and 28 are considered emergencies, Coons said.

The White House didn't help the cause of Mitchell and Palk.

Lankford and Sen. Jim Inhofe, R-Tulsa, agreed to back them last summer, but the White House didn't get their nominations to the Senate until December.

Inhofe said Wednesday that both of the nominees had received strong support in Oklahoma.

Lankford said, “Suzanne's and Scott's background and work in Oklahoma make them uniquely qualified to serve our state as federal judges. I believe they are devoted to public service and will uphold both the rule of law and integrity of the court.”

Both sides of the bench

The nominees faced no tough questions about their judicial beliefs. They were asked, though not pinned down, about Congress' power to regulate commerce among the states — a huge issue in one of the Affordable Care Act suits decided by the Supreme Court — and pros and cons of dismissing lawsuits early in the process.

Senators also asked about how their experience would help them as district judges.

Mitchell, who worked on appeals for the U.S. attorney's office in Oklahoma City before becoming a magistrate in 2013, said she had learned much from the other judges in the Western District, which is based in Oklahoma City.

“I've also been able to develop what is considered — from what I hear from my colleagues and the litigants who appear before me — to be a satisfactory judicial temperament,” she said.

“I have established a pretty efficient docket. I really respect the time of the parties. As a public servant that I've been for a significant amount of time, I understand from both sides of the bench that being timely and punctual and making decisions as quickly and as thoughtfully as possible is essential to that.

“Probably the biggest challenge I'd face — but that I think I would be ready for — is a much more broad spectrum of cases that would come before me.”

A native of New York who got her law degree from Georgetown University, Mitchell was a clerk for former federal appeals court judge Robert Henry. Henry, now president of Oklahoma City University, attended the hearing on Wednesday. Mitchell said it was because of Henry that she “went to Oklahoma, stayed in Oklahoma and am so proud to be there.”

Passion for fairness

Palk said his 20 years as a state and federal prosecutor “has instilled in me a passion for fairness.” He said he believed in a mantra at OU's law school that “you learn to love justice more than you love victory.”

Palk got his law degree at OU in 1992 and returned there in 2012 to become the assistant dean of students.

“I have so enjoyed working with the students at OU law,” he told the committee.

"I have such great faith in the future of our leadership, the students that we have. It's been inspirational in many ways. They are so much more sophisticated and bright than I recall being when I was a student.”