A victory in Salt Lake City isn’t going to extend the season for the Colorado football team. But it could be a big boost for the Buffaloes as they head to the offseason.

CU (4-8, 1-7 Pac-12) plays its season finale Saturday at Utah (8-3, 5-3), seeking to give its 15 seniors a career-capping victory and trying to send its underclassmen into the offseason with momentum.

“No doubt, I want to be able to go home to my family and friends and just know that we ended the season with a win and we didn’t back down,” said junior defensive lineman Jordan Carrell. “They’re going to talk about this game leading into next year, so we have to end on a good note and I know we can.”

Junior tight end Sean Irwin came to Boulder with many of the seniors and said it means a lot to him to send them out on a winning note. The seniors who have been with the Buffs four years are just 11-37, and those that have been in Boulder for five years are 14-47.

“I feel for them,” Irwin said. “We need this win, need it bad.”

A win might mean more to CU’s underclassmen than it would to the seniors, though.

This was a season that started with so much hope for the Buffs, and yet they come to Utah riding a four-game losing streak.

The Buffs probably face a bowl-or-bust season in 2016, and taking a win into the offseason could be the boost they need.

“It’s just been intense,” Irwin said of the team’s mind-set this week. “It’s all about coming out to practice and winning the game today, and trying to do what we were supposed to do all year.”

Considering their bowl hopes coming into the season, the Buffs underachieved in their minds. Yet several players said they still believe coach Mike MacIntyre and his staff can build the Buffs into a winning program.

“Yeah, absolutely,” senior defensive tackle Justin Solis said. “We’ve been close to beating a lot of good teams and being in a lot of games, and people are really buying into what he’s saying. You can tell with how people practice, how they’re playing.

“We thought this was going to be the year that things were going to get turned around. Unfortunately it hasn’t, but I feel like with the guys they’re bringing in and the guys that are already here, they’re going to have a good senior class next year. They’re definitely on the upward.”

Saturday’s area college games:

Noon UNLV at Wyoming, ROOT

12:30 p.m. Colorado at Utah, PAC-12

7 p.m. Colorado State at Fresno State, CBSSN

8:15 p.m. Air Force at New Mexico, ESPNU