Mike Merrigan (Photo: Submitted photo)

In follow-up to my previous article "Sometimes You Can’t Have Cake," I was able to interview several local leaders regarding work-life balance. In keeping with my prior golf theme, I limited the group to a foursome and also tried to capture the various generations in today’s workplace.

The leaders consisted of Clif Smart, President at Missouri State; Charity Elmer, General Counsel for CoxHealth; Michael Finan, Engineer and General Manager of Ciona (a joint venture of SRC and Deere); and Meghan Chambers, owner of STAXX and Jelly Beans.

Despite their differences in age, occupation and gender, several common themes consistent with the Harvard research quoted in my prior article emerged from the interviews. Their legacy with family and friends is very important to them and drives their successes. For each of them, family is the number one priority. They all have very supportive spouses, some of whom have forgone their own careers in order to raise the children and support their spouse’s career. They all use technology to manage work and stay connected – you can follow Clif on Twitter at @ClifSmart. They are very structured and disciplined in their lives, ranging from Sunday family dinners, the gym at 5:00 a.m. every day, date nights and specific vacation schedules. Lastly, they all make time to read, with their selections including "To Kill a Mockingbird," "1984," "Skyfaring," "Bossypants," and "anything by Jon Krakauer."

I am one of those who also believe that a person’s music preference is a window to the soul, telling us about a person. Therefore, I could not resist asking them "if you could go to any concert by any artist from any era, whom would you choose?"

I also asked them to identify their biggest challenges at work and tell how they manage those challenges. And I asked them what advice they would give to business graduates at a commencement address. Here is what they had to say:

Clif: Elvis. Being the MSU president is a 24/7 responsibility that you can’t just turn off when you want to. In order to manage his schedule, he keeps 2 nights a week free for him and his wife. They also take a week-long vacation out of town every quarter. "Graduates, career was your identity as part of our generation. Work is meaningful and you can get joy from it, but it can’t be everything. Family and friends, service to the community and your relationship with God will provide more meaning."

Charity: 80s hip-hop/rap festival. Healthcare is very challenging right now and getting everything done each day while staying involved with my family is a challenge. To manage this she is very structured and you can always find her in the gym at 5:00 a.m. She is also learning to let go of things and delegate more at work. "Graduates, higher level positions will demand more of your time. You will have to give all of yourself and your integrity will be tested. Working hard and going above and beyond earns you the right to enjoy being home."

Michael: Pearl Jam. Transitioning Ciona from a startup where he was the 4th employee to one that now has 50 in its 3rd year. He uses technology when he travels, sets aside Sundays for family, and does work before everyone gets up and after everyone goes to bed. He also believes that SRC is very family friendly with its policies and family events. The company is really like a family to him. "Graduates, good things and bad things will happen at home and at work. Be honest with yourself and everyone else. Honesty will allow you to celebrate the good days and will get you past the bad days quicker."

Meghan: Michael Jackson. Preparing for the next 90 days of business is crucial to her businesses. Balancing inventory, making sure marketing is on point and preparing the stores for the biggest shopping season is very challenging. To meet these challenges her employees are part of the decision making process, they know the business, the financials are transparent and a family-first culture creates a win-win for everyone. "Graduates, make sure you do something you enjoy and that makes you happy. I can assure you that if you do, your happiness will help enable you to do incredible things within your professional and personal life."

I appreciate the openness and advice from our foursome and hope something in these two articles help you.

Despite the challenges of balancing my family and my career at Mercy, both have provided great meaning for me. I don’t know if there really is such a thing as balance, but somehow we all do our best to make it work. And if you don’t really care for cake, I’ve found that making and eating pancakes with my boys while watching Spiderman and X-Men most Saturday mornings is pretty good too.

Mike Merrigan, J.D., MBA, is a clinical professor in management at Missouri State University. Merrigan, a former vice president and regional general counsel for St. John's Health System and Mercy Health, writes on issues related to health care, including the Affordable Care Act. Email: michaelmerrigan@missouristate.edu.

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1VgYhB3