Obamacare Update: Free Birth Control and Preventive Care for Women





By Tiffany Ayuda

It’s National Women’s Health Week, and there’s no better time for every woman of every age to take the initiative and protect their health. And now, the Affordable Care Act has made it even easier for women to get the proper screenings and care they need — for free.

Yesterday Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) announced steps that close major loopholes for health consumers. All Marketplace plans and many insurers must now cover all important preventive services, such as contraception, well-woman visits, breast cancer screening with mammograms, maternity and newborn care, breastfeeding support and supplies, and screenings for domestic violence — without any out-of-pocket expenses.

Many health insurance companies had failed to meet the federal requirement to cover all approved birth control methods for women without co-payments. The HHS has now made it very clear that insurers must cover the following:

One form of contraception in each of the 18 available birth control methods that the FDA has approved for women. This includes the Pill, the ring, the patch, and intrauterine devices (IUDs).

in each of the 18 available birth control methods that the FDA has approved for women. This includes the Pill, the ring, the patch, and intrauterine devices (IUDs). BRCA screenings , genetic counseling, and BRCA genetic testing for women when their doctor recommends it because they have a family history of breast or ovarian cancer and may carry the cancer susceptibility gene.

genetic counseling, and BRCA genetic testing for women when their doctor recommends it because they have a family history of breast or ovarian cancer and may carry the cancer susceptibility gene. Transgender people are entitled to coverage of preventive services based on the gender they identify with.

are entitled to coverage of preventive services based on the gender they identify with. Pregnancy, preconception, and prenatal care must be covered for dependent children who are under their parents’ plan.

“The Affordable Care Act was a major step forward in helping women get the health care services they need to stay healthy,” Secretary Burwell said. “Tens of millions of women are eligible to receive coverage of recommended preventive services without having to pay a co-pay or deductible, including contraception.”

“Today, we are clarifying these coverage requirements, including access to the full range of contraceptive methods identified by the FDA, access to genetic counseling and testing for the BRCA gene as a preventive tool in the fight against cancer, and access to preventive services for transgender individuals,” she said.

With these new changes, the HHS hopes more women will take advantage of the preventive services and necessary health screenings so they can catch illnesses, like heart disease, diabetes, and breast cancer, earlier and treatments will be more successful.

To learn more about the coverage of preventive services, visit the Department of Health and Human Services FAQs.

Image credit: Alamy