Guard averaged 15.1 points, 4.6 assists in U-18 Euros last year

Thomas Akyazili had some attractive options when contemplating which path to take in his basketball career.

In the end, he decided to become a Colorado Buffalo.

This week, the 6-foot-2 guard from Belgium is expected to sign a national letter of intent to officially become a Buff.

"I think it's the best school for me to grow as a person and a basketball player," Akyazili said in an e-mail interview with Buffzone.com. "I loved everything about the school."

In addition to having other college options — he visited St. John's and was recruited by Creighton, Utah and others — Akyazili was offered a chance to sign a pro contract with the Antwerp Giants.

"I chose Colorado above Antwerp Giants, because it's a chance I will never have again," he said. "I don't want to look back in 10 years and ask myself, 'What if I went to Colorado?' It's all about not having any regrets."

CU spent much of this recruiting cycle trying to land five-star point guard Tyler Dorsey, who ultimately elected to play at Oregon. Akyazili, however, comes to CU with a good amount of experience, a love for the game and an intense desire to compete.

"When I first started playing basketball, I was 6 years old," he said. "My brother was practicing in a small team two streets from where I lived. I wanted to join him and I loved it ever since."

Advertisement

Akyazili has played on Belgium's U-18 national team and averaged 15.1 points, 4.6 assists and 4.1 rebounds during the European Championships in Turkey last summer.

"It was a great experience for me," he said. "I was still 17 and playing against the best 18-year olds in Europe. This was a great opportunity for me to show what I can do."

Going up against college competition won't be a shock to Akyazili. He's currently playing with the Antwerp Giants, who feature several players in their mid-20s and one player who is twice Akyazili's age.

Akyazili is the youngest player on the team. His current teammates include former college stars Kyle Fogg (Arizona), DeAndre Kane (Iowa State) and Ryan Person (George Mason). Kane was an All-American at Iowa State a year ago.

Akyazili said that experience is helping him prepare for playing at CU.

"I followed (college basketball) a lot this season," he said. "I'm playing with some American players on my team. ... They're talking a lot about college basketball, so it's a subject we talk a lot about during meals."

A fan of NBA star Stephen Curry, Akyazili currently leads the Giants in field-goal percentage (63.2 percent), although he's had limited minutes.

Akyazili believes he can be a combo-guard at CU, but sees himself mostly at the point. He's excited to bring his skills to CU, and to see how he can develop as a player.

"I think I'm a good all-around player and I understand the game pretty good," he said. "I have to be more explosive; this will help me in defense and finishing around the basket."

After spending this summer playing with his national team, Akyazili plans to arrive in Boulder in mid-August, and he's excited for the day he joins his CU teammates.

"I really liked the campus, the facilities, the coaches and the team," he said. "I'm really looking forward to it and I'm going to give my all to help this program and to develop in the right way."

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.