- -



BREAKING NEWS

MISSISSIPPI, THE FAILED TEA PARTY STATE:

Last in life expectancy, per capital income, child literacy

November 02, 2014









Emmett Till, a 14-year old black teenager who was kidnapped and brutally murdered in Mississippi in 1955 after reportedly flirting with a white woman. The killers were acquitted at trial and later admitted they had murdered the boy. CLICK TO ENLARGE Emmett Till, a 14-year old black teenager who was kidnapped and brutally murdered in Mississippi in 1955 after reportedly flirting with a white woman. The killers were acquitted at trial and later admitted they had murdered the boy. CLICK TO ENLARGE



In a new Slate piece Bouie rolls out a by-the-numbers look at a poverty ridden, backward, dysfunctional state that looks more like a third world nation run by a tin pot dictator than a plot of land ostensibly run by adults anywhere in America.



Bouie starts off by painting a stark picture of modern day Mississippi that resembles most a Jim Crow state from the 1930's deep south than any place in the U.S. in 2014:



"Driven by its high poverty rate, Mississippi ranks low on health and wellness. It has one the highest rates of obesity, heart disease, and diabetes in the country, as well as the highest mortality rate for infants and adults.



These ills are worst among its black residents: 43.2 percent of Mississippi blacks are afflicted by obesity and its associated problems and 44 percent live at or below the poverty line, compared with a—still high—30.2 percent obesity rate and 16 percent poverty rate for whites. Which is to say that, more than anywhere else, the Affordable Care Act is necessary in Mississippi.



But, as Sarah Varney describes in a vital piece for Politico Magazine, the state’s Tea Party–tinged Republican leadership—including Gov. Phil Bryant—refuses to budge.



Not only did it shutter a state-run private exchange for individuals to purchase health insurance, it refused the Medicaid expansion, which would have extended coverage to those living in desperate poverty. The latter consequence is especially destructive.



As designed, the Affordable Care Act (e.g. Obamacare) provides Medicaid for everyone at or below 133 percent of the poverty line and subsidized private insurance for everyone above. Chief Justice John Roberts and the Supreme Court made the expansion optional, but they failed to extend the subsidies to poorer families, which left a gap. If you’re too poor to qualify for subsidies—but don’t qualify for the present Medicaid program in your state—you’re left in the cold. In Mississippi, this leaves 138,000 residents—most of them black—with no insurance options at all."



Bouie claims it's easy to explain why Mississippi Republicans refuse to work with the ACA: "A hyper-ideological, small government conservatism that disdains social programs and public investment. But it’s worth a look at the history behind that conservatism, which lives strongest in Mississippi but exists throughout the Deep South."



He points out something that few northerners may give a second thought about. Mississippi, which has the largest black population in the country, has a "threadbare" safety net for its citizens and is the state where "slavery was very lucrative and Jim Crow the most vicious."



This is not a coincidence, maintains the author who points out the state as well as the Deep South in general are places where "white supremacy brought a politics of racist antagonism."



For instance, the Civil War was hardly over before Mississippi passed the first of the “Black Codes” that would limit freedom for freed people.



During the civil rights movement of the 1960's, white supremacists "built a network of state and private agencies to wreak havoc on black activists with surveillance, economic reprisals, and extreme violence."



And all of that deeply ingrained history, writes Bouie has carved deep marks in the state's ongoing culture and the ideas of "exclusion," and specifically, of racial hostility to outside interference and public goods are still embedded in the structure of its politics. Public investment isn’t just disdained, "it’s attacked as racially suspect."



The full piece can be found

(NATIONAL) -- What might America look like under a strong Tea Party run White House and U.S. Congress? Simply take a gander at the failed state of Republican/Tea Party controlled Mississippi, says writer Jamelle Bouie.In a newpiece Bouie rolls out a by-the-numbers look at a poverty ridden, backward, dysfunctional state that looks more like a third world nation run by a tin pot dictator than a plot of land ostensibly run by adults anywhere in America.Bouie starts off by painting a stark picture of modern day Mississippi that resembles most a Jim Crow state from the 1930's deep south than any place in the U.S. in 2014:Bouie claims it's easy to explain why Mississippi Republicans refuse to work with the ACA: "A hyper-ideological, small government conservatism that disdains social programs and public investment. But it’s worth a look at the history behind that conservatism, which lives strongest in Mississippi but exists throughout the Deep South."He points out something that few northerners may give a second thought about. Mississippi, which has the largest black population in the country, has a "threadbare" safety net for its citizens and is the state where "slavery was very lucrative and Jim Crow the most vicious."This is not a coincidence, maintains the author who points out the state as well as the Deep South in general are places where "white supremacy brought a politics of racist antagonism."For instance, the Civil War was hardly over before Mississippi passed the first of the “Black Codes” that would limit freedom for freed people.During the civil rights movement of the 1960's, white supremacists "built a network of state and private agencies to wreak havoc on black activists with surveillance, economic reprisals, and extreme violence."And all of that deeply ingrained history, writes Bouie has carved deep marks in the state's ongoing culture and the ideas of "exclusion," and specifically, of racial hostility to outside interference and public goods are still embedded in the structure of its politics. Public investment isn’t just disdained, "it’s attacked as racially suspect."The full piece can be found here









BACK TO



HOME



More Headlines

BREAKING NEWS HUNDREDS OF AMERICAN WRITERS SIGN PETITION OPPOSING CANDIDACY OF DONALD TRUMP TODAY'S CARTOON

By Dan Rosandich PHOTO OF THE DAY:

Selfie boy TWO KIDS INJURED IN FALL FROM WINDOW IN KITSAP COUNTY

Both airlifted to hospital BREMERTON MAN PLEADS GUILTY TO PRODUCTION OF CHILD PORNOGRAPHY

More->