Untapped talent: Fiji and Wellington Phoenix talent Roy Krishna. Photo: Getty Images

Before we look forward to Asia, how about a backward glance to Oceania? Roy Krishna provided a timely reminder in Newcastle at the weekend of the exciting potential lying in wait with his thunderbolt against the Jets. The Fijian international is just the third Pacific Islander to play in the A-League. It's more than an oversight. It's a waste.

Since 2006, of course, Australia has had no obligation to develop Oceania's talent. The move to Asia will eventually transform the game, if it hasn't already. Hopefully Western Sydney Wanderers will be in Morocco this week as Asian champions, and next month the Socceroos will host the Asian Cup. These are seminal moments in our new world order, and Asia in so many ways is the place to be.

But there's more to life than obligation. Australia was a founding member of the Oceania Football Confederation, and apart from a brief separation in the 1970s was the leading light of the OFC for 40 years before the switch to Asia. There have already been generations of historical, emotional, and logistical capital invested in the South Pacific. Why throw it away?

Significantly, when Australia kicked off what became the failed bid for the 2022 World Cup, the first port of call was the OFC. After all, this is our backyard.

Advertisement

Ties have loosened in the past eight years. That's understandable. But the weekly presence of Krishna's club, Wellington Phoenix, on our television screens is proof that the connection hasn't been broken completely. Why not make the most of it?

History has shown, both in the NSL and the A-League, that Australian clubs and their coaches pay only lip service to the potential of players from Oceania. The two rugby codes provide enough evidence of the athletic potential of the Pacific Islanders, with an important distinction. In the rugby codes, it is mostly the Polynesians who excel, whereas in football it is largely the Melanesians. Understand this, and you start to see the possibilities.

In Vanuatu, New Caledonia, Tahiti and the Solomon Islands, football is the national sport. In Fiji and Papua New Guinea it holds its own against the rugby codes. At last count (2006), there were 175,000 registered players within the 14-member OFC, stretching from Micronesia to French Polynesia. A frustrated Krishna, whose chance to become a professional almost passed him by, insists there are plenty more like him around the islands, and he's right.

If A-League clubs were serious about unlocking this potential – and a couple of years ago Graham Arnold trialled two New Caledonian internationals at Central Coast Mariners – they'd send their coaches, or their scouts, to the South Pacific Games in Port Moresby next July. Most likely, they won't. So how do we change the mindset?

The easiest, most obvious, option is for the FFA to offer special dispensation to Pacific Islanders so they don't count as imports in the A-League. I see little enthusiasm inside Whitlam Square for such positive discrimination.

So let's go to the top. The very top. Oceania is one of only six confederations, but FIFA refuses to deal with the most fundamental issue of all. Reserving a place for Oceania at the World Cup.

The argument has always been that Oceania is uncompetitive, and therefore can't justify a place at the World Cup. So make it competitive, by thinking outside the square.

FIFA should fund an A-League team, based in Auckland, thereby providing the finishing school for Oceania's development pathway. This is not the normal remit of FIFA, but then this is a unique problem which after 48 years of empty rhetoric seems no closer to resolution. Sooner or later FIFA needs Oceania to be competitive, or what's the point?

Imagine how quickly the best players from Oceania would improve with the week-to-week experience of the A-League. Imagine, on the back of this, how the various national teams in the South Pacific would benefit from this professional experience.

The FFA wants to expand the A-League, and Auckland is by far the biggest city still outside the competition. FIFA already hands out development grants to the OFC, and funding a professional team offers the best possible development. Of course this falls outside the rule book, but on so many levels it makes sense.

Roy Krishna is not the only decent player in Oceania. Over the years there have been plenty more like him. Players with the instinctive flair, the touch, the pace, which we bemoan is so often missing in the A- League. All that's holding them back is opportunity. With a bit of imagination, the problem is solved and everyone wins.