We haven’t been talking very much about intra-conservative policy debates since the G.O.P. primary campaign, and especially the Trump boom, began in earnest. Over at Bloomberg Politics, Peter Gosselin has a piece up quoting some members of my own “reform conservative” tribe expressing dismay at this, and particularly at the way that Trump is killing off serious policy arguments and turning the G.O.P. primary into an exercise in substance-free showmanship. “To one degree or another,” Gosselin writes, “virtually everyone in [the reformocon] circle of mostly 30-something conservatives interviewed in recent days expressed apprehension that the Republican contest could degenerate into the negative, policy-light brawl of four years ago, something party officials and policy advocates had sought to avoid.”

That does sound pretty bad. But let me dissent a little from this apprehension, and offer somewhat more optimistic take. First, I’m not sure it’s true that Trump’s campaign is substance free: Detail free, maybe, but he’s clearly associated himself with a kind of nationalistic politics that bears some resemblance to the Perot phenomenon, and some resemblance to European right-populism. Trumpism as we know it basically combines broad appeals to American greatness and broad critiques of the political elite with immigration restrictionism, a critique of free trade deals, and a defense of entitlement programs. That’s a combination of ideas that conspicuously lacks support within the nation’s elite … but it’s one that has a fair amount of popular and bipartisan appeal.

It’s also a combination of ideas that appeals to precisely the socioeconomic anxieties that a lot of reform-minded conservatives think the Republican Party needs to do more to address. I’ve written before about the idea that what the G.O.P. and the country need is a kind of “anti-Bloombergism” — a centrist or center-right politics that reflects the concerns of middle American voters rather than a centrism or center-left politics focused on the favored causes of the Acela Corridor’s wealthiest machers. Well, in Trumpism you have the makings of a very literal anti-Bloombergism: A billionaire-led worldview that takes the exact opposite position from the Davos/Aspen crowd on everything from immigration to trade to climate change to entitlement reform.

Now of course as manifested by Trump this anti-Bloombergist spirit is crude, clownish, extreme, politically unrealistic, and so on down the list. And the danger here for reform-minded conservatives is similar to the one I discussed in the context of Mike Huckabee’s “Medicare today, Medicare forever” campaign: That instead of a reform conservatism that devises constructive right-of-center policies that are responsive to populist/Middle American anxieties, you end up with a kind of “anti-reform conservatism” that just basically lies to people about what’s possible, promising mass deportations to immigration critics, endless entitlement spending to seniors, and never reckoning with any kind of trade-offs or dealing in reality at all.

But there’s a real opportunity here for reformers as well. Because so long as a protean, ideologically-flexible figure like Trump is setting the populist agenda in the party, you’re less likely to have stringent ideological tests applied to other candidates and their ideas; so long as the voter anxieties he’s tapping into are front and center in the debate, you’re less likely to see other candidates ignoring those anxieties while chasing support from donors or ideological enforcers instead.

Take a specific issue, health care reform. Here the Republican Party was hamstrung in 2012 by its pure oppositionalism, its felt need to be as anti-Obamacare as possible, which left Romney running on the vaguest of “repeal and replace” conceptions and offering little or nothing to answer the valid anxieties of the uninsured. I’ve been worried that something similar could happen in 2016: That the arguments advanced by Bobby Jindal, to the effect that any reform or replacement that doesn’t turn the clock all the way back to 2008 is a betrayal of True Conservatism, would get traction as the default right-wing and “populist” position, and that other candidates would feel pressure to conform to that line in order to lock down conservative support.

But with Trump as the candidate of populism, promising some vague fantastic Obamacare replacement while mostly talking about other things, candidates like Scott Walker and Marco Rubio have a lot more room to offer realistic health care reforms, as both men have done, that would move the system rightward while also promising wider coverage than the status quo ante Obamacare. And while Jindal still leaped to attack them, he’s polling at 1 percent and nobody particularly cares.

That kind of under-the-radar policy move is not, I admit, equivalent to the kind of exciting policy debate that I’ve been urging the G.O.P. to have (in the increasingly unlikely form of a Rand-versus-Rubio primary contest, or some other fashion). But it suggests a possible future in which reform conservatives win certain policy debates without shots even really being fired; indeed, if Rubio or Walker ends up as the nominee, that’s exactly what will have happened on health care. And you can imagine something similar with other issues — taxes, higher education, poverty — where Rubio has staked out a reformocon position, and where Walker or Jeb or someone else (Fiorina? Kasich?) might yet. (Rick Perry has also been doing some really interesting under-the-radar policy work, though he needs a serious political break to actually get into the race.) Instead of having the populist standard bearer (and his enablers) constantly demanding fealty to the flat tax or some other implausible right-wing ideal, you’ll have Trump’s media dominance creating a kind of space for policy experiments from rival candidates that they might not otherwise feel bold enough to offer.

Then further, you can also imagine Trump’s immigration stance tugging the G.O.P. away from the course its donor class wanted to put it on after 2012, in which the party would embrace comprehensive immigration reform in order to avoid embracing any other kind of policy change on economic issues. Reform conservatives have diverse views on immigration policy, but many of them/us endorse a kind of moderate-restrictionism around low-skilled immigration, a shift toward a more Canadian or Australian model … and there’s very little question that the donorist focus on comprehensive reform is part of a “change on social issues, don’t change on anything else” policy approach that’s pretty much the opposite of where reformocons think the G.O.P. ought to go. So while Trump’s immigration rhetoric is, indeed, doing damage to one possible strategic response to the Republican Party’s 2012 defeat, I’ve never thought much of that response — substantively or politically — and I’m confident that the broader cause of policy reform can survive its abandonment.

Now I’m deliberately being glass-half-full here. It’s possible to imagine Trump’s immigration rhetoric as a kind of poison that makes any kind of non-comprehensive, immigration-limiting approach seem toxic by association. It’s possible to imagine his politics-as-showbiz approach persuading many voters that the G.O.P. is just a clown show whose entire field can be tuned out. And it’s possible — very possible — to imagine his support dropping and an alternative figure like Ted Cruz rising to play more of an ideological-enforcer role against his rivals, in which case there won’t be many reform conservative victories by default.

But just as, watching the debate, I wasn’t persuaded that having Trump in the field was necessarily making the entire G.O.P. field look bad, I’m not persuaded that his rise spells doom for my favored policy reforms either. From a reformocon perspective, Trumpism is a problem and an opportunity at once — which, at the very least, is a lot more than you could have said about what the rise of a Michelle Bachmann or a Herman Cain had to offer reformers at this time four years ago.