Few people would doubt that 2013 was a bad year for President Obama. The president, who convincingly won a second term in 2012, has faced some severe headwinds since his second inauguration nearly a year ago.

With that in mind, CNN has compiled a list of factors that have combined to afflict Mr. Obama with what’s come to be known as the “second-term curse.” CNN cited “Obamacare blues,” “How low can you go?,” “Snowden leaks,” “IRS targeting,” “Stalled agenda” and “Reality versus perception.” I believe the list is on target, but simply listing the variables doesn’t tell the full story.

Mr. Obama hasn’t been able to get much through Congress since his second term started. The president had trouble gaining support for gun-control and immigration-reform legislation. A resolution authorizing military action against Syria also didn’t go anywhere. I would argue this is consistent with the historical pattern of re-elected presidents losing their clout in Term 2.

Mr. Obama also has been beset by scandal, namely the Internal Revenue Service’s harassment of conservative groups that applied for tax-exempt status between 2010 and 2012, the administration’s handling of the 2012 attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi, Libya, the Department of Justice’s secret investigation into a national security leak and the National Security Agency’s spying. This, like the president’s stalled agenda, is consistent with history.

Controversial doings that were – for whatever reason – kept under wraps during a president’s first term often explode into public view in the second term. Just look at the administrations of Richard Nixon and Bill Clinton.

Then there is the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare. The program was rolled out Oct. 1, but the website for signing up for it was plagued by dysfunction for weeks. Not long afterward, it became clear that despite the president’s 2009 pledge to the contrary, Obamacare would cancel health-insurance plans Americans were happy with. In November, Mr. Obama even admitted the cancellations resulted from shoddy craftsmanship on the part of himself and his legislative allies.

Not surprisingly, as a result of the aforementioned episodes, Americans began losing faith in the president, and he now is plagued by the lowest approval ratings of his tenure. In fact, as I noted in my Dec. 18 post, the only president with a lower approval rating in mid-December of his fifth year was the infamous Mr. Nixon.

That, I believe, is the sequence of events that led to Mr. Obama contracting second-termitis. We’ll have to see how the president does next year, but history shows it is difficult for a president to bounce back from a rough Year 5.