Rhonda Knop jokes that 10 years ago there were more pigeons living at the vacant Evans School than people living in the Golden Triangle neighborhood.

That’s since changed, and partly in response to the influx of people moving into the neighborhood, the city recently released the first draft of the Golden Triangle neighborhood plan.

Knop, the former president of the Golden Triangle Neighborhood Association and a member of the 25-person stakeholder committee for the plan, said the old plan from 1998 was outdated.

“There’s been a lot of change since the first plan,” she said.

Golden Triangle borders the Capitol Hill neighborhood and downtown, stretching from Sherman Street to Speer Boulevard just south of Colfax Avenue.

Denver’s Community and Planning and Development department and contractor MIG spent the better part of a year coming up with the 109-page first draft of the plan and talking with residents and property owners to see what was desired as the neighborhood grows.

Co-project manager Sarah Showalter said transportation was one of the key issues. Even though the neighborhood is bordered by downtown as well as Colfax Avenue and Broadway, many residents said they felt cut off from the surrounding neighborhoods.

Residents also expressed things they liked in the neighborhood.

“One thing we heard loud and clear from the community is they really like how eclectic and diverse the area is,” Showalter said.

The plan has visual renderings that show added bike lanes throughout the neighborhood, improved streetscapes with more trees and flowers and some outdoor dining opportunities.

Community Planning and Development is accepting public feedback through July 16. Revisions to the plan will be made throughout August and a final draft will go the planning board in early fall. It will then go to Denver City Council for final approval. Implementation of any project would come later when funding becomes available. The plan is available to view online.

“We think of them as visionary documents that guide policy,” Showalter said of neighborhood plans.

Golden Triangle, while smaller than many Denver neighborhoods, is unique in that it has many amenities and civic buildings such as the State Capitol, the City and County Building, Civic Center, the Denver Public Library main branch and Denver Art Museum.

Andrea Fulton, deputy director and chief marketing officer of the Denver Art Museum is also on the stakeholder committee and said the more people who stay in the neighborhood, the better it will be for the local businesses there.

“I think it’s an exciting moment to think and have a vision of what a neighborhood can be,” Fulton said.

Residents got a chance to see the first draft of the plan at a July 1 and most had positive feedback about the plan, saying it was good to see more transportation opportunities in the neighborhood.

One resident expressed some disappointment that there wasn’t a better idea to connect the 16th Street Mall transit with the neighborhood.

“I’m just a little disappointed to hear that it’s not in the plans right now,” resident Rudy Giordano said, adding that otherwise it was a good plan.

Golden Triangle Neighborhood Association board member Margie Valdez congratulated the city and said it did a good job with formulating this plan.

“I think the neighborhood is pleased with the plan,” she said. “We’re a very different neighborhood. We need something exciting.”

Joe Vaccarelli: 303-954-2396, jvaccarelli@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joe_vacc

The plan

Read the draft of the Golden Triangle neighborhood plan and see a map of the area on the Denver city web site.