Chris Ramirez, KOB Eyewitness News 4

Updated: 07/19/2015 10:19 PM

Created: 07/19/2015 9:27 PM

This past week, KOB's Boomerang Thugs series exposed serious problems with New Mexico's criminal justice and judicial systems. We put our state leaders on the spot and forced them to recognize our shortfalls.

The Fugitive Task Force team works for the state Corrections Department. When someone on probation or parole stops reporting, they get on "the list" and this team starts looking.

"We've seen cases where they abscond four, five, six times on one particular case," a task force member told KOB.

The list has 1,700 names on it. All convicted felons; whereabouts unknown.

The Fugitive Task Force has 12 investigators statewide looking for all of these absconders.

"And that's if all of us agree not to have a life," a task force member told KOB.

Prosecutors dangle carrots in front of those accused of dangerous crimes to take a plea, like Ted Harris and Andrew Gonzalez, who were both originally indicted on soliciting minor children for sex online.

Both men pleaded guilty to lesser charges, and both were rewarded for it by state prosecutors who offered plea deals that hide their dirty little secrets, keeping them off the sex offender registry and far from sex crime supervision.

"Theoretically, are there rapists who aren't registered on the sex offender registry right now?" KOB's Caleb James asked in a report last week.

"Definitely," responded Haven Scogin with the Probation and Parole's Sex Offender Unit.

"We have got to make sure that they understand there's a unit out there looking for you, and what the problem is. When you abscond, there's no consequence to absconding," New Mexico Gov. Susana Martinez said.

The governor believes we need stiffer penalties. Other lawmakers believe we need smarter penalties.

"To prosecute violent crimes it is very labor intensive, you have to build a relationship with the alleged victim, and that's just not being done," Rep. Moe Maestas (D-Bernalillo) said.

Boomerang Thugs continue to victimize innocent people, and as a state, we're ready to stop them in their tracks. Monday from 5 to 7 p.m., law enforcement officials will be in KOB's newsroom taking calls. Meanwhile, dozens of undercover agents will spread across the state to respond to your tips.