Signs have ex­is­ted for a while that the is­sue might not be the drag on Kasich that many thought it would be. In April, a Kais­er Fam­ily Found­a­tion poll found that bring­ing down pre­scrip­tion drug costs was a top pri­or­ity for more Re­pub­lic­ans than re­peal­ing the health care law, 66 per­cent to 60 per­cent. This month, 72 per­cent of all Amer­ic­ans and a ma­jor­ity of Re­pub­lic­ans said that pre­scrip­tion drug costs were un­reas­on­ably high. And, though it is one of the cent­ral pil­lars of Obama­care, polling has fre­quently found that more than half of Re­pub­lic­ans sup­port Medi­caid ex­pan­sion in isol­a­tion from the over­all law.

The Ohio gov­ernor is run­ning second to the in­defatig­able Don­ald Trump in New Hamp­shire, the early-nom­in­at­ing state where Kasich’s cam­paign has openly put al­most all of its chips, per the latest Real Clear Polit­ics polling av­er­age. He’s moved him­self com­fort­ably in­to the top 10 na­tion­ally after barely mak­ing the cut for the first de­bate.

But as evid­ence emerges that Obama­care is not the polit­ic­al flash point it once was, even among Re­pub­lic­ans, Kasich is as­cend­ing as an in­creas­ingly cred­ible chal­lenger for the GOP pres­id­en­tial nom­in­a­tion.

John Kasich’s White House bid was nev­er sup­posed to go any­where, giv­en his great apostasy in the eyes of the Re­pub­lic­an base: his de­cision to ex­pand Medi­caid in Ohio un­der the Af­ford­able Care Act.

Of course, Kasich isn’t about to start say­ing nice things about “Obama­care” be­cause the law re­mains uni­ver­sally un­pop­u­lar with­in the GOP, and his cam­paign isn’t pub­licly wel­com­ing any ap­par­ent de­cline in the polit­ic­al pas­sion about the law. From the start, Kasich has strained to dis­tin­guish between the whole law, in­di­vidu­al man­date and all, and the par­tic­u­lar pro­vi­sion that he im­ple­men­ted.

“I don’t think he looks at it that way be­cause he op­poses Obama­care,” said John Weaver, Kasich’s seni­or cam­paign strategist, in an in­ter­view. “Un­for­tu­nately, there are people who want to con­flate the two.”

Spin aside, however, the fact re­mains that Medi­caid ex­pan­sion was au­thor­ized and fun­ded as part of the ACA.

Kasich’s primary claim to mo­mentum is New Hamp­shire, an ec­lect­ic state for con­ser­vat­ism and one that it­self ex­pan­ded Medi­caid. Wheth­er he can broaden his ap­peal bey­ond New Eng­land is far from cer­tain. His na­tion­al num­bers have im­proved but are mid­dling at best: 5 per­cent, ac­cord­ing to Real Clear Polit­ics. Most of the press cov­er­age not sucked up by the sum­mer of Trump has been pos­it­ive to­ward Kasich and light on scru­tiny so far, and he’s yet to at­tract any sus­tained at­tacks from his most prom­in­ent GOP rivals.

Those could be com­ing soon. Mike Murphy, who is head­ing the Right to Rise su­per PAC back­ing Jeb Bush, told The Colum­bus Dis­patch last week that the group would soon start spend­ing in Ohio and named Obama­care as one is­sue where they could seek to con­trast Bush with Kasich.

“Nor­mally, you don’t see these things un­til pan­ic sets in, and pan­ic has def­in­itely set in. Pan­ic has set in in about four or five cam­paigns,” Weaver said. “I know, be­cause oth­er cam­paigns have said so pub­licly, that they in­tend to maybe come at us on that, and I wel­come that. That’s fine. What they chose to do in their states is their busi­ness. I don’t think you can get away with con­flat­ing Obama­care with ex­pand­ing health care us­ing your own tax dol­lars.”

Kasich has been hon­ing his mes­sage on Medi­caid ex­pan­sion since be­fore he hit the cam­paign trail. He usu­ally de­scribes it as a com­pas­sion­ate choice to help the poor, in the con­text of his Chris­ti­an faith, and also as a fisc­ally re­spons­ible move that brought Ohio tax dol­lars back to the state. (Con­ser­vat­ive wonks have ar­gued that the money nev­er would have been spent in the first place if Kasich didn’t ex­pand the pro­gram).

It could also be that Obama­care simply hasn’t caught up with Kasich yet be­cause he didn’t war­rant much at­ten­tion un­til re­cently. Oth­er cam­paigns cer­tainly haven’t for­got­ten about it, and they may turn to the is­sue as they aim to sty­mie Kasich’s rise and el­ev­ate their own can­did­ates.

“In a race where there are so many can­did­ates and there will be ef­forts by each cam­paign to dif­fer­en­ti­ate it­self from the oth­ers, the Medi­caid ex­pan­sion in Obama­care is sure to be an is­sue of dis­cus­sion,” one Re­pub­lic­an strategist ad­vising sev­er­al oth­er can­did­ates told Na­tion­al Journ­al re­cently. “I don’t think it’s ne­ces­sar­ily the first tool out of the bag, but it is a po­ten­tially power­ful one.”

But oth­ers with­in the Re­pub­lic­an Party think the con­ven­tion­al wis­dom over­rated how much Medi­caid ex­pan­sion would be a prob­lem for Kasich. In a bit of a twist, Trump could be help­ing Kasich out on that front, said John Fee­hery, a long­time GOP strategist who has spoken ap­prov­ingly of Kasich’s cam­paign.

Bur­ied be­neath the bil­lion­aire’s bom­bast­ic rhet­or­ic can be found, Fee­hery ar­gues, a pop­u­list mes­sage that seems to be res­on­at­ing with a lot of con­ser­vat­ive voters and aligns in many ways with how Kasich sells Medi­caid ex­pan­sion.

“People mis­un­der­stand where the Re­pub­lic­an Party is on a lot of is­sues. For ex­ample, on tax cuts for the rich, the Re­pub­lic­an Party for many years said that we can’t raise taxes on rich people. Trump is say­ing ‘F—- that.’ It’s a mes­sage much more geared to the lower-middle class. People are strug­gling,” Fee­hery said. “Medi­caid ex­pan­sion helps people who are strug­gling. It might be something that people don’t like when it’s at­tached to Obama, but they want health care.”

Kasich’s team seems to see the race the same way. Weaver por­trayed the gov­ernor’s mes­sage as “a pos­it­ive ver­sion of that pop­u­lism that Trump is es­pous­ing.”

“You have every reas­on and right to be angry, angry at your gov­ern­ment, angry at your banks, angry at all sorts of in­sti­tu­tions that we use to trust that we no longer can,” Weaver said. “But hav­ing said that, there are solu­tions to these is­sues and we can make things good again. It’s a more pos­it­ive ver­sion of that mes­sage.”