Buy Photo Financial planning firm TrustCore turned a 30-year-old office building into its new digs at Maryland Farms in Brentwood. TrustCore’s offices occupy the second and third floors, while Clayton Associates has dibs on most of the bottom floor, which also houses an Education Center. (Photo: Mark Zaleski / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Maryland Farms, which got started as an office park in the 1980s, is going through a midlife crisis.

Brentwood's aging business area — the city's first major foray into office development — is trying to stay competitive in a market where prime new office buildings can be found just down the interstate in Cool Springs or even around the corner in Davidson County's Seven Springs.

But Darryl Edmonds, founder and president of financial planning firm TrustCore, which has made a home in Maryland Farms for the entire 30 years of the business's existence, believes in the former horse farm turned business park. When his company, which now counts four partners, 30 planners and 24 staff members on its payroll, outgrew its past spot, the offices didn't venture far.

"There are plenty of places we could have gone. But we wanted to stay in Maryland Farms. It's ideally located between Nashville and Cool Springs and very convenient," he said.

The firm, which has $1.3 billion of assets under management, redeveloped an older building along with former HCA President Clayton McWhorter, who founded health care and technology investment firm Clayton Associates. Because of its age and need of renovations, the building had been listed as Class C, the lowest rung for office space, but it was transformed into a top-tier Class A facility.

TrustCore's offices take up the second and third floors of the nearly 40,000-square-foot building, while Clayton Associates has dibs on most of the bottom floor, which also houses a state-of-the-art Education Center, a nearly 50-seat learning and conferencing environment for business clients and associates, charities and other community groups.

Originally, the building on Maryland Way was constructed in 1984 for Randall Baskin and his company, Continental Life Insurance. Earl Swensson was the architect. It was used as a call center, but then sat empty for a year before it was put up for sale.

Unique architecture

Edmonds describes the out-of-the-ordinary look of the three-story structure as a triangle sitting atop two rectangels.

"It's a very unique piece of architecture on Maryland Way and makes it easy to find. It's not a square box with windows," he said.

During the yearlong renovation project, almost everything in the building was stripped out, leaving only the elevator shafts untouched. Renovations included updates in technology, energy efficiency and lighting with LED fixtures. Plumbing, electrical and the HVAC also were upgraded.

When staff started moving into their new offices in December, they were greeted with red wood-lined outdoor patios, an employee cafe and glass-encased office spaces implemented by Interior Design Services, which worked in concert with Carter Group as the contractor.

A 70-inch television screen can present visual financial projects in a large boardroom. Smaller conference rooms carry Middle Tennessee-related names including Radnor, Harpeth, Cumberland, Steeplechase, Natchez and Founders. The Adams room is named after Carol Adams, TrustCore's receptionist for 20 years.

Beyond the renovation of the newly renamed TrustCore Building, Maryland Farms is seeing other prime office space come online. Most notably, Tractor Supply Co. is constructing a 260,000-square-foot building and parking garage on Virginia Way near the Granny White intersection for its corporate headquarters. The company expects to move from its leased space into the permanent facility in the fall.

"We feel very comfortable here. And with Tractor Supply building, we know there is a lot of demand for good quality office space in Maryland Farms," Edmonds said.

Reach Bonnie Burch at 615-771-5421 and on Twitter @BonnieBurch_WAM.

Maryland Farms Building Reclassifications in 2013

EMI - Sparrow Building was Class A, moved to Class B, 59,656 square feet.

The Ramparts of Brentwood was Class A, moved to Class B, 128,557 square feet.

100 Winners Circle was Class A, moved to Class B, 73,470 square feet.

Center Court Building was Class A, moved to Class B, 58,638 square feet.

Harpeth on the Green IV was Class A, moved to Class B, 78,305 square feet.

Quorum I was Class A, moved to Class B, 82,399 square feet.

Quorum II was Class A, moved to Class B, 40,049 square feet.

Brentwood Business Center was Class B, moved to Class C, 110,000 square feet.

Brentwood Highlands was Class B, moved to Class C, 69,555 square feet.

Eastpark 1 was Class B, moved to Class C, 29,981 square feet.

Eastpark 2 was Class B, moved to Class C, 85,602 square feet.

Eastpark 3 was Class B, moved to Class C, 77,674 square feet.

Synergy Business Park 2 was Class B, moved to Class C, 39,906 square feet.

Synergy Business Park 1 was Class B, moved to Class C, 45,520 square feet.

Source: City of Brentwood

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1gCzSHi