Updated story

A 19-year-old Chicago woman and her 56-year-old father have been charged following the discovery of a dismembered body in the backyard of a home on the city's far Southwest Side Friday.

Daisy Gutierrez is charged with first-degree murder and her father, Salvador Gutierrez, is charged with concealing a homicidal death, according to DNAinfo Chicago.

In court Sunday, prosecutors say the 19-year-old woman watched as her boyfriend killed a man and cut off his head before asking her father for help burying the body.

The victim was found buried in plastic bags in the backyard of the Gutierrez family's home in the 8300 block of South Scottsdale Avenue on Friday after neighbors "complained of a horrible smell" coming from the yard, NBC Chicago reports.

The Cook County Medical Examiner later identified the victim as Jose Reyes Ramos, 30, who was reported missing from his Humboldt Park home in May.

The victim was the brother of Daisy Gutierrez's ex-boyfriend, Moncada Ramos, with whom she has two children. Though the Tribune says Ramos denied there was ever a relationship between Gutierrez and his brother, prosecutors indicate the victim had previously shown interest in her, igniting her new boyfriend's jealousy.

Gutierrez's boyfriend has not been charged in the crime.

Police say the victim was lured to the home by the woman and that she was hit in the head with a pipe before his throat was slashed with a knife, according to the Tribune. She was taken into custody after she indicated to police she was "an active participant" in the slaying.

A Saturday autopsy confirmed that the man died from "multiple sharp force injuries" and assault, the Chicago Sun-Times reports.

In court Sunday, a public defender said Daisy Gutierrez is three months pregnant and requested she be held in the jail hospital. In addition to her children with Moncada Ramos, Gutierrez has a 3-year-old child. Moncada Ramos said his children with Gutierrez are not in the custody of the Department of Child and Family Services.

Daisy Gutierrez was ordered held on $2 million bond Sunday, while her father was ordered held on $500,000 bond.

Earlier on HuffPost: