A lab worker at Assurex in Mason. The company recently lined up new funding for its genetic testing firm. (Photo: Leigh Taylor, Cincinnati Enquirer)

MASON, Ohio — Assurex Health is proving Midwestern states far from Silicon Valley can produce cutting-edge technology companies.

The Mason, Ohio-based start-up is at the forefront of personalized medicine and is helping patients with depression, ADHD or chronic pain get on the right medication so they can live active, fulfilling lives. In the process, Assurex Health is reducing the significant economic and emotional costs incurred through trial-and-error treatment.

The company is a gem in Greater Cincinnati's start-up scene that's making an international impact with technology spun out of Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center in 2006.

Assurex Health is one of 10 finalists in USA TODAY's Entrepreneur of the Year contest. Profiles of the other contenders will run in the coming weeks, and a winner will be selected in December.

Every day, Assurex Health extracts and analyzes the DNA from hundreds of patient cheek swabs. Within 36 hours, the company sends a report through a secure portal to doctors, detailing which medications are most likely to be effective for individual patients, based on that patient's genes.

The company, led by former Procter & Gamble executive Virginia C. Drosos, is in the midst of a massive growth spurt. In the last 12 months, Assurex Health has more than doubled its employee count to 220, tested its 100,000th patient in June, and announced several strategic partnerships.

Gina Drosos, president of Assurex Health. (Photo: Leigh Taylor, Cincinnati Enquirer)

- In June, the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, which serves nearly 9 million veterans each year, announced it would make Assurex Health's GeneSight Psychotropic test available at its 1,400 facilities across the country.

- In October, Genome Canada awarded a $6 million grant to Assurex Health and Canada's Centre for Addiction and Mental Health to study the benefits of genetic testing in guiding medication decisions for patients with depression or schizophrenia.

- Also in October, Medicare announced it would provide coverage for the GeneSight Psychotropic test. Drosos called the decision "a milestone in helping improve the care of millions of older Americans and others with depression."

- Assurex Health also closed a $32 million round of funding this year, and overall has raised $60 million of equity and debt.

Not bad for a company that employed just 15 people four years ago and was based in an old garage and karate studio. Assurex Health survived multiple near-death experiences in its early years thanks to Cincinnati's investment community — including funders CincyTech, Queen City Angels and Allos Ventures — which leaned in with capital and their access to talent.

Key early hires included Chairman James Jim S. Burns, an experienced executive who came out of retirement in 2009 to serve as CEO, and Donald R. Wright, a technology executive who is Assurex Health's chief operating officer.

Along the way, Assurex Health executives said they learned key lessons that have since paid off for the company. The start-up pushed to hire the best talent it could find, and not simply settle for employees it could comfortably afford. Burns and Wright also instilled a company culture in which executives did whatever it took to overcome obstacles. Wright, for example, handled everything from overseeing the development of laboratory tests and software to answering customer service calls

2011 was a pivotal year as California firms Claremont Creek Ventures and Sequoia Capital — an early funder of Apple and Google — announced an $11 million investment in Assurex Health.

Equally important, the firms allowed Assurex Health to keep growing in Greater Cincinnati instead of moving the company to California. Drosos, who previously ran P&G's $6 billion beauty-care business and regularly appeared on Fortune's Most Powerful Women list, joined Assurex Health as president in 2013 and was named CEO this year.

She's acutely aware of the company's leadership position among Cincinnati's start-ups, and has said Assurex Health wants to be "the tip of the spear" that brings more attention to the region's young companies and helps them grow.

Indeed, Assurex Health is a leading start-up candidate in Cincinnati to eventually become a public company or be acquired by a large corporation, creating the kind of wealth among its investors that will help turbocharge the region's fast-growing entrepreneurial ecosystem

Drosos' primary focus, of course, is continuing to scale Assurex Health, which hopes to help 1 million people within the next five years.

"We are at an inflection point as powerful as any I've ever felt in any business on the brink of growing dramatically," she says. "We have a lot of talent, and a lot of passion in this company. Those two things will continue to take us a long way."

Pichler also reports for The Cincinnati Enquirer.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1wW10F4