UWM’s Jordan Aaron is fouled by UWGB’s Jordan Fouse as teammate Kenneth Lowe looks on in the second half Saturday at the Resch Center. Credit: Corey Wilson for the Journal Sentinel

By of the

Ashwaubenon — UW-Green Bay's Keifer Sykes singlehandedly shot down UW-Milwaukee in the teams' first meeting Jan. 12 at the U.S Cellular Arena with a career-high 34 points.

On Saturday afternoon at the Resch Center, it was Jordan Aaron's turn.

The senior guard scored 23 of his game-high 30 points in the second half as the Panthers knocked off the Horizon League-leading Phoenix, 73-63.

"Very impressive," coach Rob Jeter said of Aaron's performance. "We've really been on Jordan about staying aggressive and just have things roll off his back. He has to be an aggressive scorer for us."

Steve McWhorter and Kyle Kelm added 10 points apiece for UWM, which shot a scorching 60% (15 for 25) over the final 20 minutes.

The Panthers also did a yeoman's job defensively against a bigger Green Bay squad that dominated on the glass in the first game with 45 rebounds and 23 on the offensive end.

Alec Brown, Green Bay's 7-foot-1 center, was a non-factor and finished with just five points and four rebounds.

Sykes led the Phoenix (19-5, 9-2) with 26 points, including its final nine points, but pulled no punches afterward when addressing his team's effort.

"You could see that they wanted it more," Sykes said. "Their guys were diving on the floor, they were talking. They accepted the challenge coming in. You could tell they were the tougher team. We have to get tougher from top to bottom to win these games."

UWM (16-9, 6-5) led, 39-38, early in the second half when a barrage of three-pointers helped break the game open.

Beginning with one from the left wing by Matt Tiby, the Panthers knocked down threes on four of five possessions and came away with points on all five.

Aaron had 3 threes in the spurt, the last of which he hit with a hand in his face while falling down on the right wing. It gave UWM its biggest lead of the game to that point at 55-43 with 8 minutes 8 seconds remaining.

"It's just comfort," said Aaron. "My teammates did a great job of just getting me open, getting me the ball, and I was able to make a few tough shots.

"I've got to tip my hat to my teammates. They did a great job out there. Our bigs rebounded, our guards ran the offense and we played with one another.

"It was a great team effort."

Aaron was involved in another key play that came on the heels of his three-point explosion when he took an elbow to the face near midcourt from Brown.

The officials checked the replay and determined it was a flagrant foul, giving Aaron two free throws. He knocked both of those down and then a baseline jumper on the ensuing inbound play, extending the Panthers' lead to 59-43.

Boos rained down from the crowd of 6,071, and UWM thrived in the atmosphere as it kept the pressure on. It led by as many a 18 before Green Bay used a late run to pull as close as 64-54 with 2:30 left.

"He's a great scorer," Sykes said of Aaron. "He didn't feel us out there and he just shot a few shots over the top, and that got him going. Any scorer, once he sees the ball go through the net, they get going."

A three-point play by Malcolm Moore and four straight free throws by Aaron down the stretch kept the Phoenix from making it more interesting.

"After the first game, we just felt like Green Bay wanted it more than we did," Jeter said. "You have to play that well to beat Green Bay. You're not going to just come in here and give your B-plus effort. It's going to take an A-plus effort to get it done, and I thought that's how these guys performed today."

Jeter noted the progress the senior Aaron has made this season after sliding over from point guard to shooting guard with McWhorter eligible after transferring and redshirting.

At 5 feet 10 inches he might not cut an imposing figure on the court, but he can nevertheless score with the best of them. Aaron had 33 points in a game earlier this season and has six games of 20 or more overall.

He leads UWM in scoring at 14.3 points per game.

"Moving him from the point guard to the 2-guard position, it took him some time to really understand maybe it's more catch and shoot and less dribbling," Jeter said. "What I'm most impressed about is it's coming with less dribbling. Some of those shots he hit, they were couple-dribble pullups.

"For him to do those things and make that adjustment for the team, I'm very proud of him."

UWM also got a big lift off the bench from Moore, who had eight points, six rebounds and three blocked shots in 27 minutes, as well as Thierno Niang and even walkon Mitch Roelke, who helped fill the breach when McWhorter was up and down off the bench most of the second half with foul trouble.

Green Bay, meanwhile, saw its lead in the Horizon League shrink as it prepares for a tough two-game road swing at Wright State and second-place Cleveland State this week.

"There is no tired, there is no soreness — you've got to be a player," Green Bay coach Brian Wardle said. "You've got to be tough, you've got to battle through it and you've got to be ready to play. Hopefully this is a big wake-up call for all of us that we need to find that moxie going on these last road trips to end conference play."