Are you on track financially?

To assess where you stand, you could hire a financial planner or, alternatively, spend time plugging information into an online retirement calculator. Sound like a lot of work?

For couch potatoes, here are three faster ways to gauge your financial health.

Years of Freedom

"The goal isn't to be the richest person in the graveyard," says financial planner Allan Roth, author of "How a Second Grader Beats Wall Street." "Money is stored energy that gives you freedom, choice, security and independence."

ENLARGE Jonathan Clements

How many years of freedom do you have socked away? Find out your net worth by adding up the value of your home and investments, and then subtracting any debt. Divide this number by the amount you spend each year, including on income and property taxes.

For instance, if you have a $300,000 net worth and you spend $50,000 annually, you have yourself six years of financial freedom. If you're receiving Social Security or a pension, you could tweak the calculation by subtracting these sums from your annual spending.

Mr. Roth notes that the quickest way to increase your years of financial freedom is to cut spending. How so? If you earn $10,000 more each year, you'll lose a chunk to taxes. But if you spend $10,000 less, there's no tax cost, plus the advantage continues into retirement.

The Four-Percent Rule

You've likely heard about the 4% withdrawal rate, which suggests you can spend $4,000 in the first year of retirement for every $100,000 saved. Each year thereafter, you're assumed to step up your annual withdrawals along with inflation. The sum withdrawn includes any dividends and interest you receive, and you'll owe taxes. If you follow the 4% rule, your portfolio should carry you through a 30-year retirement.

But are you on track to have enough saved? Again, you might think about your nest egg in terms of years of income. Start by calculating how much retirement income you want from your portfolio, on top of whatever you'll get from Social Security and any pension, says investment adviser William Bernstein, author of "The Investor's Manifesto."

Let's say that annual sum is $40,000. To generate that much income using a 4% withdrawal rate, you'd need savings equal to 25 times this $40,000, or $1 million.

Now, imagine you start saving for retirement at age 25. To put yourself on track to hit 25 years of portfolio income at age 65, you might aim to have savings equal to four years of portfolio income at age 35, 10 years at age 45 and 17 years at 55, Mr. Bernstein says.

He cautions that, when assessing where you stand, you should consider recent market performance.

"If you got there on the back of a bear market, you probably have a margin of safety," Mr. Bernstein says. "But if you got there on the back of a bull market, you should be worried. Like right now."

Multiples of Income

Instead of looking at your portfolio as a multiple of the retirement income you want, you might look at it as a multiple of your income while you're working. That's the approach suggested by Charles Farrell, chief executive of Denver's Northstar Investment Advisors and author of "Your Money Ratios."

He says retirement savers should focus on their investment portfolio's value, minus any debt. The goal: Build up this sum so that, by retirement, it equals 10 to 12 times your typical annual income.

"If you earn $100,000 and have $1.2 million in investable assets and no debt, you're at a ratio of 12," Mr. Farrell explains. "At a 4% withdrawal rate, you'll have roughly $50,000 in income, which is a 50% replacement ratio. If you add Social Security, you might be at 70% or 75%."

Early in adult life, your financial progress may seem agonizingly slow. At that juncture, the biggest contributor to your portfolio's growth will likely be the money you save. "But once you get the ratio up to two or three times income, things can start to accelerate," notes Mr. Farrell.

Why? Imagine you earn $100,000 a year and have $300,000 in savings, or three times your income. If you save 15% of income, you would add $15,000 to your portfolio over the next year. But if your portfolio earns 6%, you'd add another $18,000.

"Once the return from the portfolio is exceeding your annual savings," says Mr. Farrell, "the portfolio starts to do the heavy lifting for you."