Recent scams try to scare and tap your curiosity

Scam emails appear to come from courts, well-known stores

She got an email from the "court secretary" of the Florida Fifth District Court of Appeal. It prompted her to click on a link to verify the complaint she had filed. Failing to do so would lead to her claim being canceled, she was warned.

They often try to scare you, as they did last week to Agnes Gackenbach of Emmaus.

Con artists are as slick as the ice building up outside. They're constantly looking for new ways to get us to slip up and fall for their costly tricks.

But Gackenbach hadn't filed any complaint. She hadn't even been to Florida for many years. The email was sent from court_secretary@myhomebuyerprogram.com, and Gackenbach wasn't enrolled in any home buyer program in Florida or anywhere else. She's lived in the same house in Emmaus for 55 years.

So she didn't click on the link. Instead, she contacted the Watchdog to expose the fraud.

"All I thought about is how did a court in Florida get my email address," she said.

The Florida Fifth District Court of Appeal is aware of the scam, spokeswoman Joanne Simmons told me. She said the federal judiciary issued an alert about such fraudulent emails a few weeks ago, warning that they use the names of federal and state courts and contain a computer virus.

"Unless you are actively involved in a case in federal court and have consented to receive court notifications electronically, you generally will not be served with court documents electronically," the alert says.

After I asked about it last week, the Florida court posted a warning on its website.

If you're named in a court case, you'll be served with papers through the mail or in person. But even if you receive documents, you'd be wise to verify they are real.

Two weeks ago, postal inspectors warned of a debt-collection scam in which people receive documents purported to be issued by the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania. The documents specify the amount that supposedly is owed, and recipients are threatened with arrest if they don't pay immediately using a prepaid debit card.

"The amount owed and court documents are fraudulent," postal inspectors said in their warning.

The scam occurs online, through the mail and over the phone. Callers are spoofing law enforcement phone numbers in attempts to legitimize their calls, postal inspectors said. If you get a call, letter or email claiming you owe a debt, check it out before paying. Demand proof of the debt. If the documents come from a court, verify with the court that a case really has been filed against you.

Federal officials recently accused a Florida company and its president of sending threatening emails that tried to scare people into thinking they would be violating the federal Affordable Care Act if they did not immediately enroll in health insurance.

Kobeni Inc. of Hollywood, Fla., and its president, Yair Shalev, sent the deceptive emails from May through August, according to a lawsuit filed by the Federal Trade Commission last month. Shalev did not return my call.

This is the agency's first case alleging fraud related to Obamacare.

"Final Warning — You're Breaking a Federal Law If You Don't Have Coverage," the subject line of one email said, according to the lawsuit.