Topics: Action movies, Barack Obama, Editor's Picks, George W. Bush, Iraq war, kelsey grammer, Mark Wahlberg, michael bay, Movies, Shia LaBeouf, Stanley Tucci, Summer movies, Tea Party, Ted Cruz, Transformers, Transformers: Age of Extinction, War on Terror, Entertainment News, Politics News

There’s a general feeling of distress and bewilderment to “Transformers: Age of Extinction,” Michael Bay’s latest inflated, interminable and incoherent 3-D saga of robot warfare. At least some of that distress is political: The “Transformers” franchise has gradually become alienated from its Bush-era roots in gung-ho, pro-military, “Mission Accomplished” jingoism. It now partakes of a free-floating, ill-defined, Ted Cruz-style paranoia that is both psychically dispirited and distressingly low in testosterone. (There are nearly no gratuitous shots of female pulchritude in this movie, and the only suggestion of actual sexuality is a disturbing interspecies attempted rape.) I’m halfway surprised that the script for “Age of Extinction” didn’t drag in a Benghazi reference somehow. Maybe it did and I missed it; you can’t sit through a 166-minute robot-warfare movie without occasionally slipping into a fugue state. I’m going to say that again: ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SIX MINUTES. That’s exactly one minute longer than the re-edited version of Andrei Tarkovsky’s medieval odyssey “Andrei Rublev,” perhaps the most legendarily arduous art film of all time. Coincidence? I think not.

If it sounds dumb to describe “Age of Extinction” as bewildering and pointless, given that it’s the fourth installment in a franchise that has concocted an arcane mythological back-story out of a line of toys popular with 10-year-old boys in the 1980s, all I can say is welcome to the world Bay has made, where we are all measurably stupider than we were before. Also revealed on our show today: The sky is blue (unless it’s raining) and the Catholic Church may have issues with human sexuality! There are many reasons that “Age of Extinction” is a total mess, even when we move past the fact that it’s a mess because it’s a Michael Bay movie. And although it has become patently obvious that Bay is kind of a right-winger, his movies are more about servicing the stunted psychologies of teenage boys than about any coherent ideology. Believing that military hardware is awesome, and blowing stuff up is even better, does not really qualify as a political position.

This time around, Hollywood’s master of excess finally seems exhausted, in both formal and narrative terms, by the stupefying idiocy of this franchise. If you haven’t been paying attention, that’s actually a new state of affairs: You can accuse Bay of many things, but never before of being bored with his own work. When you reach the decadent phase of the “Transformers” series, which was designed in the first place as the epitome of id-fueled overkill — my friends, that is some serious decadence. That’s Louis XIV in the recliner with a pile of thong-clad honeys and five boxes of donut holes from Dunkin, watching a highlight reel of Best Reality Show Catfights. There’s an entire scene in this movie in which the protagonists hide out from evil government forces and evil Decepticons and evil whoever-else by sleeping in an abandoned mid-century passenger train. During that scene I woke up enough to think: Wait, what? Where are these people, and why are they doing this, and what relevance or resonance does this have to the so-called plot? No answers.

There’s an earlier scene when one shot shows us the setting sun, a melting glob of orange sherbet descending behind a flat Texas landscape – one of about five “magic moment” sunset shots milked for nebulous non-meaning in this movie — and then in the next shot (and for the rest of the scene) it’s clearly the middle of the afternoon. One of the things that’s impossible to decipher about Bay is whether or not he’s basically been punking us the whole time. He clearly possesses some awareness of his own tics and tricks and obsessions, some meta-consciousness about the manipulative character of his work and his relationship to the audience, but not enough to simply throw it all away and go study the Hindu scriptures or something. (He may make movies aimed at notional heartland teens, but in real life Bay was an English major at Wesleyan, and a favored student of film historian Jeanine Basinger.) So I partly suspect that he’s pulling our leg in making a $165 million action spectacle that features elementary continuity errors, product placement for Chinese soft drinks and a running time – did I tell you this already? – of 166 minutes, at least 40 or 50 or 60 of which are not strictly necessary. OK, duh, I get it: None of it is necessary, and Bay is playing out some kind of sadomasochistic power exercise.

Thing is, sadomasochistic power exercises can be fun, and this one is often painfully dull along the long road to the admittedly magnificent action climax, when Dinobots get hatched out of the earth (don’t ask) and a giant magnetized spaceship starts sucking the ships out of Hong Kong’s harbor and raining them down on the city. If you want to belabor the question of Bay’s self-awareness some more, I refer you to “Pain & Gain,” his idiot-genius version of a postmodern social satire. Except, wait, no: The last “Transformers” movie, the massive international hit “Dark of the Moon,” was Bay’s version of a postmodern art film, and carries the mark of his studies with Basinger. I’m not actually kidding. To amplify critic David Ehrlich’s description, “Dark of the Moon” was the meth-baby offspring of Stan Brakhage and Luis Buñuel, except with giant robots and a shot of a Victoria’s Secret model’s bum as she ascends the stairs.

The unhinged political paranoia I mentioned above was already present in “Dark of the Moon,” which featured a conspiracy-theory take on the Soviet and American space programs and indeed the entire Cold War. But that film’s madness was thoroughgoing and enthusiastic; it was inarguably a much better movie than “Revenge of the Fallen” (No. 2 in the series) and it made oodles of money. It should have concluded the trilogy and provided Bay with a measure of semi-demi-vindication (which is the only kind you can get when you’re him). It was the nightmarish, Nietzschean fulfillment of the summer-movie aesthetic, a movie that seemingly had eaten all of pop culture and vomited it back up again as shards of metal. One example: It featured the real Leonard Nimoy as a robot god and also a clip from a “Star Trek” episode and hidden snippets of sampled Nimoy dialogue from a “Star Trek” movie. It was an exercise in ultimate sensual gratification that ended in the nuclear annihilation of all pleasure. It embodied every genre of film at once, each contaminated by its opposite: In retrospect, its dopey domestic-comedy scenes showed us the twitchy spectacle of Shia LaBeouf descending into madness. He was far more disturbing in that movie than in Lars von Trier’s “Nymphomaniac.”