By Leslie Garisto Pfaff, New York Times News Service

I could hear the anxiety in my sister’s voice. A week after her double mastectomy and reconstruction, she had developed a burning sensation under her right arm where her surgeon had removed several dozen lymph nodes. The throbbing and itching were so intense it felt “like poison ivy lit by a blowtorch.”

The physician assistant at her surgeon’s office told her it was probably “neuropathic in origin” — arising from nerve damage during surgery — and that the condition, known as postmastectomy pain syndrome, or PMPS, would subside over time. And luckily for my sister, five weeks out from surgery, the pain began to wane.

But for many of the estimated 20 to 50 percent of women who develop pain after a mastectomy, it may never go away.

“Quite frankly, women are not always informed of the risk or the strategies that are available to reduce the risk,” said Rosemary Polomano, a professor of pain practice at the University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing. “It’s a widespread problem.”

For women already facing the trauma of cancer, chronic pain after a mastectomy can be devastating.

“Pain is a psychological trigger for worry about cancer recurrence,” said Julie Silver, an associate professor at Harvard Medical School. “Treating PMPS really helps to relieve that anxiety.”

Postmastectomy pain syndrome is nerve-related pain that persists for at least three months after surgery, though it can take up to six months to develop. It tends to occur in the upper chest or underside of the arm, causing pain often described as burning or shooting. It

sometimes presents as an unbearable itch.

It is not certain how many women have the syndrome, but studies indicate that it can also affect women who have had a lumpectomy, in which only the tumor and a small amount of surrounding tissue are removed. A study in the journal Breast indicated that women who had lymph nodes adjacent to the cancerous breast removed were at particular risk.

Not all surgeons are aware of its extent, which may explain why many do not mention it to patients. Dr. Laura Esserman, director of the Carol Franc Buck Breast Care Center in San Francisco, said she was shocked when a speaker at a 2011 symposium said that 20 to 40 percent of women complained of persistent pain after breast surgery.

“I think that patients often don’t want to complain to their surgeon,” Esserman said, “so we weren’t as aware of the problem as we should be.” She says she now always asks about pain as in postoperative interviews.

Many patients also remain misinformed about the potential for treatment. Dr. Michael Stubblefield, chief of rehabilitation medicine service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, said he often encountered patients who had severe pain for several years and were astonished to discover that it was treatable, with an injection that combines a nerve block with a steroid.

An instructional video on the technique is available online at cancer.ucsf.edu/breastcarecenter.

Polomano and her colleagues are working to get the word out among surgeons, anesthetists, nurses and other health care professionals “to raise awareness of the consequences of poorly controlled pain and, ultimately, to prevent it.”