TAMPA, Fla., Aug. 11, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- MedHOK®, a pioneering software platform for health plans and other risk-bearing entities participating in government-sponsored programs, announced today that Fresenius Health Partners, a company offering comprehensive health care solutions to patients with end stage renal disease (ESRD), has selected MedHOK's platform to streamline care management for patients with ESRD and Medicare Advantage Chronic Condition Special Needs Plans (C-SNP).

Fresenius Health Partners works with a wide variety of risk-bearing entities, including Medicare Advantage plans and Accountable Care Organizations, to improve clinical outcomes, enhance quality measures, and reduce costs for patients with ESRD and chronic kidney disease.

"The challenges facing our ESRD patients are daunting, and MedHOK's integrated solution will play an integral role in our ability to effectively coordinate the multiple facets of their care," said Dan Geary, Senior Vice-President of Health Services of Fresenius Health Partners. "Our opportunity to coordinate our patients' life sustaining care and improve the day-to-day quality of their lives will be significantly enhanced using the MedHOK integrated platform."

The MedHOK software platform is comprised of fully integrated modules in the core areas of Risk, Care, and Quality, leveraging member data across both major medical and pharmacy, and enabling payers to manage revenue and costs across the healthcare enterprise in a compliant fashion. The MedHOK platform comes pre-configured with state and federal regulations, structured workflows, and analytics across all modules, breaking down the silos typically associated with member care and expense management. Fresenius will be implementing the entire platform for a seamless, end-to-end solution.

"MedHOK's member-centric approach shifts the focus from simply reporting quality measures to actually influencing results for a targeted population," said Anil Kottoor, CEO of MedHOK. "As the healthcare accountability model continues to evolve, MedHOK is at the forefront of technology solutions helping health care companies such as Fresenius meet strict compliance and clinical management requirements in order to succeed in the new value-based healthcare environment."

About MedHOK

MedHOK's pioneering software platform empowers health plans and other risk-bearing entities offering government-sponsored programs to excel in risk, quality, and care management, while ensuring compliance with federal and state requirements. The only software that integrates pharmacy and medical care on a single platform, MedHOK creates a 360o view of the member, allowing payers to identify and target member health risks, intelligently trigger workflow interventions, and improve quality of care to succeed in the value-based revenue model. Out-of-the-box compliant and proactively updated for Medicare, Medicaid, and Affordable Care Act regulations, our SaaS-based software is a compliance powerhouse.

Recognized by Inc. magazine as the nation's 25th fastest growing private company and the 6th fastest growing private healthcare company, MedHOK is NCQA certified in HEDIS®, Pay for Performance, and Disease Management. MedHOK is the software platform of choice for more than 50 of the nation's largest healthcare payers, managing close to 40 million lives. Visit www.MedHOK.com or call (888) 9MEDHOK.

About Fresenius Health Partners

Fresenius Health Partners is a wholly owned subsidiary of Fresenius Medical Care North America, the premier health care company focused on delivering the highest quality care to people with renal and other chronic conditions. Through its industry-leading network of dialysis facilities, outpatient cardiac and vascular labs, and urgent care centers, as well as the country's largest practice of hospitalist and post-acute providers, Fresenius Medical Care provides coordinated health care services at pivotal care points for hundreds of thousands of chronically ill customers throughout the continent. As the world's only vertically integrated renal company, it offers specialty pharmacy and laboratory services, and manufactures and distributes the most comprehensive line of dialysis equipment, disposable products, and renal pharmaceuticals. For more information, visit www.freseniusmedicalcare.us or www.freseniushealthpartners.com

Jan Luongo, APR (813) 304-2800 x1036 (813) 335-7625 cell