Want to work at home? If that’s your dream, you may want to consider the pros and cons entrepreneurs sometimes encounter.

El Paso Inc. spent time with a couple that operates a bed and breakfast in southern New Mexico, and an El Paso woman who runs a fashion business out of her home. Very different businesses, but many of the same upsides and downsides.

George Bollinger and Marlene Eichner have owned Casa de Sueños Country Inn, a bed and breakfast in La Union, New Mexico, for 12 years.

They learned that B&Bs with less than eight rooms for rent are considered a lifestyle business, which means the owners will need a second source of income. The place they wanted had four.

“The theme was Western when we bought it,” Eichner said. “We changed the name, concept and décor to give it a Southwestern feel.”

To meet their overhead, both worked at other jobs for a time. In five years they brought the occupancy rate up from 9 percent to 50 percent.

When the financial crisis of 2008 hit and the situation in Juárez was dicey, their occupancy rate dropped off.

“Sole owners have increased income potential,” Bollinger said, “but they also deal with the economy’s downturns.”

Since then, their occupancy rate has come back up and is growing, he said.

On the positive side, they enjoy tax benefits like deductible expenses enjoyed by other businesses. The flip side: They have to buy their own health insurance, he said.

Eichner feels that finding the right match is the key to making a home-based business work.

“Lifestyle is probably the biggest consideration,” she said, “so interning in the business is a good way to see if you like it.”

It’s also a good idea to learn as much as you can about the factors that can affect success. “In our business, it’s important to know the Internet, marketing, safety and zoning issues, health codes and food handling, accounting, building repair and maintenance, design and energy issues.”

A positive for Eichner? The B&B schedule fits her biological clock. Always an early riser, she’s up and most productive at 3 a.m., when she gets many chores done.

“Getting up early means I go to bed early, usually between 8:30 and 9 at night, so we arrange for late arrivals to check themselves in. We’ve found that this both meets their needs and assures their comfort.”

Staying social

Another aspect of lifestyle choice is the couple’s social needs.

“I’m more outgoing. George’s specialty is figuring out how to pay for the improvements we want to make. He keeps the books.”

Both anticipated meeting interesting people from all over the world.

“But we didn’t anticipate that repeat visits would lead to solid friendships,” and that’s an aspect she considers a definite plus. “We receive invitations to stay with many of our guests.”

The couple agrees that while their biggest concern is meeting their guests’ needs, they don’t want to have to give up their own.

“We have had some high-need visitors. One man asked me to go buy him some lunch when his car didn’t start.”

Large living and dining areas and a patio big enough for private parties usually offer enough space for guests, without intrusion into the couple’s private half of the dwelling.

“We’re able to entertain our friends without our guests even being aware,” Eichner said.

For the last few years, Bollinger has been dealing with lung cancer. With him able to take on fewer tasks, they are trying a new approach.

“We’ve joined a website called www.airbnb.com,” Eichner said. “Anyone with rooms to rent can list their space. It’s free to join, and the site makes money by charging a percentage of the room cost.”

Since guests pay in advance and the site handles the money, it’s less work for them. That allows them to spend their time in other ways.

Fashion from home

Glenna Jo Price loves working from home. A fashion consultant for CAbi – Carol Anderson by Invitation – she sells stylish clothing that are new, affordable and ageless.

“I got interested in the line when I noticed the cute clothes my son’s future mother-in-law always wore. She invited me to a show in Austin and I signed up.”

Price began by asking friends to be hostesses, and the business spread by word-of-mouth. But she also sells directly from her home.

“I work two five-month seasons a year – spring-summer and fall-winter – and send announcements and reminders by email.

“I have about 20 shows a season. While one color is featured each season, people can match this season’s color with designs from earlier shows.”

Clothing items range in size from 0 to 16, and XS to XL.

Although the two businesses are different, Price lists many of the same pros and cons cited by Eichner and Bollinger at the B&B.

“I have flexibility,” Price said.

“I can choose when to work, and since I like to paint, I can also choose when to isolate myself. I love being at home and scheduling my own time.”

But it did take her two years to learn how to set limits.

“When a client called me at midnight, I realized I didn’t always have to answer the phone!”

Price enjoys the socializing when she makes presentations at friends’ houses. And there’s a plus when she hosts a show at home, where her paintings are on display. “Customers see them, and I’ve sold many that way.”

She earns enough between the dual sales to support herself comfortably.

Another positive: the tax write-off for maintaining an office at home.

“Two racks of clothing usually sit in the dining room, but I can either move them to the garage or entertain friends in a separate area.”

As with Eichner and Bollinger, there is no guaranteed paycheck.

“I send the cash and checks to the company, and they keep a percentage, paying me twice a month,” Price said. With the Affordable Care Act, she is now able to afford health insurance.

For Eichner and Bollinger at the B&B, as well as for Price’s home fashions, the pros outweigh the cons. Their home-based businesses fit their lifestyles and talents, provide a mix of social interaction and privacy, and offer the opportunity for high earnings with full knowledge that there will also be costs.

All of that, they say, makes life more challenging and interesting.

Casa de Sueños

La Union, New Mexico

www.casaofdreams.com

info@casaofdreams.com

CAbi

Carol Anderson by Invitation

Email: glennajo@mac.com