Sioux Falls, SD

The death of Law Enforcement officers continue to make national headlines. As people mourn the loss of officers across the country, a South Dakota deputy who was shot and killed in 2009 is remembered.

It's quite the father's day for Darwin Mechels. The father of three spends the holiday remembering Chad. His son's name is tattooed on his arm. Seeing the more than 100 bikers turn out for this memorial ride melts his heart.

"It's really touching. It's good to see that we have lots of support for our law enforcement in South Dakota," Mechels said.

The bikers gather outside of J&L Harley Davidson. The event is called the South Dakota Fallen Officers Memorial Ride. The memorial ride for the last five years was for Mechels, but now it's for fallen officers across the state. The route spans different places in the area, and wreaths are laid to remember six South Dakota officers who've died in the line of duty.

The bikes fill highways in eastern South Dakota. One belongs to Paul Skyberg, who says riding with this many people is something he will never forget.

"World's best therapy. It just doesn't get any better. You have to be a biker to know what I'm saying but it's a different world riding," Skyberg said.

Out in front is Chris Hogan of the South Dakota Highway Patrol. When he heard about the event, he volunteered to lead the pack.

"It's a great opportunity to be invited to this event. It's a great way to pay tribute to those officers that have sacrificed their lives," Hogan said.

The effort is making this Father's Day special for Darwin. He says he knows his son is watching.

"Nobody has ever gotten wet till after the ride is over. We've got wet after the ride but not during the ride. So I believe he's got his hand over there telling him, 'Hey South Dakota doesn't need any rain today," Mechels said.

A sunny day for a ride of respect.

The money raised from the ride today is going to the South Dakota Sheriff's Association, South Dakota Police Association, and the South Dakota Correction Officers Association.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.