Toms River Councilmen Maurice B. “Mo” Hill Jr. (left) and Al Manforti, U.S. Rep. Tom MacArthur, R-N.J., and Mayor Thomas F. Kelaher paint their names on the wall at the site of a new Toms River downtown mural. (Photo: Courtesy of Stacy Proebstle/Township of Toms River) Story Highlights Residents can help paint panels of a mural that will be painted at 207 Main St.

Local officials were able to channel their inner artist Monday when they helped paint a portion of a mural to be displayed downtown.

"I filled in two red bricks," said Mayor Thomas F. Kelaher, who donned a white smock for the occasion. Kelaher, Councilmen Maurice B. "Mo" Hill Jr. and Al Manforti, and Rep. Tom MacArthur, R-N.J., were among the aspiring artists who took turns painting panels of the mural Monday.

Elizabeth Paseler, winner of $10,000 for her mural design from the Jay and Linda Grunin Foundation, gives Mayor Thomas F. Kelaher and Rep. Tom MacArthur painting tips. (Photo: Courtesy of Stacy Proebstle, Township of Toms River)

The brightly colored mural, with shades of red, orange and black, will be painted on the Main Street building that houses Nancy's Midtown Cafe, 207 Main St.

Artist Elizabeth Paseler won $10,000 for her mural design from the Jay and Linda Grunin Foundation. On Monday, she supervised MacArthur and Kelaher as they painted their panels in the Ocean County Library's Discovery Room.

The public is invited to paint panels of the mural on Wednesdays, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.; Thursdays, from 5 to 8 p.m.; and Saturdays, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. There will be no painting this weekend because of the Memorial Day holiday.

"I'll be able to take my grandchildren and say, 'See those two bricks over there? Your Pop Pop did that,' " the mayor said.

He joked that he had difficulty "staying in the lines." Later the officials painted their names on the side of Nancy's, which will be whitewashed before the actual mural is installed.

The new mural, which is expected to be completed in time for the Harvest Arts Festival Oct. 17, will be the third mural to be installed in the downtown. One was painted last year on the wall of Simply Skin on West Water Street.

And another mural on the alley that connects Main Street with the Irons Street parking lot depicts Toms River's history.

Toms River Councilman Maurice B. “Mo” Hill Jr. (left), Rep. Thomas MacArthur, R-NJ, and Mayor Thomas F. Kelaher paint their names on the wall at the site of the new downtown mural in Toms River. The wall will be whitewashed before the mural panels are installed. (Photo: Stacy Proebstle, Township of Toms River)

"This is all part of a continuing bid to bring outdoor art to Toms River," Kelaher said.

On May 8, 20 life-sized Seward Johnson bronze statues were unveiled in the downtown area.

The statues depict people doing ordinary things, like reading a newspaper, writing in a journal or flying a kite.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1HfbYrT