*Nationwide – To all who ever doubted the callous, inhumane mentality of the Barack Obama administration, this recent revelation of Obamacare should remove any uncertainty.

I could be referring to the hidden surcharge levied on every participant to ensure abortion-on-demand at the cost of the taxpayer… Or the absolute total disregard for the health of women in lobbing and giving monetary incentives to non-physicians to perform abortions, which recently became law in California… Yes, that would be, non-physicians performing surgery on disproportionately poor minority women… Although these could certainly be viewed as callous and inhumane, along with the tax that was levied on medical devices which mostly struggling seniors will be forced to pay, that’s not what I’m writing about, for there is something far darker and more sinister which shows the depth of depravity we have stooped to as a nation. Let’s be perfectly clear: for anyone to support this diabolical intrusion, which by design seizes control of our lives and strips us of the little bit of conscience America has left, is unconscionable.

The websites for Massachusetts’ Health Connector and Access Health Connecticut, Connecticut’s official health insurance exchange, specifically asks those attempting to sign up for health insurance coverage, if they have any “unborn children.” Is anyone in the household pregnant? Why? “Unborn Children” are counted as members of her household, so with this information, it helps determine whether she is eligible for assistance with health care costs!

“Unborn Children” are members! Wait…! What…? Who…? How…? So, let me get this straight… this segment of society which you have determined via Roe Vs. Wade to have no rights because they are not a person – and are not to be considered as a viable human being – but at the whim of the mother, can be torn and ripped out of the womb and mercilessly killed, and yet you now choose to recognize their “personhood and viability” by including them as members of your socialistic, genocidal, health care plan! Oh the unmitigated hypocrisy! This is demonstratively evil. The plan including them in coverage for their health, will also pay for them to be murdered, for their death, if another so chooses. Surely the facade of benevolence has been removed and we see the face of man’s inhumanity to man and another depth of depravity for America. As Dr. Ben Carson, the brilliant renowned neurosurgeon from John Hopkins stated,

“…the Affordable Health Care Plan is not about health care but control. It is the worse thing to happen to America since slavery.”

“Unborn Children are members…” I was so appalled I thought of God’s response to Adam and Eve when He said, “What Is This That Thou Hast Done!” As it was for Adam and Eve, so shall it be for this nation: they never got back to the place of their prosperity and neither will America ever get back once this law is fully instituted. Their expulsion from the place of their prosperity set the stage for the murder and the shedding of innocent blood for millennia; so it is for America. The Affordable Health Care Act, by design, will increase the slaughter of the innocent and they will predominately be African-American… also by design.

This mockery of justice is an “obamanation.” The themes of this madness mock justice and deceive its hearers, lulling them to sleep, thus ensuring their ignorance. Abortion. We hear terms safe, legal, and rare. Deception. The data proves it’s not safe for women; by omission they censor information on the possible link between abortion and breast cancer, the high probability of miscarriages, and psychological damage similar to PTSD. Legal? It was Augustine who said, “…an unjust law is no law at all…” Slavery was legal. Jim Crow was legal. But because it was legal didn’t make it right. Rare? Deception. Abortion is the most performed operation on a woman. One out of four women will have an abortion. In the African-American community, it can truly be described as Black Genocide, for as I have written before, 52% of all African-American pregnancies end in Abortion – 1,786 a day… Spelled out, that’s One-Thousand-Seven-Hundred-Eighty-Six African-American children a day! In the City of New York, 60% of African-American pregnancies end with the death of the child by Abortion.

It’s the same for Obamacare… Deception. That name implies ‘Barack-Obama-Cares’ about the Americans who will be receiving its care. It would appear that 2,000 companies and Unions who are a part of the Democrat machine, along with the Congress and their employees, are the only ones he cares about, for they are all exempted – along with himself – from having to have “Obamacare.” Affordable? Deception. Remember when Candidate Obama was running for president… you were promised a savings of $2,500 only to find out it will cost nearly three times the amount promised each family would save. How in heaven can you call this affordable? When companies are making full-time employees, part-time employees, and you ask them why, and they say: they can’t “afford” to keep them full time because of the “Affordable” Health Care Act… What’s wrong with this picture? The irony is unbearable and the sanity of Americans who remain silent, especially those in the church, is absolutely incomprehensible. We are beginning to mirror the conditions Pastor Martin-Niemöller poetically described in Germany in the late 30’s. I have re-arranged his historic quote to reflect America today.

First they came for a Conservative talk show host,

And I didn’t speak out because I wasn’t a Conservative talk show host.

Then they came for the Tea Party,

And I didn’t speak out because I wasn’t a member of the Tea Party,

Then they came for the Catholic Bishops,

And I didn’t speak out because I wasn’t a Catholic Bishop,

Then they came for me, a Baptist Preacher;

I told them I voted for “change” and was with Jessie Jackson and Al Sharpton,

And a United Methodist.

They Left Me Alone!

source:

Rev. Clenard Childress

[email protected]

201-704-9325

683 SHARES Facebook Twitter

Want to read more articles like this one? Subscribe to EURnewsletter.

Got A News Tip or Video You Want to Share? Contact us HERE.