Editor’s note: El Paso Inc. asked attorney Clinton Cross to update an article he first wrote in 2011 to reflect today’s political stalemate over Obamacare and government funding.

Our nation, divided, stands on the brink of political disaster. On one side of the aisle, political leaders refuse to support a budget that funds the Affordable Care Act, sometimes called Obamacare.

On the other side of the aisle, political leaders refuse to consider significant reforms to social programs.

Strong interest groups support each political camp. There are few moderates willing to consider compromise in either camp.

While there are obvious distinctions, the current political deadlock has some unpleasant similarities with the political battle that resulted in the Compromise of 1850.

Today, tea party advocates believe that they are waging a moral crusade against socialism by demanding funding cuts to Obamacare and social “entitlements.”

Others, equally adamant, refuse to negotiate, arguing that there can be no “compromise” when one side threatens to destroy the nation’s economic survival unless it gets its way.

The crises of 1850 were caused by the admission of the Republic of Texas into the union as a state in 1845, and California’s subsequent request to be admitted into the union in 1849.

With the smoldering issue of slavery underlying much of the debate, these two events threatened immediate civil war. Surprisingly, the trigger was likely to be a border dispute between Texas and New Mexico.

The boundary dispute between Texas and New Mexico had its roots in an earlier boundary dispute. When in 1836 Texas first gained its independence from Mexico, President Santa Ana of Mexico signed the Treaty of Velasco, now stored in the El Paso Public Library.

The treaty did not clearly establish the southern boundary between the Republic of Texas and Mexico. The treaty’s lacks of clarity lead to the Mexican War.

In 1848, the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo settled the issue of Texas’ southern boundary. But the treaty failed to define the Republic’s Western boundaries.

The Republic and then the State of Texas claimed that its western boundaries included much of what are now New Mexico, Colorado and Oklahoma. In 1848, Texas attempted to advance its claim to territory that is now in New Mexico by organizing Santa Fe County. New Mexico military and civilian leaders then petitioned the federal government to organize their area into a federal territory.

Texas Gov. George Wood asked the legislature to give him the power to assert the claim of Texas to New Mexico “with the whole power and resources of the State.”

In 1849, when California applied for admission to the union as a “free” state, the issue of how to admit not only California but also the other territories obtained from Mexico, some of which were claimed by the state of Texas, presented itself to Congress.

Texas, a “slave” state, claimed boundaries that included populations that did not want to be part of the new state and wanted to limit Texas’ boundary claims as much as possible. As a matter of fact, U.S. troops stationed in Santa Fe and many of its residents claimed that New Mexico extended to the southeast and east almost to San Antonio.

In January 1850, 73-year-old Henry Clay came out of retirement and presented a compromise proposal to the Senate. When after several months the matter remained unresolved, the Senate appointed a Committee of Thirteen to resolve all questions involving the slavery issue.

Among other things, the proposal recommended that Texas relinquish its claims to lands in New Mexico, Colorado and Oklahoma in exchange for federal assumption of Texas’s unpaid debts, totaling $10 million.

Clay’s proposal ignited an eight-month debate in Congress. Daniel Webster, the North’s most spellbinding orator, threw his support behind Clay’s compromise. “Mr. President,” he began, “I wish to speak today not as a Massachusetts man, nor as a Northern man, but as an American….”

Threat to the union

Opposition to compromise was fierce. On March 4, 1850, 27 days before his death, John C. Calhoun delivered through a proxy his last political speech, pointing out that division of the newly acquired territories from Mexico threatened the “equilibrium between the two sections in the government” and that failure to address the problem would result in disunion.

As Congress debated what to do about the new territories, Texas Gov. Peter Bell commissioned Robert Neighbors to travel to what is now far West Texas and New Mexico for the purpose of organizing four Texas counties.

When he arrived in San Elizario to organize El Paso County, he was met by Charles A. Hoppin, a lawyer and former mayor of Mobile, Ala. Hoppin had written Bell in 1849 asking for a copy of the Texas statutes, and asking him to take steps to organize the region as a part of the State of Texas. With Hoppin’s support, Neighbors had little difficulty in organizing El Paso as a Texas county.

When Neighbors went to Santa Fe and surrounding areas, he found himself and his proposals to organize three of the four counties as Texas counties unwelcome.

Neighbors issued a report on the results of his efforts in June 1850. Texans were outraged. Some advocated the use of military force to secure the state’s claims; others urged secession.

Bell called a special session of the Texas legislature. But before it began, New Mexicans ratified a constitution for a proposed state specifying boundaries that included land claimed by Texas. President Zachary Taylor reinforced the Army units stationed in New Mexico and stated that he would order them to resist Texas militiamen if they entered the disputed area.

On the July 4, 1850, Washington politicians remained stubbornly divided; compromise appeared to be dead. But then on July 9, President Zachary Taylor died of gastroenteritis.

Taylor’s successor, President Millard Fillmore, supported compromise. Speaker of the House Howell Cobb also supported compromise.

In Congress, Sen. Stephen Douglas led the fight for compromise, and split Clay’s proposal into five separate bills. The third proposal dealt with the hotly contested issue of the Texas-New Mexico border.

So why are we in Texas?

Although there was not enough support to pass Clay’s original package, with shifting votes and alliances for each bill, in the end each bill passed.

Logically, El Paso, closely linked historically, culturally and economically to the Southwest, should have been included in the New Mexico territory.

By the time Congress voted on the Texas-New Mexico boundaries, however, El Paso had already been organized as a Texas county. As a result, the drafters of the Compromise of 1850 had little choice but to include El Paso within the boundaries of the State of Texas.

What lessons can we learn from the Compromise of 1850?

Politicians tend to postpone really tough decisions until they have no alternative but to bite the bullet. The founding fathers, for instance, compromised on almost every issue with which they were presented. They also postponed resolution of the most difficult issue, the issue of slavery, because at that time, compromise on that issue was impossible. But the struggling nation got a Constitution.

The Compromise of 1820 again postponed resolution of the slavery issue. By 1850, the country was close to a civil war, but Henry Clay and Stephen Douglas found a way to resolve the smoldering but ultimately irreconcilable conflict. In addition, it gave the North time to increase its industrial strength and to thereby ultimately win the Civil War.

Such delaying tactics came into play again about two years ago, when Congress faced the issue of whether to raise the debt ceiling. On Aug. 2, 2011, President Obama signed the Budget Control Act of 2011. The act postponed ultimate resolution of the contested issues but provided for a Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction – a “Supercommittee” of 12 – to study, debate and make bipartisan recommendations for reducing the national deficit. In spite of the threat of significant consequences – what is now called sequestration – the committee members failed to agree on a plan. Some members of Congress now suggest appointment of a new committee to study resolution of the current budget disputes.

As Mark Twain once remarked, “History may not repeat itself, but it sure does rhyme.”

In spite of all its frustrations, the democratic process demands compromise. Santa Anna “bit the bullet” when, after the Battle of San Jacinto, he signed the Treaty of Velasco. Robert E. Lee “bit the bullet” when, after losing more soldiers than ever before in the history of mankind, he surrendered at Appomattox.

In this current conflict over Obamacare and deficit spending, war is unlikely – but economic battles are not – and compromise is necessary. In the past, unforeseen events have lead to an ultimate resolution. There’s no telling how history will play out in the next few weeks.

_________________________________________________________

Clinton F. Cross is an El Paso lawyer and an amateur historian.