Topics: aereo, Copyright, golden age, Supreme Court, Television, TV, Technology News, Business News

Imagine if we had no DVRs, and VCRs had never existed, because back in 1984, the Supreme Court decided that the technology that made home taping possible violated copyright law. That’s the easiest way to understand why many, many people, on widely varying sides of the political spectrum, are upset at the Supreme Court’s Wednesday ruling that Aereo — a company that transmits broadcast television programs via the Internet — is illegal.

It’s enough to turn a cord-cutter into an outright libertarian. To the critics of the Supreme Court’s decision, the outcome isn’t just bad because Aereo is now surely defunct, it’s horrible because there are all these other cool services that we don’t even know we want that have potentially been outlawed. The Supreme Court is denying us our future to protect the income stream of an incumbent dinosaur. Boo. Hiss.

Maybe. But there is at least one other way to look at this. One reason that TV, right now, is in a golden age, is that it has, so far, managed to resist the “unbundling” pressures exerted by new technology. In other words, TV has succeeded in protecting a big chunk of its historical revenue streams from Silicon Valley-styel disruption. For example, the cable companies pay broadcast TV large sums of money for the right to redistribute their content. And that revenue helps pay for the production of all those expensive dramas that we like so much.

Aereo threatened that revenue stream. So you could make the case, as I did a couple of months ago, that Aereo threatened the Golden Age.

But the bottom line is that this is a fight about money. Aereo has figured out an (arguably) legal technological hack that allows it to distribute broadcast TV content over the Internet without paying the same fees that cable companies or satellite TV operators are forced to pay to distribute that same content to their subscribers. If Aereo can get away with this, the pay-TV operators are likely to argue that they too should be able to do so. And whooooosh – there goes another huge stream of income previously enjoyed by the broadcast TV channels.

The argument here is that the technologically enabled cord-cutter desire to watch only what we want to watch as cheaply as possible will undermine the profitability of the TV industry to the point that it negatively impacts budgets for writers and directors and actors and special effects.