By Lydia X. McCoy of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Some Knox County school board members are still hearing from teachers and principals about their struggles to fill their absences with substitute teachers.

The issue was a main topic Monday at a lunch meeting held at Panera Bread on Cumberland Avenue by several board members who wanted to get together to talk about some items in between their regular scheduled meetings.

Attending the meeting were board members Patti Bounds, Amber Rountree, Terry Hill and Doug Harris. They were joined by Tanya Coats, president of the Knox County Education Association, and Elizabeth Alves, the school system’s assistant superintendent of curriculum and instruction.

“It really spurred on because of being together at our (Bible study meetings), when we would start visiting and a subject would come up, but we can’t talk about it,” Hill said. “We’ve been very, very aware of not violating any laws. So we said let’s sit down and have lunch and talk about this.”

The group discussed continuing the meetings and possibly even moving them to the evenings to allow other members the chance to attend.

One cause of the substitute teacher shortage has been a change the district has had to make as a result of the Affordable Care Act, which mandates health care benefits be provided if a substitute works more than a certain number of hours. As a result, the school system has restricted substitutes to working 120 hours a month.

To look at these issues and come up with recommendations, the school system has formed a 14-member committee, convened by Kathy Sims, the school system’s chief human resources officer.

Some of the recommendations included a substitute teacher recruitment fair and differential pay of $25 for substitutes who work at schools with a percentage of unfilled teacher absences of 15 percent or more and an additional $20 a day for subs who work on Mondays and Friday. Substitutes currently are paid $68 for certified positions.

Hill, who represents schools in part of the West part of the county, said she has heard that the differential pay has created another problem.

“It’s made the schools in my district … they’re losing their subs because the subs are holding out to see if they get to a school where they can get more money,” she said. “It’s hurting ours. One of the secretaries had to spend the first hour and a half of school calling, just calling trying to get subs in. I don’t know if money will change that or not.”

Harris recommended looking at a company that manages substitutes based out of Nashville. The company is similar to a temp agency, he said.

“The bottom line is we have to get that filled,” he said. “It pays the same ... they just know how to recruit. They have a computer system so you don’t have to do all of that calling.”

Bounds, who went to the substitute recruitment fair on Dec. 6, said she was encouraged by the turn out. She said she has also been talking to officials at the schools in the northwest part of the county, and those who are subbing.

“Is it solved? No. Is it better. I don’t know,” she said. “From what I understand by talking to Kathy (Sims), it’s improving and they’re encouraged by that especially in some of those high needs schools but that’s not helping your schools.”