Not that long ago, IBD Leaderboard company Acadia Healthcare was a small player in behavioral health, with only a handful of facilities in the U.S.

Then a new management team arrived on the scene with aggressive expansion in mind.

Acadia 's ( ACHC ) new boss was Joey Jacobs. He previously was chairman and CEO at Psychiatric Solutions, which had been folded intoUniversal Health Services ( UHS ) after a $3 billion merger in 2010.

Jacobs and his management team, including other executives from his merged company, arrived in the first quarter of 2011.

They quickly got to work.

In April, Acadia made its first acquisition -- Youth & Family Centered Services, based in Austin, Texas -- amounting to 13 facilities with 1,300 beds. A short time later, the team went after PHC, which is also known as Pioneer Behavioral Health.

PHC wasn't that big; it had just five facilities with 270 beds. But it was a publicly traded company, and by combining with it, Acadia became a public company.

"By getting access to public capital, they were able to accelerate their consolidation strategy," said Whit Mayo, an analyst with Robert W. Baird.

Acquisitions In Mind

Today, after several other buyouts, Franklin, Tenn.-based Acadia runs 76 behavioral health care facilities with more than 5,600 beds in 24 states, the United Kingdom and Puerto Rico.

It's going to get even bigger.

A pending acquisition of CRC Health Group, expected to close in 2015's first quarter, will give Acadia another 120 facilities in the U.S. and a much stronger presence in substance abuse treatment.

The deal, valued at $1.175 billion, was announced in a third-quarter earnings release after the market closed on October 29.

The next day, Acadia's stock shot up nearly 12% and another 5% the day after. It didn't hurt that earnings per share in the quarter jumped 53% from a year earlier to 46 cents on revenue of $294.5 million, which was up 59.4%.

CRC Health, based in Cupertino, Calif., is expected to generate $450 million this year. It operates 36 residential facilities and 84 other kinds of treatment units, which together serve 40,000 patients a day.

CRC will be Acadia's largest deal so far. Analyst Jennifer Lynch of BMO Capital Markets estimated in a research note that CRC could add 40-50 cents in per-share earnings for Acadia in 2015.

She also noted that CRC's treatment for addiction, gambling and other problems "presents another arena for expansion and investment."

Universal Health is still bigger than Acadia in behavioral health. Universal also operates 24 acute-care hospitals, which is why Acadia likes to call itself a pure play in behavioral health.

Until Acadia closes on CRC, its $662 million acquisition in July of U.K.-based Partnerships in Care, or PiC, remains its biggest deal to date. PiC gave Acadia 23 inpatient facilities with over 1,200 beds in the U.K.

PiC is known as the second-largest operator of independent inpatient behavioral health services in the U.K., with revenue last year of $285 million.

"The move into the U.K. was a savvy one," Mayo said. "The National Health Service in the U.K. is outsourcing (behavioral health) at an accelerating rate, and there is a shortage of beds."

He says that PiC had been "a little starved for capital," and now Acadia will be able to help fund organic growth and acquisitions.

"I look at the U.K. deal as expanding the entire addressable market for Acadia in the U.K.," Mayo said.

"I would say the same thing for the CRC transaction (in the U.S.)," he added, referring mostly to the new substance-abuse business that will come with it.

Reimbursement Trends

Insurance coverage for substance abuse has greatly improved with passage of the Affordable Care Act (ObamaCare) and other legislation that puts mental health coverage at "parity" with other medical and surgical benefits, Mayo says.

"The federal government is creating a whole new set of rules and mandates for the insurance industry to enhance the benefits they offer for mental health issues," he added.

According to statements by Jacobs, who wasn't available for an interview, Acadia will keep looking for other acquisitions in the U.S. and the U.K., and will keep adding new beds to existing facilities.

Acadia, Mayo says, indicated earlier this year that it would try to increase the number of beds at existing facilities by 16% over two years.

"Each new patient that comes through will provide some level of incremental margin improvement," Mayo said. He compared it to a hotel: the more rooms filled, the better.

In behavioral health, filling rooms isn't a big problem. "One issue in the industry is that there are not enough beds to serve demand," Mayo said.

The sector also has relatively low levels of uncollected payments.

"We continue to favor the behavioral space within health care facilities as low levels of bad debt, unmet demand and a growing need for services lends to quality earnings growth," noted Lynch.

Universal is Acadia's chief rival in the U.S. It's also a rival in the U.K., where it recently paid $335 million for Cygnet Health, which gave it 15 behavioral health units and two nursing homes.

In the U.S., "it's still a fragmented industry with a lot of single-facility operators out there," said Scott Brittain, an Acadia spokesman.

Acadia's revenue growth in the third quarter reflected nearly 1,900 new beds added in the prior 12 months. More than 1,500 came through five acquisitions, including PiC and McCallum Place, which runs eating-disorder treatment centers in St. Louis and Austin, Texas.

After reporting third-quarter results, Acadia raised its EPS guidance for the full year to $1.52-$1.53 from $1.44-$1.46 previously.

Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expect earnings to come in at the high end -- $1.53 -- for a 43% gain over last year. They see earnings rising 34% in 2015.

With a market cap around $3.8 billion, Acadia is the fourth-largest company in IBD's Medical-Outpatient/Home Care industry group, afterFresenius Medica l ( FMS ),Davita Healthcare Partner s ( DVA ) andMednax ( MD ). The group ranks No. 21 in performance of 197 that IBD tracks.