Interview with Daniel Ward, owner

Q: How did you get involved in this business?

A: I’ve always been into sports and fitness, and was active in high school and college. And I’ve always had a fascination with the human body — what it can do, achieve, change, etc. Writing workout programs came naturally to me, even in high school, and I have always liked working with people. So, it was either go into fitness or become a doctor. When I was at the Mayo Clinic, I came to this crossroads and decided to go into fitness based on quality of life — I wanted to have a family and kids, and be involved with how I saw fit. I wanted to work with people on a regular basis, not just when something is wrong or when they’re sick.

Q: What distinguishes you from other businesses in your category?

A: Personal touch. We pride ourselves on going the extra mile for all of our clients and members. One client told me that we make people feel good about the decision they made to come see us. It’s one thing to have a good trainer and someone you like because he or she has good workouts. But it’s a completely different thing when you have a trainer who delivers workouts that are innovative, gives you an experience to remember and is a person who becomes close to you, like a good friend or family member.

Q: What do you like best about your line of work?

A: I’d like to think of myself as a natural leader, and I really enjoy inspiring and motivating people to be their best. Quality coaches, trainers and instructors are the first line of defense against the majority of the problems today — childhood obesity, cardiac disease, etc.

Q: What is your business’ biggest challenge?

A: Increasing our position in corporate wellness and fitness. Since 2010, we’ve worked with prominent local, national and even international companies. We provide the on-site personal services for companies by offering exercise classes, weight loss challenges, fitness challenges, lunch and learns, etc. We have a unique way of working with our clients, understanding their culture.

Q: Something people might be surprised to learn about you or your business:

A: We match! I’ve always been into dressing nice and matching my shoes with my outfits. So, I carried this into my business and now it’s become something that a lot of our clients and all of our trainers have taken on. It’s fun and it feels good. Also, we have fantastic coaches, trainers and instructors, wellness coaches, nutritionists and sport psychologists.

Profile

Business: Inward Fitness

Address: 3900 E. Mexico Ave. Suite GL-10

Hours: 6 a.m. to 7 p.m. Monday through Friday, 6 a.m. to 3 p.m. Saturday, closed Sunday

Founded: 2005

Contact: 720-295-3471

Employees: 5