Who: Tenacious D, Andrew W.K., Amy Poehler, the Darkness, the Kids in the Hall, "Mystery Science Theater 3000," Henry Rollins, Kristen Schaal and many more.

With all its mysterious iconography, the Shrine Auditorium seems like a place that could have a network of underground passages and secret shortcuts. That might explain how Jack Black was able to get around the four stages of the Festival Supreme like magic.

Wearing in a dark sequined jacket over an oversized T-shirt emblazoned with a cat that nicely complemented his belly, Black popped up everywhere throughout the comedy and music festival Saturday. He capped the night by playing guitar with rap-rave headliners Die Antwoord after a day of introducing or collaborating with nearly everyone.

Of course, Black’s own group was a popular draw, but no one had ever seen Tenacious D perform like this. The act, described as “29 minutes of nonstop jazz,” was an extremely humorous, enjoyable performance, with Black scatting and improvising lines such as, “There are no wrong notes in jazz … just like in life.” Very meta.

The set included jazz standards such as “On Broadway” and “Moondance,” as well as a reinterpretation of the group’s own hit, “Tribute.” TV host Craig Ferguson joined them to perform the Proclaimers’ “I’m Gonna Be (500 Miles).” It was the perfect amount of strangeness for a crowd that included people dressed as yetis, superheroes and a crucified Jesus Christ.

One of Black’s earlier collaborations was also the most memorable. Amy Poehler walked onto the stage looking like Mitch Hedberg at his peak and told the audience she was burned out on Hollywood. Behind dark sunglasses, she deadpanned that she hadn’t prepared anything, saying, “Could I have written something? Sure. Could I have rehearsed? Fine. But that’s not what life is.”

Black and Poehler sang a duet of Bette Midler’s “The Rose” to a broken-hearted young audience member. It was the kind of “laugh at the pain” act that must be over the top to work, by two professionals who are examples of what’s going right in American comedy.

Acts like Reggie Watts and Puddles Pity Party relied on quirkiness over tradition to carry the punchlines. Puddles the Clown, with his terrifying imagery and phenomenal voice, was a crowd favorite. It was a delight to see him lurk around the Shrine throughout the evening.

Nostalgic quirkiness was on tap, too. Sketch comedy forebears Kids in the Hall performed an hour of new material, such as two guys arguing over an imaginary girlfriend. Members of “Mystery Science Theater 3000” delivered their famously corny jokes over a viewing of Godzilla vs. Mothra. Both acts were appreciated most by those already familiar with the shows, and likely over the heads of the Reggie Watts-crowd.

Punk legend and columnist Henry Rollins hit the stage ranting, hilariously recounting his cameo in the decidedly un-punk Michael Keaton film “Jack Frost.” Unfortunately, as with Andrew W.K.’s performance on the same Komodo Dragon stage later in the night, the audio would have been difficult to hear at a backyard barbecue, let alone a large festival.

The stand-up acts that did approach “traditional,” including Tig Notaro, Bill Burr and Kristen Schaal, were among the best. The reaction of Burr’s crowd reinforced that he’s a true comedy rock star, and his irreverent take on obesity, plane crashes, Kanye West and (possibly) Peter Dinklage were uproarious. Kristen Schaal’s inimitable voice is a perfect match for her charmingly dark, awkward brand of comedy. She’s an expert at mixing laughter with cringes, describing her recent marriage as “one step closer to the real goal of being a widow.”

After sundown, the main stage featured two acts known for blurring the lines between surrealist humor and edgy musicianship, starting with the Darkness. A decade later, songs like “Love Is Only a Feeling” still pack a lot of punch. Their cover of Radiohead’s “Street Spirit (Fade Out)” is heavy, and Justin Hawkins’ handstands and acrobatics are still impressive, but the act is about as subtle as a Stone Temple Pilots single. They’ve long abandoned any notion of being a “humor rock” act.

South Africa’s Die Antwoord is similarly difficult to pin down on a humor front. The rap-rave trio makes tremendously loud, hyped-up bangers, and their imagery flashes between horrific violence and genuine beauty with zero segue. Songs like “Ugly Boy” and “Enter the Ninja” are refreshing, offensive, humorous and disturbing, often simultaneously.