<p>David Hunter (J. Miles Cary/News Sentinel)</p>

Many working Americans speak bitterly of government benefits going to able-bodied people who would rather draw a check and sit at home playing video games, eating free food and using drugs than hold a job. Anyone who tries to convince them that being poor is more often the result of medical bankruptcy and other economic inequalities than laziness is apt to be accused of inciting “class warfare.”

Related: See David Hunter's new blog, "The Vanities Review"

“Get a job,” unemployed people are told, “and you won’t need government benefits.” The reality is, as of 2012, only 13.2 percent of welfare recipients were from homes with no working adults, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Furthermore, 76 percent of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program households included a child, an elderly person or a disabled person. These vulnerable households receive 83 percent of all SNAP benefits, and 47.8 percent of families in the program had at least one person working.

What about those people who are too irresponsible to get a decent medical insurance plan and end up applying for Medicaid? The truth of the matter is that of uninsured families, 78 percent have at least one working person in the family and 62 percent have one or more individuals working full time. Many of these working poor earn the minimum wage, which barely puts a roof over a family’s head. The Affordable Care Act worked in cooperating states, but Republicans turning down supplemental federal money made the poor in some states worse off.

Doesn’t quite fit the popular image of welfare cheats, does it? There is a small percentage of cheaters, to be sure, who are usually found to have filed false information because they are slightly above the maximum requirements of eligibility and understate income by a small amount to stay qualified. The greatest amount of fraud comes from health care providers who file false or inflated claims. Type “Medicare fraud” in your search engine and read away.

It’s common knowledge — just ask anyone — that welfare cheats spend a lot of taxpayer money on drugs. In states that have passed laws requiring drug testing to qualify for benefits, statistics show that welfare applicants actually test positive at a lower rate for drugs than the general population. Not surprising, since drugs are expensive. The national drug-use rate is 9.4 percent. In states with mandatory tests, the rate of positive drug tests among welfare applicants ranges from 0.002 percent to 8.3 percent, and all except one have a rate below 1 percent.

The information is available online for anyone who wants to look it up, but those who think their chunk of the American dream is being stolen by lazy, drug-using people will never give up on that idea. They don’t want to know the hardships suffered by middle-class and working-poor Americans are the result of money being sucked up and socked away up by a small percentage of obscenely wealthy people who pay nowhere near their fair percentage of taxes on income — aided and abetted by politicians whose re-election campaigns they fund.

Maybe next week we’ll talk about undocumented immigrants living in penthouses and gated communities, sipping champagne and eating Beluga caviar.

David Hunter is a freelance writer and former Knox County sheriff’s deputy. He may be reached at davidhunter333@comcast.net.