Robert Marvin, 56, waits for a doctor to check him out for pain in his left leg at the Peak Vista Homeless Health Center Friday, December 13, 2013. Marvin, who has been homeless off and on and who has a very low income, will be able to get Medicare under the Affordable Care Act. Michael Ciaglo, The Gazette

Harry Stahl walked into Colorado Springs emergency rooms twice this year, and went under a surgeon's knife once in Wyoming.

He left each hospital feeling better - but without a home to go to while he healed.

And being homeless, he left no doubt on his ability to pay for most of those medical bills.

"I didn't - somebody else did," he said.

Come Jan. 1, access to health care for homeless people such as Stahl should vastly improve, and the level of care they receive could become far more advanced and holistic, homeless advocates and health care providers say. Meanwhile, the cost to hospitals for treating homeless people could decline - potentially reducing the amount of charitable care offered each year.

It's all due to expanded Medicaid benefits across Colorado, which will soon be eligible for Coloradans making less than about $15,000 a year in 2014, or 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

As of Nov. 30, about 64,000 of the 160,000 people eligible for expanded Medicaid benefits had signed up in Colorado. It's unknown how many homeless people are among that group.

In the past, programs aimed at that population were limited - often leaving hospitals on the hook for treating uninsured patients.

While the effects of Medicaid expansion are wide-ranging, experts say it could transform health care for the homeless.

"This is a big change," said Barbara DiPietro, director of policy for the National Health Care for the Homeless Council.

To reach that group, Peak Vista Community Health Centers recently dispatched Medicaid enrollment specialists to the Marian House soup kitchen, and it's expanding enrollment hours at its homeless clinic, 117 Rio Grande Ave.

Stahl, 59, never met those enrollment specialists, but he wants to sign up soon.

A slight man with graying hair, Stahl left Wyoming after receiving a heart stent - one, he was told, that was covered under state funding. After arriving in Colorado Springs, he visited Memorial Hospital and Penrose Hospital one time each.

He isn't insured and said he wasn't billed for the first visit, and needs only to pay for half of his other visit.

He wants to sign up for expanded Medicaid coverage - he has diabetes and is nervous about more health complications in the future - but he wants to find a place to live first.

"Of course, I ain't worried about medical bills," Stahl said. "The main bills to worry about is to pay rent, pay the lights and heat and all that; cable bills and phone bills."

Services should evolve

In the past, the homeless relied on a mix of services for care in the Pikes Peak region. The Colorado Indigent Care Program offered low-cost or free care at participating providers, while a host of doctors, hospitals and nonprofits worked to fill the need for free care.

AspenPointe offers access to every service offered by the nonprofit - including psychologists and art therapy classes - but only if the person is chronically homeless.

At times, that designation was a barrier to care. To meet the criteria, a person must have four instances of homelessness in three years, or one year of continuous homelessness.

But that hodgepodge network could change with Medicaid expansion, experts say.

"Basically, individuals will have a direct line to get services instead of having to jump through these different hoops," said Michael Branscum, an AspenPointe clinician.

Already, Medicaid help was available for people living at the extremes of poverty.

Typically, Medicaid only served poor children, pregnant women and people with disabilities.

But in 2012, Colorado lawmakers offered a jump start on Medicaid expansion - opening up 10,000 slots across the state for people making less than 10 percent of the annual federal poverty level - about $95 a month.

Officials opened another 10,000 slots this year. Still, 9,200 people remained on a wait list to access those benefits, said Rachel Reiter, spokeswoman for the Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing.

Data kept from that pilot program offered a glimpse of how homeless people could use Medicaid services in the future.

In the Pikes Peak region, about half of the people signed up for the Medicaid pilot expansion signed up for a primary care doctor.

For every 1,000 enrollees, the Department of Health Care Policy and Financing recorded 159 inpatient hospital admissions and 1,316 emergency room or urgent care visits, according to an agency fact sheet. There also were 3,305 outpatient visits per 1,000 enrollees, not including emergency room and urgent care visits.

The challenge comes in dealing with a population new to health care benefits, said Marc Williams, a department spokesman.

"The majority of them are homeless, they have not had insurance before and they don't know how to use insurance," Williams said. "And so one of the challenges that we and our stakeholders have is educating this population about what this means."

Holistic advantages

The biggest advantage in Medicaid expansion may come in offering more comprehensive care, said Greg Morris, program director for Peak Vista Community Health Center's homeless clinic.

People facing homelessness often also face substance abuse problems and mental health disorders - severely complicating treatment, he said.

Nearly one-third of the 1,822 homeless people counted in Colorado Springs by the United Way in January reported a severe mental illnesses, said Anne Beer, who leads the nonprofit's point-in-time homeless count.

Slightly more than one in four of those people had chronic substance abuse problems, she said. The count did not include people "couch surfing" - staying with friends or relatives, but without a home of their own.

In the past, Morris had particular difficulty referring patients to bone specialists and neurologists.

"I could care for somebody up to a certain point, but I could not see it to its appropriate conclusion," Morris said. "And that is the most frustrating thing,"

"That is totally due to the fact that they did not have insurance. So there are certain doors that are just absolutely closed in that regard. With Medicaid, those doors open up."

Count Robert Marvin, 56, among those needing neurological care - but unable to see a specialist.

On Friday, he sat on a examination table at the Peak Vista clinic, grimacing while straightening his left leg. A doctor told him that he has arthritis, a Baker's cyst and softening of the bone.

"I'm just getting older than I think I am," Marvin said.

Meanwhile, he said issues with the vertebrae in his neck continue to go untreated.

Doctors fused two of his vertebrae after a work accident 20 years ago, he said. But those vertebrae give him problems - often causing him to lose feeling in his hands and legs.

"To try to pick change out of my pocket is impossible - I have to empty the whole pocket," Marvin said.

Having routinely been homeless - he slept in a city bush during one three-year stretch - he relies on the Colorado Indigent Care Program.

But now he has a place to live, courtesy of Westside Cares. The nonprofit offered him a job as caretaker for its new facility off Colorado Avenue, as well as an apartment for $400 a month. And he plans to sign up for expanded Medicaid services this week - though he admits procrastinating in the past.

Cultural change

That attitude - waiting until the pain is "acute and raging" before seeking care - is common among the homeless population, said Stephen Brown, the nonprofit's executive director.

With that in mind, outreach will be essential in the coming months.

"My hunch is until there's a perceived benefit, it's not going to be a hot item," Brown said. "I really think that's going to be the hard sell on this."

Other challenges abound.

People need a physical address to receive their Medicaid card - not the easiest thing for those living on the street. Also, navigating medical coverage can be confusing, said B.J. Iacino, spokeswoman for the Colorado Coalition for the Homeless.

The state suffers from a shortage of physicians and specialists, especially in Colorado's rural communities.

And while people are specially trained to deal with the homeless, many don't see them on a daily basis.

"The term is complex needs," Iacino said. "So whether or not medical providers... can understand and respond to those complex needs remains to be seen."