updated 9:45pm

WASHINGTON — The spat between Sen. Ted Cruz and GOP strategist Karl Rove escalated late Sunday, with Cruz dusting off an email exchange from 2009 to refute Rove’s denial of claims in his forthcoming book.

“I never imagined that his response would be a straight-out falsehood. It’s disappointing; this is why people are so cynical about politics, because too many people are willing to lie,” Cruz said in a statement issued by his campaign.

Cruz asserted in his book that Rove was angry that he’d secured a donation and endorsement from former President George H.W. Bush, and that Rove said Bush’s advanced age made his judgment unreliable. The emails Cruz released don’t support the ageism allegation. But they do show Rove explicitly saying the endorsement would anger Bush library donors and supporters of state Rep. Dan Branch, who was also angling to replace Abbott, something Rove denied earlier today.

“[The] distress you mention is not mine or 43 — it is the people raising money for the library who are also Branch fans and will not understand why one part of the Bush family is for not-the-guy while they are raising money big bucks for library,” Rove wrote in the email released by Cruz.

Read the entire email exchange at the end of this blog item.

updated 5pm with Rove response

WASHINGTON – Add GOP operative Karl Rove to the ever-growing list of Ted Cruz’s political adversaries.

In Cruz’s forthcoming book, A Time for Truth, set for publication on Tuesday, he recounts a tense confrontation in which Rove bullied him into burying an endorsement from George H.W. Bush amid concerns that would alienate donors to the George W. Bush library in Dallas.

Rove, in Cruz’s telling, also called Bush “too old” to exercise sound political judgment in such matters – an assertion bound to stir consternation in the tight knit family hoping to elect its third president next year.

Sunday afternoon, Rove issued a stern denial, saying he never questioning the mental faculties of a president he has revered for decades. He said his concern about the endorsement was that Greg Abbott hadn’t yet announced whether he would seek re-election as attorney general.

“My call to Mr. Cruz apparently didn’t offend him back then because he continued seeking my counsel about his political ambitions, specifically his 2012 bid for the U.S. Senate,” Rove said. “One piece of advice I offered was that he should stop describing himself as the `next Marco Rubio,’ since he did not have Senator Rubio’s outstanding legislative record of accomplishments as speaker of the Florida House of Representatives.” (Full statement below.)

The run-in took place during Cruz’s short-lived campaign for state attorney general in 2009. George P. Bush – son of Jeb Bush, and now the Texas land commissioner –offered to introduce him to his grandfather, who turned 91 this month.

Cruz flew to the Bush compound in Kennebunkport, Maine. He ended up hitting it off with the 41st president. He scored an afternoon on the boat with him and Barbara Bush with a stop for lobster rolls along the coast. Bush lent him some clothes so he wouldn’t have to wear his suit – including jeans and a belt buckle that read “President of the United States.”

Cruz called it “surreal” to be wearing Bush’s clothes.

He returned to Houston with a $1,000 donation and an endorsement.

Rove – George W. Bush’s longtime consigliore — heard about the meeting and called Cruz, livid.

“He was irate, demanding, ‘What in the hell do you think you are doing?!’” the senator writes. “Texas donors were giving the Bushes tens of millions, including major donors who were supporting the Dallas state rep who wanted to run for attorney general” – Cruz doesn’t name him, but was referring to Dan Branch – and those donors “were now berating Karl.”

Then, in a passage that could – intentionally or not — sow divisions in the Bush orbit, Cruz asserts that Rove denigrated the aging Bush’s mental capacity.

“He suggested that the elder Bush was too old to have good judgment anymore,” Cruz writes. “I was offended by that characterization and knew from my visit with 41 that it wasn’t remotely true.”

Rove demanded that Cruz return the check, but it had already been cashed. Cruz did give into pressure to keep quiet about Bush’s support, though.

“He implied that if I made any news about Bush 41’s support, then Bush 43 would endorse my opponent,” Cruz writes. That stung, given the four years he’d devoted to electing and then serving the president. He wasn’t sure if Rove had the authority to make such threats on behalf of the Bushes, but “the last thing I wanted to do in running a fledgling campaign in Texas was to get on the wrong side of Rove and the second President Bush.”

Within hours, Cruz had received an approved draft of an endorsement from the elder Bush’s office. In the face of Rove’s objections, he told campaign aides to “throw it in the trash.”

“We didn’t want to anger Karl or 43. The former president’s office said he understood,” Cruz writes.

The bid for attorney general fizzled when Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison backed away from public avowals to step down early, win or lose, after challenging Rick Perry for governor in the 2010 primary. Cruz turned his sights to winning her seat when her term ended in 2012.

Rove later tried to talk him out of that race, urging him to take the easier path in 2012 and run for attorney general, rather than challenging the establishment favorite, Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst.

“You’re a fool,” Rove told him.

The conservative news site Breitbart first reported the incident. Cruz’s book tour begins Monday.

Rove issued a response Sunday afternoon. His full response follows, followed by the emails released late Sunday by the Cruz campaign.