Anyone who knows much about growing marijuana knows it is a giant water hog. Mother Jones, a progressive, left-leaning magazine, has run multiple articles on the subject, including one last year titled “A Single Pot Plant Uses HOW Much Water?!” On July 14, the Sacramento County Board of Supervisors unanimously declared marijuana cultivation a form of water waste.

Monterey County Board of Supervisors, take note. And, perhaps while they’re at it, they can tune out cannabis lawyers, political lobbyists and assorted profiteers. Our local elected and other officials need to act cautiously, follow laws and use their best efforts to act in the best interest of its citizens, including people in need of medical care.

I personally discontinued my own informal “scientific experiments with marijuana” decades ago. As a young adult, the horrifying behavior I witnessed involving marijuana, parents and young children was enough to develop my lifetime skepticism toward pot promoters. Well-funded sophisticated medical marijuana proponents say “The industry has changed.” Yes, there is more money flying around these days, but getting stoned is still getting stoned.

Distributors of medical cannabis emphasize the intoxifying attributes of their products. Much of the merchandise has cute or catchy stoner names, and the THC level of the “artisanal edibles thoughtfully crafted” in the candy being manufactured across the street from me (yes, you read that correctly) is displayed on their website.

THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) is the most famous of cannabinoid compounds in the marijuana plant, the one that gets people high, and the primary focus of marijuana aficionados. The second most known cannabinoid, CBD (cannabidiol) has received much press. Turns out CBD has zero psychoactive properties, but most of the medicinal properties. There is an impending war between traditional drug companies that are producing cannabis-derived CBD-based medicines for specific applications (check out GW Pharmaceuticals) and cannabis growers who denounce “Big Pharma” and believe they can provide the right balance between THC and CBD. It becomes a politics vs. science war. Across the country, there is a manic rush to legitimize the entire marijuana plant as medicine. If done at the political level, and science gets trumped, everyone loses.

With marijuana, the rules are frequently bent in the name of compassion. Unfortunately, the truth sometimes gets tossed. In the July 15 Denver Post, it was reported that out of roughly 14,000 licensed doctors in Colorado, about 15 physicians make 75 percent of the recommendations. According to Harm Reduction Journal, an international journal, the average user of medical marijuana in California is a 32-year-old white male with a history of alcohol and substance abuse and no history of life-threatening illnesses. In Monterey County, a quick Google search nets more than 40 marijuana “delivery services” with menus, and only four doctors that write marijuana recommendations. California State Board of Equalization, take note. There may be enough uncollected sales tax money there to run our local office. The “good news” is that all Monterey County residents have ready access to “their medicine.”

Advertisement

My parents, now deceased, voted for Proposition 215, which was passed with 54.6 percent of the voters. It allowed patients and defined caregivers to cultivate marijuana for medical treatment. It is not real hard to grow. Proposition 215 specifically stated it was “to encourage the federal and state governments to implement a plan for safe and affordable distribution.” Today, dispensaries sell their wares for more than 40 times the price of the 1970s. And, last time I checked, cities and counties were not “federal and state” governments.

We have gone from idiotic laws of incarceration to treating marijuana as a religious sacrament. With both extremes, the public loses. I hope our politicians at the local, state and federal levels can make decisions independent of hornswoggling lobbyists. Say no to water wasting.

Michael Corlett is a lifelong Salinas resident.