By Gretchen Reynolds, The New York Times

Some forms of exercise may be much more effective than others at bulking up the brain, according to a new study in rats. For the first time, scientists compared head-to-head the neurological effects of different types of exercise: running, weight training and high-intensity interval training. The surprising results suggest that going hard may not be the best option for long-term brain health.

Studies have shown that physical activity generally increases brain volume and can reduce the number and size of age-related holes in the brain’s white and gray matter.

Exercise also, and perhaps most resonantly, augments adult neurogenesis, which is the creation of new brain cells in an already mature brain. In studies with animals, exercise, in the form of running wheels or treadmills, has been found to double or even triple the number of new neurons in the animals’ hippocampus, a key area of the brain for learning and memory. Scientists believe that exercise has similar effects on the human hippocampus.

These past studies understandably have focused on distance running. Lab rodents know how to run. But whether other forms of exercise likewise prompt increases in neurogenesis is an issue of increasing interest, given the popularity of weight training and high-intensity intervals.

So for the new study, in The Journal of Physiology, researchers at the University of Jyvaskyla in Finland injected adult male rats with a substance that marks new brain cells and then set groups of them to different workouts, with one group remaining sedentary to serve as controls.

Some were given running wheels in their cages, allowing them to run at will. Others began resistance training, which for rats involves climbing a wall with tiny weights attached to their tails.

Still others took up the rodent equivalent of high-intensity interval training: The animals were placed on little treadmills and required to sprint at a rapid and strenuous pace for three minutes, followed by two minutes of slow skittering, with the entire sequence repeated for a total of 15 minutes.

Those rats that had jogged on wheels showed robust levels of neurogenesis, far more than in the brains of the sedentary animals.

There were far fewer new neurons in the brains of the animals that had completed high-intensity interval training. They showed somewhat larger amounts than in the sedentary animals but far fewer than in the distance runners.

And the weight-training rats, although much stronger, showed no discernible augmentation of neurogenesis. Their hippocampal tissue looked just like that of the animals that had not exercised at all.

Obviously, rats are not people. But the implications suggest, said Miriam Nokia, a research fellow who led the study, that “sustained aerobic exercise might be most beneficial for brain health also in humans.”

So if you weight train or exclusively work out with intense intervals, continue. But perhaps also thread in an occasional run or bike ride for the sake of your hippocampal health.