SOCHI — As her flight from Munich began its descent into Sochi nine days ago, it suddenly dawned on Mikaela Shiffrin exactly what she wanted to do in her first Olympics, and more important, how she wanted to do it. It might have come to her in a dream while dozing off somewhere over the Black Sea; she’s not sure. If so, it was a dream about a dream that came true, and it came with clarity.

The day after she became the youngest Olympic slalom champion at age 18, the pride of Eagle-Vail related that story with humor. She wanted to write about that burst of insight immediately by typing on her iPad, but the flight attendant insisted she turn off the device in preparation for landing.

“You don’t understand, this is the medal,” Shiffrin told her with some impatience. “You need to let me write this.”

Eventually she committed her ideas to writing, and Saturday she shared them.

“I’ve been told the Olympics is all about the process, it’s all about the journey,” Shiffrin said. “I’ve also been told that you go for gold and nothing else. Right now it seems like it’s almost, they’re two opposites, and I don’t see why you can’t combine the two and use the journey to get the gold. That’s what I came here to do.

“It seems like the Olympics is a lot about the upsets. That’s what inspires people because it feels like a miracle, and for the crowd — for the world watching — miracles give them hope that something like that can happen for themselves. My goal coming to the Olympics was to prove to the world that miracles are not random, and that you’re in charge of your own destiny. I wanted to paint my own miracle. Hopefully that inspires the world that it doesn’t need to be a random thing.”

She was prepared in every way for the race she won, including making a brilliant save overcoming a bobble that almost threw it all away. She even had the foresight not to wear mascara, because she remembered a friend commenting after watching Lindsey Vonn’s mascara run four years ago at the Vancouver Games when she won the Olympic downhill.

“I was like, ‘Either waterproof or nothing, because if I start crying, I do not want to look like a witch,’ ” Shiffrin said.

When she crossed the finish line and saw the green No. 1 that confirmed her as Olympic champion, she wanted to savor the moment.

“I mostly just didn’t want to stop,” Shiffrin said. “I kept skiing around the finish arena. I wanted to keep my skis moving as long as I could because it just felt so good to be able to ski down the mountain like that and really feel free — free to make mistakes, free to recover from them.”

“A firecracker” at age 92

Shiffrin wasn’t embarrassed by the mistake she made.

“When you make it to the finish with that, it’s a bigger accomplishment than just having a clean run,” she said. “Everybody watching, their hearts stopped, it keeps going, you don’t know where you stand and you really hold your breath to the finish. That’s what makes ski racing exciting. That’s what makes any sport exciting. I do hope I can inspire people to try and put on a show for themselves, for the crowd.”

After the race there was picture posing, a flower ceremony, finish arena interviews and a news conference. It was 10:30 p.m. when Shiffrin and her parents finally left the arena, packed an overnight bag and took a car 30 miles down to Sochi for a late-night chat with NBC’s Bob Costas. They were delighted there to see NBC video of the celebration at her grandmother’s house in Massachusetts at the moment she won. Shiffrin’s grandmother is 92 years old.

“They all jumped up and were screaming, and I think she jumped higher than anyone else,” Shiffrin said. “Like, ‘Nana, where did you get that power in your legs? Give me some of that, what have you been doing?’ She’s a firecracker.”

Shiffrin’s mother, Eileen, loved it too. Nana is Eileen’s mother.

“She was so excited,” Eileen said. “It was hilarious.”

The Shiffrins were in bed by 3:30 a.m., up again at 10 a.m. Saturday for a 12:30 p.m. news conference and then more TV interviews. Despite her head cold, Mikaela was holding up great. So was Mom.

“I haven’t cried since she got the gold medal, and I’m really proud of myself,” Eileen said Saturday. “Every now and then I get really emotional, but I’m just so proud of Mikaela on so many different levels.

“To be honest, the gold medal part of it, I haven’t really gotten my arms wrapped around that. It hasn’t sunk in. It’s her tenacity that got it. It’s not the medal, it’s what it took for her to accomplish that. It’s so cool.”

“All of a sudden it hits you”

Saturday afternoon was a blur, and it reminded Mikaela of racing slalom.

“It’s been a lot like the run, where I can’t even think, I can’t remember what just happened and I can’t see but a split second ahead of me,” Shiffrin said. “I’m excited for a point where I’ll be able to really sit down and take a breath and grasp the whole thing.”

She received countless texts from friends in Vail and Vermont. At the medals ceremony Saturday night, nearly 24 hours after she became an Olympic champion, the enormity of it all began to sink in. Mom and Dad were in the audience, taking pictures. When Mikaela got up on the top step of the podium, received her medal and prepared herself for the playing of “The Star-Spangled Banner,” tears pooled in her eyes.

“It’s just one of those things that you don’t think about, and then all of a sudden it hits you,” Shiffrin said. “It’s like, ‘This is the Olympics, and I have a gold, and that’s been a dream of mine, and I’m not really sure what to think.’ “

There was one thing she was thinking because of the cold she has been fighting.

“I’m just glad I didn’t sneeze up there,” Shiffrin said. “I was scared I was going to sneeze and get like goobers all over everything.”

John Meyer: 303-954-1616, jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer