Senator Reid is getting desperate as the Democrats are resigning themselves to losing the Senate.

His frantic response to that has been to continually lash out at the Koch Brothers as if they're the reason why the country is sick and tired of Democratic Party rule. A little law called ObamaCare that drastically hiked the cost of health insurance for working families may have had something to do with that.

Is it raining outside? The Koch Brothers! Is it sunny outside? Why do the Koch Brothers hate the rain? Has Ukraine been invaded? Koch Brothers!

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) on Thursday accused Republicans of holding up crucial assistance to Ukraine in order to protect the Koch brothers. Reid tied the billionaires David and Charles Koch, who have bankrolled conservative causes, to GOP demands that language delaying the Internal Revenue Service’s regulation of nonprofit political advocacy groups be added to the Ukraine package.

Harry Reid is lying, as usual. The Koch Brothers can take care of themselves, but Obama's IRS goons targeted ordinary people to protect the Democratic Party.

And assistance to the Ukraine wouldn't be held up if the Democrats hadn't, predictably, tried to shove other agendas in.

The Dems are pushing what they call IMF reforms, that would limit America's ability to keep it from making bad financial decisions.

“The IMF money has nothing to do with Ukraine,” Speaker John Boehner said Thursday. “I understand the administration wants the IMF money but it has nothing at all to do with Ukraine. So let’s just understand what the facts are here.”

So it's the Dems who are holding up Ukraine aid by playing political games. The Republicans are putting their oar in, but the IMF "reforms" should not pass.

Meanwhile Harry Reid is ranting about the Koch Brothers who gave him a wedgie last week and kept him on a broccoli diet.

“It’s hard for me to comprehend how with a clear conscience they could say, ‘Ukrainians, we probably can’t help you because we’re trying to protect the Koch brothers,’” he said on Thursday. “And not only that, they’re saying to the American people that protecting the Koch brothers is more important than helping our country.”

Ukraine might be Reid's country, but it's not our country. But Harry Reid operates on auto-pilot these days.

But if Reid really believes that aid to the Ukraine matters that much, he'll jettison the IMF pork.