Bobbi Kristina Brown (L) and her guest attend the Premiere Of Tri-Star Pictures' 'Sparkle' at Grauman's Chinese Theatre on August 16, 2012 in Hollywood, California. (Photo by Frederick M. Brown/Getty Images)

Bobbi Kristina Brown (L) and her guest attend the Premiere Of Tri-Star Pictures' 'Sparkle' at Grauman's Chinese Theatre on August 16, 2012 in Hollywood, California. (Photo by Frederick M. Brown/Getty Images)

By Pat Saperstein

LOS ANGELES (Variety.com) - Bobbi Kristina Brown, the daughter of Whitney Houston and R&B singer Bobby Brown, died on Sunday -- six months after being found unconscious in a bathtub at her home in Roswell, Ga. She was 22.

"Bobbi Kristina Brown passed away July, 26 2015, surrounded by her family," the Houston family said in a statement to People. "She is finally at peace in the arms of God. We want to again thank everyone for their tremendous amount of love and support during these last few months."

Brown had been hospitalized and in a rehab center since Jan. 31. She underwent surgery to replace her breathing tube with a tracheostomy tube in February.

She was rushed to the hospital in late January after her partner, Nick Gordon, found her face down in the tub and called 911. She was then placed in a medically induced coma and never regained consciousness.

Her mother, singer Whitney Houston, was found dead in a bathtub the day before the Grammy awards on Feb. 11, 2012, at the Beverly Hilton Hotel. Houston suffered a heart attack complicated by the use of cocaine, with which she had struggled for many years. Bobby Brown was addicted to cocaine, crack and heroin at various times and had several run-ins with the law as well as recent DUIs.

Brown and her parents' tumultuous life were chronicled on two reality series. "Being Bobby Brown" ran on Bravo in 2005.

"The duo -- occasionally joined by their daughter, Bobbi Kristina, who appears unscarred by that gawkward 1999 'Divas' concert, during which her mother flamboyantly serenaded her -- seem, for all their idiosyncrasies, quite genuine. With the singers smoking and tippling and making really bad jokes, theirs is not the tidiest of portraits, but it feels like an honest one," wrote Gillian Flynn of "Being Bobby Brown" in Entertainment Weekly.

Lifetime's "The Houstons: On Our Own," which ran for one season starting in 2012, chronicled Bobbi Kristina Brown's attempts to move forward after her mother's death and to launch her own singing career. The show was criticized for being intrusive and exploiting a family's grief.

Her parents divorced when she was 14, and Bobbi Kristina Brown inherited her mother's estate. Gordon had lived with the Houston family since age 12, and Brown had said they were married, although the family said the marriage was not formalized. Though Brown had earlier called him her brother, she responded to critics of the relationship explaining that he was never officially adopted by Houston.

In addition to her Gordon, survivors include her father, Bobby Brown's two children from an earlier relationship, her grandmother Cissy and her aunt and uncle Pat and Gary Houston.