Stephanie Grace: Vitter still firing away at congressional health plan

Stephanie Grace: Vitter still firing away at congressional health plan

Call it David Vitter’s white whale, the subject of a lonely, yearslong crusade that the retiring U.S. senator appears bent on pursuing until his final days in office.

I’m not talking about some grand policy goal but rather the subsidized health insurance available to members of Congress and their staffs.

As it stands now, Vitter’s co-workers are eligible for this common employee benefit, just as other federal employees and people who work for just about any large private business are. Yet, rather than business as usual, Vitter casts this simple fact as an affront, a special deal for insiders and a symptom of why President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act is rotten to the core.

And as his time in Congress ticks down, the two-term Republican senator is showing no sign of letting the issue drop.

Just last week, Vitter blocked Obama’s choice to run the Office of Personnel Management, on the grounds that the agency allows members and their officials staffs to buy insurance on one of the health care act’s exchanges and still obtain a subsidy.

The technical details of the arrangement are somewhat more complicated, as is Vitter’s legalistic objection. Basically, when Congress passed the health care bill with only Democratic support, it included a provision introduced by Republican U.S. Sen. Charles Grassley, of Iowa, forcing Congress onto the exchanges that were designed for — and otherwise available only to — people who don’t get private insurance through their employers, many of whom get government subsidies based on their incomes. Grassley’s amendment was meant as a poison pill, to give pause to Democrats who might not want to trade their cushy government insurance for the presumably inferior product offered on the exchanges. But the Democrats bit, forcing the administration to come up with a convoluted workaround to preserve the benefit. That, in essence, is the so-called special deal to which Vitter objects.

The underlying politics, though, are simple. Vitter has tried every procedural maneuver in the book to block such efforts and has cast himself as a crusader for taxpayers against entitled government employees who allegedly enjoy special privileges.

There’s never been any hint that many people share Vitter’s professed outrage, no matter how inflammatory his language can be and how often he cites the fight as evidence of his professed reform-mindedness.

In fact, about the only folks who do seem to care are his fellow lawmakers and their employees, both Democrat and Republican, some of whom have made little secret of their irritation over being publicly targeted. Some members also have complained that it would be difficult to attract and keep good people on staff without being allowed to offer a basic benefit package. They’ve got a point.

That makes Vitter’s obsession a strangely self-destructive one, given the recent report from Politico, based on an anonymous tip, that Vitter is putting out feelers with Washington lobbying firms. These firms are generally eager to hire former members like him; the long list of Louisiana congressional veterans who’ve joined their ranks includes such big names as Bob Livingston, Billy Tauzin, John Breaux, J. Bennett Johnston and, most recently, Vitter’s vanquished nemesis, Mary Landrieu.

All of those politicians, though, spent their time in office building relationships. Vitter has never made doing so a priority, and his continued focus on this issue suggests he’s not about to start.

That might be an admirable impulse on the surface, if he were poking his colleagues for some greater purpose instead of a partisan stunt.

Vitter may contend that he’s motivated by a drive for good government. But nothing he proposes solves a real problem with the Affordable Care Act, of which there are plenty. It wouldn’t save much money. Nor does it address any of the congressional rules or practices that, frankly, could use some real reform.

The irony is that Vitter once had legitimate reform credentials, dating back to his early days in the Louisiana Legislature. In fact, if the David Vitter of 20 years ago heard rumblings of a sitting lawmaker holding preliminary conversations with lobbying firms, it’s not hard to imagine him calling that person out.

It’s been a while since Louisiana voters have seen that side of Vitter. And it’s definitely been a while since they’ve had a chance to cheer him on as he aimed all that reformist energy and zeal at something that really mattered.

Stephanie Grace can be contacted at sgrace@theadvocate.com. Follow her on Twitter, @stephgracenola.