Topics: aol_on, conservative movement, Grover Norquist, House GOP, Paul Ryan, The House of Representatives, News, Politics News

Last night, the so-called Freedom Caucus said most of them would “support” Paul Ryan for Speaker of the House, but they would not “endorse” him. As of this writing, it appears that Paul Ryan has accepted the conditions the caucus laid down, including a promise to maintain the Hastert Rule — which means the stand-offs and showdowns will continue under his leadership. Whether that will be good enough for the Freedom Caucus is unknown; from the looks of it, nothing will have changed from Boehner era. And so it goes.

But with all the current sturm und drang, it’s easy to forget that the right wing has been radical for a very long time. The only difference today is that they are literally running the party rather than toiling on the outside influencing from afar. But that doesn’t mean that the outside influences are no longer exerting their will. The talk radio hosts are still agitating, the Fox News pundits are still pontificating and the right-wing think tankers are still… thinking. The wingnut industry is as active and engaged as ever.

Take for example, the Godfather of the conservative movement, ,, who appeared on Brad Friedman’s radio show yesterday and declared:

“Voters do not like establishment Republicans. They really do reject them across the board. When I talk to Republicans and they say ‘We’ve got to beat Hillary’, I say that’s fine, I understand that, but if you nominate an establishment Republican — a Chris Christie, a Jeb Bush type, a John Kasich — you’re going to lose. The people don’t want an establishment Republican.”

Viguerie has been making lots of money and growing his power for more than four decades by railing against the Republican establishment. These little pipsqueaks in the Freedom Caucus are walking the path laid down long ago by the likes of Viguerie, back in the 1970s when he and Paul Weyrich and a few others created the modern conservative movement infrastructure that still exists today.

In the 1980s, a new generation of outside agitators came in with the Reagan Revolution. Among the most successful were a trio of friends — Grover Norquist, Ralph Reed and Jack Abramoff.

Reporter Nina Easton’s book, “Gang of Five: Leaders at the Center of the Conservative Ascendancy,” tracks their rise from their early years as college Republicans all the way up to the exalted positions they each held in the Bush years. Reed was the leader of the Christian Coalition, Abramoff the powerful K Street lobbyist, and Norquist the anti-tax activist.

Reed and Abramoff got caught up in a lurid corruption scandal and lost their positions as conservative movement leaders. Reed has fought his way back to some degree and now heads a different social conservative group, the Faith and Family coalition. Abramoff did jail time and became a critic of the lobbying industry upon his release. But Grover Norquist remains at the top of the conservative hierarchy, more powerful than ever.

These activists were of a different breed. Today’s Tea Party/Freedom Caucus players are impatient and solipsistic, naively disruptive. Norquist, on the other hand, has been slowly changing the landscape of American life and the relationship of the people to its government over many, many years. He has done this with one very specific longterm strategy: He set out many years ago to starve the government of funds. Not that he hasn’t been instrumental in most other conservative movement successes of the past 30 years — his regular Wednesday meeting of conservative activists remains hugely influential — but his Americans for Tax Reform “pledge” is the most significant. He has managed to put the government in a fiscal noose that just keeps tightening and strangling it ever so slowly.

This week, Michael Grunwald at Politico caught up with Norquist as the drama of the House Speakership crisis unfolded. The Republican Party may be in total disarray but Norquist keeps his eye on the prize:

Michael Grunwald: You’ve been at this for more than 30 years, pushing for lower taxes. So how’s it going? Grover Norquist: People forget Republicans weren’t always for tax cuts. Even during the Reagan years, it wasn’t a settled issue. Bob Dole wanted to do a gas tax. A lot of Republicans wanted to get rid of various deductions and credits. Remember in 1988, even after Reagan passed tax reform, Dole refused to take the pledge. He won Iowa, but then during a debate in New Hampshire, Pete DuPont handed him the pledge, and he reacted like someone had thrown the cross in the lap of a vampire. George Bush took the pledge and won. But then Bush broke his pledge in 1990, and broke the Republican Party. It cost him the presidency. Well, no one’s life is a complete waste; some people serve as bad examples to others. We haven’t had someone break the pledge since Bush. In 1994, 95 percent of Republican candidates took the pledge, and we swept the House and Senate. Today, more than 90 percent of the Republicans in Congress have signed the pledge and kept it. And we’re pushing it down to the state level, too… MG: That’s one of the big political stories of the last 30-plus years. The Republicans all agree on this now. So how much have they actually lowered taxes? GN: The top tax rate was 70 percent when Reagan came in. When he left it was 28 percent. It climbed up to 39 percent under Clinton. Now it’s 35.5 percent, plus 3.8 percent for Obamacare taxes. The corporate rate went from 50 percent to 35 percent, although it got stuck there. And at the state level, there are now nine states with no income tax.