Middle and high school students who can't get enough math spent three hours this weekend challenging themselves with math puzzles.

The advanced problems ranged from math word homophones — an apple dessert is Pi, for example — to complex word problems to a mathematical word search. The prizes for teams that solved the most problems correctly the fastest included scientific calculators and wooden geometric puzzles.

"It's a lot of cool math," said Boulder High sophomore Annie Chen.

The students competing in this weekend's "puzzlepalooza" are part of the Colorado Math Circle, a club for advanced math students held at the University of Colorado at Boulder.

CU applied math lecturer Silva Chang said she started the math circle 10 years ago because her children, who are now grown, needed more math enrichment.

"These are kids who just enjoy math as a hobby," she said. "It's less about teaching them anything in particular and more about keeping them interested in high level math."

The clubs, divided into middle and high school levels, meet once a month and combined draw 70 to 80 students. The students come from Boulder County, the Denver area, Colorado Springs and Fort Collins.

"It's really fun," said Anurag Golla, a sophomore at Boulder's Fairview High School. "You learn a lot more college level math here than in school."

Many of the high school students got hooked in middle school preparing for a competition called Math Counts. At the high school level, the highlight is the end of year American Regions Mathematics League competition held in Las Vegas.

At the monthly meetings, students learn from guest speakers and explore mathematical concepts. Past topics include generating functions, computability theory, knot theory, parity, Pascal's triangle, Catalan numbers and chaos theory. There's typically an opportunity at each meeting for group problem solving, with students encouraged to present their solutions.

"It stretches your imagination," said Ria Kim, a senior at Smoky Hill High School in Aurora."It's taking what you know and applying it."

Students said they're drawn not just to the chance to learn more about their favorite subject, but also to connect with others who share their love.

"I get to be with other people who are really into math and push me to get better," said Boulder High junior Leigha Amick.

For more information about the Colorado Math Circle, go to coloradomath.org.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa