Rural hospitals in Oklahoma face struggles to stay open due to budget cuts, provider rates, and issues with the Affordable Care Act.

Since 2010, 67 rural hospitals across the country have closed their doors.

Currently, 673 rural hospitals in the United States are at risk of closing and 42 of those hospitals are in Oklahoma.

Andy Fosmire, the Oklahoma Hospital Association (OHA) Vice President for Rural Health said several factors have caused these issues.

"Just a lot of little cuts that have added up to a large piece that has driven most rural hospitals to operate either just barely break even or at a lost," said Fosmire.

Issues with the Affordable Care Act continue to impact Oklahoma rural hospitals.

As part of the plan, hospitals across the nation agreed to billions of dollars in Medicare cuts to help pay for low-income uninsured people's health insurance coverage.

In return hospitals would get more compensation.

The state of Oklahoma rejected this offer which now means fewer people have insurance and hospitals get less compensation but still have to provide care for the increased expenses.

"It's not when rural hospitals start closing," said Jan Clark, CEO of the Bristow Medical Center.

"Rural hospitals are closing now daily. Multiple hospitals have closed. Bristow Medical Center has been very fortunate to survive this long but if things don't change the system is going to start crumbling and failing even more."

Clark said she was hired to save Bristow Medical Center from closing its doors.

She worked with her team to open another facility in Jenks called the Center for Orthopedic Reconstruction and Excellence to keep Bristow's hospital alive.

"That's going to be our flagship hospital to then keep all of our rural entities open," she said.

While some hospitals may not have the means to do this, the OHA is proposing to accept available federal health care dollars to expand the Insure Oklahoma program.

This would make health care more accessible to lower wage earners and part-time employees.

Clark agreed finding a solution is imperative for these rural hospitals.

"With the budget shortfalls that we have currently facing us I think it's time to really look at all avenues and all options that would provide funding to be able to care for all Oklahomans," said Clark.

OHA officials also said expanding the Insure Oklahoma program will bring back billions to the state revenue and give thousands of Oklahomans health insurance.