This replica of Fort Vasquez is operated by the History Colorado. The entrance is through a museum with displays that educate visitors on the fur trade well before Colorado became a territory. ( Kenneth Jessen / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

Louis Vasquez was known as "Old Vaskiss" and had over a dozen years of experience as a trapper. He had previously worked for the fur trading firm of Sublette and Campbell in South Dakota.

The demand for beaver pelts was dropping and many areas of the West were trapped out. Legendary annual rendezvous were replaced by forts.

Vasquez was looking for a place to build a trading post and picked a site upstream from present-day Platteville. His fort was constructed in 1835-36 and had adobe walls surrounding a square with interior rooms abound the inside of the walls.

If you go Operated by History Colorado (formerly the Colorado Historical Society), Fort Vasquez is located in the middle of U.S. 85 where the lanes split about one mile south of Platteville.

Andrew Sublette became a partner while Sublette's brother financed the venture. Vasquez took on the role as the fort's manager or booshway.

The employees at the fort totaled about 22 men, many French-Canadian or Mexican. Vasquez enjoyed a monopoly for the first few months, but soon, other forts were constructed in the same stretch of the South Platte River.

Getting his goods to the St. Louis market quickly was critical in the competition with other Colorado forts.

Vasquez got the notion that the South Platte River was navigable and set about to construct a flat bottom boat. It had the capacity for 700 bison robes plus 400 tongues.

Advertisement

Vasquez set sail in his 36-foot-long boat and soon hit the first of many sand bars. The South Platte was known as "...a mile wide and an inch deep."

After 49 days, Vasquez and his men reached St. Louis only to find that their biggest competitor, Bent, St. Vrain & Co., had saturated the market. Vasquez could not find buyers.

The fort was sold to Locke and Randolph in 1840 for just $800, a sum that was never collected because the new owners soon went bankrupt.

In 1842, Fort Vasquez was abandoned as a trading post, but served as an informal shelter for passing travelers. Much of the usable building material was eventually hauled off. As late as 1926 some of the adobe bricks from the fort were still being sold.

In 1935, the Works Progress Administration rebuilt the fort, however, it was not reconstructed on exactly the same footprint, partially due to the conflicts with the U.S. 85 right of way.

The fort's exact location was determined in the late 1960s through a formal archaeological investigation.

It is operated today as a museum by the History Colorado (formerly the Colorado Historical Society).

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.