1. When did you learn your husband was a sexual predator?

Here are some suggested questions to ask Hillary Clinton at FOX’s Monday night town hall.

2. Is it fair that Harvard University pays no taxes on its endowment or real estate holdings?

3. Is your political philosophy closer to that of Ted Cruz or Bernie Sanders?

4. Should President Obama disavow the endorsement he received from the Communist Party USA in 2008 and 2012?

5. The Dodd-Frank Act called for the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFBP) to be financed by the Federal Reserve. Do you support any other areas of government being financed by the Federal Reserve rather than by Congress?

6. Should suburban public schools be required to enroll illegal immigrants who cannot prove their residency?

7. Should immigrants who cannot pass a test in the English language be allowed to become U.S. citizens?

8. Do you support enabling immigrants who are married to their first cousins becoming U.S. citizens?

9. Do you support immigrants with more than one wife becoming U.S. citizens?

10. Do U.S. companies have the right not to hire persons who want to suspend working five times a day to pray?

11. Should the Department of Education end sex-segregated sports teams at the high school and college levels?

12. Should white suburban women be required to have higher test scores than other students to get into UCLA and the University of Michigan?

13. Do you feel there are too many Asians at the University of California Irvine?

14. Do you feel there are too many female teachers in our nation’s public schools?

15. Should Warren Buffett be eligible for Social Security?

16. When did you realize that the Obamacare Cadillac Tax was a bad idea?

17. Why can’t someone have an Obamacare policy that doesn’t include childhood dental?

18. Why can’t someone have an Obamacare policy with a $12,000 deductible per individual?

19. Do you feel that having 80 pounds of excess weight at age 26 is a pre-existing condition?

20. Has any law enforcement official read you your Miranda Rights in the last 180 days?

21. Do you support corporate wellness programs that offer incentives to workers to lose weight?

22. Do you support charging Obamacare policy holders more money if they engage in risky behaviors?

23. Why did you not send your daughter Chelsea to a public school since you claim to support public education?

24. Do you know anyone in journalism under the age of 35 who got paid $600,000 to work at a TV network besides your daughter?

25. Do you disavow support from Reverends Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson because of their anti-Semitic views?

Steve Bartin is editor and publisher of Newsalert.