Topics: Dream City, mass transit, urban planning, Innovation News, Sustainability News, News

The great transit systems of the Eastern Seaboard are in crisis.

In New York, the Metropolitan Transit Authority is operating a subway system strained by record ridership and storm damage, where the increasing regular delays have been supplemented by a series of recent snafus that have stranded tens of thousands of New Yorkers. A meager capital funding plan is in limbo, threatening the progress of long-awaited projects like the Second Avenue Subway.

In Washington, ridership on Metrorail is down 11 percent since 2009. Mechanical failures smoked straphangers out of underground stations on three occasions… last weekend alone. In January, a third-rail malfunction near the National Mall caused a smoke-storm that killed one woman and sent 84 commuters to the hospital.

And in Boston, a record month of snow has spawned a transportation catastrophe with few modern equivalents. “It’s like a war, we’re taking this back station by station, line by line, switch by switch,” said T chief Beverly Scott. Some parts of the system were shut for days; replacement buses, when they ran at all, created block-long lines in the cold. The city’s tempo shifted into half-time.

These are, respectively, the largest, second-largest and fourth-largest rapid transit networks in the country. And despite their differences, they have a couple things in common. First, each of the three agencies shows a streak of incompetence that irritates and frightens commuters. Second, all three networks suffer from a worrisome lack of political and financial support.

As Boston’s recent debacle illustrates, it can be hard to sift the pebbles of internal mismanagement from the vast sands of disinvestment. Boston’s fleet is so old that many of its trains run on direct current (DC), which is more vulnerable to moisture than the alternating current used in more modern cars. The newest cars on Boston’s Red Line are older than the average car in New York City. That’s a big reason the T was totally incapacitated for 24 hours a couple weeks ago.

That’s a long-term problem, and responsibility for fixing it rests (largely) with the State of Massachusetts. But even under record-setting snow conditions, the lack of an effective emergency plan rankled stranded Bostonians.

In New York City, the editorial board of the Times wrote this week that New Yorkers could sense “a steady deterioration in the system.” On weekends, service is so removed from normal as to render subway maps obsolete. (On Saturday nights, we could use our own version of this map that journalist Sara Morrison devised for Boston.) By one measure, delays are up 50 percent year over year. In October, a contractor nearly sent a drill bit the size of a lamppost through the roof of a crowded express train in Queens.