Milwaukee Police Chief Ed Flynn blames a recent spate of gun violence in the city on easy access to firearms for those with criminal records.

While Flynn said homicide numbers in Wisconsin’s largest city have fallen in recent years, Milwaukee saw a “significant spike” in December that persisted through the winter months. He told “UpFront with Mike Gousha” many of the murders stemmed from non-gang-related confrontations between armed individuals.

“We have the worst gun laws I’ve ever worked under … I want them tightened up so we can put bad guys in jail longer,” Flynn said on the program, produced in partnership with WisPolitics.com.

Calling for greater accountability in other parts of the criminal justice system, Flynn said offenders are undeterred by the current laws governing firearms. He accused legislators of caving to pressure from groups like the National Rifle Association.

He also criticized efforts to increase oversight of police, spearheaded by groups like the American Civil Liberties Union, saying they have ignored the “holocaust of violent crime being inflicted on poor communities of color.”

“The right wing could not care less how many young, dead black men I have as long as they have unfettered access to high-quality firearms,” Flynn said. “And the left wing… couldn’t care less how many dead, young black men I have as long as they are not unduly inconvenienced by the police as they go about their business.”

Flynn said the communities afflicted by gun crime are invested in curbing violence, but said many urban areas suffer from intergenerational problems that complicate law enforcement efforts.

-- U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson dismissed an early poll that showed potential 2016 challenger Russ Feingold leading the Republican by a considerable margin. He said he's focused on his role as chair of the Senate Homeland Security Committee.

“I’m not worried about it, I’ll leave other people to do the evaluation; I think it’s pretty much meaningless at this point in time,” the Oshkosh Republican said. “I’m worried about doing my job.”

He faced another setback last week, as his effort to challenge the Affordable Care Act in the courts was rejected by a second court that found he had no standing to sue. Johnson said the health care law will likely play a role in his campaign, arguing the mandated coverage has increased costs for many consumers.

Calling President Barack Obama’s extension of health care subsidies to members of Congress and their staff an “overreach,” Johnson said the president’s actions pose a “real problem for our constitutional democracy.” He also criticized Obama’s advocacy of lifting sanctions on Iran.

“There is no such thing as a peaceful uranium enrichment program in Iran,” Johnson said. “They are doing it for a weapon.”

Expressing concern at a lack of congressional oversight, Johnson said the move to normalize relations with Iran should qualify as a treaty, requiring the approval of at least 67 senators. He warned of a potential for blackmail if Iran succeeds in creating a nuclear weapon and said the nation maintains ties to global terrorism.

-- Marquette Law School Poll Director Charles Franklin said a “striking” drop in Gov. Scott Walker’s approval rating shows the Republican five points below his previous low of 46 percent.

Franklin said widespread disapproval of the proposed cuts to education played a role, but said an overall lack of approval for the biennial budget also influenced the results. He said Republican sentiment towards the state budget is less positive than in 2013, suggesting Walker’s recent out-of-state travels have impacted support.

“Two years ago … he was traveling around the state, selling his policies; we have seen a lot less of him trying to do that,” Franklin said. “As a result, the negative messages about the budget coming from within his own party are affecting his standing.”