Loomis, SD

The graying of rural South Dakota is clouding the reflection of stained-glass church windows in many small towns.

Congregations struggle to fill pews on Sundays because fewer young people are attending services. It's a problem that has one church north of Mitchell praying for answers to its declining membership.

This little church has been around for more than a century, but might not last through the end of the year.

Tucked away in a scenic grove of trees surrounding the spire, with an ancient oak welcoming its worshippers, Loomis Congregational embodies the rustic charm of a country church.

"I look forward to church at Loomis on Sundays, every Sunday," church member Carol Koepke said.

Loomis Congregational Church traces its beginnings all the way back to 1883.

"We've never had a large membership. But we've always had enough to keep us going. But yeah, it's up, it's down, it's up, it's down," Koepke said.

Loomis Congregational is in the midst of one of those downward plunges. Church membership has dwindled to just 15 people.

"We all have our own pews, we sit in the same ones every Sunday. So if a pew is empty, you know who isn't there," church member Vonda Alexander said.

Church members embrace the small size of their congregation.

"I enjoy it very much, we live a couple of blocks from here, so it's very handy and it's just comfortable being among friends," Alexander said.

But one of Loomis Congregational's greatest strengths, its small size that fosters a close-knit fellowship, could lead to its very downfall.

"We pray that God will find some kind of miracle that will help us financially keep the doors open. But we need people," Alexander said.

A rural church, rich in tradition, is cash-poor without new members. So, without an influx of younger people, Loomis Congregational may have to shut its doors at year's end.

"And I have even offered to work for free. I would rather work for free and come here every Sunday than to close it," Pastor Garry Swagger said.

"I'm sad because I wanted to be buried from my church and I don't anticipate that for a while, but it's kind of sad to see something close," Koepke said.

Loomis is a collection of houses and even some earthen storm shelters located about 10-miles north of Mitchell. A tiny town overshadowed by much larger congregations just down the road.

"The bigger churches can offer programs we can't. But nonetheless, we have that closeness that a lot of people want," Swagger said.

Pastor Swagger hopes that closeness can be a selling point in recruiting new members from the Mitchell area. But finding financial strength in numbers won't be easy.

"I don't know if they're staying away because we don't have Sunday School, but how can you have a Sunday School if there's no young ones," Koepke said.

Loomis Congregational is showing signs of new vitality. Members sing from recently-purchased hymnals. The church doesn't ever expect to be packed to the rafters. But empty pews have a way of filling up, with a little faith.

"You keep your fingers crossed, you keep your prayers going," Koepke said.

The youngest church members are in their fifties, the oldest member is in her nineties.

If you're interested in attending, Loomis Congregational holds services every Sunday morning at 9:00.

Featured Stories

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.