Kelly Perkins, left, and Sondra Voss display some of the Spinster Sisters products available at Voss Art and Home in Boulder. ( David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer )

Bath Butta Bombs, by Spinster Sisters, on display at Voss Art + Home on Pearl Street. (David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer)

The holiday countdown has begun, folks. Only 344 days until next Halloween.

If you haven't already started planning your costume, it's time to get to pinning. Time is running out.

While I eagerly wait until next October, I suppose we can talk about what I call National Consumerism Month, which runs from Nov. 1 until Dec. 24.

To be clear, I love consuming. I am a Level 5 Expert shopper with decades of intensive training. My accreditation verification is in the shape of a little black Visa card.

Perhaps because of my advanced abilities to spend a lot of money effortlessly, I've decided to do something different this year for Christmas. Studies have shown that people who spend their cash on experiences rather than things feel much greater satisfaction and happiness. So this year, instead of giving people objects that they have to dust and put away (because things do equal chores), I'm gifting experiences.

My 5-year-old daughter already hates me.

I tested the idea in September, when I gave my dad a one-night stay in a teepee at Flatiron Reservoir for his birthday. To have something physical to hand him, I wrapped up a package of hot dogs and marshmallows, which he grilled and ate teepee-side, leaving him with memories and no extra dust-collectors. OK, and maybe a bellyache.

To minimize recipient backlash, I'm defining "experiences" as something you can do or use to leave your body and mind feeling better than before, but which leaves no trace after it is enjoyed. This might include a massage, theater tickets or even bubble bath and/or a bottle of wine.

I'm intrigued by the challenge of consuming without collecting. Gifting with impermanence. Enjoying something without leaving it behind to be someone else's problem.

That's why I'm into Spinster Sisters (spinstersistersco.com), a local soap and skin care line. Kelly Perkins, a Fairview High School graduate, created the company to provide an "alternative to the witches' brew of chemicals that many modern skin care products represent."

A sampling of Spinster Sisters soaps. (David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer)

She makes soaps and other beauty products using natural, local-when-possible ingredients and packaging that is environmentally friendly. Like shaving soap that leaves almost no waste behind, no aerosol cans. Even the shrink wrap for packaging is compostable.

The shop's headquarters are even powered via renewable energy.

Perkins aims to use easy-to-recognize raw ingredients, such as coconut, avocado and jojoba oils. The shea butter is bought fair-trade from women in Ghana, and Spinster Sisters also grows many of its ingredients. Perkins aims to start making her own essential oils soon, but she also buys from a lavender farmer near Palisade.

Perkins is not a spinster, nor does she run her company, Spinster Sisters, with her sister. Although it did start with Christmas gifts.

Perkins made soap for Christmas gifts in 1994, and her friends and family kept urging her to make more. In 2010, she began selling her soaps regularly at craft fairs. Two years later, she quit her job as a business analyst to run her company full time.

She now runs a "microsoapery" in downtown Golden, has four employees and sells her products in more than 250 locations around the country, including seven shops in Boulder County: Boulder Blooms, Boulder Bookstore, Madelife and Leanin Tree in Boulder; Curating the Cool in Lafayette; Adornables in Longmont, and The Corner Studios in Lyons.

Spinster Sisters just opened its second full shop inside Voss Art + Home in Boulder. Find the charming, 200-square-foot Spinster Sisters store in the back of Voss, 1537 Pearl St.

It's small, but it's full of pleasant potential experiences — lotions, luxurious bath bombs and salts, even soap and products for dogs. And with recyclable containers made in an Earth-friendly facility, one man's treasure doesn't have to be another man's future trash.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay