During a stop in Orlando, the new U.S. Surgeon General said that the current measles outbreak deeply concerns him because the illness is highly contagious and can lead to complications and death.

"If you're not immunized and you're in a room with someone who has measles, you have a 90 percent chance of acquiring measles," said Dr. Vivek Murthy, who was sworn into office in December.

"My message to parents is to please, please, please vaccinate your children. It is the best strategy that we have for preventing kids from getting sick," said Murthy.

He stressed that the vaccine is safe and effective, and that "the science tells us very clearly that there is no evidence of any link between the measles vaccine and autism and there are no long-term adverse effects from the measles vaccine."

Murthy's visit to Orlando is part a 20-city listening tour he's conducting in his first 100 days in office to learn about challenges and creative solutions in different communities.

On Thursday he met with local elected officials and community leaders at Orlando Health before taking a tour of the facility's new tower.

"It was fantastic," said Anne Packham, the lead Central Florida navigator for the federal health insurance marketplace, who attended the meeting. "We talked about the Affordable Care Act and other public health issues, and how important it is to have community support."

Murthy said that he was encouraged to see the spirit of collaboration in Orlando, particularly in projects like the Primary Care Access Network (PCAN) and the Hispanic Health Initiative, which is training community health workers to go into communities and connect them with proper health resources.

"There are a number of great organizations that are doing fantastic work here in Orlando and one of my hopes is that as we proceed on this listening tour to learn more about these lessons and share them between communities," he said during a media briefing.

Murthy said that Orlando's main health challenges are similar to what he's seen across the nation: mental health access and integration, and high rates of obesity and chronic diseases.

Addressing these issues along with substance abuse sit at the top of his agenda, he said.

"One of the things that I've learned is that within our communities lie the tools to really take on these epidemics and solve the problems we see. That's why we need partnership, coalitions and collaborations within communities to take on these issues," said Murthy.

He also touted the health insurance marketplace and encouraged uninsured Central Floridians to visit healthcare.gov and see what health options are available to them.

"The vast majority of people will qualify for financial assistance with a low monthly cost," he said.

The nation's doctor grew up in Miami and received his higher education in Harvard and Yale. He is the co-founder and president of Doctors of America, a nonprofit that aims to improve access to health care, and VISIONS Worldwide, a nonprofit that focuses on HIV/AIDS education in the United States and India. He is the country's first Indian-American surgeon general.