There’s talk that Vice President Joe Biden will run for the Democratic presidential nomination, challenging front-runner Hillary Clinton. Would Biden be a good or a poor presidential candidate?

Too unpredictable

This is an odd thing to say, but a Joe Biden candidacy might be the closest thing the Democrats could offer to counter Donald Trump.

Biden doesn’t share Trump’s obnoxious, opportunistic, race-driven populism. But he’s similar in that his appeal — to fans, anyway — is that he’s, well, unpredictable, and not always beholden to talking points: Biden is the avuncular uncle at Thanksgiving who says what everybody else is thinking. Just like Trump, Biden sometimes offers the thrill of the forbidden.

Sometimes this has helped him be a great public servant. But it would probably make him a bad president.

Remember when President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act? It was Biden who grasped the president and — in the presence of a hot microphone — proclaimed the moment a “big (expletive) deal.” He was right!

And remember when Biden told the nation that gay marriage should be legal? It was that act that forced President Obama — who had never before supported gay rights to marriage — to follow suit several days later in an interview with ABC’s Robin Roberts.

On the flip side, Biden destroyed his own presidential run — and aided Obama’s — in 2008, when he referred to the then-Senator as “articulate and bright and clean,” a racial faux pas that could’ve ended his political career if he weren’t, well, Joe Biden.

The vice president’s unpredictability, you see, goes both ways: Sometimes it’s a force for good. Sometimes not. But that attribute would be unforgivable in a president, an office that demands a level of self-discipline that Biden — God bless him — has never mastered.

In some ways, that’s great: It means our vice president is human, which is a big part of his appeal. But a president’s loose lips can sink ships — or at least send stock markets plummeting, or cause diplomatic problems we don’t need.

Joe Biden has served his country honorably, and for a long time. His dignity in the face of his son’s death is an example to us all. But he shouldn’t be president. And he doesn’t need to be: His legacy is already assured.

— Joel Mathis

An exquisite foil

Joe Biden would be an exquisite foil, first for the less-than-inevitable Hillary Clinton in pursuit of the Democratic Party’s nomination, and then — should he be so fortunate — in a general election fight with just about any Republican. Even Mike Huckabee.

Advertisement

And it was impossible not to be moved by Biden’s reminiscence with Stephen Colbert about his son Beau, who succumbed to brain cancer last year. But paternal love and Irish sentimentality are not qualifications for the presidency. Americans don’t need an affable, gaffe-prone guy in the Oval Office. We need a statesman, or somebody close to one.

The trouble with Biden is he doesn’t know as much as he thinks and doesn’t think as much as he knows. Journalist Richard Ben Cramer put it best in his account of the 1988 election, “What it Takes”: “Joe often didn’t know what he thought until he had to say it.”

That brings to the time in 2007 when Biden told the late TV newsman Tim Russert, “I have changed my mind, but I haven’t changed my mind in any fundamental way …” about his support for the Iraq War. Like John Kerry in 2004, Biden was for the war before he was against it.

It’s a basic axiom of our politics: People forget. And people often don’t know.

People forget about Biden’s disgraceful slanders against Robert Bork and his “high-tech lynching” of Clarence Thomas when both were nominated for the Supreme Court. Ancient history? Biden showed then, and many times thereafter, that he was not a man of his word and that he would distort the judicial philosophy of conservative nominees if it suited his agenda.

People forget or don’t know about Biden’s lousy judgment. He was alone among President Obama’s advisers in urging the president not to order the 2011 raid that ended with the death of Osama bin Laden.

Biden should run so people remember, so they will know. Let him vindicate his terrible judgment and the follies of the administration he’s served these seven long years. Let him defend the toothless Iran deal. Let him explain why China and Russia are more belligerent after Obama’s two terms. And then let the people decide if affable old Joe deserves to be president.

— Ben Boychuk

Ben Boychuk is associate editor of the Manhattan Institute’s City Journal. Joel Mathis is associate editor at Philadelphia Magazine. bboychuk@city-journal.org, joelmmathis@gmail.com