She talked about how laying the groundwork to move the city forward takes time, requiring a lot of roll-your-sleeves-up grunt work. Two years isn’t enough, Triolo said, to finish what she and the rest of the commissioners started.

“We’re creating a comprehensive master plan not just for the streets, but for everything that lies below it,” Triolo said. “Not only fixing the potholes, but the very reason they exist to begin with.”

It’s no secret Lake Worth has a massive infrastructure problem, one that won’t be solved overnight, especially with so many crater-sized potholes and no real money to fix them. But the city appears to be taking baby steps to address those issues.

One of those will be on display Tuesday afternoon when the city hosts a ribbon cutting ceremony at 3 p.m. to tout the completion of the first phase of a $17 million, six-phase project to replace steel water mains that are, it seems, older than The New Testament.

+ Lake Worth crews replacing a damaged water main between 13th Avenue North and 15th Avenue North. (Contributed) ×

For about $50,000, two-inch water mains were replaced by city crews with four-inch water mains on North N Street between 13th Avenue North to 15th Avenue North to increase water flow from 100 gallons a minute to 600 gallons a minute, said Brian Shields, the city’s water utility director.

Some of the water mains are up to 60 years old and break frequently — at least once a month. “They’re very shallow, so when traffic goes over them, they tend to break and cause a lot of disruption,” Shields said.

The next phase, scheduled to start in about a month, will be on Lakeside Drive, south M Street and South J Street between 11th Avenue South and 18th Avenue South. That should take about a month to complete, Shields said.

When the project is finished in six years, Shields said 22 miles of water mains will have been replaced. That’s more than 300 football fields. Shields noted how the project has an added bonus.

“When we tear up the streets, we also repave the roads,” Shields said. “So we’re accomplishing two things at the same time.”

Killing two birds with one stone might just be a baby step and not nearly enough to satisfy residents tired of driving over and walking on crumbling streets and sidewalks, but at least it’s a step.