For years, Finland’s public education system has served as the exemplar against which schools in other countries should be measured.

By elevating the status of teachers to “professionals” and minimizing testing in favor of personal attention, the Finns have a proven track record. As LynNell Hancock reported in this 2011 Smithsonian piece:

Educators had little idea it was so successful until 2000, when the first results from the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), a standardized test given to 15-year-olds in more than 40 global venues, revealed Finnish youth to be the best young readers in the world. Three years later, they led in math. By 2006, Finland was first out of 57 countries (and a few cities) in science. In the 2009 PISA?scores released last year, the nation came in second in science, third in reading and sixth in math among nearly half a million students worldwide.

Now it looks like the Finns are on to another interesting idea, this time in the criminal justice arena: assessing fines for certain offenses based upon ability to pay.

As explained in this Atlantic piece by Joe Pinsker:

Finland’s system for calculating fines is relatively simple: It starts with an estimate of the amount of spending money a Finn has for one day, and then divides that by two—the resulting number is considered a reasonable amount of spending money to deprive the offender of. Then, based on the severity of the crime, the system has rules for how many days the offender must go without that money. Going about 15 mph over the speed limit gets you a multiplier of 12 days, and going 25 mph over carries a 22-day multiplier.

Such a system is certainly worthy of consideration in this country, where the illogic of heaping hefty fines and penalties upon those least able to pay, and then jailing those who don’t pay, has been well-documented.

Here’s Durham County Chief District Court Judge Marcia Morey:

We say, “okay, you got $250 to do community service, you got $180 to pay for your court costs, you may have a fine, you have attorney’s fees of $55 an hour and a $6 dollar court appointment fee” – add that all up on someone who’s unemployed, mentally ill, charged with a misdemeanor. “And if you don’t pay, you’re going to jail.” What kind of system is that? I mean, of course it’s a revolving door.

Pinsker points out that the Finnish system is not without its critics, but argues that at the very least introducing it conceptually could turn the conversation here:

Day-fines could introduce some fairness to a legal system that many have convincingly shown to be biased against the poor. Last week, the Department of Justice released a comprehensive report on how fines have been doled out in Ferguson, Missouri. “Ferguson’s law enforcement practices are shaped by the City’s focus on revenue rather than by public safety needs,” it concluded. “There’s a renewed interest in this because of the outrageous kind of fining and gouging that has become well-known out of Ferguson,” says Judith Greene, who founded Justice Strategies, a nonprofit research organization. “But of course that kind of stuff goes on everywhere.” Greene says that day-fines won’t curb the troubling practice of aggressive, means-to-an-end fining, but it would be effective to introduce them anyway. “Then the criminal fines should come into the picture as they were originally intended, which is a criminal sanction—a penalty for crime—and then scaled appropriately,” she says.