By Peter Whoriskey, The Washington Post

The article kicked off not just a diet, but a movement. Appearing in the New England Journal of Medicine in January 1985, “Paleolithic Nutrition: A Consideration of Its Nature and Current Implications” argued that the human body is “genetically programmed” to run, not on a modern diet, but on the foods consumed by our Stone Age ancestors.

“The human genetic constitution has changed relatively little since the appearance of truly modern human beings, Homo sapiens sapiens, about 40,000 years ago,” S. Boyd Eaton and Melvin Konner wrote.

The authors reasoned that human bodies have been shaped more by our prolonged time as huntergatherers than by the brief span since the advent of farming. Meat, probably lots of it, as well as fruits and vegetables were in. The staples of agriculture — breads, cereals, milks and cheeses — were not.

Three decades later, that academic ripple is now a popular tidal wave. We have not just Paleo diets, but Paleo exercise, Paleo sleeping and Paleo toilets. They’re all based on the premise that our bodies are more suited for Paleo-era habits.

But even as the “caveman” diet rose to become the most Googled diet in 2013 and 2014, evolutionary biologists were with much less advertisement using advanced DNA techniques, sometimes on ancient bones, to suggest that the original Paleo premise may be off the mark: In fact, it seems, we have evolved.

Over the last year alone, prominent scientific journals have published evidence of genetic shifts in humans over the last 10,000 years — apparently in response to the transition to agriculture.

Two relatively recent gene variants help humans survive with deficiencies characteristic of agricultural diets; another genetic shift appears to help fight

the dental cavities that arose with farm-based staples; another changes the way humans digest fats; dozens of others help fight the diseases that came with living at higher densities.

Those new findings add to previous efforts showing that two other critical adaptations to new diets. After the domestication of milking animals, many humans evolved to digest milk. Separately, humans developed better ways to digest the starches characteristic of agricultural diets.

“It drives me crazy when Paleo diet people say that we’ve stopped evolving; we haven’t,” said Anne C. Stone, a professor of human evolution at Arizona State University who has shown that genes related to starch digestion appear to have changed in number apparently in response to farming. “Our diets have changed radically in the last 10,000 years and, in response, we have changed, too.”

A closer look at evolution

While all this new evidence challenges the Paleo diet argument, it doesn’t necessarily disprove it, and Eaton and Konner maintain that their central hypothesis remains sound.

“There’s evidence that there’s been a lot more selection and genetic change in the last five to 10,000 years than previously thought,” Konner said. “This is a challenge to the Paleo diet claims — including mine and Boyd Eaton’s over the years But I don’t think it’s much of one.”

For one thing, he and Eaton say, the newly discovered genetic differences between Paleo hunter-gatherers and modern humans are not very numerous. While there may be some ways in which humans have adapted to agricultural diets, those are far outnumbered by the ways in which human bodies are suited for Paleo-era.

Moreover, Konner said, even if one concedes that there has been significant genetic change over the last 10,000 years, those changes would only catch us up to human diets from 10,000 years ago. But our diets have changed radically over the last 300 years alone. We consume less fiber, more refined grains, etc., and evolutionary forces can’t have altered our bodies so quickly over that time.

“The biggest culprit with the current epidemic of diabetes, a looming problem world-wide, is refined carbohydrates,” Konner said. “There’s no way humans could have adapted to that because they haven’t been around long enough.”

When Eaton and Konnner wrote in the ‘80s, it was far more difficult to detect evidence of recent human evolution. Since then, the pace of research accelerated rapidly, especially with the ability to sequence the entire human genome. It allowed researchers, for example, to compare the DNA of populations with different diets — new and old — and look for signs of adaptation.

“In populations where starch was a major component of the diet, being able to extract as many calories as possible as quickly as possible, likely was a lifesaver for kids who suffered from bouts of intestinal illness,” Stone said.

More recently, another advance gave scientists a direct way of comparing contemporary humans to our Paleolithic ancestors. They were able recover DNA from ancient bones.

In November 2013, for example, researchers announced that they had sequenced the DNA of a Siberian boy who lived 24,000 years ago. Then in October 2014, researchers announced that they had sequenced DNA from the bone of a human — a thigh discovered in Siberia — believed to be 45,000 years old. It is currently the oldest modern human genome .

“We now have some idea how people who lived 45,000 years before present were related to present-day people,” one of the researchers, Janet Kelso, said at the time.

One of the largest, most significant recent critical finds came from excavations done in advance of a railway project in Motala, Sweden. In a paper in the journal Nature, scientists looked at the DNA that has been recovered from the Motala remains and from those of more than 200 others ancient Eurasian humans. The ages ranged from 8,000 years old to about 2,000 years old — a span of time that covers ancient hunter-gatherers as well as early farmers.

In analyzing the DNA from those ancient remains, the scientists noted thousands of distinct places where there were DNA changes that didn’t seem just random. That is, the changes didn’t seem to be merely a case of genetic drift, but a sign that the human species was actually adapting to some aspect of its environment.

Out of those thousands of places, the scientists then highlighted 12 places in the DNA where the signs of selection were clustered. One of those clusters related to the digestion of milk — a confirmation of previous findings. Another related to how humans digest fatty acids. Two others may have a link to celiac disease. Others were related to skin color, which got lighter as human moved northward from Africa, and disease resistance.

“Europeans of 4,000 years ago were different in important respects from Europeans today, despite having overall similar ancestry,” the authors concluded.

Those findings, like the others, challenge the Paleo assumption that humans have not changed. What remains unanswered is how much. As good as the research techniques have become, and as far as the technology has advanced, the validity of the central premise of the Paleo movement remains uncertain. As Eaton and Konner advised in 1985, any diet proposals, to be validated, must be tested with experiments.

“My overall opinion of this is that we don’t really know,” said Iain Mathieson, a Harvard med school researcher and a co-author of the Nature paper. “We do know there are some specific changes in humans. But they are a relatively small in number. To me it’s an open question. It’s a hypothesis.”