Isabella Wong, Wei Wong, Sanford Rubenstein and Kang Wong announce Wei Wong’s lawsuit against the NYPD on Friday. Joe Jackson

An 84-year-old New York City man briefly hospitalized in January after he had a physical altercation with police officers arresting him for allegedly jaywalking is suing the city and the New York Police Department.

Attorneys for Kang Chun Wong, of West 97th Street, filed a lawsuit in Manhattan Supreme Court Thursday seeking $5 million in damages. The suit said Mr. Wong, who is of Chinese descent, suffered mental and physical injuries, “the full extent of which are currently unknown,” following the incident on the Upper West Side.

“My father still is traumatized by the whole event,” his son, Wei Wong, said Friday at a news conference. “He’s not back to his normal self where he’s…an independent person.”

Mr. Wong was lawfully crossing 96th Street on Jan. 19 when he was “grabbed, pushed against a wall, beaten [and] thrown to the ground causing him to lose consciousness” by NYPD officers, according to the lawsuit.

After he was treated at a local hospital for a bleeding head wound, police eventually released Mr. Wong with a desk appearance ticket “for criminal charges that are without merit,” the lawsuit added.

The Manhattan district attorney’s office later declined to prosecute the case. The NYPD didn’t return a message for comment.

Mr. Wong—flanked by attorney Sanford Rubenstein, his son and daughter-in-law—said “I lost my memory and my ribs still hurt.”

Mr. Wong speaks Cantonese and his statements were translated by his daughter-in law, Isabella Wong.

He added he had largely stayed at home for the first two months after the incident: “Right now, when I cross the street it’s very scary. I didn’t want to go out.”

Mr. Rubenstein said Mr. Wong’s allegedly heavy-handed treatment is symptomatic of the New York Police Department’s “broken windows” policy.

“When an elderly 84-year-old man ends up needing multiple staples to close up a huge wound in his head because of the issue of alleged jaywalking, it’s simply not right,” he said. “This is not a policy appropriate for 2014.”