SAGINAW, MI -- Six weeks into his first term in Congress, U.S. Rep. John Moolenaar is settling into his new job representing a large area of the central and northern Lower Peninsula in Washington, D.C.

Moolenaar, R-Midland, was elected by the voters of Michigan's 4th congressional district in November 2014 to fill the seat held by longtime Congressman Dave Camp, who retired and also calls Midland home.

Related: Midland's John Moolenaar to represent most of central Lower Peninsula in Washington

The freshman congressman stopped by The Saginaw News offices Wednesday, Feb. 18, to give an update on how his first term is going.

Here is what Moolneaar had to say in response to questions about the transition from his service in the Michigan Legislature to the national stage.

How are things going with the new job?

"We've had a very productive first six weeks on the job in Washington, D.C. I was sworn in January, on Jan. 6, and I had the opportunity to attend my first State of the Union address. I've got my committee assignments now, my three committees, and I'm actively working on those. I had the opportunity to preside over the House Chamber; I did that once during special orders. And I've spoken on the floor a few times. I had a chance to ask questions of witnesses in different committees. We've passed 25 bills, all but one bi-partisan. The Obamacare repeal wasn't that bi-partisan."

Is all of that still a little surreal?

"At the State the Union, just looking around the Chamber, it was just fascinating. It's just an amazing place to walk in. You go through statuary hall and it's a majestic building. One of the highlights was just to talk a little bit with John Lewis, a congressman who has been a hero in the civil rights movement. One of the first speaking opportunities on the floor was we all took a piece of the Constitution and read a section. I had the opportunity to do that, and of course he was reading the amendment to abolish slavery. It was just pretty impactful."

Have you taken on Congressman Camp's habit of flying back and forth to D.C. each week?

"Yeah. I'm trying to be home on weekends. And then, we had six weeks of work in Washington and now we have a district work period. So yesterday I was in Big Rapids. Today in Saginaw County and Shiawassee County. And tomorrow in Cadillac, in the northern part of the district. It's a large geographic area and I want to make sure I'm available to meet with constituents and hear the concerns of the district."

What are the concerns of the district?

"Usually on each issue that comes before the House, we receive communications. So we received a fair amount on the XL pipeline, and we voted on that. And also on the Homeland Security funding. We passed a bill in the House and, of course, we'd like to see the Senate take action to fund Homeland Security. Now we're hearing more, with the events on the weekend, with the situation in the Middle East with ISIS and terrorism and we'll have the opportunity to work on a use-of-force resolution authorization. As I speak to different groups, people have serious concerns about what is happening around the world. And we'll have Prime Minister Netanyahu come speak to a joint section of Congress in the weeks ahead. And of course Israel is our important ally in the Middle East and it's important that we understand their perspective."

"Jobs remain at the forefront. I campaigned on some of the themes of wanting to make sure we're promoting policies that support job creation. The Keystone pipeline is important in that regard and energy security. Also rolling back some of the burdensome mandates of Obamacare."

Have you found any retreats away from the office building and away from the Capitol, or is it always the Capitol cafeteria or a sandwich at your desk?

"There are a variety of options. There are the cafeterias in the office buildings. There is a Subway right nearby. There are different restaurants. Often there will be different meetings that will be different kinds of food sitting out. And I'm trying to discipline myself there. There's a lot of walking from building to building. That has, especially in the winter months, been very helpful just to get some exercise."

Where are you working when you're not on the House floor?

"My office is in the Cannon building, which is easy access for people visiting Washington, D.C. There's the Capitol South Metro station that you just walk up the hill and you're right there at the Cannon building. We're on the first floor on the left, right down the hallway."

"I'm across the hall from Debbie Dingell and she's a new member of Congress from Southeast Michigan. I've enjoyed getting to know her and her staff. We've got how many different members of the Michigan delegation there? At least four."

Is there anybody that you'd call a friend or an ally at this point?

"I've enjoyed getting to know Congresswoman Dingell. We each had an open house during the swearing-in and a number of the guests that came to our office, brought over to introduce to her. And, likewise, she brought Steny Hoyer over to our office just to say hello. And actually our daughter was able to go over and meet the vice president over at her office. So she's very gracious, and is someone who I hope we can work together on things."

"I've gotten to know Dan Kildee and he's been very, you know, shown a lot of hospitality in terms of being very friendly and warm. On some of the issues with the Michigan delegation, you know I raised the issue about the president's budget proposal where $50 million is cut from the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative and advocated for funding that and raised that issue in the committee with the OMB direction. That was something that others in the delegation, Debbie Stabenow raised that issue, Dan Benishek, Candice Miller. I think, wherever we can, we'll work well together as a Michigan delegation. Then, of course, there will be some issues where there will be differences of philosophy."

Moolenaar, who formerly represented the 36th District in the Michigan Senate, defeated Democrat Jeff Holmes, of Alma, in the November 2014 election to win election to Camp's seat in Congress.

He currently serves on three committees in the U.S. House of Representatives:

House Committee on Agriculture

House Committee on Budget

House Committee on Science, Space and Technology

Michigan's 4th congressional district covers 15 counties in central and northern lower Michigan, reaching from Lansing suburbs to Cadillac. The district includes all of 13 counties -- Clare, Clinton, Gladwin, Gratiot, Isabella, Mecosta, Midland, Missaukee, Ogemaw, Osceola, Roscommon, Shiawassee and Wexford -- as well as portions of Montcalm and Saginaw counties.

Moolenaar has taken over Camp's longtime district office, located at 135 Ashman in Midland. Staff at that office can be reached at 989-631-2552.

Constituents are also welcome to stop by Moolenaar's office in Washington D.C., Room 117 on the first floor of the Cannon House Office Building. The building is located just up a hill from the "Capitol South" Metro stop. Staff at the Washington D.C. office can be reached at 202-225-3561.

Constituents can also contact the congressman through the contact page of his website.

Mark Tower covers local government for MLive/The Saginaw News. Contact him at 989-284-4807, by email at mtower@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.