Every Saturday cleveland.com will highlight stories of interest from the previous week of news coverage. This week, Rep. Marcia Fudge defends Obamacare, the Cleveland Orchestra is voted "World's Favorite" in an online poll, Frank Jackson's handling of the water, fire, and police department examined, Obamacare blamed for hospital cuts, paying to have your mug shot removed from the Web, Chief Wahoo looks more "stupid and racist" in light of the Washington Redskins' controversy, and a lawsuit was filed against Cracker Barrel in relation to a 2012 triple-murder that occurred in the restaurant. Included below are overviews each of these stories and more.

MONDAY

Rep. Marcia Fudge defends Obamacare on "Meet the Press"

Warrensville Heights Democratic Rep. Marcia Fudge expressed disappointment on Sunday with the technical glitches that plagued the Affordable Care Act's newly created health insurance exchange websites, but said it "does not negate the fact that the plan is going to work."

In a panel discussion on NBC's "Meet the Press," Fudge said the federal government should have prepared better for the launch, but said it's important to "differentiate between enrollment and the plan itself."

"We're going to do things that are going to make this country better and reduce the cost of health care," said Fudge, who chairs the Congressional Black Caucus.

Fudge said Congress should end the current government shut-down by funding the government without strings attached. Republicans who control the U.S. House of Representatives have tried to get the White House to make changes in the Affordable Care Act law in exchange for passing funding legislation. | Read the full story



194 homes forfeited

Part of Mark Tow's plea agreement he that would forfeit 194 properties to the Cuyahoga County Land Bank and pay six victims more than $300,000 in restitution for his role in a house-flipping scheme

Plates unveiled

State Rep. Bill Patmon, members of the board of directors of the Siegel and Shuster Society, and relatives of Superman creators Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster stood outside 10622 Kimberley Ave. and showed off the new plate.



Expanded recycling

Slowly but surely, recycling and automated trash collection will reach Cleveland residents. Another 25,000 will receive bins this month.

TUESDAY

Cleveland Orchestra voted 'World's Favorite Orchestra' in international online poll

The results are in, and the Cleveland Orchestra is the world’s favorite orchestra.

So, at least, says the London-based website Bachtrack.com, an international concert finder that ran a poll to learn which group the world loves best.

After a month of online voting, Cleveland emerged Tuesday in the top spot, earning 20.3 percent of 11,895 votes from 97 countries. Its closest competitors were Ireland’s RTE Concert Orchestra and the Berlin Philharmonic, which garnered 12.4 and 8.5 percent, respectively.

Fans of the Cleveland Orchestra probably aren’t surprised. After all, it was they who pushed the organization into the lead and joined the more than 5,200 Americans, or 44 percent of the total, in voting since Sept. 6. | Read the full story



Stuck in a hole

The $5.5 million Waterloo Road beautification project that has created a temporary hole that shopkeepers are trying to dig out of.



Case unsealed

A four-count indictment against the Steubenville school district's director of information technology was handed down in connection with the August 2012 rape of a 16-year-old West Virginia girl.



Not for sale

Using an ice cream truck to attract students to a new charter school is unacceptable, say members of the Greater Cleveland Congregations.

WEDNESDAY

Frank Jackson's mettle tested by years of dysfunction or scandal in police, fire and water departments

For much of Cleveland Mayor Frank Jackson’s two terms, three of the city departments that play the most critical roles in residents’ lives – police, fire and water -- have suffered varying stages of dysfunction.

Jackson now seeks a third four-year term, and challenger Ken Lanci cites some of the problems -- particularly in the police department -- as evidence of failed leadership by the incumbent.

As part of its coverage of the Jackson-Lanci race, the Northeast Ohio Media Group revisits some of these issues and what Jackson has done – and not done – to restore public trust in the three departments.| Read the full story



Antidotes to sprawl

The Northeast Ohio Sustainable Communities Consortium is zeroing in on a vision for the region's future that stresses redevelopment of existing urban areas rather than continued consumption of open land for new sprawl development oriented to the automobile.

Bedford brothel closed

An indictment says that James Walsh operated a brothel from the Walsh Professional Building, 466 Northfield Road. Walsh ran a staff of women who provided services from nude massages to sex acts. | Residents shocked



Breaking Bama

As Ohio State ventures into the South and Alabama expands its reach into the Midwest, the teams are going head-to-head more often for the nation's best high school players. That's particularly true this year with three players at Glenville High School. | Part 2 | Part 3

THURSDAY

Washington Redskins' mascot controversy makes Cleveland Indians' Chief Wahoo look even more stupid and racist

Chief Wahoo should quit smiling.

The growing controversy around the Washington Redskins' name and logo is highlighting again the indefensible position of using a stereotype to represent a sports franchise.

The controversy, being fueled by some prominent sportswriters and political leaders, just might turn into an awakening that kills – or at least permanently weakens -- the Redskins name. The Indians and Chief Wahoo could be next. At least I hope so.

Redskins owner Daniel Snyder rejects the complaints and says he won't give up the name. And a few sportswriters have come to his defense, dismissing the racial charges as a liberal conspiracy for political correctness. | Read the full story



The Blame Game

Is Obamacare really to blame for cuts at the Cleveland Clinic and other hospitals? A number of financial and political factors independent of the Affordable Care Act have been nibbling at hospitals' bottom lines, but they're all coming together now.

Mug-shot lawsuits

The jail mug shot -- the photo that captures one of a person's lowest points -- has become a lightning rod on the Internet. A lawsuit filed in U.S. District Court in Toledo claims that companies that post the mug shots and charge to take them down are nothing more than extortionists.



Was it suicide?

The review by the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction raised the possibility that the kidnapper and rapist was attempting sexual self-gratification rather than suicide, the official cause of death.

FRIDAY

Wrongful death lawsuit accuses Cracker Barrel of negligence in 2012 triple-murder

Good Samaritans typically receive praise and sometimes awards, but were the employees of a Cracker Barrel restaurant in Brooklyn negligent for failing to help a woman and her two daughters before the three were shot to death during a domestic dispute in April 2012?

That is the allegation contained in a wrongful death lawsuit filed by the woman's brother Thursday in Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court.

Kevin and Katherina Allen of Strongsville were sharing a birthday dinner at the restaurant on Tiedeman Road with their daughters, Kerri and Kayla, when the girls’ mother informed their father that she was leaving him, according to police reports.

The scene turned chaotic after Kevin Allen threatened to kill them all, and left the restaurant, said attorney Terry Gilbert, who is representing Carl Jindra of Brunswick, Katherina Allen’s brother.