South Florida seniors can't start shopping for managed care and stand-alone drug plans until next month, but Medicare has released a sneak peek of what will be available in 2015.

The new data, which the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services released Thursday, names the insurers that will be selling privately run HMO-style Medicare Advantage and prescription drug plans in the area, as well as deductibles and premiums.

The big picture? There will be fewer plans, higher premiums and more deductibles.

Open enrollment will run from Oct. 15 to Dec. 7. Details about doctor and drug co-payments, additional benefits like dental and eye exams, and plan rankings on Medicare's five-star rating scale will be released in the next few weeks.

All the information is expected to be posted soon on the Medicare Plan Finder at Medicare.gov.

Here, at first glance, is what the 2015 Medicare Advantage and prescription plan marketplace may look like in Broward County and Palm Beach County:

Fewer plans: There will be 62 Medicare Advantage health care plans in Broward and 53 in Palm Beach County next year, as compared with 81 in Broward and 67 in Palm Beach County. These include what are called "special needs" plans, which serve low-income seniors or those with chronic medical conditions like heart disease.

Part of this reduction is due to the closing of Physicians United Plan Inc., which offered three plans in Broward and Palm Beach County. The courts declared PUP insolvent and ordered its assets sold in early June.

There also will be fewer prescription drug coverage plans, called Part D plans or PDPs. Seniors will be able to choose among 25 plans instead of this year's 33.

Rising premiums: Most HMO-style plans in 2015 will continue to have no deductibles and charge no additional premiums other than what seniors already pay for Medicare Part B, which covers doctor visits, test and outpatient therapies. That premium is $104.90 to $335.70 this year, and comes out of seniors' Social Security checks.