Milwaukee Brewers catcher Jonathan Lucroy laughed at the conspiracy theorists who posted and referred to the video showing him tugging at his left sleeve just before the pitch that struck McCutchen for a second time. Credit: Associated Press

Brewers Blog The Journal Sentinel sports staff brings fans the latest news and inside information on the Brewers SHARE

By of the

Pittsburgh - Taking a page out of Matt Garza's book from Saturday night, Brewers manager Ron Roenicke said Sunday anyone who thinks catcher Jonathan Lucroy called for Pittsburgh's Andrew McCutchen to get hit with a pitch a second time in Milwaukee's 1-0 game is an "idiot."

"It means exactly what Garza quoted last night when you guys asked him about hitting McCutchen," said Roenicke. "If you think that, you're an idiot. If you're thinking he was calling for that, you're an idiot. It was a great quote and it's appropriate for anybody who thinks Luc was doing that."

Lucroy laughed at the conspiracy theorists who posted and referred to the video showing him tugging at his left sleeve just before the pitch that struck McCutchen for a second time. Garza was ejected for that HBP because the benches had been warned earlier, and said anybody who thought he did it on purpose was "an idiot."

"I don't know if people even watch the games but I do it all the time," said Lucroy. "I do that all the time. My sleeve gets caught around my elbow and I pull it up. You can go back and watch film from every game in the season and I'm doing that. You're going to see what you're going to see as a fan. Whoever thinks that, I'm not really worried about it. I don't even need to say anything because I know I'm in the right."

Roenicke said he understood why the Pirates were upset that their best player was hit twice by pitches in the game. But he had an appropriate response when it was noted to him that Pittsburgh by far leads the league in hitting batters with 85. Philadelphia is a distant secon with 65 HBPs. The Brewers rank 13th with 41.

"It's not even close," Roenicke said of how many batters the Pirates have hit. "The way they hit people, the way they pitch inside, they shouldn't be complaining about anything.

"Every year I've been here, we don't hit a lot of guys. Maybe we control that (strike) zone better. When we go in, most of the time we feel like we throw where we want to."