Green Bay Packers quarterback Brett Favre on Dec. 9, 2007. (Photo: File/AP)

Would you buy a ticket to get inside Lambeau Field and witness former quarterback Brett Favre's induction into the Green Bay Packers Hall of Fame?

We think many of you would. So much so that it makes sense for the team and the Hall of Fame group to look at changing the Packers Hall of Fame ceremony to accommodate that great fan interest.

This past week in a Fox News interview, Favre said he'd like to see his Packers Hall of Fame induction move from the Lambeau Field Atrium to the bowl of the stadium so that fans can attend.

POLL: Would you buy ticket for Favre induction ceremony?

Right now the induction banquet is scheduled for July 18 in the Atrium. About 1,600 tickets were available, but they were gobbled up by special guests and sponsors. (Press-Gazette Media is one of the sponsors.)

In past years, there were tickets left over and they were then made available to fans. This year, however, Favre has proven to be a popular draw.

So the Hall of Fame, the Packers and Favre reportedly are looking into moving it to inside Lambeau Field.

We believe it makes a lot of sense for a number of reasons:

• This type of event is not unprecedented. The team has been holding its shareholders meeting in Lambeau Field, rain or shine, since 2006. The Packers have experience in arranging this sort of event.

• Money. Let's face it, it would make good economic sense. The Packers and the Hall of Fame could charge $10 a head and if 5,000 or 10,000 or more fans show up, they could cover their expenses while having money left over to donate to charity. They could also open up some concession stands.

Plus, fans would travel to Green Bay ahead of training camp and the shareholders meeting and would spend money at area hotels and restaurants as well as the Packers Pro Shop.

• The Packers Hall of Fame could still have its more intimate ceremony in the Atrium before or after the stadium event, satisfying sponsors and dignitaries.

• It would give fans who aren't shareholders and season-ticket holders a chance to be in Lambeau and to see Favre inducted. These fans would be excluded from a halftime celebration or small Atrium gathering.

• Finally, it would be a fitting reconciliation between Favre and Packers fans. The quarterback was a fan favorite during his playing days. He helped reinvigorate a team that had gone through a long dry spell in the 1970s and 1980s. His durability and toughness endeared him to a population known for its work ethic and dedication. The fact that he could complete passes other quarterbacks only dreamt of, that he would not back down from menacing defenders and that he helped the Packers win a Super Bowl cemented his star status with fans.

Luckily there is time to work this out. There are five months until the ceremony.

The only downside is that the Packers Hall of Fame face an additional burden of coordinating such a large gathering. The group is a relatively small nonprofit that is independent of the Packers, but together they host the Hall of Fame. However, with help from the Packers, we think a larger event could be held.

For a team that wears the shareholder-owned description with pride, the Packers should step up and seriously consider opening up Favre's induction to fans.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1EbAxWI