Paonia ends Cougars' title bid again

Resurrection Christian football coach Mark Roggy addresses his team in Fort Collins after a tough 21-15 playoff loss to Paonia on Saturday. (Michael Bettis / For the Reporter-Herald)

FORT COLLINS — Only the setting of Fossil Ridge High School was different for Resurrection Christian in its state semifinal playoff bout with Paonia on Saturday.

Last season, the Cougars fell short to the Eagles in the semifinals at Paonia.

Saturday's result, a 21-15 dramatic comeback win for the Eagles, brought the same disappointment for the Cougars as last season's conclusion.

The Cougars thought they were going to have the revenge they had waited a whole year for, and it even looked like they were well on their way as they maintained a lead for nearly four quarters.

"It's a memory that I'm never going to forget, finding out we were going to have our redemption round against Paonia," RCS senior running back Evan Anderson said.

But with under four minutes to go, with the Cougars up 15-13, Paonia quarterback Taylor Walters gave his Eagles a fighting chance with a 46-yard bomb to a wide-open KJ Seriani, who ran for at least 20 yards after the catch before going down at the Cougars' 19.

"What happened right there, nothing better could have happened," Seriani said.

Two plays later, it was running back Jeremiah Hillman's turn to get what he had worked for all day: a game-winning touchdown. The senior ran in from 14 yards out with 3:06 remaining to put the Eagles up 21-15, with the ensuing two-point conversion from a Taylor Walter run.

Hillman was a workhorse the entire game. The senior took a carry 60 yards on the Eagles' opening possession, and didn't stop there. On the day, he racked up 134 yards on 15 carries.

Advertisement

Just a few minutes before that TD, with 7:53 to go, Rez came up with a what seemed to be a crucial stop on a two-point conversion. The failed conversion followed the only touchdown of the second half to that point, and prevented the Eagles from tying the score at 15. Defensive backs Zane Zuhlke and Conner Stahla went up and both batted a Walters pass to the ground in the end zone to keep the Eagles trailing 15-13 following Walters' 2-yard touchdown pass to junior Dagan Rienks.

The Cougars thought that would be enough.

"We had our sights set on just trying to run out the clock, trying to pull together as a team," Anderson said. "Our offense is built to be able to wear teams down."

But the Cougars were forced to punt the ball back to the Eagles with plenty time enough for Seriani's big gain to set up Hillman's TD.

Rez's offense looked nowhere near as unstoppable as it had in its previous 10 wins, all of which came by 40 or more points. The Cougars recorded just 75 yards on the ground for the game, and junior quarterback Michael Stevenson was held to 7-for-14 passing with three interceptions, two by Hillman.

Resurrection Christian senior Cooper Ward (4) sprints downfield with a group of blockers Saturday against Paonia during playoff action in Fort Collins. (Michael Bettis / For the Reporter-Herald)

"I will say that our defense played a great game, and I would say also that they were out on the field way too long," Rez coach Mark Roggy said. "Whenever that happens, that kind of offense just wears you down. Even at the end we were fighting our tail end off to try and stop things. They have a real good team."

The Cougars' offense scored when it needed to, though, even going deep in the playbook for a touchdown to give them a lead they would hold onto until Hillman's go-ahead TD turned the tides for good. With 1:14 before halftime, a double-reverse ended up in the hands of junior Brin Hayden, who played backup quarterback behind Stevenson all year. Hayden stepped up in the pocket and gunned one 39 yards to Stevenson on a fly route for a touchdown and a 15-7 halftime lead on the double-reverse pass.

Both juniors, Stevenson and Hayden will return for Roggy next year. But the Cougars will not have another chance to play Paonia in the playoffs, as they are moving up to the 2A classification in football for next season.

"As a senior, it's going to be awesome to see where these kids are in a couple years, but it hurts knowing this was the last go-around for me," Anderson said.

1A State Semifinals

Eagles 21, Cougars 15

At Fossil Ridge HS

7 0 0 14 — 218 7 0 0 — 15

First quarter

RCS — Evan Anderson 40 run (Anderson run), 4:41.

Second quarter

PHS — Taylor Walters 2 run (Colby Simpson kick), 6:04.RCS — Michael Stevenson 39 pass from Brin Hayden(Stevenson kick), 1:14.

Third quarter

No scoring

Fourth quarter

PHS — Walters 2 pass to Dagan Rienks (conversion failed), 7:53.PHS — Hillman 14 run (Walters run), 3:06.