A Duck Dynasty bible is on the way thanks to television’s Robertson family.

The founders of the company Duck Commander and stars of the A&E reality show are planning to release their Duck Commander Faith And Family Bible later this year, publisher Thomas Nelson noted.

The Duck Dynasty bible will be published in the King James Version and include 52 Bible-reading plans. Publishers said it will highlight the family’s core values of “faith, family, fellowship, forgiveness and freedom.”

“We are honored and excited to be working with Phil and Al Robertson on this new Bible,” said Robert Sanford, Vice President and Associate Publisher for Thomas Nelson’s Bible Group, said in a statement. “The Robertson family’s passion for the Word is infectious and the impact of their ministry is amazing. We see this Bible as being something people can grow with in their own personal walk with God.”

The Duck Dynasty bible seems to indicate that the controversy surrounding comments made by Phil Robertson are not having a lasting effect on the Robertson family brand. Despite a dip in ratings the show remains one of the most watched on cable, and its stars remain both marketable and popular, especially in conservative circles.

Phil Robertson himself recently spoke at the Republican Leadership Conference in New Orleans, referring to statements from the White House as “evil” and imploring Republicans to “get Godly.”

“You can’t be right for America if you’re wrong with God,” Robertson said.“If you want to turn the Republican party around, get godly,” he told an approving crowd.

Speaking about President Obama, Robertson said “We’re up against evil like I’ve never seen in my life. I’m sitting here and I’m thinking, ‘What’s coming out of the White House?’ ” he said. “The only thing I can tell you folks is it’s downright embarrassing.”

The family’s upcoming Bible may revive some of the controversy from earlier this year. Phil Robertson has come under fire for his interpretation of the scriptures after paraphrasing Paul’s letter to the Corinthians to condemn homosexuality and gay marriage.

“Don’t be deceived. Neither the adulterers, the idolaters, the male prostitutes, the homosexual offenders, the greedy, the drunkards, the slanderers, the swindlers—they won’t inherit the kingdom of God,” Robertson said, quoting a section of the book that has been hotly debated by Bible scholars.

The Duck Dynasty bible will be released in October.