Sign up for Women's Health's new newsletter, So This Happened, to get the day’s trending stories and health studies.

From the start, churches, mosques, and synagogues were automatically exempted from the ACA’s employer-provided contraception mandate, but religious nonprofit organizations, like schools and hospitals, that object to providing their workers with access to birth control have to either fill out a form or send a letter explaining their religious objections in order to get the same exemption—an accommodation that was actually endorsed by Justice Antonin Scalia in the Hobby Lobby case.

RELATED: What It's Like to Be an Abortion Provider in the Midwest

The seven religious nonprofit plaintiffs that are suing the U.S. government under Zubik v. Burwell are claiming that the simple act of filling out a form requesting the accommodation is something they view as a sin, and that they, too, should be automatically exempted.

We're at the Supreme Court today to say: #HandsOffMyBC! pic.twitter.com/o0j2nxXmDf — CenterforReproRights (@ReproRights) March 23, 2016

It is worth noting that thanks to that ACA’s contraception mandate, an estimated 55 million more women with private insurance are now able to get contraceptives without any out-of-pocket co-pay costs. This has increased the use of contraceptives in general, and upped the use of many of the most reliable contraceptive methods that used to be more expensive before the ACA—like IUDs and hormonal implants—which is kind of a huge deal in a country where more than half of all pregnancies are unintended.

RELATED: What's Going On With the Supreme Court and Birth Control?

The outcome of this case is relevant not only to the half of the population capable of conceiving babies, but also to the physical and economic wellbeing of future generations of children. In one of the many amicus briefs filed in support of the government in this case, a group of doctors’ associations that includes the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists wrote, “The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention identified family planning as one of the greatest public health achievements of the twentieth century, finding that smaller families and longer birth intervals contribute to the better health of infants, children, and women, as well as improving the social and economic roles of women.”

Your medical decisions are just that — your own. But some bosses want to chip away at #BC coverage. #HandsOffMyBC pic.twitter.com/4uEaJ0zFFr — Planned Parenthood (@PPact) March 23, 2016

Ironically, although increased access to contraceptive care has been proven to reduce the numbers of unintended pregnancies and abortions, many of the same groups fighting to destroy abortion care access are the same ones fighting to decrease access to contraceptives.

As with the Whole Woman’s Health case, it’s especially troubling that this case is being heard right now, while Republican senators are still obstinately refusing to allow Obama to appoint a new SCOTUS justice following the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, since it means the eight remaining justices could easily reach a tie in this decision. If they do, chaos is likely to ensue—the law will be interpreted differently state by state, which could lead to unequal access to basic medical coverage for millions of workers across the US.

Like other “religious freedom reform” laws and statutes at the state and federal level, the potential scope of this ruling also definitely runs into slippery slope territory. If SCOTUS rules in favor of Zubik in this case, it would set a precedent that could begin to allow religiously affiliated organizations to defy civil rights and anti-discrimination mandates that protect people not only on the basis of gender, but also sexual orientation and race—which is well worth rallying against.