Jay MacIntyre is mobbed by CU teammates after scoring a touchdown during the first half against Nicholls on Saturday. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Nicholls at CU, at a glance What went right: From the start, CU took care of business against an overmatched opponent. The Buffs scored on their first three possessions and moved the ball up and down the field all day long. Defensively, they shut down the Nicholls offense from start to finish. What went wrong: Mistakes prevented the Buffs from being as crisp as they could have — and should have — been on offense. Quarterback Sefo Liufau wasn't sharp, and the Buffs had a fumble that couple of other misses plays that prevented points from going on the board. Turning point: CU needed just 89 seconds to march 70 yards on six plays on the opening drive of the game, capped by a Phillip Lindsay touchdown run. That set the tone for a blowout victory. CU player of the game: Lindsay. The sophomore tailback had 113 yards and two touchdowns on his 17 rushing attempts. While his first score set the tone for the afternoon, his second one, which made it 31-0 in the third quarter, put the game away. Bottom line: Nobody really expected Nicholls to come into Boulder and get a win, or even give CU much of a game. Credit the Buffs, however, for taking control early and doing what was expected of them.

Colorado quarterback Sefo Liufau wasn't in a great mood Saturday afternoon.

Sure, he and his Buffaloes' teammates dominated overmatched Nicholls, 48-0, at Folsom Field, and ultimately, that was the goal.

Advertisement

Liufau, however, came away from the easy victory feeling "pretty frustrated" after his performance was less than stellar.

"I just think I missed a lot of throws out there; I think it's obvious," the junior said. "It's pretty frustrating overall, and just something to work on and get better for next week."

The good news for CU (3-1) is that Liufau didn't need to be sharp for it to snag its first three-game winning streak since a 3-0 start to the 2008 season, all while sending Nicholls (0-3) to its school-record 21st consecutive defeat.

Still, there has to be concern for the Buffs.

Liufau injured the AC joint in his right (throwing) shoulder during CU's 27-24 overtime against Colorado State on Sept. 19. While Liufau continued to play, and played well, through the rest of that game, CU head coach Mike MacIntyre said Liufau "wasn't able to throw all week" leading up to the Nicholls game.

Against Nicholls, Liufau's overall numbers (13-for-21, 227 yards, one touchdown) were solid, and he's now thrown 105 consecutive passes without an interception - the fourth-longest streak in school history.

Liufau badly missed receivers on several throws, however, and said afterward that he was in pain throughout the game.

Colroado running back Donovan Lee runs in for a touchdown against Nicholls on Saturday. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

"Yeah, but I don't want to make any excuses," he said. "If you're out there playing, you need to make plays. I think fundamentals, probably, is what it comes down to and not trying to compensate for it."

On the plus side, Nicholls came nowhere near hitting Liufau, so he didn't take any punishment to the shoulder, and MacIntyre didn't sound concerned.

"He was out of rhythm just a little bit, but he did a lot of excellent things," MacIntyre said. "He'll feel much better next week than he does this week."

Watching film of Saturday's game might make Liufau feel a little better.

While the Buffs' starting quarterback may not have had a great performance, many of his teammates did as CU picked up its biggest blowout since a 52-point win against Northeast Louisiana on Sept. 16, 1995.

Phillip Lindsay rushed for 113 yards and two touchdowns. Donovan Lee, who converted from receiver to running back this week, rushed for 103 yards and a touchdown. Redshirt freshman receiver Jay MacIntyre had a breakout performance.

On defense, sixth-year senior Jered Bell picked off two Nicholls passes in helping the Buffs to their first shutout in six years.

"It means a lot," coach MacIntyre said of the Buffs winning their third in a row. "It hasn't been done since we've been here and hasn't been done in a long time. That's what we want to do next is get another one and make it a four-game win streak.

"(Against an opponent like Nicholls), the main thing you want to do is you want to win the football game, and then you want to get out of there injury free, and we basically did that today."

The Buffs raced to a 21-0 lead in the first quarter after scoring on their first three possessions. While they sputtered in the second quarter, they never really looked back.

In all, CU reached the red zone on each of its first nine possessions and didn't punt until the fourth quarter. The Buffs finished with 636 yards, their highest total since posting 767 against San Jose State on Sept. 11, 1999.

CU led 24-0 at halftime and actually went to the locker room upset. A fumble inside the 5-yard line by running back Christian Powell and a failed fourth-and-1 attempt at the Nicholls 6 prevented the Buffs from burying the Colonels before the break.

"At times we were sloppy," Lindsay said. "But, I feel like we got better today."

Defensively, CU played without three injured starters — linebacker Addison Gillam and defensive ends Leo Jackson III and Derek McCartney — but posted its first shutout since a 24-0 win against Wyoming on Sept. 19, 2009.

"I think it's really big that we did that," MacIntyre said. "Any time you shut anybody out, it's a good deal. It's hard to shut anybody out, I don't care who it is. Our effort and our tenacity was excellent."

CU held Nicholls to 166 yards, the lowest total by a Buffs' opponent since Miami-Ohio had 139 on Sept. 22, 2007. The Colonels never got beyond the CU 42-yard line and ran just three of 56 plays in CU territory.

As a whole, it may not have been the game Liufau wanted for himself, but it was the type of game the Buffs needed as they look forward to starting Pac-12 play next Saturday against 13th-ranked Oregon.

"We're not satisfied," Liufau said. "We definitely have to get better and clean up the mistakes we made because people can pick on that. Starting tomorrow we'll watch film and get ready for Oregon next week."

Contact staff writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/BrianHowell33.