Winterlike weather reared its ugly head again Sunday, shutting down stretches of Interstate 70 in the mountains and bringing fresh snow to the Front Range.

A winter warning was issued throughout the mountains and an advisory for the urban corridor from early Sunday morning until midnight.

The spring storm that began overnight dumped 4 to 6 inches of snow in the mountains by Sunday evening and produced wind gusts up to 40 mph on the Eastern Plains — causing “sporadic” power outages and shutting down sections of I-70.

Multiple accidents were reported along the highway as the sun set and temperatures dipped. Colorado Springs, Thornton and Aurora were on accident alert by evening.

Snow was expected to continue in the mountains during the night, with accumulation in the double digits and heaviest on the eastern slope of the Front Range. Denver was expected to receive an additional 2 to 4 inches overnight. “It is pretty common to get a storm like this in April,” National Weather Service meteorologist Jim Kalina said. “And it will help keep Colorado from drying out later.”

According to the State Patrol, eastbound I-70 was closed at times Sunday from Vail to Vail Pass, from Silverthorne to the Eisenhower Tunnel and westbound from Georgetown to the tunnel, with multiple crashes and several cars sliding off the road.

Westbound lanes also were closed at Steele Street in Denver late Sunday afternoon because of slick and icy road conditions.

Loveland Pass and Colorado 67 near Cripple Creek were closed Sunday afternoon. The State Patrol expected extended closures.

The Colorado Department of Transportation implemented the chain-up law for commercial vehicles crossing Cerro Pass on U.S. 50 and westbound near the Twin Tunnels and Glenwood Springs. Vail Pass also enforced the chain-up law before closure.

Residents in Yuma and Washington counties lost power early Sunday morning. but it was restored quickly.

Xcel Energy had crews standing by Sunday night should there be outages in its coverage areas.

The snow caused minor delays at Denver International Airport as airlines de-iced planes, but no major cancellations were reported.

A representative of Copper Mountain said it was “dumping” until midafternoon Sunday and said the day’s official snowfall totals would be released Monday morning. Copper already has announced that it would extend its regular ski season, opening the weekend of April 25.

Snowfall in northeastern Colorado was expected to be between 3 to 6 inches, and wind gusts were expected in the plains up to 50 mph.

According to the Weather Service, temperatures at lower elevations were expected to warm Monday to the 40s, with a 10 percent chance of snow.