Posted on November 13, 2014

Howard Kurtz: Media's "Virtual Blackout" Of Gruber's Obamacare Remarks

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

HOWARD KURTZ, MEDIABUZZ: It's been a virtual blackout, Bill. It is inexcusable, nothing on the network evening newscasts. One mention on CNN. Not a word in the New York Times. On what planet is this kind of embarrassing admission not news, maybe on that comet where the spaceship just landed.



BILL O'REILLY, FNC: Let me just run down: CBS Evening News on Monday night. The time that the story broke. No coverage, ABC no coverage. NBC no coverage. CNN one mention on the program called The Lead. Tuesday morning on the morning shows, with three hours sometimes of editorial time. CBS This Morning no coverage. ABC Good Morning America no coverage but I understand Renee Zellwegger did get another eyebrow lift so that took 45 minutes. You can understand why Good Morning America didn't cover it? NBC's Today Show no coverage. CNN New Day no coverage. We don't even count MSNBC. They are not a news organization. Okay.



KURTZ: Well, I sometimes sit here and tell you, you know, they were consumed with other stories, but nobody in America has Ebola anymore...



I think it's gotten more pronounced during the Obama administration and by the way you mentioned MSNBC. Jonathan Gruber goes on an afternoon show there and talks to Ronan Farrow who has zero journalistic experience.



O'REILLY: We invited Dr. Gruber on. He has been on before. He turned us down. If you were Dr. Gruber who are you going to face? Some kid who is 14 years old or me? Come on.



KURTZ: My 9-year-old daughter could have conducted a better interview with Jonathan Gruber.



O'REILLY: He knew that and that's why he went there.



KURTZ: He says he acted inappropriately. Farrow doesn't say what do you mean by that? Do you stand by the comments.



O'REILLY: The story isn't Dr. Gruber. I think Dr. Gruber is a patriot for finally telling the truth to the people. The story is that we have a free press that was designed by the founding fathers to hold those in power accountable for what they do. The doctor asserts that Obamacare legislation was deceitful, it was a fraud. It was put together as a giant redistribution tax.