Members of a Dallas-based open-carry group held a rally on the Katy Trail Saturday afternoon protesting requests from Dallas police to leave guns off the trail, saying it has led to an uptick in crime on the trails.

“When the police announce that an area won’t have armed, law-abiding citizens able to defend themselves, the criminals come out of the woodwork, and that’s what we’ve seen down on these Dallas trails,” said Murdoch Pizgatti, founder and president of the group Come and Take it America.

About 40 people gathered at Reverchon Park and walked part of trail during the peaceful protest. Dallas police were on hand to monitor the event, though kept a distance from the protesters.

In October, police made the request that people leave their guns at home when using the trail after two men wearing bulletproof vests and carrying fake rifles caused a scare.

Pizgatti pointed to five recent armed robberies on the Katy Trail and the murder of David Stevens, a 53-year-old runner, who was hacked to death on White Rock Creek Trail, as examples of people needing to defend themselves.

On Thursday police announced the arrest of two people in connection to the robberies. Daray Robinson, 21, and Jamaciay Smith, 17, have each been charged with one count of aggravated robbery. Police are investigating whether Robinson and Smith are behind all five armed robberies.

Pizgatti said the group did not want to intimidate other users of the trail but rather, “encourage people to take it upon themselves to protect their loved ones and their lives.”

But earlier this week Friends of the Katy Trail posted to their Facebook page asking people to avoid using the trail during the rally.

Melissa Fisher, who frequently uses the trail, said she has felt unsafe on the trail at some point, largely in part to the low visibility in some areas, but that guns didn’t make her feel any safer.

“How do you walk up to a guy with an AK-47 and know if he is a good guy or a bad guy?” she said.

Texas law does not prohibit the carrying of long guns and starting in January, licensed Texans will be able to openly carry handguns in belt or shoulder holsters.

Matthew Short, the group’s public relations director, invoked Friday’s terrorist attacks in Paris to make his point about gun rights.

“We do not want victims of those gun free zones in Dallas,” Short said. “Dallas is not going to be Paris. We are not going to have an environment where people can go and murder 150-plus people because the public is not armed. We want the criminals to know the public is armed and going to take care of themselves.”