According to a new survey, the job market is improving and putting additional demands on human resource managers to find the talent they need. According to the survey from by job site CareerBuilder, employers expect the job market to improve in 2014, but already more than half of human resource managers report that they cannot find qualified candidates for open positions. Almost half of human resource managers report that these jobs are going unfilled for three months or longer.

The U.S. government's inability to deliver a clear and long-term solution to the debt-ceiling issue is affecting hiring. The problem seems to get resolved, but recently the debt-ceiling issue made headlines about a possible default. The latest news is that the debt-ceiling issue is resolved for another year. We hope so because America's political stalemate makes managers reluctant to hire full time workers until they have a clearer view of the direction of the recovery.

The Affordable Care Act is also having an impact on hiring. Seventeen percent of employers report that they will be recruiting more part-time workers in 2014. Twelve percent of employers report that this decision is due to the Affordable Care Act.

The freelance workforce fills the growing skills gap and gives managers the flexibility they need in uncertain times. This makes freelance consultants an ever more important part of America's corporate and small business workforce. The percentage of employers who are hiring temporary or contract workers keeps growing. In 2014, 42% of businesses plan to hire temporary or contract workers, up from 40% last year.

In this environment, Yurcor's services are more important than ever. Yurcor helps businesses, staffing suppliers and freelance consultants work together by offering Employer of Record and Vendor Management services.

Employer of Record services enable businesses to engage freelancers as W-2 employees of Yurcor, reducing worker misclassification and labor costs, while offering freelancers health and wealth benefits that are portable from project to project

Vendor Management Services enable companies to streamline the process of engaging workers from staffing suppliers while ensuring that services are delivered in compliance with business requirements.