Half the hospitals in New Jersey got bonuses and half got penalized for how they treat Medicare patients in the latest scorecard based on data released by the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services.

Under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, the federal government can withhold a portion of reimbursement money for hospitals that did not meet standards in 24 categories. They range from how quickly the staffs responded to heart attacks and prevented blood clots, to patient satisfaction measured in a survey that asked about the cleanliness of rooms and communications with nurses and doctors.

At stake was a 1.25 percent penalty or bonus for every bill paid between October 2013 and September 2014. With thousands of patients seeking hospital care, the money adds up.

Among the state's 62 hospitals and multi-hospital networks, 31 will receive a bonus, 30 will pay a penalty and one hospital will receive neither, according to an analysis by Kaiser Health News, an online independent and nonpartisan news organization.

"The Affordable Care Act gave the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services many new tools to convert Medicare from a program that paid for decades on automatic pilot, into one that deliberately pays to promote better health," Patrick Conway, the centers' chief medical officer wrote in the CMS blog on Thursday. "Now thanks to one of those tools, the Hospital Value-Based Purchasing Program, Medicare is no loner a program that just pays the bills. Acute care hospitals across the country not only are paid more for higher quality, they also have skin in the game."

Nationally, 1,231 hospitals will get bonuses and 1,451 hospitals will pay penalties for each Medicare patient they treat, according to Kaiser's analysis.

The health care law also requires hospital to reduce how many patients cycle back into the hospital within 30 days. Those hospitals with high rates this year lose up to 2 percent of reimbursements.

The data show that at the end of 2010, 21.6 percent of hospitalized New Jersey Medicare patients were readmitted 30 days after discharge, but by the end of 2012 the figure had dropped to 19.98, according to Healthcare Quality Strategies of East Brunswick, a firm hired by the federal government to improve the quality and efficiency of New Jersey's Medicare and Medicaid programs.

"Overall, if you look at how New Jersey hospitals compare with the national average, we are slightly above average – we have a higher percentage of hospitals receiving bonuses based on their quality efforts and a lower percentage of hospitals that were penalized," said Kerry McKean Kelly, spokeswoman for the New Jersey Hospital Association, a lobbying group. "New Jersey hospitals have invested a lot of energy and resources in quality improvement efforts but that work must continue. Our goal is for continuous, sustained, long term improvement."

Hospital readmission rates are down, but they are still too high, she added. "There are so many complex factors that contribute to hospital re-admissions and many of them are beyond the hospitals’ control. It’s going to take much more work, and a lot of coordination among healthcare providers, social services, community groups and patients themselves, to continue reducing our readmission rate," Kelly said.

Suzanne Ianni, president of the New Jersey Hospital Alliance, a lobbying group representing 16 urban hospitals that serve the most low-income and uninsured patients, said the grading system does not take into account the turmoil in people's lives that may contribute to hospital re-admissions.

“The ACA contains incentives and penalties aimed at improving population health but often does not recognize the extreme challenges that safety net hospitals have within their communities," Ianni said. "If patients are readmitted to the hospital within 30 days for the same diagnosis, the hospital is penalized through lower Medicare reimbursement. But this does not recognize the socio-economic challenges of the people living in cities."

"Patients may not have social supports like people to take care of them at home or even money to buy medicines – leading to a much more likely result that the patients will be readmitted to the hospital," Ianni said.

Hospital-specific penalties and bonuses may be found at http://www.kaiserhealthnews.org/Stories/2013/November/14/value-based-purchasing-medicare-hospitals-chart.aspx

RELATED COVERAGE

• N.J. hospital readmission rate is down about 8 percent among Medicare patients



• Nearly every N.J. hospital to be penalized by Medicare for high readmissions





More Politics