Thousands of Louisianians who signed up for health insurance with the Louisiana Health Cooperative were abruptly notified last month the company would discontinue all coverage in 2016. It was likely surprising news to many of the 17,000 customers who relied upon the company to help pay for their health care needs.

Yet there were clues from the start that Louisiana Health Cooperative -- a not-for-profit insurance company created with $56 million in federal loans through the Affordable Care Act -- was in deep trouble.

Louisiana Health Cooperative was only 17 days into its initial coverage period at the start of 2014 when complaints about the organization began rolling into the Louisiana Department of Insurance.

The first customer said the company misrepresented its products. The next said the company had unfairly denied a patient's claim.

By the end of 2014, Louisiana Health Cooperative customers had filed 106 complaints with the state. It was the highest rate of complaints-per-customer of all of Louisiana's five major insurers — nearly twice the rate of those filed against market-leader Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana, a company with 45 times as many customers.

"The co-op in Louisiana had significant difficulty getting up and running in a professional manner," said Louisiana Insurance Commissioner Jim Donelon, whose office is working with Louisiana Health Cooperative staff in Metairie to ensure it keeps its promises to its customers through the end of the year. Though the co-op placed its enrollment at 16,000 at the time of its announcement, Donelon's office said the figure is 17,000.

Louisiana Health Cooperative complaints by type Reason 2014 Jan. 1 to May 15, 2015 Access to care 23 2 Cancellation 6 7 Claim delay 18 56 Delays/no response 1 Denial of claim 11 7 Misrepresentation 2 Pharmacy benefits 2 1 Premium & rating 1 Premium misquoted 1 Refusal to insure 8 2 Related to state rules 24 7 Unsatisfactory premium refund 3 4 Unsatisfactory settlement/offer 1 3 Coordination of benefits 1 Premium notice & billing 1 Total 101 91

Figures from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners and the U.S. Department Health and Human Services' Office of Inspector General illustrate more about Louisiana Health Cooperative's profound failure to thrive in just its first year selling insurance:

• It experienced financial losses more than 10 times what it expected in its first year, leaving it $20 million in the hole by the end of 2014.

• Enrollment in 2014 was less than half of what it planned -- 13,000 mid-year in 2014 compared with the 28,100 people it projected. By December 2014, those numbers dropped 23 percent, the highest percentage loss among all of the nation's 23 co-ops during that period.

Donelon said Louisiana Health Cooperative's flop was somewhat of a surprise, given the pedigree of its founding leadership.

The cooperative was formed in 2011 by a core of people closely affiliated with Ochsner Health System. Its board at one point included four Ochsner executives, including CEO Warner Thomas.

Terry Shilling, a co-op founder and interim chief executive officer, had been CEO of Ochsner's health insurance arm for five years before forming the Atlanta consulting firm Beam Partners in 2004.

"Ochsner is very large, very efficient in our area and even had experience with their own health plan a few years ago," Donelon said. "So I was very encouraged when I saw them entering into the co-op area, thinking they would bring more intellectual resources into the co-op than most states would have available."

Yet, between June and December of 2014, customers said goodbye to Louisiana Health Cooperative by the thousands, resulting in a 23 percent enrollment drop in just six months to 9,980, according to data from the OIG report. Though nearly all of the nation's 23 co-ops were struggling in their first year, Louisiana's rate of enrollment loss in that period was number one.

Were you a Louisiana Health Cooperative customer? Tell us about your experience. Email rcatalanello@nola.com or call 504-717-7701.

Louisiana Health Cooperative CEO Greg Cromer did not respond to requests to discuss the organization's trajectory. Cromer is also a state representative from Slidell whose 2013 co-op salary co-op was $140,970, according to federal income tax records.

A spokesperson with Deveney public relations firm, named on Louisiana Health Cooperative's website as the organization's media contact, said Cromer would not grant interviews.

In response to questions about what factors led to the company's decision to shutter, the public relations firm issued a five-sentence statement on behalf of the company, calling its decision to stop enrolling customers "proactive" and "voluntary."

"By addressing the situation now, we place ourselves in the position to maintain all policies through December 31, 2015," the statement read.



Rough start for co-ops

Health care co-ops, formally titled "Consumer Operated and Oriented Plans" by the Affordable Care Act, are not-for-profit insurance companies created with the aim of encouraging competition in the new insurance marketplace.

Like credit unions, they were envisioned as a consumer-oriented alternative to corporate insurance companies in that their primary aim was to serve members rather than maximize corporate profits. Unlike for-profit carriers, the law required cooperatives to reinvest all profits in order to improve benefits and pricing for customers. And similar to credit unions, the federal government also required them to become member-governed.

But there were early signs that the co-ops nationally were off to a rough start. The state of Iowa took over its co-op late last year after it was clear it was floundering financially. In that case, the co-op successfully enrolled a lot of customers -- more than most co-ops nationally -- but its low prices did not generate enough cash for it to operate and pay for its customers' care.

"It has been said that health insurance industry is one of the hardest for a start-up to break into, if not the hardest," said Sabrina Corlette, senior research fellow at the Georgetown University's Center of Health Insurance Reforms.

For one, it requires significant capital.

The Affordable Care Act made federal loans available to cooperatives, money to cover their launch costs and help meet some states' capital reserve requirements. But many experts say the money allotted was not sufficient.

Though the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services did award $2.4 billion in loans to co-ops, that amount was far less than the $6 billion Congress first appropriated. And even that was less than the $10 billion actuarial experts said was needed to manage risk.

Another significant hurdle, Corlette said, was building a provider network with premium prices low enough to compete with established insurers such as Blue Cross Blue Shield, which in Louisiana has about 70 percent of the market.

It would have been difficult under any circumstances for a new name to break into an insurance market like that. Add into the mix a new law that substantially changed how patients access and pay for their health care, and the odds were stacked against the new co-ops, Donelon said.

"This," he said, "was the worst-possible environment to start an insurance company."

Seventeen of the 23 co-ops across the country projected negative income in the first year, as start-ups often do. But by the end of 2014, 20 of them had lost more money than expected. Together, not including Iowa, they lost $376 million, 10 times higher than hoped, according to a July analysis by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Office of Inspector General. Only Maine's co-op ended the year in the black.

Louisiana Health Cooperative's actual revenue losses in that first year were the seventh highest in the nation.

Moriba Karamoko, director of the Louisiana Consumer Healthcare Coalition, said he wasn't surprised to see Louisiana Health Cooperative discontinue insurance sales.

The company didn't seem to have the resources, experience or self-discipline to effectively handle customer complaints, he said.

"The happiest people with their insurance are the ones who don't use it," Karamoko said. "If you use it, you're going to want to use that customer service line."

He said he didn't feel the deals available with the Louisiana Health Cooperative provided much lower premiums than the established insurance providers.

A look at 2014 plan prices available to marketplace customers in five parishes -- Jefferson, Orleans, East Baton Rouge, Caddo and Assumption -- shows Louisiana Health Cooperative's mid-level silver plan prices were among the highest in all but East Baton Rouge and Assumption.

In Jefferson Parish, for example, a 27-year-old buying an individual "silver" plan would have paid a monthly premium of $296 or $351 to Louisiana Health Cooperative if it picked one of the two plans available in that range. The cheapest plan came from Humana, costing $208.

Similarly, a 40-year-old couple with two children in Jefferson could have paid as little as $763 with Humana or $822 with Blue Cross Blue Shield. The only two Louisiana Health Cooperative plans available to them were the most expensive, costing $1,081 or $1,284.

In 2015, the co-op's silver plans became somewhat more competitive in two of those parishes. But prices across the market edged up.

A widely held fear is that if co-ops fail, consumers will have fewer options, there will be less competition and for-profit insurers will control the market.

Karamoko said he isn't worried that loss of the Louisiana Health Cooperative will raise premiums among other insurers. That's because the company was already planning a substantial 2016 rate hike of about 23 percent — just as several competitors are planning their own.

"We already had a premium issue with them in the mix," Karamoko said.

Future cloudy for co-ops

Donelon, like many others, is not optimistic about the future of co-ops such as Louisiana's, despite the fact that several are experiencing enrollment growth.

"There is hope," he said, "but in my conversations with my colleagues, the expectation is that most will not make it."

That's too bad, the insurance commissioner said, because they were supposed to bring more choice and competition to the market.

Dr. Martin Hickey, board chair for the National Alliance of State Health Co-ops and CEO of New Mexico Health Connections, a more successful co-op, said he believes it's too soon to pronounce these organizations dead. After all, the failure rate for any new start-up is high.

"If you were an investor trying to get something new going, then you know there's always going to be a risk," Hickey said. "It's just the beginning and people are talking like it's the end -- and it's not."

More needs to be done to support these organizations, he said, so they can bring more choices, higher quality and lower prices without being driven by shareholder pressures.

"The co-ops are, in some cases, the last, best hope," Hickey said.

It's unclear how Louisiana Health Cooperative will go about repaying its $56 million in loans.

"My guess is that the federal government is going to take a loss on that," said Corlette, the Georgetown researcher.

When asked if Louisiana Health Cooperative is being investigated for its business practices, Donelon said he could not comment.

Rebecca Catalanello can be reached at rcatalanello@nola.com and 504-717-7701.