Did Bill set this up?

The prostitutes at Dennis Hof’s famous Moonlite Bunny Ranch in Carson City, Nevada, have launched a campaign endorsing Hillary Clinton for president in 2016.

The sex workers, cleverly unified under the name “Hookers For Hillary,” have launched a website in addition to social media accounts to outline the four-point platform on which they are supporting Clinton as she seeks the Democratic nomination for president.

The workers at the Bunny Ranch are particularly enthusiastic about Hillary’s positions on health care, foreign policy and the economy.

According to their webpage, the “hookers” have enrolled in health care coverage under Obamacare and want Hillary to win the White House so she can protect the Affordable Care Act. The sex workers are also attracted to Clinton because of her support for government public health agencies like Health and Human Services (HHS) and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

When it comes to the economy, Dennis Hof’s Bunnies stand behind Hillary’s dismissal of trickle-down economics (though one can imagine they don’t agree with Clinton when she says businesses and corporations don’t create jobs).

Perhaps the most colorful endorsement the prostitutes provide for Hillary is that which is anchored by her foreign policy experience.

As reads the website:

As secretary Of State, Hillary Clinton gained invaluable experience negotiating with foreign leaders, and the Bunnies can definitely relate to negotiating through a language barrier. The Bunny Ranch entertains customers from all around the globe, and the girls have great respect for any woman who can take powerful men from oppressive cultures and make them bend to her will. With her eye on the international landscape, the Bunnies are confident that President Hillary Clinton would also avoid a repeat of the Secret Service’s Colombian prostitution scandal by making sure that her detail “buys American.”

We’re betting Hillary Clinton isn’t too turned on by this endorsement, while Bill is probably already looking into organizing a campaign event at the Bunny Ranch.