Government Work: Enrollment in Covered California was flat this year, and consumers hate it. But the director still got a huge raise and a fat bonus. So much for ObamaCare rooting out health care waste.

The 1.4 million who signed up for an ObamaCare plan through Covered California, and who are paying a $13.95 fee every month for the privilege, might be interested to learn that Executive Director Peter Lee just got a 26.8% raise, plus a $65,000 bonus, which is bigger than the $53,000 bonus he received last year.

To put this in perspective, Lee’s base salary of $333,120 is 49% higher than the average health insurance CEO in the country, and 69% higher than all the CEOs in California, according to Bureau of Labor Statistics data.

We don’t begrudge people for being well compensated for their success. But in this case, Lee is being rewarded by Covered California for what looks like a rather astounding string of failures.

Enrollment in the state exchange climbed only about 1% this year, leaving it 300,000 below Lee’s goal of 1.7 million. And because the exchange relies on enrollment fees to operate, low sign-ups put the exchange in financial jeopardy.

According to Covered California’s proposed budget, released in May, it expects to run an operating deficit of $98 million next fiscal year, and $41 million the year after that. And those numbers assume the exchange can wring 21% out of its budget over the next two years while sharply increasing enrollment.

Lee himself admitted in December that there are questions about the “long-term sustainability of the organization.”

We also recently learned, thanks to former CBS News investigative reporter Sharyl Attkisson, that Covered California suffered from “gross incompetence and mismanagement” as it was getting started. Attkisson reported her findings in a two-part piece on the Daily Signal.

This May, the Columbia Journalism Review called for “stronger (media) coverage of Covered California” because of the challenges it’s facing and because it’s the “largest state-run health insurance exchange.”

To top things off, consumers give Covered California an overall one-star rating on Yelp.

Does any of this seem deserving of a raise? Or bonus?

ObamaCare cheerleaders once held up California as a model of success. It certainly is a model of something.