She brought Inuit, and indigenous, art to the fore with her distinctive style of animal prints, and was beloved by many.

Now, Inuit artist Kenojuak Ashevak, who walked on last year, is being honored by Google Doodle in Canada for what would have been her 87th birthday.

Anyone north of Turtle Island’s 49th Parallel (excluding Alaska) undertaking a Google search today will come face to face with Ashevak’s unmistakable style: a sample of her artwork is the illustration above the search box.

“Our doodle in Canada pays tribute to Inuit artist Kenojuak Ashevak, who would have been 87 today,” reads Google Doodle’s description. “Ashevak’s work brought national attention to indigenous art and thrust the ever-humble artist into the spotlight.”

The Doodle notes note that Ashevak received a star on Canada’s Walk of Fame in 2001 “for her contribution to art and Canadian culture.” In addition she was made an Officer of the Order of Canada in 1967 and a Companion in 1982, according to the Governor General of Canada's office.

Born in on October 3, 1927, in Ikirasaq, Baffin Island, Northwest Territories, Ashevak walked on in January 2013 at age 85.

RELATED: Renowned Inuit Artist Kenojuak Ashevak Walks On

One of her most iconic pieces, The Enchanted Owl, was used by Canada post to adorn a 1970 stamp that commemorated the 100th anniversary of the creation of the Northwest Territories, where she had been born. This brought Inuit art to the fore and established the Cape Dorset school on the world stage.

The Google Doodle itself is an artful take on one of Ashevak’s main themes, a “highly stylized and striking two dimensional rendering” of a bird in ocher and brown, with the search giant's name inscribed in the bird's tail feathers, as the news website ECanadanow.com described. The Inuk artist was also known for other animals and for being a pioneer in Inuit art.

The artist herself remained humble throughout her life, infused with gratitude for having been bestowed with a gift, her friend and fellow Cape Dorset artist Okpik Pitseolak told CBC News upon Ashevak’s death. The doodle can be found at Google.ca.

Google regularly uses its logo to draw attention to noteworthy people and issues that may or may not be commonly known. There have been other tributes to Indigenous Peoples as well. In 2012, for instance, the search engine's Latin American sites paid tribute to the end of the Mayan Long Count calendar.

RELATED: Google Doodle Mexico Honors the End of the Mayan 13th Baktun