Art by Mike Lucas

Riskified has raised another $4 million from insiders for its e-commerce fraud-fighting software, Deborah Gage reports for VentureWire. The Israeli-based company, which launched in 2012, now claims more than 1,000 customers, including the online ticket marketplace Viagogo and the music equipment retailer Turntable Lab. Competitors include big companies like RSA Security (part of EMC) and younger companies such as Threat Metrix. The Series A round was led by Genesis Partners and includes Founder Collective and Entrée Capital.

ALSO IN TODAY’S VENTUREWIRE (subscription required):

FunPlus Interactive Holdings, a mobile and social gaming startup, has split off its most mature games and other assets and sold them to Shanghai-based conglomerate Zhongji Investment Holding for up to $960 million, the companies announced Tuesday.

Paula Long, a serial entrepreneur and one of the few females who has started hard-core technology companies that sell products to businesses, released more details on her latest venture—DataGravity, a startup that is using technology to bring intelligence to data storage.

PlayFab, which handles back-end operations for gaming companies such as configuring servers, managing logins from multiple devices, marketing and analytics, secured $2.5 million in seed funding.

HealthQuest Capital, a new firm that Sofinnova Ventures is sponsoring, has raised a $110 million first fund it will use to help companies in markets such as medical devices, diagnostics and health-care information technology become self-sustaining.

Nirmidas Biotech, a spin-out from Stanford University with technology that amplifies fluorescence in laboratory samples in a bid to better identify disease, has raised $2 million in seed funding from backers including Stanford-StartX Fund.

Rethink Autism, which has built a software platform that educators and administrators can use to tailor lesson plans and then track the progress of students with autism and other behavioral-health problems, has raised a $10 million Series C round co-led by new investors Beringea and Arboretum Ventures.

(VentureWire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals and personnel moves involving start-ups and their venture backers. For a two-week trial, click here.)

ELSEWHERE AROUND THE WEB:

Silicon Valley Mergers and the Toothbrush Test. When deciding whether Google should spend millions or even billions of dollars in acquiring a new company, its chief executive, Larry Page, asks whether the acquisition passes the toothbrush test: Is it something you will use once or twice a day, and does it make your life better? Google’s test highlights the increasing autonomy of Silicon Valley’s biggest corporate acquirers—they are leaning on their internal corporate development teams to identify targets, conduct due diligence and negotiate terms instead of relying on Wall Street bankers, writes the New York Times’ David Gelles.

AppNexus Raises Another $60 Million. Ad technology company AppNexus has accepted a $60 million investment from a Boston-based public equity and asset management firm that values it at $1.2 billion, the WSJ’s Jack Marshall reports. AppNexus previously raised about $140 million from investors including Microsoft, Technology Crossover Ventures, Venrock and Tribeca Venture Partners. The additional funding means AppNexus is under less pressure to raise capital through the public markets. In the past two years a handful of online advertising companies have held initial public offerings of their own, but have subsequently performed poorly.

The Dog Fight for Tech Talent. To compete for tech talent in a region dominated by Microsoft and Amazon.com, Seattle-based dog sitting service Rover.com, backed by Menlo Ventures, Madrona Venture Group and Foundry Group, offers employees a $1,000 coupon, redeemable for a dog of their choice, for Web developer referrals that are hired by the firm and stay 90 days, writes Gary Beach for the WSJ’s CIO Journal.

Trends That Will Make A Difference In Mobile Payments. These three trends have the greatest potential to drive mobile adoption at both ends of the transaction–for the consumer and for the merchant—writes Alberto Jimenez, director of mobile payments at IBM, in a TechCrunch guest post.

Reading Lists of Top Founders, Investors. Social news aggregator Nuzzel is rolling out a handful of custom news feed pages that show what founders and investors at the top venture capital firms are reading every day, writes VentureBeat’s Tom Cheredar. The move comes weeks after the startup had success with its first experimental custom news page that aggregated a list of the top links shared by the top 1,000 angel investors on AngelList.

How One Startup Attracts Top Female Candidates in China. Beijing-based mobile tech company PapayaMobile has a female-to-male employee ratio that’s 50/50 on the dot. Company founder Si Shen explains how they created gender balance in a post for the WSJ’s Accelerators blog.

Unplugging is Hard for VCs. Union Square Ventures founder Fred Wilson is trying to unplug during his vacation time, which is not easy to do, as the WSJ reported recently.

Craigslist’s Spawn, and What Makes a Great VC. Looking back at the many startups that popped up a few years ago to carve out niches from Craigslist, Spark Capital General Partner Andrew Parker realizes that a portfolio made up of all those companies would likely be one of the best venture funds of the decade. The lesson? Knowing which companies will become interesting is not what makes a great VC—it’s gaining access to those companies.

Write to Zoran Basich at zoran.basich@wsj.com. Follow him on Twitter at @zoranbasich