Australian media mogul pays $15 million for a 514-year-old prayerbook that was stolen by Adolf Hitler during World War II



The Rothschild Prayerbook was created in the 16th century and used for private worship



It was purchased by Channel Seven chairman Kerry Stokes this year

The prayerbook will take its place in his private collection in Perth, WA



Soon it will go on a tour of the east coast to Canberra and Melbourne



A 514-year-old book which contains 67 paintings created by some of the most talented Renaissance artists has been purchased for more than $15 million by Channel Seven chairman Kerry Stokes.

The Rothschild Prayerbook, also known as a Book of Hours, was once owned by a European banking family, the Rothschilds, and was taken from them by Adolf Hitler in 1938 when Austria was invaded by the Nazis.

Each page of the prayerbook - which was created in the 16th century and used for private worship - is made of animal skin and lined with gold leafing.

It is not known who commissioned it to be made or how four pages of it went missing.



Channel Seven chairman Kerry Stokes purchased the 514-year-old book for $15.5 million The Rothschild Prayerbook contains 67 paintings done by some of the most talented Renaissance artists

When Hilter took the prayerbook from the Rothschilds, he stored it in the Nazi vaults with other pieces of priceless art works until it was moved to the Vienna Library, presumably because he thought it would be safer there.

After the fall of the Nazis, the library refused to return the prayerbook to the Rothschilds.

The family waged a 60-year battle with the Austrian government to get it back.

In 1999, it was finally returned to its rightful owners, according to Channel Seven's Sunday Night.



The book then went under the hammer at a Christie's auction months later in England and was purchased by an anonymous buyer.

The prayerbook was not to be seen for another 15 years.

The prayerbook was created in the 16th century and used for private worship It is not known how four pages of the book went missing but it was once owned by Adolf Hitler

But then in 2014, it re-appeared at another Christie's auction at New York City's Rockefeller Centre.

As a phone bidder, Mr Stokes - an art enthusiast - bought the slice of history for $15.5 million to add to his collection in Perth in Western Australia.

But he will not keep it to himself like the prayerbook's previous owners, it will soon go on a tour of the east coast to Canberra and Melbourne.

Mr Stokes said the book felt alive underneath his fingertips when he first touched it.

Its pages are made of animal skin and lined with gold leafing, and has pictures of Madonna holding Jesus Christ The prayerbook is now part of Mr Stokes' private art collection in Perth in Western Australia

'When I first saw it I actually didn’t know if I should touch it and open it, I started to turn the pages and the hair on the back of my arm stood up,' he told Sunday Night.

'I’m a pretty tough nut I guess and I love art as one of the expressions that...probably appeals to the softer side a lot of people would deny I have.