The end of open enrollment for the Affordable Care Act is fast approaching at the end of this month and one of the biggest problems that continues to affect signups in the diverse state of New Jersey is language and cultural barriers among minorities.

New Jersey is one of four target states nationwide that the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services sees as having a high number of eligible uninsured.

A panel last week at Holy Name Medical Center in Teaneck addressed the Latino community with input from U.S. Sen. Bob Menendez.

Holy Name has been making a name for itself by pursuing culturally sensitive care for various ethnic communities after the success of its Korean care program. The hospital now has a care structure for Chinese and Filipinos as well, and is also working on the Latino and Hispanic community.

“From our perspective, culturally sensitive delivery of care is important. We have found this with the data gathered from the Korean program,” said Holy Name CEO Michael Maron. “There are disease prevalence factors that are ethnically and culturally based, whether due to genetics or diet, and we have found that by screening them and having the ability to understand the culture, we are much more effective in treatment and prevention care.”

Maron said that, rather than just depend on the health insurance companies to do outreach, it is increasingly important for a health provider to be involved with managing its community’s health — at more than just a public relations or marketing level.

Get our e-newsletters Click here to subscribe to the NJBIZ Daily and other newsletters

“Others replicate and fail and don’t understand why. It’s done under the auspices of public relations and marketing versus a clinical or culturally sensitive team. (The latter) is very effective,” Maron said.

Which is why Holy Name rolled out Familia y Salud, or “Family and Health,” to engage Latinos and Hispanics in the region, and partnered with AmeriHealth New Jersey to insure the individuals.

“We know there’s a real need for quality, affordable care in the Hispanic community, and it’s critical to have programs like Familia y Salud that bridge cultural gaps,” said Health & Human Services Region II Executive Officer Dennis Gonzalez at the event Friday. “With over 38 different plans offered and most applicants eligible for rates as low as $75 a month in New Jersey, there’s a right plan out there for everyone, and we need to make sure no one slips through the cracks and misses the Jan. 31st deadline to enroll.”

Dr. Alexander Hesquijarosa, an internal medicine physician at Holy Name, also participated in the event and said that, as a Latino himself, he understands firsthand the issues facing the community.

Both Maron and Hesquijarosa explained that many Latino countries’ governments pay the health care bills, so when the first generation of immigrants lands in the U.S., they don’t understand the system is different and are shocked when they are slammed with the bills.

Hesquijarosa previously worked in Hudson County with his uncle and recalls an overwhelming number of pro bono cases at the practice, making it a popular office in the community. But after some time, the need to ensure a solid revenue stream meant no more free visits and instead working out a different arrangement that would benefit both parties.

Now that he is working at Holy Name, he can relate to the community and care for them in a way that is easier for patients to understand.

“They are people who want to be heard and there is a trust component. They are possibly ashamed of their illnesses, so they tend to be more reserved. You have to be patient and compassionate. If someone tries to hear us out better or listen to us better, they will have better results,” Hesquijarosa said.

Menendez, a Democrat, said that, while the ACA has helped improve the health of Americans, the non-English speakers are still left out.

“The Affordable Care Act has provided millions of Americans with access to high-quality health care and the peace of mind that comes with having insurance,” Menendez said. “We can’t allow cultural and language barriers to stand in the way of our loved ones and neighbors getting the health care they need, and I applaud efforts to bridge those gaps. We are all healthier as a community and as a nation because of the ACA, but we need to ensure that everyone eligible for coverage gets it.”