In a part of town where it’s difficult to find any new ranch plans now, you can’t find a prettier setting for a home like that than in Ravenna, the gated hamlet that winds through Lyons formation rocks and lush fairways of a Jay Morrish golf course near Waterton Canyon. Ravenna is showing four different ways to create main-level living, that’ll all include scenery and a carefully managed sense of community.

Ravenna’s visitor center, five minutes south of C-470 on Wadsworth, is just outside the gates – from where you can be escorted in to see the rocks, the course, and just how pretty this really is. “We’re very much about creating a boutique experience for you,” says Dale Schossow, Listing Broker and Managing Partner at Ravenna. “We greet everybody and want to provide you a very personal tour.”

What you’re not going to see is ranches ready for move-in – not in this market. “Even with the fast pace of sales in Colorado now, it’s much tougher for builders to do spec-versions of a luxury ranch now than it was a decade ago,” Schossow adds. But that’s not to say there’s not lots of activity now: Ravenna has luxury ranches underway by three prominent builders, not counting ones for buyers who pick a site and find their own architect/builder.

Starting with Remington Homes, a pioneer in building ranch patio homes, priced from the $700s for a dramatic setting along the west side of the Dakota Hogback — all built to Ravenna’s high level of trim in Old World, southern Mediterranean architecture. Also by legendary builder Thomas Sattler Homes, with sites near the Clubhouse for homes from the $900s that have 360-degree views, and by Tom Burdick of Burdick Homes, from the mid-$800s. Each, says Schossow, show sites positioned to increase in value. “Prices will be going up,” he adds.

You’ll experience the duality of Ravenna’s setting – so close that my drive from the DTC was 25 minutes, but with an ambience that’s remarkably secluded as soon as you pass into its rock-lined vales. “It feels like a hideaway,” says Schossow, who says that Ravenna is culturing that sensation now with services and events crafted around its clubhouse that make for quick relationships between neighbors.

“This is a place where you’ll drive in Friday night and you may never get in your car the rest of the weekend,” Schossow said. Alternative pursuits include the golf (new golf director George Kahrhoff “has taken the experience here and totally recreated it,” Schossow adds); and the culinary work by Executive Chef Christopher Moore, which lured a packed house to Ravenna’s temporary clubhouse for Mother’s Day brunch last weekend. “You’re going to see a community that’s a step above anything else you can find; better staff, service, landscape,” says Kevin Collins, who’s lived here since 2009 and became managing partner last fall. “Ravenna is becoming the place it was always meant to be.”

Club membership is optional, but Schossow says you’ll be surprised at the affordable value, particularly with respect to the permanent clubhouse under design. If you can, call ahead before you drive out; then take C-470 to Wadsworth and head south four miles to Waterton Road, turn left a half mile to Dante, and right to the sales center.

Tour new home sites for luxury ranch plans in Ravenna, gated golf community wrapped in red rocks, national forest; builders include Remington Homes Golf Villas, Burdick Homes, Thomas Sattler Homes European Estate Collection; concierge services. 11118 Caretaker Rd., Littleton; from C470 exit S. Wadsworth, south 4 mi. to Waterton Rd., turn left (south) 1/2-mile to Dante; turn right 1 blk to Caretaker

From low $700s; custom sites from $200s

By appointment today, 10 a.m. to6 p.m.; Sunday 11-6

720-956-1600

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him atmark@samuelsonassoc.com. You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns online atDenverPostHomes.com