Maury County school officials plan to limit substitute teachers to a 28-hour work week to avoid paying health insurance required under the Affordable Care Act — a move that will save the district from spending an estimated $2 million per year.

But district officials may not be able to avoid spending an estimated $1-$3 million more each year to pay dependent coverage for classified employees to meet another requirement under the same law. Violation of the latter requirement could cost the district $1.5 million in penalty.

Amanda Alexander, the district’s human resource manager, reviewed the two compliance issues during a meeting with board members on Thursday.

The news brought mixed reactions from school officials and board members who said the district must address the issue as soon as possible.

“We’re going to have to start monitoring this … cutting back on these hours,” school director Eddie Hickman said. “If not, we’re rolling the dice.”

Board member Tommy Dudley described the health reform law as “crap forced on us by the federal government,” and expresed concerns that compliance makes it look like the district is punishing substitute teachers.

“I don’t want the substitutes to think we don’t appreciate what they do,” Dudley said.

Under the Affordable Care Act employees who work 30 or more hours per week or 130 hours per month average will be eligible for health care coverage. The district currently have 298 substitute teachers on the payroll who do not receive single cover insurance.

Under current coverage rates, health insurance would cost $585.71 per month for each substitute teacher or more than $2 million a year.

Alexander said during October the district used 193 substitute teachers of which 103 worked more than 30 hours. The cost of providing health insurance for those teachers would have cost the county about $723,000 that month, she said.

Any substitute teacher working 30 hours or more as of Jan. 1, 2015 must receive health care benefits for one year, Alexander said.

She said her department is looking into purchasing some computer software to help track the hours of substitute teachers at a cost of about $22,000.

“The cost for implementation and administration of these type systems is far less than the cost to cover health insurance premiums for substitute teachers,” she said.

Under the Affordable Care Act, the school district also will be required to provide equal coverage to all employees. Since the district pays 45 percent of the dependent coverage premium for all licensed employees, the district now will be required to pay the same toward the same coverage of classified employees.

The district currently employs 631 classified employees and if 50 percent enrolled in family coverage, the district’s share of the insurance coverage would increase to more than $1.5 million. If 100 percent of the classified staff enrolled, the district’s cost would climb to more than $3.1 million, Alexander said.

The district could be levied a $1.5 million “Discrimination Penalty” for non-compliance, she said.