Editorial

The next person to coach the University of Guelph Gryphons football team will have a tough act to follow.

The on-field pieces are no doubt in place for the Yates Cup-winning team to again be a powerful club next year. Stu Lang and his organization have succeeding in building a program that has recruited well and created a culture of winning, particularly surrounding matches at the U of G's Alumni Stadium.

So, the competitive future should look bright for the next person to be the chief on the sidelines for the team.

That's not to say his record hasn't set a standard that might intimidate. In leading the Gryphons this fall to their first Ontario championship since 1996 and making 7-1 regular season win-loss records seem the norm, Lang has set conditions where championship calibre play is expected of the team.

It is, however, what he did away from games that might leave the biggest footprints.

There's a very small circle of people who appreciate how much Lang invested in a variety of ways to elevate this program and the university.

Lang is incredibly discreet about it. But he has personally made substantial financial donations to the Gryphons and other aspects of athletics at the U of G. Among the only publicly disclosed gifts of this sort was a pledge to match up to $1 million to a program seeking to create 18 new scholarships for future U of G student athletes by the end of this year.

But Lang's mark will go beyond winning and quietly supporting through this manner.

He was a terrific ambassador for his team and for the school. Lang encouraged his players to do myriad things in the community, such as school visits and stints at soup kitchen duty. He also took pride in helping his players grow as citizens, and not coincidentally has presided over a program during a period rather free of off-field misbehaviour by his charges.

It's unclear what Lang's new role with the university and team will be. It seems probable that he'll work to see a continuation of what he has helped to build — and also that he will be missed as a coach.