Buy Photo Insure Tennessee protesters block House Speaker Beth Harwell's door on April 5. (Photo: Mark Zaleski / For The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Using a pile of sneakers, pumps and cowboy boots, protesters blocked House Speaker Beth Harwell's office door for three hours Tuesday while urging her to bring the Insure Tennessee plan up for a vote.

The protesters sang and chanted in and around the threshold to Harwell's office in Legislative Plaza while telling the stories of uninsured people across the state who do not have access to affordable health care. The group — which included three or four dozen people at its peak — held signs asking Harwell and others to "walk in the shoes of the uninsured" and pass "Insure Tennessee now."

Gov. Bill Haslam's Insure Tennessee plan would expand access to health insurance for thousands of low-income Tennesseans. But it has not been able to gain traction in the Republican-dominated General Assembly in part because of its ties to President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act.

Visitors and staffers between about 11:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. had to climb over the shoes and squeeze past the protesters to get into the office. Some of them argued with the protesters before going inside — including Rep. Glen Casada, the House Republican Caucus chairman from Franklin, who told the protesters they didn't know what they were talking about.

Protesters resisted several attempts by staff members, state troopers and others to clear an open pathway into the office.

"We're not here to make enemies," Justin Jones, a college student and protest organizer, told the crowd. "But we are here to disrupt business as usual."

Nashville woman Michele Fardan held her daughter's funeral program while she spoke to the crowd. She said her daughter died because she didn't have insurance and couldn't afford to seek treatment for an illness until it was too late.

"These are lives that we're talking about," she said. "No one should be denied basic health care in the United States of America, especially in Tennessee."

In a statement, Harwell's spokeswoman, Kara Owen, said the speaker "always welcomes Tennesseans sharing their opinion on any issue," but added that she could not grant the protesters' request.

"The Governor decided earlier this year not to pursue implementation of Insure Tennessee," Owen said. "As Speaker, she cannot unilaterally bring a bill to the floor. All bills go through the committee process, and this has failed to receive the support needed to advance."

Fardan said she and the other protesters would continue to push for Insure Tennessee.

"We can't give up," she said. "We can't stop because people are still dying, still suffering."

While the protest was mostly peaceful, tension briefly simmered between protesters and state troopers. The troopers watched most of the protest without interfering, but they stepped in when protesters were taping messages to Harwell's door frame.

The troopers removed the signs and crumpled some of them up.

Capt. Tommy Fyke said the troopers took action because the tape protesters were using was "defacing property."

"We're trying to let them have their say. They have their right to the First Amendment," Fyke said. "But they can't deface property."

Harwell was not in her office midday Tuesday. Jones, the organizer, said the group would be looking for another way to engage with her on the issue.

Around 2:30, the protesters scooped most of the shoes into plastic bags, pledging to donate them to charity. But they left a pair behind for Harwell, along with a note urging her to take action on the health care measure.

Owen, Harwell's spokeswoman, said the speaker has met with multiple groups to discuss Insure Tennessee, and added that the protesters "are welcome to set up an appointment for a future time when the Speaker is available."

Reach Adam Tamburin at 615-726-5986 and on Twitter @tamburintweets.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RWKyiF