By Parrish Alford

Daily Journal

Robert Cleckler Bowden, better known as Bobby, says he embraced a reputation as the coach of second chances during his 34-year run at Florida State.

It wasn’t always the most popular approach to coaching football, but it was the right approach, he says, because it was right for the young men he was leading.

It’s harder to make right decisions these days for both coaches and players alike, and the Fellowship of Christian Athletes is an important component in helping both ends of the football spectrum succeed.

That will be Bowden’s message when he’s the keynote speaker at an FCA fund-raiser, the Breakfast of Champions, March 25 at 7 a.m. at The Orchard church in Tupelo.

It’s often coaches who fill the void for players from single-parent homes.

Filling the gaps

“The value that FCA has nationally … so many boys across the nation – it might be 50 percent – don’t have a daddy,” Bowden said. “They’re raised by their mommas, grandmommas and big sisters. The daddys are gone. At Florida State we were talking like 65 percent. It might be more or less at other schools. FCA tries to help fill that gap to get coaches and players to be role models.”

Bowden, a native of Birmingham, won 315 games at Florida State, another 42 in six years at West Virginia before that.

His 1993 and 1999 FSU teams won national championships. He coached 24 consensus All-Americans, and not all came from homes with All-American families.

Those who experienced little discipline and structure previously did not always easily adapt to a new environment, and off-field issues could follow.

Some players Bowden couldn’t help, because they were immediately suspended, he said.

“I would give them a second chance if I could,” Bowden said. “They used to call me the second-chance coach, and sometimes the press didn’t like that, but that’s what Christianity is all about. “So many of these kids did not have a father in the home.”

Players like this were seeking leadership, and FCA was not a hard sell for them, Bowden said.

He wants coaches to understand the importance of modeling positive behavior.

“I would tell them that God has put them where they are for a reason,” he said. “If they live a Christian life and encourage boys to get into FCA where they learn how to pray and read the Bible … I’ve seen many saved that way.”

For more information on he Breakfast of Champions, call 315-0860 or visit MississippiFCA.org.

parrish.alford@journalinc.com

Twitter: @parrishalford