Health clinics offering abortions in Texas filed a federal lawsuit on Wednesday to block a new state rule that could shut down more than half of the state’s remaining providers this fall, forcing women seeking an abortion in southern and western Texas to drive several hundred miles each way or go out of state.

The rule, part of a sweeping anti-abortion law passed last year, requires that all clinics providing abortions at any stage of pregnancy, including nonsurgical drug-induced abortions, meet the costly building standards of ambulatory surgery centers.

Only six of the state’s 24 abortion clinics now meet that standard, which will take effect Sept. 1.

Also on Wednesday, a new law in Arizona to restrict medication abortions was put on temporary hold by a federal appeals court, which will decide as early as next week whether the limits should take effect until a challenge, brought by Planned Parenthood and other groups, goes to trial.

Proponents of the Texas law, including Gov. Rick Perry, a Republican, say the surgery center requirement will enhance patient safety. But the clinics, backed by major medical associations, say it is unnecessary and singles out abortion clinics for costly regulation when other, riskier outpatient procedures do not have to meet the same standard.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The new suit comes less than a week after a federal appeals court refused to overturn another provision of the 2013 law that has already forced several clinics to close, leaving the Rio Grande Valley in South Texas without abortion services. That provision required doctors performing abortions to have admitting privileges in nearby local hospitals, a rule that has proved impossible to meet in several smaller cities where clinics use visiting doctors. But the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, held that the requirement did not pose an undue burden on access to abortion since many other clinics continued to function.

The effort to block the surgery center requirement may be more likely to prevail in the appeals court, legal experts said, if the clinics can show that it imposes still greater burdens on abortion rights, without commensurate benefits.

“The greater the evidence that this rule will cause more clinics to close, and leave large areas of the state without abortion providers, the greater their chance of success,” said Caitlin E. Borgmann, an expert on reproductive law at the CUNY School of Law.

The mandates for surgery center standards and admitting privileges in the 2013 law, the new suit says, “are inconsistent with accepted medical standards, impose costs that are far in excess of any potential benefits and will dramatically reduce the number and geographic distribution of medical facilities in the state where women can access safe and legal abortion services.”

The suit was filed in Federal District Court in Austin by the Center for Reproductive Rights on behalf of several abortion providers in Texas that have been forced to close, or could be in the months ahead.

The suit also brings a new, narrower challenge to the admitting privilege requirement on behalf of just two clinics, Whole Woman’s Health in McAllen, which has already shut down, and Reproductive Health Services in El Paso, which fears it will have to close in May when a temporary hospital agreement expires.

Just before the law was adopted last year, about three dozen clinics provided abortions in Texas. Recently, as the admitting-privileges rule took effect, the number has fluctuated from 20 to 24. Six of them, in Austin, Dallas, Fort Worth, Houston and San Antonio, are licensed as surgery centers. In response to the rule, Planned Parenthood has started construction on a $5 million surgery center in San Antonio, where an existing center would be unable to meet the demand as other clinics close.

The centers need to be in larger cities in part so they can meet the other requirement, employing doctors with local hospital privileges. Abortions beyond the 16th week of pregnancy must already be performed in surgery centers, and that is not under challenge.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

If the surgery center rule takes effect on Sept. 1, clinic owners say, the effects are likely to be the greatest on low-income women and women to the south and west of San Antonio.

Amy Hagstrom Miller, the chief executive of Whole Woman’s Health, which also runs the surgery center in San Antonio, said it could not afford to meet the standard in other clinics because the construction costs could range up to $7 million each. In addition, she said in an email, surgery centers need to charge higher fees to meet expenses, while the shut-down McAllen clinic served many uninsured and poor women, offered subsidies and charged an average of $400 per procedure.

While some groups may raise millions to build surgery centers, she said, it is a pointless diversion from real needs. “Our long-term strategy must not simply be to comply and comply and comply with every new restriction,” Ms. Miller said. “Putting millions of dollars into construction that could be used to offer direct care and services is a misuse of our precious few resources.”