EL PASO, Texas -

El Pasoans who want to enroll in health insurance through the "obamacare" website can now get an early preview of 20-15 premiums.

Federal exchanges on healthcare dot gov are open to allow consumers to see what health insurance plans are available. Enrollment for next year doesn't begin until November 15th. But the early access lets shoppers see how much they can expect to pay.

There are stiffer fees for those who don't enroll, but not everyone who fails to enroll will face a fee. In fact a lot of people in El Paso make so little money that they'll be exempt from paying the penalty for not signing up, said Roy Ortega, an administrator with Project Amistad.

"We've seen over and over again and we've had people come up to us and tell us that they're convinced the federal government is going to levy these stiff fines because they couldn't afford the insurance. Well if they were below a certain level in poverty they can get that exemption and they will get that exemption and they're not going to be levied any penalty."



In Texas, a person has to make more than $11,670 a year to qualify for health insurance subsides under the Affordable Care Act. For two people - it's $15,730 and for three people, it's $19,790. People who make less than than that are exempt and will not face a fee if they don't sign up.

But people who make more than that and don't have health insurance could face a penalty if they don't sign up. That penalty used to be $95.00 but because this is the second year, it'll increase to $325.00 when individuals file for their 2015 taxes in 2016.

Even though the Department of Health and Human Services cut down on the number of navigators to help people enroll, Ortega said they'll still have lots of enrollment events and resources to help people enroll, including one on Saturday from 9am to 5pm at Centro San Vicente.

Administrators say users will find a number of other new features on the website exchange, designed to make it easier to use. President Obama himself has promised the site will function better this year. Last year, consumers had to start the enrollment process before they could browse plans, though a window shopping feature was added later. That feature proved to be the most popular section on healthcare.gov.

A report by the urban institute finds many consumers will be able to find cheaper plans this time, though they may have to switch insurers to secure a lower price.