Watching Jenny Simpson race in the 1,500-meter final Sunday at the U.S. Outdoor Track and Field Championship was to see patience, confidence and maturity in action.

Simpson sat patiently midpack through a slow-starting race before she swiftly moved to the front with two laps left. She threw down a blistering sub-60-second last lap and won her second consecutive U.S. title.

The victory came in 4 minutes, 14.86 seconds at Hayward Field in Eugene, Ore., just ahead of Shannon Rowbury, who placed second in 4:14.99. Kerri Gallagher finished third in 4:15.81.

It was an uncharacteristic race for Simpson and mirrored tactics taken by her training partner, Emma Coburn, in the 3,000-meter steeplechase Saturday.

“I get nervous still,” Simpson, a former University of Colorado distance runner, told NBC after the race. “It’s tough to be in that crowd and think, ‘Trust yourself, trust yourself.’ But this is exactly what we practice for — to be able to win in any type of tactical race. But I’ll tell you what: It felt good the last 400 that I just had to run strong and I would come home with the win. It made the last 400 a little easier.”

Simpson had earned a bye into the Aug. 22-30 world championships in Beijing because she was last year’s Diamond League champion in the event. So she didn’t need to race, but wanted to go through the preliminaries and finals regardless. OTC Elite’s Lauren Johnson, who finished fourth in the race, will compete in Beijing because of Simpson’s bye.

It was Simpson’s eighth overall U.S. title: She earned two in the steeplechase (2007 and 2009) while with the Buffaloes and was the 2013 U.S. 5K champion.

In the 110-meter hurdles, Denver East High School product David Oliver, who also earned a bye into worlds as the 2013 defending champion, won another U.S. title in 13.04 seconds — a season best.

Oliver did not get out as fast as others, but he made up ground quickly — cleanly making it over all hurdles but fifth and ninth. He might have dipped under 13 seconds with a cleaner race.

Ronnie Ash finished second in 13.13, Aries Merritt was third in 13.19 and Aleec Harris was fourth in 13.25. Harris will go to Beijing because Oliver has an automatic bid.

Oliver, now a four-time U.S. outdoor champion, was the world champion in 2013.

This win comes after he recently fired his coach, 81-year-old legend Brooks Johnson, who didn’t approve of Oliver attending his best friend’s wedding a week before the Prefontaine Classic, an important meet in early June. Johnson let the media know how he felt, and Oliver responded with an e-mail to Johnson that eventually went public.

“I had to let Brooks go,” Oliver told The Denver Post last week. “It was time for a change. He sent a nasty text message out to the media, and I just had enough. He didn’t want to talk about it face to face, so I had to e-mail him my feelings on things and how this just wasn’t going to work anymore.”

In the women’s 5,000 meters, Kara Goucher finished a disappointing 18th. Her performance came just weeks after she alleged in a joint story published by the BBC and ProPublica that her former coach, Alberto Salazar of the Nike Oregon Project, had skirted anti-doping rules and forced runners to take medications they weren’t prescribed while she was a part of the team. She said his tactics caused her to leave the team several years ago.

The story has ricocheted through the insular world of track and field, and moved the Colorado Springs-based U.S. Anti-Doping Agency to open an investigation into Salazar and his team.

Goucher is living once again in Boulder and trains with Simpson and former Colorado runners Coburn and Shalaya Kipp.

“Today it definitely kind of caught up with me,” Goucher said. “I’m human like everybody else. Much as I’ve tried to separate myself from it and focus on all the positives that have come from it, I think I’m very tired.”

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com or twitter.com/danielpetty