CLIVE, IOWA—Righteousness glows, like a distant fire in the snow. Self-righteousness glistens, like a thin sheet of white ice on a foul, poisoned river. At Noah's Event Center on Wednesday night, there was a great glistening on the stage. Rick Perry came to introduce Ted Cruz. So did Congressman Louie Gohmert. So did Congressman Steve King. So did Iowa evangelical ward-heeler Bob Vander Plaats, and so did Tony Perkins of the Family Research Council, because what would this company be without the leader of a designated hate group anyway? All of them went out of their way to mention one quality that Ted Cruz possesses, but I'm not going to tell you what it is because it's less a recommendation than it is a punchline.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Make no mistake: Ted Cruz is running an explicitly theocratic campaign. (His well-worn Constitution seems to be missing Article VI, Section III. You know, that whole thing about banning religious tests for office.) He has mashed up radical Tentherism, talk-radio conservatism, and religious extremism into a great ball and he is running to lead a revival in this nation based in end-times Protestant eschatology. It is Dominionism 101. (There is more than a little irony present when Cruz mocks the president as "the chosen one," when there is considerable evidence that Cruz was deliberately raised to believe that of himself by his crazoid preacher father.) When Steve King says he prayed his way to endorsing Cruz, and that he did so "hoping that god would raise up a leader," he's not kidding, and I promise we'll get to that later. But the thing about it is, not only is Ted Cruz running an explicitly theocratic campaign, he's running a very good explicitly theocratic campaign. Of all the true believers in Ted Cruz on that stage, nobody believes more truly in Ted Cruz than the candidate himself.

Most Popular

He glistens, Ted Cruz does. There's a thick film of sanctimony on every word, even when he's jiving with Donald Trump over the latter's refusal to participate in Thursday night's debate. He glistens more brightly when he gets all whispery and moved by his own words, describing his own martyrdom at the hands of liberals, and the media, and the leaders of his own party. A lone warrior, "constitutionalist fighter," as he says. He glistens more brightly when he's calling the president "…an imperial dictator like we've had the last seven years," or narcissistic and self-involved. He glistens more brightly when he talks about the seven battles he's fought against the right to choose and against marriage equality. He brags about the victories he's won as regards the former issue before the members of that same Supreme Court, which he calls "activists" when he talks about the decision in the latter question of which he doesn't approve. He glistens more brightly when he talks about "bearing the stripes" of his vain attempts to destroy the Affordable Care Act, and about "bearing the stripes" of defeating a very reasonable immigration reform bill that had passed the Senate. He glistens more brightly when he talks about how he has stood tall and dared to call "radical Islamic extremism" by that name. He glistens, Ted Cruz does.

But he never glistens more brightly than he does when he rolls into his peroration, asking his audience to pray the country back from the "abyss" that he and this audience see so very clearly yawning before them. He quotes from Chronicles: "If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land." And there's no question in anybody's mind who the instrument of divine healing will be.

Oh, yeah, that one thing about Ted Cruz that Perry, and King, and Gohmert, and Vander Plaats, and Perkins wanted us all to know?

How humble he is.

He humbles himself before god…and virtually nobody else.

This country has a great number of political dialects in which I am not fluent. This is one of them.