DALLAS — Different day, different city — and a different take on Denver.

After talking up this week Denver’s success in hosting the 2008 Democratic National Convention, the chief site scout for the 2016 Republican convention sounded a different tone upon arriving in Dallas on Wednesday.

Enid Mickelsen, the chairwoman of the Republican National Convention Site Selection Committee, downplayed the importance of Denver’s experience in comments to the Dallas media at the airport.

That was just one day after she said Denver’s successful hosting of the Democratic National Convention six years ago was “very impressive,” and Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus called it “a big advantage” for Denver.

“That’s not a big consideration,” Mickelsen said Wednesday, after a Dallas reporter asked how much weight she would give Denver’s Democratic convention experience.

Mickelsen explained: “There’s some things where you say, ‘Well, that’s convenient.’ For example, the police department knows what it’s getting into if they’ve already done a convention. Dallas has already done it, though it’s been a few years (since 1984). Denver’s already done it.

“But really, that’s not a huge factor.”

More important, she said, is that each of the competing cities — also including Kansas City, Mo., and Cleveland — realizes the scope of the commitment its leaders would be making if picked to host the convention. That includes raising more than $60 million.

RNC officials have made flattering comments in each of the four cities they’ve visited this month, making it appear they’re just as eager to please as their potential hosts. That was certainly true during a news conference Tuesday at Denver’s Pepsi Center.

Mickelsen’s comments Wednesday in the baggage-claim area at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport came after a welcoming committee of party volunteers, Dallas Cowboys cheerleaders and the team’s mascot greeted about two dozen arriving members of the Republican delegation.

The cowboy-hat-wearing volunteers’ greeting at the gate — “Welcome to Dallas!” — surprised a few fellow travelers who weren’t members of the delegation. When the site-visit group entered the baggage-claim area, the two cheerleaders were waiting.

Mickelsen was escorted arm in arm for several strides by Rowdy, the Cowboys’ mascot, complete with a Texas-sized hat.

The delegation will spend Thursday, its only full day in Dallas, touring the American Airlines Center arena and meeting with local bid leaders, before departing Friday. The RNC is expected to choose a host city in coming months.

Jon Murray: 303-954-1405, jmurray@denverpost.com or twitter.com/JonMurray