Editor's Note: This is part of a continuing series looking at the history of the Estes Valley. The panic of 1857 - the first international economic crisis that caused many domestic banks to fail - created a cry for "free land" by those who were hit hardest by the financial downturn. These were in large part immigrants in the north and mid-west regions; those in the southern states largely escaped the financial impacts of the panic.

After President James Buchanan, a Democrat, vetoed a small homesteading provision to meet the demands of those who were struggling, Abraham Lincoln of the Republican Party made passing such a law part of his campaign for the presidency, along with his outcry against the spread of slavery. Lincoln owed his stance on these issues, among others, to being elected in 1861 - the first Republican to hold that office.

He inherited a country boiling with unrest, on the eve of civil war.

The Homestead Act of 1862 was adopted just after the secession of seven southern states, to further the cause of the North by allowing for nearly cost-free expansion to unppropriated land in America and its territories to the west.

Any citizen who was "the head of a family" or who was at least 21 years of age, was granted permission to file claim on open public land for the preemption fee of $1.25 per acre for 160 acres; or, $2.50 per acre for 80 acres or less, after the land was surveyed. Under this act, the homesteader was granted a patent (final title) to the land if, after five years, the land had been improved with settlement or cultivation. No citizen would be allowed to acquire more than 160 acres (1/4 section) of land under this law.

Advertisement

Between 1871-1880, 64,515 successful patents were filed on their land by homesteaders in this country, effectively expanding the US territories and hastening the establishments of statehoods nationwide.

Among these were Estes Park's first settlers , who came just after the area had been surveyed for homesteading in 1874. Petitioning the American government to complete the land survey were the agents of Lord Dunraven, employees of the English Company, who were intent on acquiring as much of the land in Estes Park as possible to create a hunting preserve for the Irish lord.

This scheme - which counted on bribing citizens to file preemption claims on large tracts of land in Estes Park - backfired spectacularly, due in no small part to the legitimate settlers of Estes Park. Among these were Abner E. Sprague, Alexander MacGregor, Elkanah Lamb, and William James.

The first in the area was MacGregor and his wife, Clara, who filed a claim on a full 1/4 section of land in the Black Canyon. Clara's mother, Georgianna Heeley, joined them and filed claim on another 160 acres. Over the years, the MacGregors acquired additional land - by 1970, the MacGregor Ranch consisted of nearly 3,000 acres.

In its early days, the family also built and ran a toll road, and in 1876 established a post office.

Although reduced in size from the original claim, the ranch has been preserved as a museum today; every summer, children are invited to take part in a heritage camp where they learn what it must have been like for the first Estes Park MacGregors.

Abner E. Sprague homesteaded in what is now Moraine Park in Rocky Mountain National Park in 1874 and later in Glacier Basin (at the site of present-day Sprague Lake) in 1910. At the original location, the Spragues ran a general store and the second post office in the area. None of the buildings included in the Sprague homesteads stand today; they are located within the boundaries of RMNP.

The Reverend Elkanah Lamb established his homestead at the base of Longs Peak in 1875. He too, established a toll road and eventually built the Longs Peak Inn.

William James settled along Fall River Road in the early 1870s in order to raise cattle; he built Elkhorn Lodge - still standing in much of its original state - in 1874.

As American citizens, each of these four families (and many more) filed legitimate claims on their Estes Park land. But they were continually pestered by Theodore Whyte, who worked for the English Company, to leave and/or sell their land to his company. Whyte ran cattle over the settlers lands and tore down their fences; the homesteaders fought back and eventually won an indictment against the English Company's false claimants; the English Company eventually dissolved.

Without exception, all of these four settlers - and many more who settled the area at the same time and afterward - took in visitors. This practice soon eclipsed the ranching, toll roads, or any other endeavor the early pioneers took on, proving to be the most lucrative practice in Estes Park.

Homesteading in Colorado helped pave the way for the territory to become a state in 1876 by increasing the area's population of American citizens; the borders of the state remain unchanged from its establishment as a territory 15 years prior to statehood. Today, there are many additional remnants of Estes Park's homesteading history, including the popular hike to Homestead Meadows, accessed from Hermit Park open space.

Sources: "This Blue Hollow: Estes Park the Early Years," 1999, James H. Pickering; "Facing the Frontier: The Story of MacGregor Ranch," 1998, Betty D. Freudenberg; "My Pioneer Life: The Memoirs of Abner E. Sprague," (compiled, 1999); NPS.gov (Homestead National Monument of America); "Team of Rivals," Doris Kerns Goodwin