For the fifth consecutive year, Walgreens is offering more than $10 million worth of flu shot vouchers free to those without health insurance coverage and unable to afford a flu shot without the voucher. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is again assisting in the voucher distribution effort to help improve flu immunization rates across the country.

Each voucher is good for one flu shot at any Walgreens pharmacy in the U.S. and Puerto Rico, Duane Reade pharmacies in New York and Healthcare Clinic at select Walgreens, and are subject to the terms and conditions on the voucher.

“Our ongoing collaboration with HHS has enabled Walgreens to provide free access to flu vaccine to people in need while improving immunization rates in underserved communities across the U.S.,” said Kermit Crawford, Walgreens president, pharmacy health and wellness. “This program is one of the ways in which we’re responding to the needs of the communities we serve, and also helping to address the access challenges of our health care system. Following another severe flu season, we aim to help more people get, stay and live well throughout the season with the help of the voucher program.”

Individuals who are eligible can call 1-800-925-4733 to find the nearest Walgreens location with flu shot vouchers available, as availability is on a first come, first served basis while supplies last.

“Since 2010, more than half a million individuals have received free flu shots and vouchers through this innovative partnership,” said J. Nadine Gracia, MD, MSCE, deputy assistant secretary for minority health and director of the HHS Office of Minority Health. “In the face of persistent disparities in influenza vaccination coverage – especially among adults – this initiative reflects our ongoing commitment to expanding access to important preventive services for our most vulnerable and underserved communities.”

Dr. Gracia received her seasonal flu shot from a Walgreens pharmacists today, while also promoting the flu shot voucher program at the Mid-Maryland Mission of Mercy and Health Equity Festival in College Park, Md.

Individuals who are eligible for vouchers can call 1-800-925-4733 to find the nearest Walgreens location offering flu shot vouchers, as availability is on a first come, first served basis while supplies last.