WASHINGTON — When he was elected chairman of the Republican Study Committee in November, U.S. Rep. Bill Flores, R-Bryan, knew he’d been handed both an enormous opportunity and a challenge.

In last year’s elections, Republicans took control of the Senate and built their largest majority in the House since the 1920s. As the leader of the most powerful conservative bloc in Congress, Flores won an unprecedented chance to steer House legislation to the right.

But after recent reports about a group of study committee members forming a rival conservative caucus, Flores’ task got even harder. In addition to cashing in on Congress’ current conservative makeup, he must also keep his group together or risk losing its considerable clout. In just his third term in Congress, the Central Texas lawmaker is suddenly in the spotlight.

“I feel pressure to deliver,” Flores said. “But that comes with the territory of being chair of the Republican Study Committee.”

Flores, 60, knocked off Democrat Chet Edwards in the tea party wave of 2010. He had previously worked as a CPA, and as an executive for several oil and gas companies.

Flores has served on the Budget, Natural Resources, and Veterans’ Affairs committees. He looks every bit an accountant and speaks in a fast Panhandle twang.

Inside his office, trinkets from Texas A&M University, his alma mater, cover the walls and shelves. Pocket copies of the Constitution and the Bible sit side-by-side on a coffee table. He’s quick to quote Ronald Reagan, often invoking the former president’s metaphor of the U.S. as a “shining city on a hill.”

Texans make up more than 10 percent of the group’s total membership, more than any other state delegation. Other Texans have held the chairman post, including Rep. Jeb Hensarling from 2007 to 2009.

Hensarling went on to serve in Republican leadership and currently chairs the Financial Services Committee. But chairing the study committee has been his favorite job in Congress.

“Of all the positions I’ve held in the House, I probably enjoyed that one the most,” Hensarling said.

Hensarling ran the group when Republicans were the minority in the House. Now that the GOP controls both chambers, Hensarling said Flores is “playing with real money.”

“Although this is a committee of both study and action, action is more important than study,” Hensarling said.

Flores recently tasked his members to formulate the committee’s priorities for the 114th Congress. They came back with policy items grouped into “five key themes”: economic development, rebuilding national defense, addressing Washington’s fiscal issues, rolling back the reach of the federal government, and protecting American values.

They listed repealing the Affordable Care Act as their top legislative priority. Flores said he secured a commitment from Speaker John Boehner, Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy and Majority Whip Steve Scalise that the House would vote on that by mid-February. But as with dozens of previous such House votes, repeal won’t happen. Even if the new GOP-led Senate were to vote the same, President Barack Obama would surely defend his signature legislative accomplishment with a veto.

For Flores, getting committee members’ other priorities a House vote won’t be easy.

The group is filled with lawmakers who are more than willing to buck party leadership. And with a GOP majority in both chambers, they may be emboldened to demand legislation that’s popular with staunch conservatives but politically impossible.

Flores said his job is to represent the will of the group’s members, regardless of the political landscape.

“If there is an issue that the bulk of our membership is passionate about, my role is to do all I can to get our leadership to hear it and put it on the floor irrespective of three things: is it politically feasible, can the Senate pass it, or will the president sign it,” he said.

And while Flores’ style is to build rapport and negotiate behind closed doors, he doesn’t mind if his members take a more outspoken approach.

“You need some people that are more deliberative in their approach to the deal, and then you need some of those that are out there keeping everything stirred up,” he said.

Of the 25 Republicans who did not vote for Boehner for House speaker this term, 18 are study committee members. An additional four are freshman who may yet join the group.

Members also accounted for 58 of the 67 Republican votes against the recent $1.1 trillion government funding measure that GOP leadership backed. Flores was one of them.

Rep. Joe Barton, R-Arlington, said Flores’ style should yield results.

“He’s got credibility with Scalise and McCarthy and Boehner. I think he intends to use that credibility in a positive fashion,” Barton said.

Flores, who is good friends with Scalise, said he wouldn’t be a “shill for leadership.” But navigating between the interests of party leaders and study committee members can be tricky, Hensarling said.

“Occasionally there’s the opportunity and imperative to try to move … the leadership in a rightward direction. That takes a lot of skill, a lot of leadership, a lot of aplomb,” Hensarling said. “There’s a little bit more art than science to it.”

But Flores’ relationship with leadership may be one of the reasons that a group of study committee members plans to form their own group.

The National Journal reported that some group members, including Reps. Mick Mulvaney of South Carolina, Justin Amash of Michigan, Raul Labrador of Idaho and Jim Jordan of Ohio, who once chaired the study committee, plan to form an invitation-only group to push the Republican conference even further to the right.

Some viewed Flores as the “leadership candidate” in the contest among Flores, fellow Texan Rep. Louie Gohmert and Mulvaney. Labrador said after the vote that party leadership had “twisted arms” to ensure Flores’ victory. Flores brushed those claims aside.

The new group claimed that the study committee’s size, which has ballooned in recent years, is another reason for the split, according to the National Journal. Some members want a more purely conservative group.

Flores said that being the largest caucus in Congress is crucial to the group’s effectiveness. It had about 170 members in the last Congress, and Flores predicted it will have “north of 150” for the 114th.

Barton cautioned that splitting the GOP caucus could mean squandering a historic opportunity for the Republican agenda.

“If we are unified we can actually get stuff to the president’s desk, which we’ve not been able to do recently because of the Democratically controlled Senate,” Barton said. “You don’t normally gain influence by splitting up. You gain it by coming together.”

If Flores can hold his group together and win legislative victories, he might be in line for additional responsibilities.

Past chairmen like Hensarling, Scalise and former Rep. Mike Pence have won party leadership posts after helming the study committee. And Pence is now the governor of Indiana.

Flores insists he’s not thinking about that now.

“I didn’t run for Congress to be part of leadership,” he said. “I’m doing this for the good of the American people.”

Follow Michael Marks on Twitter @michaelpmarks

BACKGROUND: William H. “Bill” Flores

Age: 60

Birthplace: Warren Air Force Base in Cheyenne, Wyo.

Education: Bachelor’s degree, Texas A&M University, 1976; Master of Business Administration degree, Houston Baptist University, 1985

Career: 2011-present: U.S. House; 2005-09: president and CEO, Phoenix Exploration Co.; 2004-09: commissioner, Texas Real Estate Commission. Before that, Flores, a certified public accountant since 1978, held several executive positions with energy companies and other firms.

Family: wife, Gina; two children, two grandchildren