INDIANAPOLIS - Democrat presidential contender Hillary Clinton made her first public appearance in Indiana Sunday before an energetic crowd at a public park gymnasium where she called for unity instead of hateful rhetoric.

She hit all the expected topics - calling for women to make their own health care decisions, defending the Affordable Care Act and supporting gun control regulations.

"America's best years are still ahead of us," Clinton said. "If you'll go and vote for me I will stand up and fight for you."

The event came with less than a day's notice and about 400 people were inside while several hundred remained outside with signs because the venue was too small

"Everybody stuck outside, we apologize," she said immediately. "You are probably cooler out there than we are in here."

Before the rally, she made an unannounced stop at downtown Indianapolis pancake house to meet voters, as well as a few elected officials.

A recent IPFW poll has Clinton leading Sen. Bernie Sanders by 13 percentage points but other polls have shown the race much closer, often just a few percentage points and within the margin of error.

While Sanders has surged recently, winning a number of states, Clinton is still well ahead with 2,165 delegates. She needs 2,383 to clinch the Democrat nomination. Indiana has 92 pledged delegates to be split based on the percentage of statewide vote going to both candidates.

Clinton said she will work against the hateful rhetoric that Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump and others are spouting, including not allowing Muslims in the country.

"I really find it so wrong and so dangerous. When you divide people against one another you don't know what's going to happen," she said. "All this hateful talk about immigrants, about Muslims, about women. I mean enough. Enough!"

She said she supports Hoosiers standing up against Gov. Mike Pence and the Indiana legislature on abortion issues - referring to a restrictive law recently passed that bans some abortions.

"I will defend a woman's right to make her own health care decisions," Clinton said, drawing the loudest cheers of the day.

She also spent a key part of her speech addressing economic concerns, noting the last time incomes were rising was when her husband, Bill Clinton, was president.

She said Trump and GOP challenger Sen. Ted Cruz want to go back to trickle-down economics rather than raise up the middle class.

They "want to slash taxes on the wealthy. Haven't we done that enough? We need to start raising taxes on the wealthy so they pay their fair share."

The event was a who's who of Democratic politics, with former U.S. senator and Indiana governor Evan Bayh, U.S. Congressman Andre Carson, U.S. Senator Joe Donnelly and Indianapolis Mayor Joe Hogsett.

Democratic gubernatorial candidate John Gregg didn't attend, though he was at a labor rally alongside Sen. Bernie Sanders on Friday.

While Pence threw his support behind Sen. Ted Cruz on the Republican side, Gregg is staying out of the Democratic primary.

He has supported Clinton in the past - even co-chairing her presidential campaign in Indiana in 2008.

"John is not endorsing anyone in the primary," said Jeff Harris, spokesman for the Gregg campaign. "He's focusing on his race and will support the party's nominee."

nkelly@jg.net