Topics: Black women, DAME, Dame Magazine, debra harrell, the myth of the welfare queen, Welfare, working poor, Life News

This piece originally appeared on DAME

When Debra Harrell allowed her 9-year-old daughter to play in a park unattended on July 1, the 46-year-old South Carolina mother did not abandon her child, as some provocative headlines would have readers believe, nor did she carelessly leave her to fend for herself amid pedophiles and pimps.

In a nation where black mothers struggling in poverty are routinely mischaracterized as leeches on a system overburdened with coddling corrupt corporations, Harrell did what we’re told black mothers must do or face swift and painful condemnation: She went to work.

After weighing her few options, Harrell made a decision that she felt was best for her child; a decision that enabled her to continue to provide for her daughter without leaving her home alone. She gave her a cell phone in case she needed her and left her among throngs of children and parents in a popular park while she trekked less than one mile to her job at McDonald’s.

On any other day, Harrell would have taken her daughter with her and allowed her to surf the web on her laptop. Unfortunately, that laptop was stolen from their home and, with nothing to do while her mother worked, the young girl asked to go outside and play.

More from Dame: People Who Attempt Suicide Are Not Criminals

While she was playing at the park, a concerned woman asked the girl why she was unsupervised. When she responded that her mother was at work, the woman immediately called the police. This chain of events led to Harrell being arrested for “unlawful neglect toward a child” and her daughter being placed in the custody of the Department of Social Services.

Tragically, it never once seemed to occur to this woman that there were other ways to alleviate her concern, the most obvious choices being to call Harrell or keep an eye on the girl until her mother returned.

Apparently though, the entire proverbial village has been completely destroyed and that would’ve been too much like right.

This is not to say that it’s anyone’s responsibility other than a child’s parent to ensure that child’s safety, but the fact remains that more energy was expended on criminalizing Harrell than protecting her daughter. She was immediately stripped of her humanity and reduced to a pile of stereotypes—poor, black, irresponsible, unfit mother—and her child was taken from her in a blink of an eye, tossed into a system where she is more likely to be abused and/or neglected than she was in danger of beingabducted by a stranger at the park.

More from Dame: What Would It Take to Get Ann Coulter to Shut Up?

According to an essay written by Professor Dorothy Roberts, author of Shattered Bonds: The Color of Child Welfare, “Black children in the child welfare system are placed in foster care at twice the rate for white children [according to federal statistics]. A national study of child protective services by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services reported that ‘minority children, and in particular African-American children, are more likely to be in foster care placement than receive in-home services, even when they have the same problems and characteristics as white children.’ Most white children who enter the system are permitted to stay with their families, avoiding the emotional damage and physical risks of foster care placement, while most black children are taken away from theirs. And once removed from their homes, black children remain in foster care longer, are moved more often, receive fewer services, and are less likely to be either returned home or adopted than any other children.”

In addition to these disheartening findings, 26 percent of children placed in foster care are African American; this number is double the percent of African-American children in the population in the United States.

As Roberts notes, “If you go into dependency court in Chicago, New York, or Los Angeles without any preconceptions, you might conclude that the child welfare system is designed to monitor, regulate, and punish black mothers.”

That risk, of being under constant surveillance by a society which sharply criticizes black mothers in poverty for daring to have children, while simultaneously calling their wombs “dangerous,” is likely not one that Harrell had time to focus on that day. Instead, she went to work in an effort to maintain her fraying independence within a system designed for her to fail; the very same system that decided that she’s an unfit mother and snatched her child away without a backwards glance.