6 Big Ones, Summer Club programs start in June

STERLING --- With school out, parents maybe asking, what do I do with the kids all summer long? The Logan County Interagency Oversight Group 's(IOG) got you covered, they're planning a variety of programs for youth this summer.

For youth going into sixth through 10th grade this fall, IOG's TEAM program will be offering a free Summer Club, every Tuesday beginning June 10. The club will meet from 1 to 2:30 p.m. at the Prairie Park Pavilion, across from Sterling Recreation Center.

A number of fun activities are planned for the club, including a "Kick-Off Party," June 10; "The Amazing Race," June 17; "Bingo at Nursing Homes," June 24; "Overland Trail Museum," July 1; "Minute to Win It," July 8; "Volleyball (maybe mud), July 15; "Meals on Wheels," July 22; and "Picnic at the Lake," July 29.

To participate go to the IOG website, http://hb1451.wix.com/logancountyiog, click on the link to register for the TEAM Summer Club, complete the online registration form, print the parent permission form and bring the completed permission form, with parent signature, to Prairie Park on June 10.

In addition to the Summer Cub, IOG will also once again be offering "The 6 Big Ones," a decision-making workshop series for teens, focusing on school, relationships with friends and parents, dating and sex, addictions and self-worth.

Advertisement

The program runs for two weeks on Mondays, Thursdays and Fridays, from 1 to 2:30 p.m. at the CSU Regional Engagement Center, 302 Main St. A two-week session for middle school students will run from June 16-June 27 and a two week session for high school students will run from July 14-July 25.

Those who complete the program will receive a $50 gift card.

Space is limited for the free program, so sign up today. To register visit, http://6bigonessummerms.eventbrite.com for middle school students or http://6bigonessummerhs.eventbrite.com for high school students.

The IOG will also continue to offer Young Parents Playdates, sponsored by the Family Resource Center, IOG and Centennial Mental Health Center, every Wednesday, from 1 to 2:30 p.m. at the Family Resource Center, 120 Main St.

Parents age 21 and under are invited to come participate in weekly activities and get to know other young parents like themselves.

For more information any of these programs or the IOG, contact Rhonda Conger at 970-580-7187 or like Logan County IOG on Facebook.

Contact Journal-Advocate staff writer Callie Jones at 970-526-9286 or cjones@journal-advocate.com