Buy Photo Lisa Vanderveer, a Brick homeowner who wound up suing her flood insurer after they offered her only $35,000 for her Sandy-damaged home and wound up settling for about $110,000, sits outside of her home Friday March 13, 2015. Her house has foundation issues and must be knocked down and elevated. (Photo: Tanya Breen/Staff photographer)Buy Photo Story Highlights Homeowners whose properties were damaged by superstorm Sandy and who were dissatisfied with their flood insurance payouts will get the chance to have their claims reopened.

FEMA has not yet revealed the process homeowners will have to follow the reopen their claims, but the agency will be mailing letters to the more than 140,000 individuals who made a flood claim.

Homeowners whose properties were submerged during superstorm Sandy have long believed they were cheated out of the financial security that their flood insurance was supposed to provide. Recent action by the federal government means they will now have a chance to prove it.

FEMA runs the National Flood Insurance Program, which underwrites most residential flood insurance policies in America. It agreed Wednesday to reopen nearly 142,000 previously settled claims in instances where it looks like homeowners may have been shortchanged by their insurer. Another 2,200 Sandy-related claims are being contested in the courts.

Count Little Egg Harbor resident Lisa Stevens among those who may be interested in reopening her claim. She received a total payment of $78,000, up from an initial payout of $32,000, from her $250,000 flood insurance policy.

"I think I would," said Stevens, whose home in Little Egg's Mystic Island section took on two feet of water during the storm and must be torn down and rebuilt. "When my adjuster came out, she lowballed me. She didn't seem to know what she was doing."

The reopening of potentially thousands of previously settled flood insurance claims stems from what may end up being a widespread scheme to change the fundamental findings in engineering reports, according to government officials, lawyers representing property owners, and media investigations. The conclusions drawn from these inspections are central to a claim being approved or denied.

The dubious practice would unfold like so: An engineer working on behalf of the insurer would inspect a home in-person and assign the damage to the effects of superstorm Sandy, only to reverse the finding after the report was reviewed by another employee who never set foot in the home or even discussed the changes with the original engineer.

Brick resident Lisa Vanderveer and her husband Scott filed suit against their flood insurer, Wright National Flood Insurance Co., after receiving a payment of only $35,730 on damages they estimated at more than $200,000. After a second adjuster finally visited the home and a subsequent mediation with the insurance company, they reached a settlement expected to increase their total award to about $110,000. And they still face problems.

"My house is sinking," Lisa Vanderveer said. "I'm going to have to knock the house down and elevate it. The insurance company said, as far as the structural damage to my home, they said, 'Oh, it's not the water that did that. It wasn't caused by Sandy.'" But since the Vanderveers already sued Wright, which is also known as Fidelity National Indemnity Insurance Co., its unclear if they will be eligible to have their claim reviewed.

Buy Photo A Keansburg home where the homeowner’s flood insurance claim was denied because an engineering report attributed the foundational damage revealed after superstorm Sandy to earth movement — the house settling. (Photo: Tanya Breen/Staff Photographer)

FEMA is now developing a process for which the flood claims of those who did not sue can be challenged anew. So what are the practical effects of this investigation on the regional rebuild and Sandy victims? Here are five developing questions, and answers, to pay special attention to:

1) If a homeowner ends up receiving more an additional payout from their flood insurance as a result of this review, what does that mean for their RREM grant?

Short answer: You'll lose a chunk of your Rehabilitation, Reconstruction, Elevation and Mitigation (RREM) grant equal to any payout that results from the investigation.

Grants of up to $150,000 through the RREM program were intended to supplement, not replace, settlements from flood insurance in the coffers of rebuilding homeowners.

If additional money that is considered duplicative of the RREM grant, including insurance payouts, comes in after the grant is awarded, then the homeowner is required to relinquish or pay back the overlapping portion. When the project is finished, the state checks whether additional funding, such as Small Business Administration loans, FEMA grants or proceeds from an insurance claim, came through, said Lisa Ryan, spokeswoman for the state's Department of Community Affairs, which distributes most of the relief money.

"If it's determined that RREM funds already disbursed exceed the recalculated grant award based on additional benefits received, we take action to recover the funds," she said.

2) Is FEMA willing to review cases where an underpayment from insurance was caused by incompetence rather than deception?

The engineering reports scandal has grabbed the headlines — it has been featured in NPR, "60 Minutes" and Park Press reports — but many homeowners and housing advocates have blamed ineptitude on the part of their insurance company's adjuster.

"From my conversations with constituents and FEMA, it appears that there may have been underpayments not just due to fraudulent or altered engineering reports, but also as a result of well-under market cost estimates," U.S. Rep. Chris Smith, R-N.J., told the Press last week.

FEMA previously described the target of this inquiry as claims that were subjected to "fraud or bad practices," but it's not immediately clear whether bad practices refers simply to criminal or unethical behavior. Adjusters from southern or midwestern states who didn't account for the difference in the price of materials or labor between their home state and New Jersey would be radically underestimating costs, according to a report from the Citron Agency.

FEMA didn't respond to a question on this matter.

3) Will policyholders be required to do anything in order to trigger a review?

Whatever the process ends up being, it certainly sounds like policyholders will need to opt-in to the review.

"FEMA is going to go so far as to direct mail all of those individuals to know of the process and the opportunity," U.S. Sen. Robert Menendez, D-N.J., said following a meeting with FEMA chief Craig Fugate on Wednesday.

4) Are the companies that have been identified as potential bad actors in the scandal still able to work on NFIP policies?

Insurers who work within the NFIP will need FEMA to sign off on engineering firms or other experts they want to hire to work on claims, FEMA annnounced on Monday. In the past, companies were allowed to hire their own engineers and experts without prior approval by FEMA, as long as costs did not exceed $2,500.

FEMA will now require insurers to get approval in advance for any engineering firm or expert they wish to hire. This could help the agency weed out firms that FEMA believes have not been acting in good faith.

5) Why should we trust FEMA to uncover manipulation that happened under its watch and that was exposed by people outside the agency?

These questionable engineering reports were first brought to the public's attention during a hearing in a federal court in New York last fall, not FEMA watchdogs. In fact, Brad Kieserman, who is leading the internal review of the NFIP's claims process, told "60 Minutes" that they first started getting word of potential problems with home inspections in the summer of 2013.

"The bottom line is, FEMA and the insurance companies have been doing this for two years," said George Kasimos, founder of Stop FEMA Now, a FEMA watchdog group. "They came out and said there has been fraud in this process. Now these same people are going to be revisiting this and they are still in charge of the process. We're going to have to keep an eye on them."

In a letter to Menendez on Wednesday, Fugate said that a senior NFIP executive — David Miller, who oversaw the program — had resigned, another had retired and "other personnel changes may be required."

U.S. Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J., said March 11: "FEMA gets it now, and they know we're going to be watching,"

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1CdmamB