(Tom Toles)

Cries of shock and wails of lamentation waft in the springtime air today. But most of that is fake, and most of the rest should be disallowed. Here’s why.

FAKE SURPRISE category. Yes, Donald Trump is a pathetic excuse for a presidential nominee, and most considered his success an improbability. But the fact is that he has been leading in the polls and delegate count for a long time. Yet this is not the reason that expressions of surprise are not allowed.

Trump is only surprising if you are willing to overlook what the Republican Party had become. And was deliberately cultivating itself to be. Racial resentments and ethnic backlash politics were open source code in the party and everybody knew it. Polite company liked to be quiet about it, but everybody knew.

The other thing the party had been bred and raised to be was indifferent to fact-based analysis. From budgeting to Obamacare to climate science, elected officials in the GOP almost made a fetish about operating on a non-rational basis. The electorate learned this anti-lesson well. The media was all too happy to play along. So, no, nobody gets to act surprised that Trump ran and won with a purely emotion-based appeal.

FAKE OUTRAGE category. First, see all of the above. Second, you know the outrage is mostly fake because real outrage looks very different. All those candidates on the stage with Trump, and at the children’s table too, did two things that made his victory possible. They all stayed in the race too long, because they calculated that advancing their own personal chances was more important than stoping Trump. They only got out of the race when their campaigns became hopeless. And then, oh well. Real outrage, as I said looks different.

The other tell was how gingerly they treated Trump most of the way through. And why did they do that? Because they wanted his voters, the ones who would go on to put the nation in peril. They wanted those voters, with their Trump-sympathies and all.

And now, look at the tepid way the bulk of the GOP is reacting to this so-called outrage, How? By hedging their bets. Bets at the Trump Casino table.

It turns out people are quite comfortable and ready to adapt to Trump and see how things go for them. The only thing on the casino table after all, is the country.