Millions of Americans have been checking out new health insurance exchanges since enrollment in Obamacare launched Oct. 1.

During its first week, California's insurance exchange received nearly 60,000 calls from consumers and about 1 million Web visitors. Despite numerous technical glitches, federal officials say 8 million people logged on last week to their online exchange for 36 states not running their own marketplace.

This rollout has prompted many questions from people about what President Obama's Affordable Care Act will mean for them.

Here are some answers from healthcare reporter Chad Terhune to questions we received through Twitter. You can tweet more questions to @chadterhune or email healthcare@latimes.com.

An accurate income estimate is important to determine what amount of premium subsidies you may qualify for. Individuals earning less than $46,000 annually could receive some financial help in purchasing insurance.

Trouble is, if you underestimate your income, you could end up owing a sizable refund on those subsidies to the federal government. This makes it crucial for consumers to report any significant changes in income during the year to limit surprises later at tax time.

Another approach is to only take a portion of your monthly subsidy in advance and collect the rest later when you file your taxes. That would increase what you pay upfront, but could save some heartache if you’re worried about the numbers.

Health plans have begun notifying many existing customers about the changes ahead and what their options may be. To receive the tax credits, you must buy a plan inside California’s health exchange.There will be other policies available outside the exchange, too.

Talking to an enrollment counselor or insurance agent trained by state would give you an idea of the new options from various insurers.

That isn’t a myth, but it doesn’t kick in right away. They are referring to a provision in the Affordable Care Act that’s commonly called the “Cadillac tax.”

It’s new surcharge on high-cost health plans that generally provide workers some of the most generous benefits, including ultralow deductibles and small copays. Starting in 2018, a 40% excise tax would be levied against health plans that exceed a certain value, such as $10,200 for individual coverage or $27,500 for a family.

In response, some employers have started to scale back benefits to escape the tax in future years. Supporters of the tax say these generous health plans lead to the overuse of medical care because workers are shielded from so much of the cost.

There’s no top income that bars people from buying a policy in the government-run exchanges. At lower levels, some people will qualify for Medicaid at no cost to them.

There is a cutoff for who can receive financial assistance with their premiums. A family of four can qualify for premium subsidies at $94,000 a year or less. The financial aid is calculated on a sliding scale to help the lowest income people the most.