Newt Gingrich and Howard Dean talked Donald Trump on Balance of Power (Photo: Brandon Rittiman, KUSA)

KUSA - This week, we aim to make sense of this election year with two people who've run for President before.



Republican Newt Gingrich supports Donald Trump as nominee and is considered a possible running mate. Democrat Howard Dean supports Hillary Clinton.



Both shared their insights on what sort of race we're in for when they stopped into Denver to meet with clients of Dentons law firm where they both work as advisors.



9NEWS published a portion of the interview on Tuesday when Gingrich predicted Trump would either be “amazing” or “worse than Goldwater” in the November election.



RELATED: Gingrich - Trump will be ‘amazing' or ‘worse than Goldwater'



Balance of Power airs every Sunday at 8:50 a.m. on 9NEWS, right before NBC’s Meet the Press. Episodes and extended interviews are posted on Sundays to 9NEWS.com.



YOUR THOUGHTS: connect with Balance of Power on Twitter and Facebook to send us your questions and comments. You can also send us an email. (politics@9news.com)



“Eventually, people want to elect someone for a positive reason,” Dean said, rejecting the notion that the presidential race will spiral in an ever more negative direction. “[Clinton] is going to stick to the high road as much as she can, but she has to show she’s strong, which means that when Trump does go after her she’s going to have to punch him out, then turn.”



“I don’t know if you’d call it nastiness, but I think there will be a remarkable amount of one-side truth-telling by both candidates,” Gingrich added.



Gingrich cast Speaker Paul Ryan as causing needless negative publicity for Trump by witholding support for Trump when he first became the presumptive nominee.



Gingrich said he’s “irritated” by leaders in his party who are taking that approach.



“I watch the Bushes and Romney, all of whom if I had said what [Speaker Paul] Ryan said, all whom would’ve gone crazy, but now that it’s their turn to be loyal, it’s their turn to be supportive, they’re a long way from being the kind of people I thought they’d be,” Gingrich said.



Out interview went longer than time allowed on TV. In the web extra below, hear Dean and Gingrich discuss whether America should embrace more than two political parties, the rift in Colorado between Clinton and Sanders supporters, the future of Obamacare, and how those who think American politics is rigged should view politicians who later work on lobbying the government:

Copyright 2016 KUSA