Five out of seven reviews on the Yorkville Endoscopy Yelp page are negative because Rivers stopped breathing there

Some Joan Rivers fans are blaming her death on the clinic where she stopped breathing during surgery on her vocal chords on Aug. 28, and are taking to the Yorkville Endoscopy’s Yelp page to make sure their voice is heard.

“Rest in Peace Miss Rivers, I surely won’t see myself here anytime soon…I mean ever,” Nathan S. of Attleboro, Mass. wrote in a short, obviously biased Yelp review. “Is there a discount if you die during a visit?”

See photos: Hollywood’s Notable Deaths of 2014

One user has already found it “useful,” even though Nathan did not mention his own experience with the medical facility.

“They killed Joan Rivers… This did not have to happen,” Holly G. from Florida wrote in another quick review. “They were negligent…”

Also read: Joan Rivers Remembered: 16 of the Comedienne’s Funniest One-Liners

Holly G.’s assumption has not yet been proven, however. A spokeswoman for the New York Medical Examiner’s Office told TheWrap on Friday that the initial autopsy did not yield a cause of death for the 81-year-old comedienne, famous for her stand up and numerous television jobs, including E!’s “Fashion Police.”

Because the cause of death is not readily apparent, the NYPD is investigating the death, which occurred a week after Rivers was initially rushed to Mount Sinai Hospital. Daughter Melissa Rivers said in a statement that the comedy icon died “passed peacefully” in a private room at the Manhattan hospital, “surrounded by family and close friends.”

See video: Anderson Cooper Remembers Joan Rivers, and Why He Didn’t Like Her as a Kid

The New York State Department of Health is also looking into the circumstances surrounding Rivers death that five out seven Yelpers who wrote reviews for Yorkville Endoscopy are certain the clinic is to blame.

“I am glad that Yorkville Endoscopy is being investigated and they will find out that someone screwed up big time. This was a procedure that is done on a routine basis. I believe that anyone else going to this center needs now to get whatever procedure done in a proper hospital,” Sandra N. from California wrote in a review. “Thanks a lot Yorkville for killing a woman who the day before was just fine and healthy. I hope that you have the biggest wrongful death suit filed by Melissa on your shabby procedures. Shame on You.”