The Eye

'Pretty Little Liars,' 'Grey's Anatomy,' 'Downton Abbey': 5 Best Christmas Episodes Ever

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook) 2014's Christmas episode of "Pretty Little Liars" was one of the best episodes ever! Check out our full list of Top 5 Christmas Episodes!

The Christmas season is full of love, drama and a dazzling display of television to choose from. But there are some episodes that stand out from the others.



Here are five of the best Christmas episodes that have aired on television so far.







5. "Downton Abbey" 2013 Christmas Special



The "Downton Abbey" Christmas special took the Crawley family to Buckingham Palace, where a scandal threatened to engulf the British monarchy. Lady Rose celebrated her coming out at the palace, and Cora's mother and brother arrive from America. In the episode, Robert was forced to act to protect both the royal family and his own.







4. "Pretty Little Liars:" "How The A Stole Christmas"



Airing on Dec. 9, 2014, "How the A Stole Christmas" was "Pretty Litttle Liars" first holiday episode. After an hour where the group continued to be haunted by the cryptic wrongdoings of A, Aria, Spencer, Toby, Caleb, Hanna, Emily, Ezra, and Paige found themselves snowed in and spending Christmas together. Paige broke the news to Emily that her parents are moving to California for good. Hanna was sad that Mona was not there to celebrate the holiday with the group. Alison, left out of the group, watched them through a window. Just as they attempted to have their holiday feast, they all heard a noise and ran outside to see what it was. There in lights was a message on Spencer's barn stating, "Merry Christmas B*****s - A."







3. "Grey's Anatomy:" "Grandma Got Run Over By A Reindeer"



In this 2005 episode of ABC's "Grey's Anatomy," Christmas hit Seattle hard. Izzie was caring for a man who fell from his roof while hanging decorations. Cristina helped perform a heart transplant on a depressed boy, and George had to deal with a family from Hell, who were determined to ruin his and everyone else around's holiday.







2. "Modern Family" Season 7 Christmas



Everyone was forced to get into the holiday festivities in the Christmas special of hit series "Modern Family." Gloria made a grand effort to organize the Christmas she was never able to have when she lived in Columbia. She planned to have the ideal White Christmas celebration with her family by renting a cabin in the Columbian mountains. What she didn't count on was hot weather. It was definitely not the winter wonderland Gloria wished for, but the hilarity that ensued more than made up for it.



1. "Jane the Virgin:" Mateo's First Christmas





The hilarious CW comedy, "Jane the Virgin," Jane (Gina Rodriguez) and Rafael (Justin Baldoni) continued to have difficulties adapting to their new roles as parents as Christmas approached, making the merry in the holiday almost impossible. Jane and Rafael continued to struggle over how much Mateo will be spoiled for his first Christmas and throughout his life, knowing their child will inherit millions of dollars.



What are some of your favorite Christmas episodes? Let us know in the comments section below!



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.