On Sept. 8, I learned that I had not been appointed to the Governor’s Task Force on Oil and Gas Development.

I moved through the stages of grief and loss at a brisk pace. Wasting not a second on Denial, I accepted reality, and barely paused for Anger and Bargaining. I did make a brief stop at Depression, moping over the fact that the people of Colorado had not spoken with one voice to ask for my help in navigating this contentious terrain. But in short order, I raced on to Acceptance, where I have reposed for four and half months.

And yet appointing a historian to the task force could have provided occasions for an unexpected unity and shared spirit in its members.

If fate had decreed otherwise, I could have unleashed the under-utilized power of historical perspective as a delivery system for equal annoyance. In healthful and spirit-lifting interludes, the Task Force could have had moments of unity in wishing I would go away.

Here’s how I would have achieved this miracle. From time to time, I would have reminded everyone that two paired historical legacies have been obstructing — and will continue to obstruct — problem-solving if they are not addressed with forthrightness.

First, the oil and gas industry inherits the complicated history of Western extractive industry. The extraction of natural resources — gold, silver, coal, oil, timber, grass, water, soil nutrients, etc. — drove American expansion into the West. Extraction also left behind many messes: abandoned mines leaking acid drainage into waterways and open pit mines evolving into toxic lakes; clear-cut forest lands; eroded soil; ghost towns stranded when busts followed booms. Today, when an energy company puts forward a plan to drill for oil and gas, this legacy of memory and resentment instantly surges to the surface.

Second, the residents of the Front Range’s towns and suburbs have an awkward historical legacy of their own. They reside in communities that would never have come into existence — or continued to exist —without a festival of combustion of fossil fuels, particularly for transportation. Just a few decades ago, sprawl — the rapid expansion of the population of these communities, a movement driven in part by white flight from urban desegregation — was a principal focus of concern and alarm among conservationists and environmentalists. This history provides awkward footing for Front Range residents who would like to position themselves today on the environmental high ground.

When delivered together, those two statements have been shown to exercise an equal and commensurate power to irritate everyone in sight.

Of course, it is crucial to acknowledge that historical legacies do not behave in a very sporting way. In a fair world, people who have recently moved to a Front Range suburb should not have to bear the burden of the town’s long history. In a fair world, a CEO of a natural gas company working hard to take precautions to guard against environmental damage should not have to bear the burden of association with, for instance, the abandoned mines that pockmark the West.

But historical legacies are not obligated to bestow themselves with aim and precision. They hang around anyway, unconcerned about and unconstrained by fairness, and they will not surrender an ounce of their power until they are acknowledged and addressed directly.

In my wilder moments of imagining routes out of our current stalemates, I dream of a custom in which meetings on controversial subjects universally start with a group recitation of Romans 3:23: “There is no distinction, for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.”

If quoting from scripture threatens to become the occasion of another squabble, we can easily shift this to secular phrasing: We cannot plan for our future until we face up to our history.

Let the discussion begin — on new and better footing.

Patty Limerick is faculty director and chair of the Center of the American West at the University of Colorado.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.