Topics: Ai Weiwei, Art, Asia, Books, China, Writers and Writing, Entertainment News, News

I carry the fresh tea back into the room. Weiwei pauses, his hand resting on his dog’s back.

“You know, sometimes they actually tried to make my conditions better,” he says quietly, almost to himself. “Once, after two days I couldn’t shit. Normally, every day I shit. Regularly. I go to the toilet every day. I said, ‘I need a banana.’ They gave me a banana but it was totally black. I joked: ‘It must be from the Beijing Cave.’ You know: Beijing has a cave with fossils of monkeys that are supposed to have evolved into human beings. It’s called Beijing Cave. These are the earliest signs of Chinese people. He laughed and said, ‘I’m sorry we don’t have any more bananas. This is the only banana we have left.’ But after that he started to routinely bring me bananas and oranges.”

‘This is the man who looked like a professor?”

“Yes. Because this man, although he is definitely kind of arrogant, he’s a little bit proud of himself as well. He said, ‘I smoke but I never take a cigarette from someone else.’ He’s not, how you say, corrupted.”

I found this incredible. I had assumed that the sort of people who work as secret policemen, and definitely as interrogators, must be ideologically pure – two-dimensional even – like characters in a Hollywood movie. As I listened, I couldn’t help wondering if Weiwei’s judgement had become compromised. Perhaps this was a sort of variation of the Stockholm Syndrome that one might expect him to suffer. I pressed him repeatedly on this: surely, I asked, some of the people who dealt with him must have had the zeal and the values of the Red Guards – the fanatical young supporters of Mao who would think nothing of beating their ideological opponents to death.

“I’m talking about the place I was in for the first fourteen days,” Weiwei says. “At the very end of the fourteen days both of the men had become soft. They started telling me they had given up. One of them said, ‘I cannot interrogate you, Wei-wei. I would rather interrogate a murderer or a thief. I cannot do this any more.'”

“But do you think this transformation was genuine? Or were they trying to trick you?”

“Later I found out it was genuine. They were telling me the truth. But at that moment I thought, well, maybe this is just a tactic.”

“What happened at the end of this first fourteen days then?”

“On day fourteen the interrogator came in and said, ‘Weiwei, the rest will be even more difficult. You may be transferred to many bad places that are much worse than here. You will remember your time here and wish you could come back. But you have to have patience. You have to be strong and have patience.’ I tried to capture every word they said. You want to save them because it is so strange they are saying these words to you. But you also don’t know precisely what they mean. These two interrogators just suddenly disappeared, which was a big surprise. They thought they would be doing the whole case. In their mind, they told me they would. They said, ‘We want this to be finished fast. We never imagined a case can be like this, but we can’t tell you the details because we’re not allowed.’The main one, the Professor, was very sorry when he left, he touched my shoulder. Then four guys suddenly came in and said, ‘Time for you to move.’ They were all dressed in black suits. They stood, one of them in each corner of the room and then one of them said, ‘Stand up. Where are your belongings?’ They covered my face and I was driven off and moved to another place. Now I was in a military compound. There were two soldiers in front of me.”

“When you arrived, you were in what vehicle?”

“A van. Something like a Buick. Three rows of seats.”

“And your hood comes off again only when you are finally sitting on the chair?”

“Yes. They take me out a few times but always covered so you don’t know what is beyond the door.”

“How do you know it’s an army base then?”

“The soldiers are in the uniforms of Tiananmen Square. They walk like a performance. They are like robots. Every movement, even the smallest movement is like that. If they want to change position, they stamp their feet like robots. Like badly designed robots. What immediately came to my mind was the movie “Blade Runner.” There is a guy in the movie who likes to design little robots. They walk, hit the door, spin round, walk off again, hit the wall. It’s just like that. But of course it’s deadly serious.”

“So now what did you feel?”

“I understood that was what the interrogator had been trying to tell me. Because, you know, this was a completely different kind of condition, a whole set of different principles.”

“So you must have suddenly looked back on the first fourteen days as being better?”

“Yes. It is not nice to find yourself in an army base at all. It is terrifying, really another level of fear. I was very afraid that they would now use other techniques – techniques that I have heard about from other people who were arrested. I wouldn’t say I hate the army . . . but yes, I really do hate the army because I hate any kind of army because it is the most inhuman way of organizing people. You are into the hands of people only nineteen, twenty years old. But later I found out it’s not so bad because everything is so regulated, so empty, so abstract. If you behave in this condition you are perfectly fine. They completely don’t understand what’s going on. They’re doing their job just like the guards in front of the big gate at Tiananmen. ‘You cannot come in,’ they shout. You say anything else to them and they just shout ‘You cannot come in!’ Trained to do only one thing and incapable of doing anything else. But for the first week or ten days I was so terrified.”

“But where were you kept?”

“Again, a room. A kind of hotel room. But this room looked so funny because everything was covered with soft cushions.”

“You mean it was a comfortable room?”

“No, to prevent suicide I think.”

“Oh – I see: a padded room.”

“Yes. That’s the word: padded. But so badly taped and everything. Very badly. Soft foam everywhere.”

“The walls? The floor?”

“Everywhere. Even the water taps. You turn on the water and the foam around the taps is so dirty because of the moisture. Even the toilet. After a while the foam gets loose, they re-tape it. After a while the wall becomes curved, where it sags because it is so old. But you can’t touch anything anyway. You have two guards. All the time. Twenty-four hours a day. When you sleep they sit there and they’re not like police. The police, they like phones. They play phone games and they’re a little bit loose, you realize later, because when you have soldiers, even at midnight they are still like this: stiff like brooms. They cannot doze but they are so sleepy because their minds are so empty. And sometimes they would argue. One would say, ‘You cannot blink your eyes!’ And the other said, ‘You did, not me!’ Because there’s two cameras watching the room all the time and if either one of the guards is caught, if they are found to be sleeping or blinking, they’re both in serious trouble. The two cameras can blow up their eyes to the size of a wall. So the cameras can really see if they doze. You realize they are soldiers but they too are just like criminals. They are really being highly watched. Even when they come out of my room they are searched. There’s two other soldiers whose job it is to search them . . . They cannot talk to you. They cannot talk to each other. The whole day is silent until someone comes to interrogate you. The silence is exhausting. Being silent with other people in the room. And when you go to pee you have to raise your hand and say, ‘Sir I need a pee.’ They have to say yes before you can even stand up. Then you can stand up but they have to go with you, in this tiny room. One person before you, one behind. One goes to the bathroom door. He stamps his feet and turns round and looks at you and then goes backwards into the bathroom. Then you go in. Between the two of them. The other one follows you in. Stamp, stamp. Then you start to pee. Then they look at your dick because, you know, they have to make sure it’s really a dick. It’s true! This is their regulation and there’s also a camera in the bathroom. They are being watched. After peeing you report to the soldier, ‘Sir, I have to wash my hands.’ If you don’t say anything they say, ‘Report!’ So you say, ‘Report, sir, I have finished washing my hands. Can I go out?’ They say yes, then one goes backwards. Stamp. You go backwards and again the other one stamps feet and follows. This is total full protection. You cannot make any single strange move.”

“How close were they?”

Weiwei moves his chair towards me. Now his face is forty or fifty centimeters away from mine. Already it feels very uncomfortable.

“This close. And if you do like this –” Weiwei wobbles – “they immediately jump. They say to me, ‘If you hit the ground I will be in jail, in your position.’ But there’s so many stories . . . It’s another world. They are just nineteen-year-old boys. Before they come to the camp, they are in places where there is no electricity. They are farmers’ sons. No toilet.”

“How do you know? You can talk to them?”

“We develop techniques for talking. They change shifts every three hours and every time when their shift came to an end I could see that it was such a relief for them and always as the end of the shift was approaching, they would always keep looking at their watches and muttering, ‘Fuck! They’re late.’ They would do this even though the next shift might only be late by one minute. Even one minute was too long to bear; it would make them so frustrated, it would make them so mad, ‘Fuck! They’re late again. Fuck.’ Because they are so desperate to escape the prison cell as well – they’re almost as desperate as I am. They signed up to the army for two years when they were still so young and as soon as they become soldiers they have to do so much daily exercise. It’s very hard. They have to run five kilometers in less than twenty minutes with all the gear and then there’s lots of physical training. Then they have to come and sit in this room and for two years literally they never leave this army camp. There’s no vacation, no Sunday, no Saturday; they can only call their family for ten minutes each week, in front of the whole army, with no privacy.”

“Are they conscripts or volunteers?”

“First two years they are volunteer soldiers. They are paid less than forty dollars a month. They join up because they are from such poor areas. In those parts of China, life is so hard. Before they arrived at the army they would never have seen a toilet. There’s no electricity, there’s no toilet sheets, I mean the paper, they just use newspaper or whatever comes to their hands; leaves, rocks, whatever. Then they see on the television some advert or something – a movie – so they start to admire the army uniform and they start to say, ‘One day I want to be a soldier.’ But now they are so miserable. They’re just farmers’ children. They feel very sad. All the time they become ill because of the training. Their bones make noises when they move, cracking everywhere because they have to stand all day. They have problems with their backs and they have problems with their legs but they always have to stand to attention. They are not allowed to talk to me. If they do that it would be a very severe crime. They can be removed immediately. They are not supposed to reveal what their names are or where they come from but because they are only eighteen or nineteen they start to talk to me. They are curious. They have so much curiosity.”

“How do they do this?”

“Everything happens during the period when I walk around the room or when I am lying on the bed pretending to sleep. They develop this technology – not technology – I mean they develop this technique. They talk to me without moving their lips. They talk like this, like a, how you say, like a ventriloquist. They have to look at me but they are not allowed to look at each other and I am forbidden to look at them, even for a second. But when I am walking round the room and they are walking next to me, guarding me in this tiny room, we talk without moving our lips. Of course I have to hold my pants because I don’t have any belt and my button is already loose. I walk, holding my pants round and round in circles and they march next to me. They have to march and stamp their feet when they turn. It’s crazy. I keep asking them if they￼can just put in a few stitches, so I don’t have to hold it. They could never even agree to that simple request. Every time they said, ‘We have to check. We have to report to our leader; report about the loose button and see if anything can be done.’ Every day they walk with me in this military fashion, every turn, every move, maybe even just one step, all very precisely done. Clicking their heels. It’s so ridiculous but they have to do it. The camera is watching them so they have to do that. They are being examined. And they keep telling me, ‘Don’t just think about you; think about us. We’re still young and we have no criminal record but we are just as much a prisoner as you are.’ Then they say, ‘The first day I arrived in the army I so regretted coming. I realized it was such a big mistake.’ Someone’s watching them all the time but they keep telling me these stories. They keep saying to me, ‘You sleep, we have to stand to attention next to your bed. You eat, we have to stand next to you. You shit, you take a shower, we have to stand there. What crime did we ever commit?’ They don’t understand what has happened. One day, I noticed that one of them was sad and I said, ‘Why do you feel so sad today?’ He said, ‘Because the person I look up to, the person I respect . . .’ How do you call that?”

“A mentor?”

“Yes. A mentor. He said, ‘I am sad because my mentor has died.’ I thought: What? But he’s a farmer’s son. How can he have a mentor? I said, ‘Who is your mentor?’ ‘Bin Laden,’ he said. ‘He was killed by the Americans.’ That day was May 2. I was completely shocked. It was incredible. I was not supposed to know any information from outside and this guy was telling me that bin Laden had just been killed by Americans! I said, ‘He’s not your mentor.’ But he said, ‘I respect him. I hate Americans.’ They all say they hate Americans but they don’t really hate Americans. They love American songs, they love whatever Americans do but they’ve been told Americans are brutal, crazy, inhuman. But you can sense this military education . . . but you can sense this whole military education.”

“So, it was sixty-six days you spent there. Was there a third place?”

“No, I stayed there till the end. I stayed almost seventy days in there.”

“Who were the interrogators?”

“The guy at the army camp was about my age and you can see that he grew up during the Cultural Revolution.”

“Was he a soldier?”

“No. He was a soldier once, now a policeman. Many policemen were soldiers before. He was a very hardcore type of person.”

“Did you meet him on the first day?”

“No. After two days. The first interrogator came to tell me: ‘Weiwei, this guy will replace my work, my job. He will be the one to take over.'”

“Was he uniformed?”

“No, plainclothes. He likes to wear shirts like me. But they always have bright colours printed on them. And big English words, very sporty – but I’m sure he doesn’t understand one single word of what they say.”

“What is his accent?”

“He’s from the northeast. Dongbei. That’s a sign. Because normally Beijing police are Beijing people. When somebody’s not from Beijing they must have been in the army.”

“And during this second period, on the army base, were the interrogators more resolute?”

“This guy at the army base was a real gung-ho person and was leader of the team. They have a team of four or five people.”

“It’s a police team?”

“Yes. It’s a Beijing police team. The military police. APF, that’s Armed Police Force. Their job is just to do the capture. They know nothing about the case.”

“And the Beijing police force is responsible for the interrogation?”

“Yes.”

“But during the second period you didn’t find the same sympathy among the interrogators?”

“Later I did. But not at first. The interrogator who came in was so stylish, so self-conscious. He questions me but of course you can see that mentally he has no idea about political crimes or art. They know nothing about art.”

“Yes. How did they deal with your art?”

“At the beginning he was yelling, very mad. I said, ‘Why are you doing that? Why do you have to raise your voice so high?’ He looks at me like I’m a criminal or something. Then gradually he became calm. I can sense that they are all so frustrated with the situation. Firstly, they don’t understand art. Especially they don’t understand my kind of art. They have no idea why Sunflower Seeds is art. He shouted at me, ‘Why do you think the twelve animal heads from Yuan Ming Yuan are your work?'”

The work the interrogator was referring to was the circle of giant animal heads that Weiwei had cast in bronze. They were inspired by twelve animal heads that had acted as fountains in the old Summer Palace in Beijing. Each head was an animal from the Chinese zodiac. Anything to do with the Summer Palace, which was burnt to the ground in 1860 by invading French and British soldiers, is a lightning rod for Chinese nationalism. Weiwei points out that the ruling Qing dynasty were not actually Han Chinese (being descendants of Manchurian invaders) and the designers of the original heads were also foreigners (Jesuits), as were the craftsmen who cast the figures.

“It’s impossible for them to understand. So I have to do a lot of explanation.”

“But did he know about all those pieces?”

“Of course. But like the others, he thinks these pieces are really economic scams. Big scams. He became very angry. He said, ‘This is not art. I tell you what this is, my friend. This is a scam. We know how much it costs to make Sunflower Seeds and you sell them for this much.’ They said, ‘How can Sunflower Seeds be art?’ I said, ‘It’s art, or not art, I don’t know, I don’t care. It’s not the thing I care about the most. I care if I can provide a new condition, a new perspective, and from that angle, see something completely new.'”

“Condition? For other people or for you?”

“For me and also for others. So that in the new condition people can look at the world differently and draw different conclusions. It’s not practical or logical; it’s not science or rational thought. It deals with our imagination, our fears, our dreams. We talked quite a lot on these things actually. First they don’t understand: ‘What other view? What condition? What new angle?’ I tried to tell them that the classical view about art is very limited and it cannot really cope with today’s life or today’s understanding of ourselves or our universe. Very often it is beyond our aesthetic judgement. Then later on they start to understand a little bit. They really did. And they learnt. They want to know the nature of my work: why did you stick a finger at Tiananmen – it’s not art, it’s just a gesture of insult in the west, everybody knows this means ‘Fuck off.’ I said, ‘The work is entitled ‘A Study of Perspective’ and in the old days in the west, in Renaissance times, perspective was suddenly very important.’ So of course first they think I’m just lying. But they are fast learners. They are very smart people. They are all very smart, intelligent people. It’s only because their job limits them to a very limited position. So, I explained art to them and then many times they said to me, ‘Weiwei, why whenever we talk about art and concepts do you get so excited that you keep talking? And why when we talk about facts, you say, ‘I don’t know’?’ But I say, ‘You know, I like to talk about art, and it makes me joyful and when I get to talk about art and explain I get very high spirits.’ But when I talk about which day, and how much money and all that, I really don’t remember those things. It’s not what I care about. And later they realise there are movements like Dada, or surrealism. It was incredible. One day they came back in to interrogate me some more and they were very happy, as if they had made a great breakthrough in the case: ‘OK, we found out! You’re part of Dada.’ I said, ‘Ahh, yes, you’re a little closer.'”