As world leaders muddled though the frustrating weeks after the downing of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17, few wanted to speak entirely frankly. Commercial contracts, strategic interests, domestic concerns, and evidentiary gaps tempered many comments.

But then, like a foghorn through the mist came a simple unvarnished truth carried on an Australian accent:

A ceremonial welcome for Tony Abbott. Photo: Andrew Meares

"Right at this moment, Russian forces are massing on the border with Ukraine," Australia's Tony Abbott told the world from a Sydney kerbside on August 8.

Advertisement

"If there is any movement by his [Vladimir Putin] forces across the border, it won't be a humanitarian mission, it will be an invasion. It will be an invasion."

The atrocity with the airliner had focused attention on Russia's sponsoring role, not just in that appalling act of mass murder, but on Putin's expansive nationalism.

In one fell swoop, Abbott had given the lie to Russian complicity in the Ukrainian civil war, and to its rank duplicity in posturing as a model global citizen. Russia had blood on its hands and was planning more.

From the outset, Abbott had been more direct than other leaders, and thus had taken a leadership role in coordinating the international response. He had quickly dispatched his foreign minister to New York for special sessions of the UN Security Council, and had held numerous direct talks with other leaders – Putin included. Now, by speaking frankly, Abbott forced others to confront the facts, too. It was crucial and necessary.

Bluntness is an Abbott hallmark. It has brought him no shortage of detractors in politics, but also has given him a power to cut through debates in a talent matched by few politicians. And strangely enough, in the softly spoken world of international relations, it has seen Abbott stand out, enabling him to fast-track crucial relationships and establish a solid profile as a man of purpose.

This has seen the conclusion of two vital free trade agreements (with Japan and Korea), and established the impetus for a third important one with China.

The MH17 disaster called for just this approach. As Abbott piled on the pressure, some Australians questioned their prime minister's motives prompting suggestions in the semi-detached echo chamber of Twitter that the PM was capitalising on the tragedy.

But what were they saying really? That he should have been less muscular? Thirty-eight Australian residents had been killed among 298 overall. As an Australian, and as an Australian prime minister, Abbott's job was to lead the outrage, to focus the nation's anger, to find the cause, and to ensure the repatriation of the dead.

It is a mark of how polarised and cynical Australian politics has become that such opinions even were expressed.

Yet while Abbott was on the receiving end, he is hardly blameless in this slide in Australia to such percussive politics.

The MH17 disaster has dominated the end of Abbott's rookie year as prime minister. With the anniversary of his September 7 victory due on Sunday, scorecards are now being marked on his overall performance one year into his three-year term.

The verdict? The main judgment that counts is another two years away, but the frequent snapshots we receive in the meantime reveal a government with the job of connecting with voters well and truly ahead of it.

The gap between Abbott's early performance as a national leader and how it might have been was on display in the final week of his first year, when he made a state visit to India. There, Narendra Modi's newer government is just 100 days old, but his popularity remains high according to published polling, even across sections of the electorate that did not back his party.

One explanation offered was his success in establishing a dialogue with voters.

This perhaps is the signature shortcoming of Abbott's first year. Its source-code can be found in the unrealistically high expectations Abbott established in the minds of voters.

His promises of no new taxes, no excuses, no surprises, have been broken wilfully, repeatedly, and without adequate expression of remorse. Rather, there has been a resort to lawyerly slipperiness.

When Kevin Rudd abandoned his carbon pollution reduction scheme, he compounded the insult by indifference. One minute the CPRS was vital to address "the greatest moral, economic, and social challenge of our time". The next minute, it was dropped.

Voters were not just surprised, they were disillusioned, which is far worse.

There is a sense of this with the Abbott-and-Hockey budget. A document so politically angular and contrary to promises as to necessitate the most deft of political handling.

Yet Abbott's response has been a mixture of bravado and denial. First he declared he would be held only to the promises he had actually made, rather than the ones people thought he had made. The message to voters was, you got it wrong, not me.

Unsurprisingly, you don't hear that argument any more. But the subsequent approach is scarcely better. It involved retrofitting his iron-clad promises with a ranking system where the primary aim was to fix the budget and other commitments to offer no excuses, no surprises, and no new taxes, were second-order pledges.

Voters aren't buying it.

Abbott's Coalition government has now trailed the opposition it replaced for more than half of the time since it was elected. The fall came unnervingly early. According to Fairfax-Nielsen, the two-party preferred vote had slipped to 48 per cent to 52 per cent behind Labor as early as November 21 – less than three months after beating Labor on a 53.5 per cent 46.5 per cent vote.

Since the election victory, the monthly survey charted a minor recovery when politics took a summer break, before showing a precipitous dive to be 44 per cent to 56 per cent in the days after the May budget.

The most recent Fairfax-Nielsen poll was taken between July 17 and July 19 just as the MH17 atrocity occurred. It had the government still trailing badly at 46 per cent to 54 per cent.

Now, as the government struggles to regain popular support, it is showing signs of a siege mentality, which is seeing ministers withdrawing and speaking to an ever-narrowing spectrum of the country – something more usually associated with governments nearing the end of their shelf-life.

Joe Hockey has at various times blamed commentators and business for being against him.

Another senior minister notable in the past for his willingness to spruik the message, recently responded to a request for a discussion about his portfolio with a dismissive text message explaining that "… you only write the bagging me stories".

Abbott has invoked the idea of Team Australia and suggested the ABC, for example, had taken the side of other countries in the debate on anti-terror legislation. As in good and evil, right and left, for Abbott, and increasingly his government, the world is construed as a series of binary choices in which journalists are either for them or against them.

This was evident in Abbott's decision this week to grant some Canberra correspondents an anniversary interview while pointedly denying it to others - a clear breach of an established convention around such milestone moments.

Access to the highest office in the land is now a currency – a tool of control, to be extended or withheld according to political compliance.

Second-hand accounts of Abbott's self-assessment are typically upbeat.

Addressing his MPs in Canberra this week he told them they could be "quietly proud" of what had been achieved in the first year.

He did acknowledge that it had not all been "plain sailing" but said the government had made a good start in its first year, because the boats have "all but" stopped, the carbon tax had been repealed, the roads and infrastructure spending rolled out and the budget was being brought back under control, fulfilling the promises the government had made.

By week's end he could also have added the mining tax to the list of achievements.

Yet even here, the story is compromised. To repeal the mining tax, Abbott has had to break another two promises relating to no negative changes to superannuation, and regarding the immediate scrapping of the Schoolkids Bonus.

Perhaps fittingly, Abbott rounded out the year forging new agreements and new relationships on the world stage. In India - his first trip there since backpacking in 1981 - Abbott was again impressive, displaying a facility for international affairs.

Foreign policy has been Abbott's surprise strength. With a few minor blips, his work with key partners has been exceptional, allowing him to stop the people-smuggling trade while rebuilding his relationships with Indonesia and Malaysia. His relationships with Chinese, Japanese, American, and European leaders have been genuine and respectful.

He told business leaders in Mumbai that Australia was open for business, having scrapped the mining and carbon taxes and approved $800 billion in new investment projects after streamlining environmental approvals. And he had the free trade agreements to point to also.

Economically, Abbott has performed better than his government's poor communications have allowed him to explain. Business has been given a boost, and the budget is on the way back - albeit not as quickly as promised and certainly not as painlessly.

Yet as impressive as these facts are, the government remains unpopular.

In the binary world of Abbott's own judgments, year one is either a pass or a fail. The polls show what voters say right now. But Abbott knows that government is a three-year enterprise and that he has both time and the advantages of incumbency on his side.

The question is, can he reverse the tendency to divide the nation into backers and slackers? If he does not, he will find himself governing for a small coterie of noisy media barrackers, and a wedge of the community that is too small and far too unrepresentative to build an election win in 2016.

THE FIRST YEAR

September 7, 2013 Abbott Coalition government sweeps into power with 90 seats in House of Representatives, leaves Labor with 55.

September 16

Abbott announces cabinet; criticised for appointing only one woman, Foreign

Minister Julie Bishop.

October 16 Fairfax Media reveals Coalition MP Don Randall claimed thousands of dollars on questionable travel expenses, sparking scrutiny of MP entitlements.

November 18 Edward Snowden leaks documents that show Australian spies monitored phone calls of Indonesian president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.

December 4 Joe Hockey strikes deal with Christine Milne to scrap debt ceiling.

December 11 Holden announces it will quit manufacturing cars in Australia; a month later, Toyota follows as the government's tough approach to industry assistance takes shape.

December 17 Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook reveals a $17 billion blow-out in budget bottom line.

February 10, 2014 Royal commission into union corruption launched.

March 6 Terms of reference for sweeping review of Fair Work Act by the Productivity Commission leaked.

March 17 Government commits to leading search efforts for Malaysia Airlines flight MH370.

March 19 Assistant Treasurer Arthur Sinodinos steps down from front bench, citing attention on his involvement with Australian Water Holdings, under investigation by ICAC in NSW.



March 25 Government announces plans to repeal section 18C of Racial Discrimination Act, sparking community protest. PM announces restoration of knights and dames.

May 1 Commission of Audit delivers report, shocking many with harsh recommendations.

May 13 Joe Hockey hands down first budget.

July 1 New Senate takes its place. With 33 senators, government needs six extra votes to pass legislation.

July 17 Flight MH17 shot down over Ukraine. Abbott and Bishop lead efforts at the UN Security Council, send police to the site and impose sanctions.

July 17 Government repeals carbon tax.

August 5 Abbott shelves plans to repeal section 18C of Racial Discrimination Act.

August 14 Government carries out humanitarian air drop to people fleeing Islamic State extremists in Iraq.