Buy Photo Jefferson County School buses arrive to drop off children at 8505 Terry Road, one of two child care centers operating under the name Lil' Kings &ÊQueens Child Care. April 20, 2016 (Photo: Brian Bohannon, Special to the C-J)Buy Photo

Days after a two-year-old boy died in a hot van operated by one of its employees, a day care was ordered closed Wednesday by the state.

The Cabinet for Health and Family Services issued an emergency license suspension Wednesday afternoon to two child care centers operating under the name Lil' Kings & Queens Child Care, 8505 and 8409 Terry Road.

LaVontae Swain, who attended one of the day care centers, died Monday afternoon after police said he spent three to four hours inside a van operated by an unidentified day care employee.

An investigation launched by the cabinet on Tuesday found that the employee picked up LaVontae from his home at 9:36 a.m. Monday to take him to the day care, according to suspension documents addressed to Ja'que Thomas of K & Q, Inc.

But LaVontae never showed up at the center, staff told investigators.

It wasn't until the same employee arrived at Gutermuth Elementary School around 3:45 p.m. to pick up other children that those youth found the toddler unresponsive in the back seat.

Buy Photo Parents talk as they wait for their children to arrive outside 8505 Terry Road, one of two child care centers operating under the name Lil' Kings &ÊQueens Child Care. April 20, 2016 (Photo: Brian Bohannon, Special to the C-J)

The school district reported that staff called 911 and began administering CPR. LaVontae died shortly after 4 p.m.

It's not yet clear what happened between the child's pick up from his home and his discovery outside the elementary school – a six-hour period.

The child's body overheated – hyperthermia – according to Larry Carroll, a Jefferson County deputy coroner.

Hyperthermia, a condition involving abnormally high body temperature, is often cited when children are left inside hot vehicles.

Monday's high of 87 degrees marked the hottest day of 2016 in Louisville so far and nearly broke a record high of 90 degrees, according to the National Weather Service

Louisville Metro Police is investigating the case and will hand it over to the Commonwealth Attorney's Office sometime next week to determine if criminal charges should be filed, police spokesman Dwight Mitchell said Wednesday.

The businesses' suspension will remain in effect until the cabinet's investigation ends. A woman answering the phone Tuesday at one of the day cares declined comment.

Two child care centers operated by K & Q, Inc. were found to be in violation of health and safety state standards when investigated by the cabinet six times in the last four years, online records show.

Inspectors concluded that at times children at the center weren't adequately supervised and that its director did not always have proper background check documentation for employees or emergency contact info for children in its care, among other violations.

In an October 2015 investigation, the cabinet found one of the centers wasn't following transportation regulations. Some children were signed off a transport van within a minute of being signed on while others were logged onto the van for hours. The investigation revealed that the transportation log was used only to record when students arrived after school, not monitor their movement on vehicles.

The cabinet is working with families to find new day care providers and is offering counseling through Seven Counties Services for the children who attended the day care with the boy.

Reporter Matthew Glowicki can be reached at 502-582-4989 or mglowicki@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1WekSkx