Since taking office, President Obama and his Administration have taken significant steps to advance equality for the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community. You’ve probably heard of many of these accomplishments: repealing “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,” prohibiting anti-LGBT discrimination in hospitals and in housing, promoting international LGBT human rights, standing up against DOMA and then implementing the Supreme Court’s decision in United States v. Windsor.

That’s an important, and exciting, list of accomplishments over the last few years – but it’s missing one very important accomplishment: the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare.

The Affordable Care Act has the potential to transform the lives of countless LGBT people and improve the health and well-being of our community – for generations to come.

Here’s why:

This is exciting stuff – but many Americans aren’t aware of their new options or that they can sign up for health insurance by December 23 and get coverage by January 1!

That’s why we have been working closely with organizations like Out2Enroll, CenterLink, the Gay and Lesbian Medical Association, PFLAG, the Equality Federation, and the Gay and Lesbian Victory Institute over the last few months to raise awareness of the Affordable Care Act. And we’ve also been working with LGBT community centers, Pride organizations, philanthropic foundations, LGBT health centers, and HIV/AIDS service providers to empower local LGBT communities with the information and resources they need to get access to quality, affordable health care.

These efforts are making a difference – but we can’t stop now!

Here’s how you can help:

Share this infographic over social media to let everyone know why they should #GetCovered! Tell us why the Affordable Care Act is important to you. Print out this sign, fill it out, and then post it on Twitter, tumblr, or Facebook! Don’t forget the hashtag #GetCovered.

And don’t forget to sign up for coverage by December 23 by visiting healthcare.gov!

In case you missed it: