Last week, the Harvard Institute of Politics released shocking new poll findings regarding millennials.

Overall, young people are not interested or enthusiastic about anything public policy-related with 43 percent believing that the country is on the wrong track. However, those that do have a stake in the game are young conservatives.

For the first time ever, more millennials lean to the right, with 35 percent of respondents identifying as conservative and only 33 percent identifying as liberal. Watch out, Washington! It would appear as though the liberal hold among members of America’s largest population is waning.

Despite the desperate attempts to drum up enthusiasm among millennials, by famous progressives, such as Lena Dunham—who starred in a ridiculous viral video with the song “Turn Down for What” blaring in the background—young people just aren’t interested.

Young people are so jaded and fed up with liberal policies, as this poll underscores. In this Harvard poll, 53 percent of respondents said they disapproved of Obama’s job performance—a drastic change since he assumed office. Millennials are fed up with federal government intrusion in their daily lives. They are increasingly more skeptical of big government.

In March, Young America’s Foundation released a poll that showed 53 percent of millennials were outraged by NSA data collecting, 50 percent were bothered by the lies surrounding Obamacare, and 46 percent were upset by the IRS targeting of conservative groups. Millennials are concerned with the growing number of issues that have plagued the federal government over the past year. The string of scandals has had a serious impact on young people’s perception of the Obama administration as well as an unfavorable view of big government programs—especially after the botched rollout of Obamacare.

Last week, it was reported that, under Obamacare, health insurance premiums for 23-year-olds have increased 78 percent among men and 45 percent among women. These expensive premiums are far cry from the “affordable” healthcare promises that Obama made to millennials. This Harvard poll shows that 57 percent of millennials disapprove of Obamacare—a drastic jump from two years ago when support for it was at an all time high. It seems Obamacare is to blame for the waning support among young people for the liberal agenda.

This poll just might be the real “October Surprise”—it is very telling of the complete lack of confidence that millennials have in Washington and the policies coming out of it. Millennials bear the financial brunt of these big government policies. Millennials are tired of a nanny-state government constantly telling them it knows what’s best. The ideas of limited government and more individual freedom are resonating among our nation’s young people, proving that conservatives are attractive to this unique demographic.