UPLAND >> The situation was bad for the Inland Empire economy after the downturn of the late 2000s, but the outlook is starting to look brighter, according to Inland Empire economist John Husing.

Husing presented his 2014 annual outlook for the Inland Empire report to members of the regional business community at San Antonio Community Hospital. He told a large audience about modest and steady increases in job numbers and positive development in the sectors of healthcare and logistics.

Husing projects about 35,000 new jobs for the region in 2015, with the health care sector set to skyrocket with the numbers of baby boomers and Affordable Care Act customers expected to begin utilizing services, he said.

He said the successful implementation of Obamacare would be crucial to revving up the economic engine of Inland Empire healthcare.

“This is a sector that isn’t just going to grow,” Husing said. “This is a sector that’s going to explode. People without health insurance in this region in 2012 is at 19 percent. That’s 828,000 people. If Obamacare can ever figure out how to make it work, they are going to be arriving.”

Husing also predicts a supply problem with the expected onslaught of new patients.

“We’re already handling 35 percent more people per healthcare worker than the California average,” he said.

In the area of logistics, major fulfillment centers, such as the new Amazon.com goods processing facility in San Bernardino, are also a huge regional job engine Husing expects to grow in the coming years.

“If you want to build a fulfillment center, you’re not going to downtown Los Angeles,” Husing said of the available land in the Inland Empire. “You’ve got no place to go.”

Husing said people will want to move to the Inland Empire because of cheaper housing and employers will want to locate here to find a more cost-effective workforce.

“Just as people start moving, because housing is cheaper, the office companies will move because their workers are cheaper,” Husing said.

He added it is difficult for more impoverished residents to break into the middle class because of a lack of job opportunities and education.

He also noted that the Inland Empire and Southern California showed no growth in manufacturing jobs in the past year, which is hurting the ability for impoverished people to break into the middle class.

The top hindrance for the creation of blue collar manufacturing and logistics jobs, Husing said, was air quality regulation, and he argued the air in the region is becoming dramatically cleaner because of better technology.

Advertisement

“With logistics, it’s (the hope) that the regulators are unsuccessful in trying to shut down for what our blue collar workers is clearly the most important sector,” Husing said.

Husing ended his presentation by saying that it was the first time in a long time that things were looking good for the Inland Empire, a region whose economy he has studied for the past 50 years.

“I think the bottom line message for me is that the worst is clearly over and in 2014, it won’t happen to everybody, but a lot of people are going to start to feel an economy that resembles something like normal,” Husing said. “We haven’t had normal for a long time. But as the year comes along it should increasingly feel like what the Inland Empire used to feel like.”

The presentation was hosted by San Antonio Community Hospital, which expects to grow as a regional healthcare provider. The current hospital in Upland is expanding to accommodate more patients, in addition to breaking ground for a new facility in Eastvale. When completed in 2015, the expansion expects to bring 500 new jobs to the region.

“John’s remarks focus on optimism, and if we focus on logistics and focus on healthcare and create educational and training systems to support more workers that are homegrown, the Inland Empire will do much better,” said Harris Koenig, president and CEO of San Antonio Community Hospital.