The first data about Colorado health care costs under the Affordable Care Act were released Monday, but it is impossible to tell whether health reform is increasing or lowering costs as the two top providers took different paths on premiums.

Kaiser is predicting an average increase of 7 percent in 2015 premiums while HMO Colorado Inc., better known as Anthem, is predicting its average premium will drop 5 percent, the filings show.

ACA supporters had promised the reform would eventually reduce rates, while ACA opponents said it will increase costs.

Marc Reece, associate director of the Colorado Association of Health Plans, said the preliminary data won’t settle that argument.

“You can’t take a 7 percent increase or a 5 percent decrease and read an overall trend,” he said. “There’s a lot built into those rates.”

The rates the Division of Insurance released were preliminary and won’t be approved by the state until September.

Adam Fox, director of strategic engagement for the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative, said the rates are based on who the insurance companies’ enrollees are and what the company believes it will cost to care for them.

“It’s encouraging at least some rates are going down,” he said. “It means insurers are seeing competition and responding to some of that pressure.”

The insurance division declined to answer questions on the rates because they have not been approved but issued a news release saying the average premium changes fall between a 10 percent increase and 10 percent drop and individuals will have about 350 plans to chose from next year.

“Rates seem to be holding relatively steady, which means we will continue to see a strong market in 2015 that will provide Colorado consumers with many options for health insurance,” said insurance commissioner Marguerite Salazar in a written statement.

Anthem cautioned that some individuals might see increases or larger drops.

“It is important to note, depending on the plan selected and other factors, such as age and whether a member uses tobacco products, an individual member’s rates may vary from the overall average,” wrote Anthem spokeswoman Joyzelle Davis in an e-mail exchange. “In Colorado, our ACA 2015 rate filings reflect assumptions based on the information we have at hand.”

Kaiser declined to comment on its filings.

Reece said it doesn’t make sense to compare any premium change between 2013 and 2014 because plans were changed to comply with the ACA. “It would be comparing apples and oranges,” he added.

However, federal figures show that between 1991 and 2009, Colorado personal health care costs averaged a 7.3 percent annual increase — one of the largest in the nation and higher than the 6.5 percent annual average for the country.

However, in 2012 average health care costs nationwide increased by only 3.7 percent, but that figure was not broken out by states.

This story was produced in partnership with Kaiser Health News, an editorially independent program of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, which is not affiliated with Kaiser Permanente.