Sioux Falls, SD

There is a national push for all police officers to wear body cameras, allowing them to record the situations they face. Michael Brown's death in Ferguson Missouri is bringing new light to this on-going debate.

No video recordings of the August ninth confrontation between Brown and Officer Darren Wilson exist. Some local law enforcement experts believe body cameras would have made a difference in the Ferguson case.

Pushing for police officers to wear body cameras is not a new effort. On Tuesday, KELOLAND News showed you how body cameras are helping police officers in Aberdeen. The Aberdeen Police Department was one of the first in the country to have the body cameras. The department was one of only a few that tested the equipment more than four years ago. Officers have worn them ever since.

It could be years before the Sioux Falls Police Department has officers wear body cameras.

"We have been experimenting with some of them over the last couple of years, because we're trying to find an option we can use for our officers who ride motorcycles, because they don't have cameras like our squad cars do," Chief Doug Barthel, Sioux Falls Department, said.

Sioux Falls squad cars have cameras, and start recording video as soon as an officer turns on the car's lights. The officers also wear microphones.

"Anything that happens in front of the car, the video portion of it is captured, but in addition, we also get all of the audio. So, if they happen to get out, go into a house, go into a business, or whatever. All of that conversation is recorded," Barthel said.

Barthel likes the how the cameras have worked for the department. He does not have an official timeline of when the department could expand to body cameras. At this point it is more of an idea. A camera can be at least $1,000. With 245 officers in Sioux Falls, that ends up being a big price tag. Whether the cameras are in cars, or on officers, they are not a cure-all. Barthel said cameras have their limitations.

"Really all you're going to capture is just that narrow focus of things that happen right in front of the officer, whereas in real life, in this situation, the officer is seeing things from a different angle. There might be things happening to either side of them," Barthel said.

However, the pros may outweigh the cons. Barthel says the footage comes in handy as evidence in court, and it helps him see what actually happened in a situation.

"I think it certainly makes people think twice about what they do and how they do things when they know there's that possibility they're being recorded," Barthel said.