Has America become the habitation of devils?



He has no interest in women in general. Some people believe he may be gay because of this. I believe he has no time for women because he is altogether too busy either wielding power or focusing on himself. (Daniel 11:37)





He is vicious and self-serving and violently uproots his rivals and political opponents. (Daniel 7: 20-24)





He is enamored with himself and the sense of his own self-importance. He could easily he considered as the king of megalomaniacs. (Daniel 7: lf,) (Revelation 13: If,) (2 Thessalonians 2: 3-4)





He has trouble speaking without blaspheming God, the people of God and anything connected to God. He is a prolific boaster of his own brilliance and self-worth. (Daniel 7: lf Revelation 13: lf)





He has only disdain for most commonly established civil laws of man, or moral laws of God. He attempts to change most of the rules and ignores the ones he chooses not to regard. He gives new definition to the word recalcitrant. (Daniel 7:20-24)



By Michael Bresciani "God has no foibles and is not farcical, finicky, or foolish otherwise he may have given us the Ten Suggestion" –I do not agree with those who say America is the 'Babylon' spoken of in the book of Revelation. It is impossible to deny that America is a type of Babylon. America is the undisputed leader in every prurient proclivity and perverted pursuit in the world. Thus, the picture of the fallen Babylon can also be shared by this nation at this moment in time.(Rev 18: 2)For months the heart of all news reporting has centered on ObamaCare and the lies the President told about whether people could keep their doctors and healthcare plans. Is this really the problem, or is it only a symptom of a much more serious and pervasive problem?With the LGBT, atheists and the Godless of this generation throwing themselves against God, Christians, positive traditional values and using the law to turn the nation upside down, why has it not been seen as a clue to the real problem.Before discussing the modern onslaught of demons in America, it does well to remind the reader that the god of this world (Satan) has long pulled the wool over the eyes of the perverted and polluted. The long predicted 'day of evil' is approaching at breakneck speed, but the stage was set long before today – to wit.(Pr 16: 4)The biblical statement that prophesied or predicted the deception laid upon all of the unbelieving, has proclaimed in no uncertain terms that those who dismiss God's commandments, his Son's death on the cross and the very grace of God, have given themselves openly to the powerful interventional actions of the arch deceiver.(2 Co 4: 3, 4)The answer to this question is –America may be an exceptional nation, but Satan is the god of this world (cosmos) and he works with the willing of all nations, he does not discriminate. To wit:(Lu 4: 5, 6)It is only when we stop seeing statements like this as alliterative, allegorical or metaphorical that we realize that the entire world is already in the hands of God's enemies and the trial period is on. Is it the world or the Kingdom of God – the choice was once laid on Christ, but now it is laid upon us all.When nations fall it is because they are making the wrong choices. The wrong moral and spiritual choices wreak far more havoc than bad choices in politics or economics. This is the promise of scripture. The ObamaCare wreck is far from our worst problem, but the Obamic view of morality is proto-typical of all that is wrong with America today.God chose dispensations to nurture civilization into maturity and the knowledge of God. He brought us along from the age on conscience (A total failure for man – before the flood) to the giving of the Mosaic law (Also failed eventually, becoming religious and ineffective) to the age of grace. That is when in the "fulness of time" God revealed his son, the Lord Jesus Christ.In Satan's realm three major shifts have already transpired. Starting in the ancient world of paganism, most idols were fashioned as animals and inanimate objects. The idols were not encumbered with demonic spirits, but they became agents to the indirect worship of devils.(1Co 10: 20)A second stage of devil worship which brought the worship of man closer to the front was the worldwide introduction of Greek and Roman gods, mostly shaped or presented as human beings not animals like the ancients'. Still devil worship by any standard.In fact, when Jesus addressed the church at Pergamum, he said it was situated where the seat of Satan was. ( Rev 2: 13 ) The people of Pergamum were not the only ones impressed with Zeus and dozens of other Greek and Roman gods. In 1939 Adolph Hitler had the entire altar of the devil (Zeus) dismantled stone by stone and shipped to Berlin and re-constructed.In the last days, the indirect worship of devils shifts to the demon possession of untold millions of people as reprobation sweeps across the globe. The creature is worshipped rather than the creator! ( Ro 1: 25 Men will worship themselves and their pursuit of materialism, contemplative diversions, prurient interests and pleasure.But the introduction of the worship of man takes on its final and quintessential form in the last day's with the final ruler of the world known as – the antichrist.The antichrist is possessed not with a mere demonic spirit, but he is inhabited and guided by Satan himself. ( Rev 13: 2 He is the exact opposite of Christ, but is fully endowed with the entire spirit of the devil. Christ was given the entire Spirit of God without measure ( Jn 3: 34 ) thus he was the very 'incarnation' of the Living God. The antichrist is the incarnation of Satan, he is – Satan in the flesh.The shift is complete when antichrist presents himself as God. At last, mankind will have come full circle from worshipping devils indirectly through idols and material things, to worshipping devils within themselves, and their revered satanically inhabited leader. This ugly portent lasts a mere three and one half years, but it brings the judgment of God to the entire planet. This is prophecy, this is pre-written history, and we will all experience this fact in real time.Almost fifty times the King James Bible refers to demons as devils. They are shown to haunt, torment and hurt those they possess – they like their leader do not love mankind. Those possessed were driven into graveyards and other dank and dark places. They were found trying to murder others or themselves and some stripped off their clothes and appeared nude on a daily basis. Sound anything like modern society in general?It is only when we compare the concerted effort of the perverted to manipulate academics, the laws of the nation and general societal trends that we can make the comparison between the antichrist's behavior and that of last day's modern man.Here are a few of antichrists more blaring qualities and behaviors. This brief list is copied from an article I wrote entitled "Hitler Was a Choir Boy Compared to the Coming Final Dictator." Many of the traits and behavioral patterns seen in the antichrist are emerging today – a clear sign of both demon activity and the very nearness of the antichrist's appearing. The growing trend of Christian persecution is a pre-cursor and a clear sign that the boss of devils is about to get on the job.About the time when 'Saturday Night Live' was poking fun at God's laws with the character known as the ' Church Lady ,' brave Christian leaders who clearly saw what was coming gave stern warning to America of things to come.When the late David Wilkerson wrote 'The Vision,' first published in 1973, but continuing in sales and popularity until the late 80's, Americans were generally unbelieving.Today the predictions Wilkerson made are fully underway and others are now taking up the slack by giving even more serious warnings to a nation that is about to plunge into its last hurrah.Can it be reversed? Is it too late to see the nation return to the former days or something akin to them?Before reading all the signs of this day as proof that there is no hope, we have to consider that God has not yet pulled in his offer of redemption for our nation or the individuals within it. We must also consider that regardless of how dark a situation may look if we become compliant; God's hand is not shortened. To wit:(Mt 19: 26)While this is not proof that America will collectively turn back to God, hope springs eternal in that one individual at a time may still present themselves in repentance to God and become a member in good standing in the family of God. This good news goes on until the very last moment of time.(Jn 1: 12)© Michael Bresciani