In the prosecution of suspected Aurora theater shooter James Holmes, we all want to see a fair trial and justice served. But we’re growing weary of the nonsense of the court proceedings.

Shenanigans based on the case’s gag order have been over the top from Day One — ranging from keeping information private that has already been aired in court to the latest bizarre defense filings over the court spokesman’s Twitter feed.

On Wednesday, the defense submitted a complaint about Rob McCallum, the public information officer for the Colorado judicial branch. The motion asked the court to crack down on McCallum for allegedly violating the judge’s gag order and included a broad look at McCallum’s Twitter feed — including who he follows, his “jovial tweets” with a prosecutor, exchanges with reporters, announcements about press conferences and responses to questions from non-news sources.

The 18-page filing provides clear evidence of one thing: McCallum is doing a great job. He is performing his duties exactly how they are written — helping the press do its job and responding to questions. At times, he is even funny.

The Holmes’ case is one of the most intriguing in the country and is being watched internationally. McCallum has handled the crush of media interest with aplomb and has not endangered the case with his Twitter feed.

Last year, McCallum was even awarded the Sue O’Brien Award for Public Service by the Colorado Freedom of Information Coalition. Yet, the defense believes his tweets are inappropriate and could be grounds for “immediate recusal and imposition of judicial discipline.”

All this for — among other things — telling reporters when documents will be released and where to pick them up; retweeting a reporter’s message about an important court date; and inserting the hashtag #JusticeForJessica after the 10-year-old’s killer pleaded guilty to all charges.

The motion says McCallum has “underminded Mr. Holmes’ right to a fair trial by an impartial jury.”

Holmes’ rights for a fair trial have not been trampled. If anything, the public’s right to know basic information about the horrific shooting has been undermined by the overreaching gag order.

Because of the demand for silence on the case, Aurora police officials have not been allowed to discuss the heroism that occurred July 20, 2012, when patrol officers loaded wounded victims into their cars because ambulances couldn’t get close to the theater. Officers testified by the end of the shift, their cars were sloshing with victims’ blood. But they can’t talk about it outside of court.

Other cities seeking to learn how Aurora managed its resources in response to the massacre have been denied information because of the gag order. The public could be served by allowing communities to discuss what went right and what went wrong.

Even victims themselves have been rebuffed in the name of preserving the sanctity of a fair trial for Holmes. Victims suing the owners of the theater where the assault occurred have been denied access to transcripts and exhibits that were presented in open court during Holmes’ preliminary hearing.

And now this kvetch about McCallum’s Twitter feed. This frivolous motion was a waste of taxpayer resources that pay for Holmes’ public defenders, court personnel who process the complaint, and the judge who must read it and issue an order.

Fortunately, Judge Carlos Samour didn’t find any violations to mute McCallum and merely issued an order reminding everyone a gag order on the case remains active.

But he didn’t need to say that. We already were gagging.

Jeremy P. Meyer: 303-954-1367, jpmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jpmeyerdpost