Jada Pinkett Smith got candid on the Today show and said husband Will has her “on lockdown.” She added that though she may take notice of attractive men, Will was the only man for her.

Will Smith may be one of the most desirable men on the planet today, but that doesn’t stop his wife from secretly ogling attractive men. However, despite the occasionally wandering eyes, Jada says her husband is very much aware that she would never cheat on him, shared the Magic Mike XXL star. Explaining her internal conflicts, Jada said,

“The good Jada says, ‘Boo boo, you’re married, OK, so we need to shut it down. But the bad Jada goes, “Wow, procreate! Procreate! Procreate!'”

Despite such strong emotions battling inside her, she will never act on them, continued the sultry actress,

“After you’ve been with somebody for 20 years, you think there’s any room for [jealousy]? He knows he got me on lockdown.”

What Jada clearly implied was the strong bond that the celebrity couple shares. Married since 1997, Jada and Will have never revealed a single chink in their marriage. Apart from apparent marital bliss, the couple’s son Jaden is being groomed with utmost creative freedom any celebrity couple’s offspring can hope for. Such relationships unbridled by orthodox conventions is the primary reason Jada and Will Smith stay together without the proverbial lockdown, she shared with SiriusXM radio host Howard Stern.

“We have traveled and you’ve gotta be strong. It takes work — you know that! Here’s the deal, Howard. You’ve gotta trust who you’re with. And at the end of the day, right, I’m not here to be anybody’s watcher. I’m not his watcher. He’s a grown man.”

Undoubtedly to promote her latest movie Magic Mike XXL, Jada Pinkett Smith categorically complimented the amazing physical transformation of her many gorgeous co-stars, including Channing Tatum and Joe Manganiello. Jada plays the owner of the strip club owner under whose employment the studs operate. Speaking about her co-stars, Jada added with a twinkle,

“Let me tell you something, (I like) all of them, because it’s all different… there’s a variation, there’s a variety. We like variety.”

What keeps the relationship going is perhaps the acceptance of the base nature and yet wholeheartedly keep the relationships going, said Jada. Rumors about the state of their marriage have been rising and falling ever since they got married, but Jada perhaps has the most profound realization that will undoubtedly keep her relationship with Will Smith going on for quite some time to come.

“Here’s what’s real: I’m not the kind of woman that believes a man is not going to be attracted to another woman. Just because a man is attracted to another woman does not mean that he does not love you. And it doesn’t mean that he’s going to act on it.”

[Image Credit | Gilbert Carrasquillo / Getty Images]