If You Go What: Boulder County commissioners will hold a public hearing on whether the county should act as the local sponsor of a set of post-September 2013 flood stream restoration projects under a Natural Resources Conservation Service grant program. When: 9 a.m. Tuesday Where: Third floor hearing room in the Boulder County Courthouse, 1325 Pearl St., Boulder Information about Boulder County's Creek Recovery and Restoration Program: bit.ly/1JqRJiN

Boulder County commissioners on Tuesday morning will consider having the county act as the official "local sponsor" of a federal agency's stream-restoration grants program.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture's Natural Resources Conservation Service has been allocated $47 million for awarding grants to help fund flood recovery projects in Colorado.

Boulder County officials stated in a news release there are 29 stream-restoration projects in the county, with an estimated total cost of $35.8 million.

The Colorado Water Conservation Board will administer the federal agency's Emergency Watershed Protection grants program. Before any of those projects can move forward toward implementation, though, a local sponsor must be named, Boulder County officials said. That sponsor will be responsible for overseeing the grant-funded projects and provide a local match amounting to 12.5 percent of the total project costs.

Advertisement

Boulder County is considering local sponsorship of 12 projects, which would have a total estimated cost of $18.3 million, the county staff said.

Eight of those projects are associated with road reconstruction adjacent to James Creek, Fourmile Creek, Fourmile Canyon Creek and Gold Run. The other four are on county parks and open space properties on or adjacent to the St. Vrain River or Left Hand Creek.

Tuesday's meeting will include a public hearing and a Boulder County Creek Recovery and Restoration Program staff's presentation about that program and the potential projects.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc