Topics: Ben Carson, Bobby Jindal, conservative political action conference, Conservatives, CPAC, CPAC 2015, Mike Lee, Sarah Palin, Ted Cruz, Politics News

The annual Conservative Political Action Conference kicked off this morning with a refreshing and necessary speech from Sen. Mike Lee (R-UT), who used the opportunity to tell the conservative activists in the CPAC audience that Republican politics too often becomes an embarrassing parade of sideshow clowns and that they are part of the problem.

Okay, he didn’t put it that starkly, but that was more or less the message he delivered to the conservative faithful as he called for the GOP to support and elect “principled, positive, and proven” conservative candidates, and not to reward candidates whose sole talents are stimulating the reptilian sectors of the conservative brain with empty slogans and buzzwords:

LEE: We have a job to do, and that job is not just to find the guy who can shout “freedom” the loudest. … If that that’s what conservatives reward, and that’s all they reward in the next year and over the next two days here at CPAC, if that’s what they reward with cheers and standing ovations and straw poll votes, then that’s all that we, as conservatives, will ever get. Talking points, and platitudes, and empty promises. But when conservatives elevate unserious presidential candidates – candidates who are not principled, positive, and proven – it’s not the media’s fault. It’s not the establishment’s fault. It’s our fault, and we can’t let that happen.

Lee also had a challenge for the crowd: “Imagine for a moment the impression this audience could leave a candidate if each of you refused to give a standing ovation to every trite one-liner, every empty platitude, or every hollow political slogan that you hear over the next day and a half – and yeah, you will hear some of those.”

It was a bold message, a clarion call for seriousness in political discourse and a sober approach to elections and policymaking, and it was rewarded with a smattering of perfunctory applause from the people on hand to hear it.