Enquirer Illustration / Think stock Birth Control Pills (Photo: Michael Matisse, Getty Images)

The case decided by the U.S. Supreme Court on Monday, allowing some businesses to refuse to cover contraception at no charge, directly involved two companies – Hobby Lobby and Conestoga Wood Specialties Corp. But it's also expected to clear the way for about 50 other companies – including a packaging firm based in Hebron – that filed suit against the Obamacare requirement to continue their anti birth-control policies.

The contraceptives at issue in Monday's decision were two known as morning-after pills, the emergency contraceptives Plan B and ella; as well as two intrauterine devices, which are implantable devices inserted into the uterus to prevent pregnancy. Many business owners objected to them because they're designed to work after conception occurs.

But on Tuesday, the high court left in place lower court rulings in other cases that allowed businesses to refuse to pay for all methods of government-approved contraception.

Hebron-based Zumbiel Packaging filed suit last October in U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C. against the Affordable Care Act contraception rule. The case has been on hold, awaiting a decision by a Washington, D.C.-based appeals court decision on a similar case involving a company from Sidney, Ohio. The Supreme Court's decision will affect both pending cases.

The local company's owners, Robert and Thomas Zumbiel, said in their suit that they have always excluded both coverage of birth control and abortion from health coverage for the company's 350 employees. The Zumbiels suit says the owners "hold to the teachings of the Catholic Church regarding the sanctity of human life from conception to natural death" and the church's teaching "regarding the immortality of artifical means of contraception."

In addition, the company prohibits its sales representatives from "accepting orders for packaging related to artificial birth control, e.g. condom boxes," wrote the company's lawyer, Colby May, in a 16-page complaint.

May works for the American Center for Law & Justice, a conservative Christian law firm based in Washington co-founded by TV evangelist Pat Robertson that's associated with Regent University School of Law in Virginia Beach, Virginia.

The law firm didn't respond to requests for an interview. Writing on the center's website, senior counsel Francis Manion said what was at stake in the Hobby Lobby decision "was nothing less than the right of all Americans to conduct their businesses in a way that gives glory to God." Hobby Lobby has seven stores in the Cincinnati region.

Ed Zumbiel, executive vice president of Zumbiel Packaging, declined comment because the company's case is still pending.

The Zumbiel lawsuit, filed on behalf of the company and both of its owners, charges that the Obamacare contraception requirement violates the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act, the First Amendment of the Constitution and the Constitution's equal protection clause.

The suit also asks for the government to pay its court costs.

No impact expected on most employers, workers

Despite this week's Supreme Court ruling, don't expect a massive wave of companies to stop paying for employees' contraceptives.

Many companies of all sizes paid for contraception by choice, even before the Affordable Care Act required it, believing it's an important benefit that helps them attract and retain good workers. A survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation found 85 percent of large employers already paid for contraceptives before the health care law required it.

Even employers who want to opt out of some forms of birth-control coverage see covering others as important.

"We want to provide for good health care for our people. We just don't want to fund abortive procedures," said Mike Sharrow, owner of C12 Group in San Antonio. His company, which provides faith-based counseling for business owners, has always paid for what he calls traditional forms of contraception, such as birth-control pills.

The Supreme Court's Monday ruling left standing the health care law's requirement that contraception coverage be provided to workers at no extra charge.

That means that while millions of American women are entitled to coverage, it isn't clear who will pay for it. The 5-4 ruling has the Obama administration looking for another way to provide contraception for women who work for these companies.

The ruling applies to businesses that are closely held, with five or fewer individuals owning more than 50 percent of the company's stock. By some estimates, 90 percent of businesses are closely held and employ about half the nation's work force.

In the Cincinnati region, 62 of the 100 top privately held companies are family-owned, according to the 2013 Deloitte Cincinnati 100 listing. The companies had a combined 58,000 employees, accounting for 61 percent of the workers in the region's top 100 privately-held firms, with a combined 2012 revenue of $13.9 billion or 42 percent of the total revenue for those top 100 companies.

Bloomberg News contributed.

WILL WORKAROUND WORK?

The U.S. Supreme Court's suggested work-around to provide and pay for employees' birth-control coverage at businesses whose owners have religious objections hasn't worked in practice, say the companies administering it.

While free birth-control coverage is required under Obamacare, the insurance administrators providing it for workers at religious-affiliated groups say the current solution has left them stuck with the bill.

That may be further exacerbated by the court's ruling, which exempted for-profit, closely held companies whose owners have religious objections, said Mike Ferguson, chief executive officer at the Self-Insured Institute of America, Inc.

"If that is the accommodation the administration chooses, then it would create the same problems, in our view, that are currently in play for the nonprofit religious organizations," Ferguson said. His Greenville, South Carolina, trade association represents insurance administrators and their clients.

Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , insurers and employers offering health benefits are required to cover all U.S.-approved forms of birth control with no out-of-pocket costs. President Barack Obama's administration carved out an exemption for religious organizations that object. To make sure women got the coverage, outside companies that administer health plans for religious groups were required to pay for it, with government reimbursement to follow.

It's a complex solution that hasn't worked in the real world, said the third-party administrators, or TPAs, providing the birth-control benefit, because the government hasn't figured out how to pay them back.

Without a solution, the benefits administrators may ultimately choose to drop clients with religious objections to covering birth control, Ferguson said. Nonprofits and businesses with religious owners that refuse to cover the benefit would have to change the way they provide health benefits as a result, adding to disruptions from the health-care law.

Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1lWZ5N5