Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

OAKLAND, Calif. (AP) — With the stakes high and fans ready to question and critique every move, Steve Kerr knew he’d be in the spotlight no matter how things played out this postseason.

That’s just the reality of being a rookie coach with the NBA MVP and the league’s top-seeded team.

Of course, Kerr is no stranger to playoff pressure. This is the same guy who received a pass from Michael Jordan and calmly hit a 3-pointer that sealed the 1997 NBA title for the Chicago Bulls.

A five-time champion as a player, Kerr has kept his cool so far as a coach in these playoffs and lived up to his nickname “Ice.”

He made a series-changing move that helped rally the Golden State Warriors from a 2-1 deficit against the Memphis Grizzlies and has the franchise in the Western Conference finals for the first time in 39 years.

Kerr has no time to savor the accomplishment, nor relish his role in it. The spotlight on him will be even brighter beginning Tuesday night, when the Warriors host the Houston Rockets in Game 1 of the conference finals.

“The playoffs are a different animal, they are. You feel it as a coach,” Kerr said. “I felt it as a player, but to feel it as a coach you can tell the difference in preparation from one day to the next.”

Kerr’s key to success is focusing on the task at hand — each game, each practice, each play. But he does get away from the game at least once a day by reading a non-basketball related book.

The current title on his list is “All the Light We Cannot See,” a Pulitzer Prize-winning novel by Anthony Doerr that takes place during World War II.

Kerr encourages his players and staff to read each day during the playoffs. It’s a philosophy he adopted from one of his coaching mentors, Phil Jackson.

“If you can get an hour a day where you just get lost in your thoughts and forget about the game a little bit, it’s a good respite,” Kerr said.

Kerr often solicits ideas from others, especially in his first postseason as a coach. The biggest and boldest move of his tenure came last week after listening to the advice of his coaching staff, notably assistant Ron Adams, who is one of the league’s most respected defensive minds.

Before Game 4 against the Grizzlies, Kerr and his staff decided to make Memphis pay for playing disruptive defender Tony Allen extended minutes.

Kerr essentially told his players not to guard Allen — a poor shooter — on the perimeter, allowing center Andrew Bogut to be a help-side defender that could pack the paint and double-team Marc Gasol and Zach Randolph.

The unorthodox strategy allowed the Warriors to make more stops and push the pace, freeing up Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson for open 3-pointers in transition.