By Tom Humphrey

NASHVILLE ? A post-election poll found most Tennessee voters approved of their state Legislature's performance in 2014 ? a stark contrast to overwhelming disapproval of Congress ? although the same poll found the 108th General Assembly was out of sync with voter thinking on several issues.

In an overview, the polling might indicate general voter content with what the Tennessee Republican Legislature's supermajority did not do as much as with what it did do ? perhaps again in contrast to national polling indicating unhappiness with Congress over continuing conflict and partisan gridlock.

The Vanderbilt University poll results released in early December showed 55 percent approval for the Tennessee Legislature and 23 percent approval for Congress.

Tennessee's Legislature has no partisan gridlock. But in 2014 there was fairly frequent gridlock on issues that became controversial within Republican ranks and an occasional example of bipartisan gridlock. Indications are that gridlock will continue in the coming year and perhaps even grow.

During the 108th General Assembly, which officially ended on election day, Republicans held 71 of 99 seats in the state House and 26 seats in the 33-member state Senate. With the 2014 elections, the GOP grip has grown to hold 73 seats in the House and 28 in the Senate.

Twenty-three members of the 108th General Assembly will not return for the 109th when the Legislature convenes Jan. 13. The 108th had 31 freshman members when it began, meaning 54 of the overall 132 members will be in their first or second terms.

Thirteen legislators ? four senators and nine representatives ? chose not to seek re-election to their seats in 2014. Ten were defeated by challengers in the November general and August primary elections ? three senators (two Republicans and one Democrat) and seven representatives (five Republicans and two Democrats).

House Speaker Beth Harwell is now tied with representatives Joe Armstrong, D-Knoxville, and Steve McDaniel, R-Parkers Crossroads, for being most senior member of the House, all first elected in 1988. Sen. Randy McNally, R-Oak Ridge, is the most senior member of the Senate, first winning his seat in 1986 after prior service in the House.

Some things the Legislature did in 2014:

n Approved Gov. Bill Haslam's popular "Tennessee Promise" plan for offering free community college tuition to all high school graduates, using surplus state lottery funds.

n Adopted a $32 billion state budget that was lower than the previous year because of state revenue shortfalls and shrunken federal funding in some areas. There was no pay raise for state employees or teachers, although Haslam initially planned for a boost.

n Ended years of controversy by authorizing sale of wine in grocery stores, subject to approval by local referendum. Sale of high-alcohol beer was also authorized outside of liquor stores.

n Ended another long-running dispute by blocking city governments from annexation without approval of voters in the affected area ? the latest in a series of moves that some see as a legislative trend toward limiting the powers of local government.

n Repealed statutes prohibiting carrying switchblade knives and some other knives with blades longer than four inches.

n Gave the state Board of Education authority to approve charter schools, even if that means overriding a local school board's rejection of the application.

n On the crime front, legislators put new restrictions on the amount of non-prescription purchases of certain cold and allergy medications that can be used in the illegal manufacturing of methamphetamine, made it a misdemeanor for pregnant women to take illegal drugs and declared death row inmates can be executed by electrocution if lethal drugs are unavailable.

n Passed resolutions disapproving of the "Trail of Tears" forced removal of Cherokee from the state in the 1830s and of the state's support of slavery prior to the Civil War.

n Approved new laws allowing schools to teach about "traditional winter celebrations," specifically allowing use of the phrase "Merry Christmas," and prohibiting schools from discriminating against students for expression of religious viewpoints.

Some things legislators did not do in 2014 that will be revisited in 2015:

n Expand coverage under TennCare, the state's Medicaid system, although Democrats proposed bills to do so. The supermajority passed a "Stop Obamacare Act," although it was amended from an original version that declared Tennessee would never expand Medicaid to simply say the Legislature must approve any expansion. Haslam says he will ask lawmakers to do so in the coming session. The Vanderbilt poll indicates most Tennesseans favor Medicaid expansion.

n Repeal Common Core standards, although a bill was approved to scrap the testing system that had been tied to the standards. Repeal efforts are expected in the coming session, although Haslam ? who strongly backs the standards roundly criticized by many legislators ? is calling for a year-long study instead.

n Approve a proposed repeal of the state's Hall tax on investment and dividend income, despite an organized effort by national anti-tax organizations and most Republican legislators signing on as co-sponsors. Americans for Prosperity says it will renew the effort in the coming session. Haslam is opposed, although he backed bills passed previously to repeal the state's inheritance and gift taxes and reducing the sales tax on food.

n Approve proposed laws allowing for-profit groups to operate charter schools and expanding a "parent trigger" law that makes it easier for parents to force a public school into becoming a charter school. Both bills passed the Senate and failed in the House.

n Approve a school voucher system for Tennessee. The gridlock came with one group of Republicans supporting a limited "pilot project" voucher system as proposed by Haslam and another pushing a much broader program while a third faction ? joined by most Democrats ? opposes any voucher system at all.

n Adopt various major changes in state gun laws, notably including a bill allowing Tennesseans to carry guns without a permit and to repeal a current law that lets local governments ban guns in parks. Both bills passed the Senate but failed in the House.

n Authorize sale and use of marijuana for medical purposes, although polling indicates a majority of Tennesseans support the idea. The bill was killed in a House committee ? all Republicans voting no, all Democrats yes.

n Create a state minimum wage in Tennessee that is above the federal minimum wage, an idea embraced in many Democrat-dominated states and, according to some polls, popular among most voters in general. A Democrat-sponsored state minimum wage bill was killed in a House subcommittee.

There was a long list of other failed legislative ideas in 2014, ranging from making daylight savings time permanent and year-round in Tennessee to allowing some illegal immigrants to get in-state tuition rates at state colleges and universities and repealing the current definition in state law of what constitutes "Tennessee whiskey."

Harwell, in a December speech to House Republicans asking a new term as House speaker, cited the 55 percent approval rating for legislators as "unheard of" in the current political environment. She won a new term handily over Rep. Rick Womick, R-Rockvale, who contended she had hampered conservative causes. Senate Speaker Ron Ramsey and other Senate Republican leaders all won new terms in their positions without opposition.

In an emailed statement, Harwell said she believes "sending the message that Tennessee is open for business" is a primary concern of legislators and their success.

"As always, I will implore my colleagues to ask themselves three questions when reviewing legislation: Does it increase the size of government? Does it make it easier to start and operate a business in Tennessee? Does it keep us moving forward in ensuring our educational system meets the needs of the 21st century?"

Ramsey said in an email 2014 was "an excellent year" for Tennessee, in part because of "our Republican majority's commitment to fiscally responsible government."

"We tightened our belts, made hard choices and continued to live within our means. The session again ended ?on time,' saving the taxpayer over $150,000 a week," he said.

The 2014 session ended on April 18, a day earlier than in 2013 and far ahead of closing dates for most past legislative sessions in years before the Republican supermajority. There were some complaints ? disputed by Harwell and Ramsey ? that the rapid pace meant little debate for some measures.