Cassidy Roberts, left, and Haley Demana give a biometric presentation for their Human Body System class at Springfield High School. Five years after moving out of fiscal emergency status Springfield City School District is projecting large positive cash balances for the next five years. Jeff Guerini/Staff

By Katie Wedell

Staff Writer

Five years after emerging from fiscal emergency and state oversight, Springfield City School District is projecting positive cash balances of more than $20 million for the next five years.

The school board credited several factors with the turnaround including support of several key levies from voters, concessions made on the part of staff and an uptick in student population for the first time years.

The district is expecting to bring in about $88.5 million in fiscal year 2015 while spending about $88.4 million.

Just over 75 percent of that revenue will come from the state. Benefits and wages make up nearly 70 percent of the district’s spending.

At the end of FY14 the district reported an ending cash balance of about $27 million. The same amount is projected at the end of this fiscal year followed by conservative projections for the next four years with ending balances dropping to $22.8 million in FY19.

For comparison, district Treasurer Dale Miller said the district had an year-end balance of only $7 million in 2006, the first year after projecting a deficit and having the state take over their finances.

“Springfield’s in a good place,” Miller said. “We’re able to provide every student every opportunity.”

The school board approved the district’s five-year financial forecast last week, which must be submitted to the state by Friday.

The projections are based on several assumptions, the most critical being the renewal of two operating levies — a 7-mill levy which expires in 2015 and a 9.59-mill levy which expires in 2018. Combined, the levies generate about $7 million annually.

It was the passage of the second levy in 2006 which, along with slashing 200 jobs and $15 million from the budget, that helped buoy the district out of fiscal emergency, Miller said.

“The main reason we were able to do that was the support of our taxpayers,” he said.

Since coming out of state supervision in 2009, the district has been successful in keeping controllable expenditures, such as utilities, down, Miller said.

“We spent several million in updating our heating and cooling systems,” school board President Ed Leventhal said. He added that this has already had an impact in terms of energy cost savings.

Other measures that helped were a three-year salary freeze for staff and a rebound in the student population, he said, which had been on a sharp decline for years.

“We’re not losing the number of students we had been,” Leventhal said.

In fact, the district has gained 177 students since 2012.

SCSD doesn’t necessarily get more money for each of those students, said Superintendent David Estrop, because of the state funding cap — but it gets some.

“What it shows is that people are voting with their feet,” he said, referring to them choosing to stay in the district rather than leaving for other options.

“It’s taken a lot of people a lot of work … to go from essentially bankruptcy five years ago to solvency today,” Estrop said.

He called the looming levy renewal the only cloud on the horizon.

“If we weren’t financially stable, then we wouldn’t have seen so much improvement in student achievement,” Estrop added.

Some other variables that affect the forecast are out of the district’s control and have been factored into the projections, according to the forecast.

The most recent reductions in property valuations due to the 2013 reappraisal have been incorporated and the district acknowledges that health care costs could increase as much as 2 percent as additional portions of the Affordable Care Act are rolled out.

The five-year report also points out that there are provisions in the new state budget which could decrease district revenues and increase expenditures in the form of expanded EdChoice Scholarships, the income-based voucher program and other school choice options.

Currently about 16 percent of the district’s expenditures are expected to be eaten up by those services. That’s about $14 million in state funds which is designated for the public school district, but is deducted when families choose to take advantage of various choice programs and scholarships.

About 11 percent of the projected $88 million in expenditures in fiscal year ‘15 is expected to go to other paid services such as utility costs and property insurance while materials are expected to account for about 3 percent.