Welcome to Tuesday, the 97th day of 2015 and the 24th year since Mike Krzyzewski, Duke University’s basketball coach, won his first national championship by defeating the then-unbeaten University of Nevada-Las Vegas in the Final Four and Kansas in the title game. Last week at a press conference ahead of this year’s Final Four in Indianapolis, Krzyzewski – who reportedly earns $9.6 million a year – refused to talk about Indiana’s religious freedom law that had caused such an uproar, saying his job was basketball, not politics (he later endorsed his school’s sentiments about the law). Coack K, however, has been active in Republican politics, hosting a fundraiser for then-U.S. Senate candidate Elizabeth Dole of North Carolina. He also took a jab at President Barack Obama in 2009 when Obama left Duke out of his finals bracket that year. Here’s your Three-Minute Briefing, all the News You Can Use in 180 seconds or less:

FSBO: As the world continues to digest news of a framework for a no-nukes, no-sanctions deal with Iran, Obama’s working hard to sell it through his favorite news outlets. He did an NPR interview Monday in which he compared the tentative deal to a house under contract, albeit a house with nuclear material in the basement and in a pretty unstable neighborhood that gets a lot of cop calls. But the president also took a swipe at Scott Walker, the Wisconsin governor and would-be presidential contender who said he’d chuck the deal, first thing, if he made it to the White House: Walker might change his mind “after taking some time to bone up on foreign policy,” Obama said.

[READ: Who Gets What Out of the Iran Nuclear Deal]

30 Nuclear Experts Can’t Be Wrong: The president’s got at least one group of independents who back him up on the Iraq deal: a consortium of 30 nuclear non-proliferation experts. In an open letter to critics of the deal – looking at you, Sen. Tom Cotton and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu – the scientists, scholars and diplomats shoved back hard: The deal, they wrote, will curb Iran’s appetite for the bomb, allows enhanced levels of inspections to catch them if they backslide and (this one’s for you, Bibi) is a giant step toward regional peace that won’t trigger an arms race in the region.

Or Can They?: But Sen. Chuck Schumer of New York, in line to succeed Minority Leader Harry Reid as the Senate’s top Democrat, isn’t buying the arguments of those nuclear eggheads. He’s backing legislation that would give Congress the authority to reject it outright, and it’s close to getting enough votes to override a presidential veto.

Rand Stands Alone: Now that he’s officially entered the 2016 race for the Republican presidential nomination, Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul’s record is getting a lot more scrutiny these days. U.S. News’ Dave Catanese reports the scrutiny includes a look at Paul’s semi-isolationist, mostly libertarian worldview that favors “peace through strength” (aka throwing more money at the military) but isn’t all that interested in playing offense on defense (aka invading certain foreign nations). That sets him apart from most of the 2016 field so far, most of whom want to bulk up the military – along with the power to use it.

Know the DIfference: In case you’re coming late to the Rand Paul party, the good folks at Mother Jones have put together a helpful primer on everything you want to know about the candidate: his background, why you should vote for him – or not – and how libertarian Rand Paul deals with Libertarian Ron Paul, his dad and a former long shot presidential candidate.

[ALSO Rand Paul Stands Alone]

To Your Health: Despite killer storms, rising sea levels and a record drought in the nation's salad bowl, the climate change debate continues in Congress and actual action seems far over the smog-filled horizon. That’s probably why Obama’s not taking any chances with the nation’s health. On Tuesday, he unveiled a series of initiatives to help mitigate the effects of global warming, which is expected to trigger longer, hotter summers, colder winters, a jump in asthma rates, a longer allergy season and other respiratory ailments.

Making It Rain: Less than half of the nation believes that climate change is mainly a result of human activity. But U.S. News’ Alan Neuhauser reports California hedge-fund billionaire Tom Steyer thinks his money can pin down GOP presidential candidates on the issue.

Downton White House: It’s been said that household staff are barely noticed if they do their jobs properly. In a new book, members of the White House household service must’ve served well, because they’re able to give readers a behind-the-scenes glimpse of what life’s really like in 1600 Pennsylvania Ave., from the folksiness of President George W. Bush to the fighting between President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton and the adjustments the Obamas have had to make since taking over the ultimate government housing.

Your Morning Video: In what could be a metaphor for the Iran no-nukes deal, Obama tries to calm kiddie hysteria when a bee interrupts his White House Easter Egg Roll dramatic reading of “Where the Wild Things Are”:

Stat of the Day: State (or pseudo-state) with the highest percentage of adult residents who think global warming is man-made, according to the Yale Project on Climate Change Communication: District of Columbia (61 percent). With the lowest percentage: Wyoming (42 percent).

Tweet of the Morning:They’re not called the Duke Blue Devils for nothing:

You're welcome, #Duke. You know why. — Francis J. Underwood (@RepUnderwoodSC) April 7, 2015



Duly Noted: On this date in 1788, Gen. Rufus Putnam’s expedition established a settlement at present-day Marietta, Ohio. Union forces led by Gen. Ulysses S. Grant in 1862 defeated the Confederates at the Battle of Shiloh in Tennessee. Jazz singer-songwriter Billie Holiday, also known as "Lady Day," was born in Philadelphia in 1915. The image of Commerce Secretary Herbert Hoover in 1927 was transmitted from Washington to New York in the first successful long-distance demonstration of television. During World War II in 1945, American warplanes intercepted and effectively destroyed a Japanese fleet, which included the battleship Yamato, that was headed to Okinawa on a suicide mission. In 1966, the U.S. Navy recovered a hydrogen bomb that the U.S. Air Force had lost in the Mediterranean Sea off Spain following a B-52 crash. In 1985, British pop sensation Wham! – George Michael and Andrew Ridgeley – performed at a packed Beijing stadium in communist China's first big-name pop concert.