Both winners were first timers at race

Kristen Arendt wasn't sure what to expect out of her legs less than two weeks after running the Bolder Boulder, but on Saturday, the Longmont resident found out they're just fine.

The 25-year-old won the women's 10K race at the 29th Annual Sunrise Stampede, held at Longmont High School. A semi-professional runner for Newton Running, she finished in 37 minutes, 4 seconds to win by more than three minutes. Second-place Kristin Johansen of Longmont finished in 40:10.

"Coming off the Bolder Boulder, you're always a little bit flat, so it was just kind of a tester to see how I'm feeling," Arendt said. "It was great."

Justin Young of Louisville, won the men's 10K event.

Arendt grew up in Bailey, and was a seven-time state champion at Platte Canyon High School (two-time Class 3A cross country champion, five state titles in Class 3A track and field). She was also an 11-time All-American at Adams State College.

Saturday was her first crack at the Sunrise Stampede, though.

"Last year I wanted to do it, but it just didn't work timing wise with some other stuff we had going on in summer, but it was on my to-do list," she said. "It was a great morning for it. I've never run the race before, so it's a challenging course with a lot of little ups and downs out there, but it's a great race."

Arendt said her strategy was simply to "keep it comfortable, see what guys I could roll with and kind of see where I'd come in."

Advertisement

She also wanted to get an idea of how her legs felt before she trains for the Peachtree Road Race on July 4 in Georgia.

"That's the U.S. 10K championships this year, so I'm gearing up for that," she said.

Young was competing in the Stampede for the first time, too, and was more than pleased with his results. He finished in 33:46 to beat second-place Zach Watson by nearly 2 minutes. Watson, who won the event in 2013, finished in 35:31, beating his time from last year by 29 seconds.

Kristen Arendt smiles after winning the women's 10K on Saturday at the Sunrise Stampede in Longmont. More photos and videos: www.timescall.com (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"I had (ankle) surgery about a year ago, and this is my first race back to try to get back into the rhythm of things," Young said.

The 34-year-old, originally from Peoria, Ill., has been a professional runner and before his injury was considered one of the top marathon runners in the country.

He hopes Saturday's Stampede was the first step toward a return to elite status.

"No, I didn't feel good. I felt like where I was in my fitness, just starting," he said. "I didn't know if I was going to be able to hang on, to be honest. I didn't know what pace or shape I was in or anything, so I just kind of went with the feel of the race. I probably overstepped my fitness a little bit halfway through and then hung on."

With all he's been through, however, Young was thrilled to experience the feeling of competition again.

"It was awesome," he said. "That's exactly what I wanted. I didn't expect to win at all. I just wanted to go off the leaders and see where my fitness was, and it's pretty cool finishing in a stadium. Although, that last lap felt like a mile."

Maybe so, but Young is hoping to have many more miles ahead. His goal is to compete in the Olympic trials for the marathon in February 2016, in Los Angeles.

"It felt like a marathon (today), but it's a good start," he said. "I'm happy with it."

Contact staff writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.