Alan Scarrow, president of Mercy Springfield Communities (Photo: Submitted)

Mercy Springfield Communities — the local division of Chesterfield-based Mercy Health — will take in at least $30 million less revenue this fiscal year than in the past, despite taking care of more patients, according to its top leader.

Mercy Springfield president Alan Scarrow stated the figure in a blog post published last week that discusses Mercy's recent layoffs, which saw 347 positions eliminated across four states.

"Less revenue forces us to find ways to reduce our costs if we are going to maintain the quality and breadth of service our community expects from us," Scarrow wrote. "Given that approximately 60 percent of all our costs are wages and benefits, it is no surprise that part of that cost reduction results in a loss of co-workers."

Scarrow said "continued implementation of cuts in the Affordable Care Act, cuts in Medicare reimbursement, a switch to value-based payments, and lack of Medicaid expansion in Missouri are among many reasons" for the $30 million figure.

Mercy's fiscal years begin July 1. In the fiscal year ending June 30, 2013 — the most recent for which records were immediately available — Mercy Hospital Springfield had total revenue of $968.7 million, according to tax forms filed because of the system's nonprofit status. The hospital is just one component of Mercy Springfield Communities, however, which also includes local clinic facilities and facilities in the surrounding area, from Rolla to Berryville, Arkansas.

With 127 positions eliminated, Mercy Springfield was the division of Mercy Health hardest hit by the most recent round of layoffs, which were completed two weeks ago. The health system told local media outlets in the St. Louis region that 126 positions had been eliminated there. That leaves 94 additional positions eliminated in other parts of the system, which has hospitals in Missouri, Oklahoma, Arkansas and Kansas.

In announcing the layoffs, Mercy stressed that the 347 positions eliminated constituted less than 1 percent of its systemwide workforce. Mercy Springfield is the largest employer in the five-county Springfield metropolitan area.

Mercy had said that the Springfield layoffs eliminated positions "across a variety of departments and services" and that the systemwide layoffs had "a focus on reducing management," with 178 of the 347 positions that were cut considered leadership roles.

In his blog post — which reads more personal than Mercy's official statement on the layoffs — Scarrow said the priority within Mercy Springfield was to do "everything we could to augment salaries and additional manpower to front-line positions — to the ER, hospital floors and clinics where patients are cared for."

"Thus the jobs affected in the Springfield Communities have primarily been vice presidents, directors, managers and supervisors," Scarrow wrote. "Some of these individuals have been with Mercy for many years and dedicated their entire professional careers to our organization, which makes it disheartening for all of us. That, of course, is the hard thing."

Scarrow, who assumed his current position earlier this year, said the layoffs likely also affected employees who still have their jobs.

"For those who have not been directly affected by the reduction in force, I suspect some will continue to have fears," he wrote. "Perhaps some will fear they could be next. Perhaps some question our commitment or ability to sustain the organization. I cannot quiet all those fears."

"The fact remains that these are challenging times for health care," Scarrow continued. "But while this moment may be difficult, we will face these moments together and overcome our challenges."

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1M8e29b