ROCKY HILL – Town Manager Guy Scaife sharply questioned the 3.93 percent increase sought by the board of education for next year, arguing that recent history suggests the request contains a built-in surplus possibly exceeding $1 million.

Scaife criticized the board's $36.7 million budget proposal as unsupported by year-to-date expenditures, or spending projections until the end of the current fiscal year, June 30.

Based upon spending patterns the past two years, Scaife said the salary, benefit and tuition accounts in the 2015-16 schools budget appear to be over-budgeted to the tune of $600,000 to $1.1 million, money local taxpayers will have to foot. The excess in salary and benefit accounts alone, which Scaife said were historically over-budgeted in the years he reviewed, project to $675,000.

"I would think it critically important that you bring forward your actual spending rates for the year and what your projections are. That would put some meat on the bone,'' Scaife said at Monday night's town council meeting.

Hired in September, Scaife is in the midst of his first budget season. He proposed a $69.6 million town budget for next year, but acknowledged when he released it in March that he had not had an opportunity to analyze the board of education portion.

Superintendent Mark F. Zito outlined the schools' budget for council members, saying said he anticipates ending the current year with a projected surplus of $510,000, thanks to savings in various accounts, primarily health care. He declined after the meeting to respond to Scaife's criticism of the budget.

Board Chairman Frank Morse said with teacher retirements, transfers, maternity leaves and other situations, salary and benefit accounts can be "more volatile'' than those for municipal employees. The town manager's questioning "sounded like it was a little aggressive,'' he said.

Scaife also took aim at the board's continued use of multiple health insurance plans for employees. That practice is creating a "looming problem'' for the town, he said, with the threat of excise taxes levied under the Affordable Care Act against more generous, so-called "Cadillac plans" in 2018

"We have single plan. You have 14 different ones. We need to find a way to move to a single plan,'' he said.

Charles Zettergren, board director of finance and operations, said adopting a single health plan for all board and town employees was not a guarantee of savings, as plan costs are typically based upon claim history, as well as coverage design.

"You can't just say the board should move to the town's plan and that will magically reduce our costs I don't think that will happen,'' he said.

But council member Guy Drapeau urged the board and town administration to move toward consolidation. "You guys need to work together on the insurance for next fiscal year I think it's very important."

A public hearing on the budget is scheduled for Monday. Deadline for budget adoption is May 18.