Generally, Colorado and the nation are making progress in reducing illicit drug abuse among teens. But there’s one big exception: nonmedical use of prescription drugs.

Every day in this country, 2,500 teens abuse a prescription drug for the first time. One in five teens, or 4.5 million young people, have abused prescription drugs. More people die from prescription drug overdoses than from either motor vehicle accidents or overdoses of illicit drugs, such as cocaine and heroin.

While illicit drug use by teens is dropping — by 18 percent from 2002-12, according to a federal survey — teens still are commonly abusing painkillers, depressants like sleeping pills or anti-anxiety drugs, and stimulants (mainly prescribed to treat attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder). Locally, that same federal survey found nonmedical use of opioid painkillers is growing rapidly, and Colorado ranks No. 2 nationally for nonmedical use among people between the ages of 12 and 25.

Prescription drug abuse can become a lifelong problem with grave consequences. Youths may drop out of school, adults lose jobs, families suffer irreparable losses. The problem comes with staggering costs for treating drug addiction and criminal justice functions.

Teens report using prescription medications as an acceptable and safer alternative to illicit drug use, second only to marijuana. Prescription drugs are easy to get. Fifty-six percent of people who use prescription medications non-medically say they obtain these drugs from friends and relatives, meaning that these drugs are freely shared or taken from medicine cabinets or other accessible places.

We must protect the rights of those who need these medications for legitimate reasons while also preventing their abuse. Sounding the alarm is key. Prescription Drug Abuse Awareness Week in Colorado in November featured a town hall meeting and discussion on prescription drug abuse among youths, held at the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus in Aurora.

We must respond collectively as a state to create a bottom-up, cooperative response to the problem by drawing from the many agencies, task forces and programs already in place — such as the programs of the Colorado Department of Human Services Office of Behavioral Health and the Department of Public Health. Over the past year, the governor’s office developed the Colorado Plan to Reduce Prescription Drug Abuse, with the goal of preventing 92,000 Coloradans from abusing opioids by 2016.

The governor’s office has also formed the Colorado Consortium for Prescription Drug Abuse Prevention, a collaboration of state agencies, universities and constituent communities. The consortium was recently made a subcommittee of the state’s Substance Abuse Trend and Response Task Force, a legislatively authorized committee chaired by Attorney General John Suthers.

We are building one of the most comprehensive, coordinated approaches in the nation, and are rolling up our sleeves to create collaborations and initiatives in several key areas: public awareness, health care provider education, treatment, safe medication disposal, and improved data systems for monitoring controlled substance prescribing and use and the extent and impact of the prescription drug abuse problem.

John Hickenlooper is governor of Colorado. John Suthers is Colorado attorney general and chair of the Colorado Substance Abuse Trend and Response Task Force. Robert Valuck is professor of pharmacy at the University of Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences and coordinating center director of the Colorado Consortium for Prescription Drug Abuse Prevention. Also signing this commentary were consortium members Laurie Lovedale, Carol Runyan, Jason Hoppe, Lee Newman, Sunny Linnebur, Helen Kaupang and José Esquibel.