McConnell 'perplexed' by Obama

Incoming Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said Tuesday that he’s “perplexed” by President Barack Obama’s actions since the mid-term elections, arguing Obama seems in denial over the “butt-kicking” the Democratic Party experienced.

When asked about his relationship with the White House at the Wall Street Journal CEO Council event in Georgetown, McConnell boasted of his deal-making acumen when paired with Vice President Joe Biden, citing deals to extend the Bush tax cuts, approve the Budget Control Act and avoid the fiscal cliff in 2012 as examples that he can negotiate with the other side.

Story Continued Below

But the newly reelected Kentucky Republican had little praise for Obama’s actions in the month after Democrats’ devastating mid-term results, a list of presidential moves that include an emissions pact with China and executive action to shelter millions of undocumented immigrants from deportation.

“We don’t have any personal problems. There is, however, a deep philosophical difference. You look at the way the president’s reacted to what can only be described as a butt kicking election,” McConnell said. “By any objective standard the president got crushed in this election. So I’ve been perplexed by the reaction since the election, this sort of in-your-face dramatic move to the left. So I don’t know what we can expect in terms of reaching bipartisan agreement. That’s my first choice, to look at things we agree on — if there are any.”

McConnell mentioned two areas of possible cooperation: Fast-tracking new trade deals and comprehensive tax reform. But he said his party will not pay a “trillion dollar ransom” in new revenues for tax reform and urged the crowd filled with powerful executives to lobby the White House to support a more “competitive” tax code.

And though the GOP leader was publicly down on his relationship with the White House bearing legislative fruit, he predicted that there are still enough moderate Democrats in the Senate that can join with his party to move some legislation to the president for his signature or veto, like tweaks to Obamacare and energy legislation.

After the narrowly failed Keystone XL Pipeline vote in the Senate last month, McConnell said his phone blew up from centrist Democrats who were ebullient that McConnell will bring approval of the pipeline up early next year, when it is assured of passing the Senate’s 60-vote threshold.

“My hope is that regardless of what direction the president takes, there will be 10-15 Senate Democrats who want to get back to normal and get back toward the political center,” McConnell said.

As for perhaps his most important relationship with Obama — considering the president’s executive and judicial nominations next year — McConnell said that Republicans remain undecided on whether those positions will require 60 or 51 votes for ultimate approval after Democrats altered the Senate rules to require a bare majority last year.

The Senate GOP, including its new freshmen members, will huddle on Dec. 9 to discuss whether to reverse Democrats’ “nuclear option” — a move that continues to cause division in the party.

“I can’t give you the answer to what we’re going to do, but we’re going to have an in-depth discussion of it shortly,” McConnell said.

While Republicans strenuously opposed Democrats’ unilateral rules change at the time, there are many voices in the party arguing against reversing the change. There are several practical reasons for the GOP to keep things as is: In the short-term, keeping it at a bare majority will require fewer Republicans to vote for presidential nominees over the next two years. And in the long-term leaving the rules alone will make it easier for a future Republican president to win approval of his or her nominees.