Wendell Potter, an insurance-insider-turned-whistleblower, meets with medical professionals before giving a lecture at the Chaminade Resort in Santa Cruz on Thursday. (Kevin Johnson -- Santa Cruz Sentinel)

The PR playbok In “Deadly Spin: An insurance company insider speaks out on how corporate PR is killing health care and deceiving Americans,” Wendell Potter, who spent 25 years in public relations, describes the PR playbook fundamentals used to fend off reforms by executives in the tobacco, oil, soda, big banks, and health insurance industries. Step one is to hire a well connected PR firm to: • Set up and operate a coalition or front group with words like “American” or “freedom” or “choice” in the name. • Recruit third parties to list as members of the front group. • Write letters to the editor and opinion pieces that will be signed by the third parties. This PR firm likely will have people on staff who have worked at news outlets and who can influence the tone and content of what reporters write. Other strategies include: • Conducting a survey or finding statistics that support the client industry. • Feeding talking points to columnists or TV hosts to discredit your opponents. • Carrying out a communications campaign to position the company or industry as part of the solution. Source: “Deadly Spin”

SANTA CRUZ >> Wendell Potter, a journalist who spent 15 years in public relations at health insurance giant CIGNA, saw firsthand how corporate spin worked to raise the stock price and executive compensation. Since he quit in 2008, he’s been trying to atone for what he did.

Potter wrote “Deadly Spin,” a book revealing manipulative tactics used by the health insurance industry to guard profits, joined the Center for Public Integrity as an analyst, and Thursday night spoke to more than 100 physicians gathered at Chaminade for an event presented by the Santa Cruz County Medical Society.

Potter’s column last month pointed out United Health Group, the largest health insurer, reported $10.3 billion in profits in 2014, up 7 percent from 2013. United Health’s stock climbed to a record $113.85, up from $30.40 on March 23, 2010, when the Affordable Care Act became law.

Asked about the dispute between insurer Blue Shield and Sutter Health, a fast-growing regional provider, and its affiliated Palo Alto Medical Foundation that left 284,000 Californians, many in Santa Cruz County, in the lurch for 30 days, Potter said, “It revolves around money.”

Analysts said Sutter wanted a rate increase, which was unacceptable to Blue Shield, but when a two-year agreement was announced Jan. 30, neither side explained how the dispute was resolved.

“Who knows?” asked Dr. Brian Brunelli, a neurologist with Palo Alto Medical Foundation who is president of the Santa Cruz County Medical Society, noting the economics were not shared with doctors.

“Both sides are loath to provide the public with any details,” Potter said. “They all insist it’s proprietary information. The big losers are the patients. You never know what rates were finally agreed to. It’s impossible to know the true cost of health care.”

This secrecy contributes to escalation in health care costs, he said.

“Lawmakers need to take a very close look at this,” Potter added. “There’s no incentive for change to happen within the industry.”

Opponents spent $57 million to defeat Prop. 45 to give the state insurance commissioner authority to regulate rates. On the other side, proponents spent $7 million.

“A lot of campaign money is spent by special interests, insurance as well as healthcare providers to influence public policy,” Potter said. “Most of us are completely unaware of how much is being spent. A big portion of what we pay in premiums is used for PR campaigns.”

Advertisement

Potter identified a 1996 change in the insurance industry affecting health care. A trade group of Blue Cross and Blue Shield insurers amended its bylaws to allow members to become public-stock companies.

Since then, executives at for-profit insurers have pursued strategies such as higher premiums and more customer cost-sharing to boost their price of their stock and their stock options.

“Quite frankly it’s greed,” Potter said.

Is it possible to reform the current system?

He contends the U.S. is “far away” from a time when a doctor’s office would have a price list “that would be of significant meaning to a patient.”

Insurers are developing “clinical pathways,” which are proprietary.

“Does that make any sense?” Potter asked. “I assure you Wall Street is really calling the shots. They have to demonstrate every three months to their shareholders they are meeting profit expectations.”

A glimmer of hope comes from Dr. Leana Wen, inspired by her mother’s care, who developed the Total Transparency Manifesto, a TEDMED talk, prompting thousands of doctors to sign her pledge to be accountable to patients.

Dr. John Christensen cited the case of a publicly traded staffing company that fired a doctor, overwhelmed by very sick patients in the emergency room, who asked for help.

Ed Gomez, a marketing rep at Norcal Mutual, which provides liability coverage to physicians, said, “Maybe we have to do is blow it up and start over.”

One frustrated physician wondered where to go for ideas on what to do.

Potter suggested a group run by former Medicare chief Don Berwick and the Commonwealth Fund.

He advised local doctors work together to make a difference.

Potter said he fell in love with idea of being a journalist, worked as a reporter in Memphis and then in Washington covering Congress and the Supreme Court.

He said he was lured to public relations by money and recruited to work for Humana, where he thrived, and then to CIGNA, where he became the chief spokesman.

He helped defeat the Clinton health reform initiative and a patient bill of rights before health care reform took shape under Obama.

On a visit home to Tennessee, he made a trip to Wise County, Virginia, where health care was being offered free for the weekend at a fairgrounds, where lines of people waited to be seen in animal stalls. “

“It hit me like a ton of bricks,” he said. “I began to see I was part of the problem.”

He said he thought he could make changes from the inside, but realized that was not possible and gave his notice.

“I didn’t set out to be a whistleblower,” he said, but seeing someone on television give the kind of talking points he used to write led him to volunteer for reform and in 2009 testify before Congress.

He explained common industry practices that contributed to the rising number of uninsured Americans, such as cancelling policies of women after they got breast cancer, which then led to his book.

One statistic from the book: A Kaiser Family Foundation report found insurers raised premiums in employer-sponsored health plans 97 percent from 2000 to 2008 when overall inflation was 21 percent.