Wipro eyes $2 billion revenues by 2018 in healthcare business

BENGALURU: Wipro's healthcare business, which is on track to touch $1 billion in annual revenue by the end of this year, will grow faster over the next few years and touch $2 billion by 2018, with top customers looking to increase spending on technology amid the Obamacare healthcare reform in the United States, unit head Sangita Singh told ETin an interview on Wednesday.

India's third largest software services exporter has hired senior executives from rival firms to strengthen in the United States its healthcare business, which counts Johnson & Johnson and Catholic Health Initiatives among its top clients. The company has brought in Asheesh Shukla from Cognizant to head its pharmaceutical division. Shukla, who is based in the US, will join the company as vice president next week.

Wipro will look to combine organic and inorganic growth, as it chases its longer-term goal of $2 billion of revenue and target acquisitions in the $100-200 million range. "I think there's tremendous momentum (in the deal pipeline)," said Singh, chief executive of healthcare and life sciences at Wipro.

"There is a lot of work that is happening on the government side, Medicaid-Medicare... 32 million people are getting insured and a lot of them are first-time outsourcers." The US healthcare outsourcing market is estimated to be well over $20 billion, according to figures provided by outsourcing advisory Everest Group.

"It should be (quicker)," added Singh, when asked whether the next $1 billion of revenue for healthcare will be generated faster than the first $1 billion. "We want to get there within the next three years," she said. Singh added that while Wipro had also looked at US-based healthcare technology solutions firm TriZetto, which was eventually gobbled up by US-based Cognizant for $2.7 billion, the company would ideally stick to smaller niche acquisitions for the time being.

"One has to be careful about the soil in which one is planting a tree - you take a big tree and plant it in soil that is not tilled yet, the tree will die," said Singh. Wipro is also looking to partner with startups in the healthcare and life sciences segment in the US, especially in areas such as analytics, and working closely with the company's venture capital arm that is headed by new board member and strategy chief Rishad Premji to identify start-ups.

Wipro also won a new, large deal in healthcare during the last quarter, Singh said, without disclosing the name of the customer. The deal will generate $50-100 million of revenue annually for Wipro, she said. " As you've seen, Obama has undertaken a massive shift in healthcare in the US. The onus now is on more services being provided at lower costs," said Sid Pai, Asia-Pacific head at outsourcing advisory firm ISG.