HARTFORD — A bipartisan group of legislators urged the governor not to veto a nearly unanimous bill that would require insurers to cover 3-D mammograms as standard screening tests, if women ask for them.

"We've heard a lot about mandates. We can't afford it, and we have a deficit, etc. I would argue that we already cover this. This is just a 3-D mammogram vs. a 2-D mammogram,'' said House Minority Leader Themis Klarides, who organized Monday's press conference.

Klarides praised the governor's record on women's health, despite the possibility of a veto by Gov. Dannel P. Malloy.

"It's certainly hard to question the governor's record on women's health issues," said Chris McClure, a spokesman for Malloy. "Like all bills, we're looking closely at this legislation and its corresponding fiscal impact to the state as an unfunded mandate."

The bill would increase costs if state workers and their spouses start choosing 3-D mammograms, and the state government would be responsible for covering the additional incremental costs for insurance plans sold through Obamacare exchanges.

The exams are not available at all sites, but Bristol Hospital, UConn Health, Middlesex Hospital and an outpatient practice in Hartford all have the machines.

Medicare began covering 3-D mammograms for standard screenings in January 2015 and Medicaid began covering them in Connecticut a year later, but the major national insurers do not, because the U.S. Preventative Services Task Force says there's not enough research yet to prove they're superior to the standard 2-D screens.

A typical charge for a 3-D test is about $175, compared to about $120 for a traditional mammogram.

The Connecticut Business and Industry Association and the health insurance industry opposed the bill because of the increased costs for employers and insurers.

Yale-New Haven's chief of breast imaging, Dr. Liane Philpotts, said that with the new machines, "We can better tell which lesions are cancerous and which are not," and therefore avoid unnecessary biopsies.

She cited studies that say as a result, the savings per screening is more than the $50 increased cost per test.

The 3-D tests also reduce the number of women who are called back for a second screening because the images were inconclusive in the first mammogram. Philpotts said at Yale, 12 percent of women had callbacks with traditional mammograms, and just 4 percent did with 3-D mammograms.

Hologic Inc., the manufacturer with the largest market share in 3-D mammogram machines, makes the product in Danbury.

"This is a fact, this will save time, save money, save lives,'' said state Sen. Joan Hartley, D-Waterbury.

Even if the bill becomes law, it would not cover all women in the state. That's because women whose insurance is provided by a town government or large company that is self-insured are not required to change their benefits. About 52 percent of women who get employer-based insurance would not see a change to 3-D mammogram coverage.