CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Neighborhood Family Practice (NFP), a federally qualified health center with five West Side locations, has been awarded more than $1 million in federal funds to expand one of its centers and its midwife services.

The health center will use $1 million in funds from the Health Infrastructure Investment Program, part of the Affordable Care Act administered by the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, to support the expansion of its Puritas health center.

The new standalone building will be about a half-mile from the existing Puritas location, and will allow the health center to serve more patients by adding exam rooms and behavioral health offices.

"The HHS funds go hand in hand with what NFP has been doing for more than 30 years, which is providing quality primary health care services to those who need it most on Cleveland's near west side," NFP President and CEO Jean Polster said in a news release. "We'll now be able provide expanded services to even more patients, including many who have become insured through the Affordable Care Act."

NFP will continue to serve patients from its current Puritas location in Puritas Park Plaza and aims to have the new building open to patients within two years.

Expanding midwifery services

The health center also received almost $277,000 in federal funding to expand its nurse midwife program, which offers CenteringPregnancy, a group-based prenatal care program for women at high risk of poor pregnancy outcomes, as well as family planning, gynecological and well-woman care.

"Infant mortality is a priority public health issue in Ohio, and rates for Cleveland's neighborhoods are dramatically high, with poor health status, high rates of prematurity and smoking among pregnant women contributing to these poor outcomes," says Julie Kellon, CNM, MSN, an NFP certified nurse midwife.

Neighborhood Family Practice developed a strategic plan this year to provide more access and choice for the women it serves in order to help address this problem.

"The expanded services award from HHS will accelerate our ability to implement this plan," says Kellon.

Last year, NFP served 440 women around the time of their pregnancy and more than 4,600 women of childbearing age.