With just a few days left before Christmas, it’s the time of the year that people are divided up into naughty and nice. Of course, we’ve had our share of bad lawmakers, media stars who have made fools of themselves and professional athletes that have taken advantage of their fame and power. They aren’t the only people who deserve coal in their stockings this year, however. Here are five more recent contenders we should say bah humbug to.

1) The lying witness from the Michael Brown grand jury. Almost everyone who read the journal entries that “Witness 40″ submitted to the grand jury hearing on Michael Brown’s death felt there was something a little off in the testimony. From the bizarre opening of, “Well I’m gonna take my random drive to Florissant. Need to understand the black race better so I stop calling blacks niggers and start calling them people. Like dad always said, you can’t fear or hate an entire race cause [sic] of what one man did 40 years ago,” to a narrative that conveniently supported every allegation made by police office Darren Wilson when he claimed his murder of the unarmed teen was justified, the entire diary appeared highly suspicious.”State prosecutors asked [Sandra] McElroy to testify during the grand jury hearing one day after she met with federal investigators, and she told the panel that she had written down her account the day of the fatal shooting – although she hadn’t mentioned the journal the day before,” reports Raw Story. “She returned 11 days later, as prosecutors asked, with handwritten journal pages.” The site also reports that, “The FBI special agent interviewing McElroy doubted she was actually at the scene of the shooting, and noted that McElroy had expressed a desire to help Wilson.”

McElroy’s testimony helped lead to a grand jury decision not to pursue charges against Wilson in Brown’s death.

2) George Zimmerman’s friend who decided maybe Zimmerman was guilty after all. While in Missouri, Wilson was able to get away with a deadly racial profiling act thanks to supportive witnesses, in Florida George Zimmerman did the same with the help of his own character witnesses. One of his friends, however, has decided two years later that maybe Zimmerman’s murder of African American teen Trayvon Martin was an act of racism versus an act of self-defense.

“Frank Taaffe served on the neighborhood watch with the man accused of killing Trayvon Martin and vocally supported him throughout his trial. But months after Zimmerman was acquitted, Taaffe told Orlando’s News 13 that his neighbor should have been found guilty,” reports New York Daily News. “He told the TV station that the incident stemmed from the color of Trayvon’s skin. ‘What I know of George and his tendencies and also my opinion is that he racially profiled Trayvon Martin that night,’ he said. ‘If that had been a white kid on a cellphone, walking through our neighborhood, he wouldn’t have stayed on him the way he did, and that’s a fact, and I believe that in my heart.’”

Taaffe defended Zimmerman in the media prior to Zimmerman’s trial, but now says he will testify against him in a grand jury surrounding Martin’s death, citing the loss of family members as the reason he has changed his view. Apparently it was impossible for him to feel compassion for Martin’s family until he had his own deaths to compare it to.

3) “Public servant” Officer White. Obviously, racial tensions are at a fever pitch, especially between law enforcement and every day citizens. Things only get worse when you have a police officer with a Twitter account that he uses to stir up more controversy. Enter San Jose police officer Phillip White, who has spent the last few weeks taunting those who have been protesting the deaths of Michael Brown and Eric Garner. “By the way, if anyone feels they can’t breathe or their lives matter I’ll be at the movies tonight, off duty, carrying my gun,” he recently said in a now deleted tweet, as one of many that were deemed racist and unprofessional. White has now been put on administrative leave.

4) Internet “journalist” Charles C. Johnson. Johnson was probably already on the naughty list when he offered a $1000 reward for anyone who could get him a photo of Mississippi Senator Thad Cochran’s wife in her nursing home. His place was no doubt sealed however when he decided his job was to “doxx” or out the previously anonymous “Jackie,” the woman at the center of a controversial and now pulled Rolling Stone article on campus rape. Regardless of whether “Jackie” was telling the truth, was confused and traumatized, embellished her account or outright lied, revealing private information about an otherwise anonymous person so a mass of strangers can contact and harass that person is always wrong.

5) Phyllis Schlafly. Okay, to be fair, Schlafly, the anti-feminist, has likely been on the naughty list for decades now. Yet she has to get a special honor this year for escalating her “war on men, feminists are evil” rhetoric to an even higher level than ever before. Schlafly, like most conservative pundits, has taken a skeptical eye to the Rolling Stone rape investigation, and, despite all evidence to the contrary, has decided that there is likely no issues with sexual assault at colleges to begin with.

No, according to her, higher education is a dangerous place — but only for male students. “It’s really dangerous for a guy to go to college these days. He’s better off if he doesn’t talk to any women when he gets there. The feminists are perfectly glad to make false accusations and then claim all men are capable of some dastardly deed like rape,” she told WND.com, adding, “There isn’t any rape culture. There is a war on men, and [feminists] are very open about it.”

Perhaps it’s time to keep those poor men safe by making them stay home.