Trump: close hedge fund tax loophole

Photo: Robert Gauthier / McClatchy-Tribune News Service Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump on the debate stage at the Reagan Library in Simi Valley, Calif., on Wednesday, Sept. 16, 2015. Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump on the debate stage at the Reagan Library in Simi Valley, Calif., on Wednesday, Sept. 16, 2015. Photo: Robert Gauthier / McClatchy-Tribune News Service Trump: close hedge fund tax loophole 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Donald Trump is their prototypical client — a risk taker with financial assets galore.

But not all tycoons stick together, apparently.

In Wednesday’s Republican presidential debate, Trump called for closing a loophole on how money management fees earned by hedge fund, venture capital and private equity managers are taxed.

“The hedge fund guys won’t like me as much as they like me now,” Trump said. “I know them all, but they’ll pay more.”

Connecticut is ground zero in the debate over what is known as carried interest. It has the third-highest concentration of hedge funds after New York City and London, a $3 trillion industry. Most are located along Fairfield County's Gold Coast, which is also a major private equity hub.

Trump said it’s unfair that the fees are taxed at a lower rate as investment income instead of as regular compensation.

The discussion of hedge fund carve-outs was part of a broader debate segment on taxes, in which several of the 11 candidates, including Sens. Ted Cruz and Rand Paul, advocated for a simplified flat-tax system and Dr. Ben Carson compared the current graduated tax system to socialism.

The flat tax was a point of departure for Trump, who said under the tax plan that he plans to introduce in two weeks, the rich would shoulder more of the burden, including hedge fund managers.

“If you make $200 million a year you pay 10 percent, you’re paying very little relatively to somebody that’s making $50,000 a year and has to hire H&R Block because it’s so complicated,” Trump said of a flat tax.

“I know people that are making a tremendous amount of money and paying virtually no taxes, and I think it’s unfair.”

Republican Peter Schiff, the vocal money manager and financial commentator from Weston, said hedge funds are low-hanging fruit for Trump as he tries to burnish his populist image.

“So he’s kind of Warren Buffetting it,” said Schiff, referring to the billionaire who has called for increasing income taxes on the wealthy.

Fellow CNBC talking head Larry Kudlow said the hedge fund niche and the larger financial services industry is eagerly awaiting the fine print of Trump’s tax plan.

“If he’s going single them out and not give them any relief on the corporate tax, I personally would think that’s wrong,” said Kudlow, a Redding resident who was a budget adviser to President Ronald Reagan. “I think Donald is going to propose a significant corporate tax cut.”

Carried interest is currently taxed at the capital gains rate of 20 percent, plus an additional 3.8 percent investment tax that is a component of the Affordable Care Act.

Critics have long argued that the fees should usually be treated as personal income, where the top tax rate is 39.6 percent.

They say the change could raise up to $17 billion in tax revenue over the next decade from an industry that has gotten special treatment from the IRS for too long.

Schiff said that Trump self-funding his presidential campaign builds up the narrative that he’s not beholden to special interests and makes it easier for him to go after carried interest.

“I think it’s a good issue for Trump because he knows his opponents can’t attack it because they’re trying to get money from Wall Street,” Schiff said. “It’s probably winning him some support.”