Screw poor women and babies that need food through a WIC program that has been curtailed as a result of the government "slim down." In the alternate reality of the right wing, the most egregious result of the shut down of government services was the closing off of a veteran's monument - a closing that allowed members of the GOP crazy caucus to have a great photo-op with the vets who broke through the barricades. And because immigration activists were allowed to have a rally on National Mall, right wing veterans are mad as hell. Their righteous wrath was documented by wingnut "filmmaker" Dennis Lynch whose oeuvre consists of xenophobic pieces of paranoia, pimped on Fox, about how those "illegals" are sneaking into America to slit your throat. So are we surprised that he would be warmly welcomed by new opinion show host Megyn Kelly who was muy sympatico with the white, racist veteran featured in Lynch's video....

Last week, Kelly did her trademark propaganda opening by setting the faux "controversy." She reported on "exclusive video that raises tough questions about how the administration is handling the partial government shutdown." (Wait, I thought it was a "slimdown.") She set the "double standard" message immediately with her report on the immigration rally in Washington DC "despite the fact that this piece of property is technically closed."

FACT CHECK: According to White House press secretary, Jay Carney, "the closure order provides a process for accepting First Amendment activities on National Mall and memorial parks in D.C. and in Philadelphia." As such, the organizers of the rally received permission because of First Amendment rights.

She breathlessly noted that lawmakers, at the rally, OMG "thanked the administration." She mentioned how the WWII vets were "shut out" of their memorial. She played some of Lynch's video in which he stalked Rep. Nancy Pelosi in order to shame her but, actually, didn't. What was really interesting was the footage of a good ole boy type who launched into a racist diatribe sure to bring tears to the eyes of patriotic Fox watchers: “I’m appalled at what I see going on here at the World War II Memorial. We have people other than the World War II veterans are basically shut out from coming in and seeing this memorial which pays homage to the veterans that died serving our country and Nancy Pelosi and her bunch right across the yard have hundreds of thousands of illegal aliens over there that they’re glad-handing. On a scale of one to 10, I’m upset at a 10. In fact, 10 doesn’t even reach where I’m at."

So rather than question the assertion that the demonstrators were "glad handing" "illegal aliens," Kelly told "filmmaker" Dennis Michael Lynch that "you can see why" the man featured in the video was "so upset." She described how the poor vets faced barricades but "today it's welcome and thank you president Obama for making it possible." She continued "that guy touches on the anger that you encountered."

Lynch described the so called double standard as "despicable" and asserted that he watched "thousands of illegal immigrants through the mall" while the veterans are still being kept out of their memorials. Kelly sat silent as Lynch launched into a xenophobic screed about how real Americans (truckers and bikers) ask "what is happening to this country." "Entrepreneur" Lynch claimed to "know immigration and business when it comes to Obamacare." He warned of a "perfect storm" when "amnesty" (Fox viewers are now drooling) and Obamacare "come together in a catastrophe for the American worker." He urged Sen. Ted Cruz to "stand his ground" because Obamacare, Nancy Pelosi, illegals, yadda yadda. Kelly didn't bother do correct his assertion that a path to citizenship is not amnesty.

While Kelly said that while these people have the right to protest, the question is - wait for it - a "double standard" and whether Obama is trying to placate his allies, Lynch made strange smiley faces. Lynch continued to rail against the "illegal immigrants" whose presence at the protest was "welcomed" and that this is why truckers will "shut down the beltway." (Uh, didn't happen). He predicted that "everyday Americans" will "rise up in droves" and more "Americans" than "illegal aliens" will be converging on Washington.

Good thing that Megyn's time slot isn't official news because, in this segment, she aided and abetted xenophobic, racist, paranoia. But hey, that's Fox News' bread and butter so it's all good....