Town Administrator Kate Buch presented the proposed operational budget for the upcoming fiscal year during special Tuesday night meeting on Jan. 26. The proposal calls for a town budget of $45,552,756, an approximate decrease of 3.2% from the current year.

Working with the Superintendent Dan Brenner’s initial education budget proposal, the town mill rate would go up to an estimated 15.70, an increase of just 0.35. In comparison, the mill rate rose by 0.8 in 2015, and 1.84 in 2014. The mill rate determines the amount of property tax residents pay each year and is determined based on the budget and the town’s grand list, which assesses the value of taxable property in town.

“The department heads have put a lot of care and a lot of work into the budget and compiling those numbers with quite a bit of detail.” Buch said during Tuesday night’s presentation. “They did a terrific job bringing in this budget and made my job easier.”

Buch has worked with Darien’s budget for many years as the director of finance, but was delivering the information for the first time as administrator. Buch also thanked new Finance Director Jennifer Charneski for her help in preparing and formatting the budget. Charneski will also be present at the board of selectmen’s budget meetings throughout the process.

Operational expenses are expected to rise by 1.1 percent, falling in line with last year’s increase of 1.04 percent. Buch attributed the significant savings in the budget to changes in the town’s pension and health care offerings. Low energy costs have also contributed to lower expenditures as the town spends less on fuel and electricity.

Looking at a second year with a operational budget increase of about one percent, First Selectman Jayme Stevenson spoke to critics of the 2015-16 selectmen budget. Some, Stevenson said, believed that the low rise in operating costs was the product of manipulated statistics for the adjusted pension and health care services.

“It’s good management, we’ve altered we’ve made systemic changes in our healthcare offerings to be able to make these reductions,” Stevenson said. “So I don’t subscribe to the idea that they are misgiving to reduce the operating budget.”

Darien resolved contract negotiations with all town employees, including the police union and the Department of Public Works staff, during 2015 with the help of new Human Resources Director Lee Palmer.

Those employees will be transitioning to high deductible health plans and a pension cap has been put into place for incoming town hall employees. Additionally, the town will expects to spend less on legal council with the contract negotiations complete.

“The good news is that we at the local level here in Darien are making those changes and I can’t say the same for our friends in Hartford,” Stevenson said of the pension changes.

Buch said the town may still be susceptible with the “Cadillac tax” associated with the Affordable Care Act. Scheduled to take effect in 2018, it and would implement a 40% excise tax on any health plan valued at more than $10,200 per year for individuals or $27,500 for families. As it stands, the tax will not be adjusted based on region.

The Board of Selectmen will review the budget during special meetings and is expected to vote on Feb. 10. Buch recommended that the board review two new full time positions being added to the town staff, and proposed capital expenditures from different departments. Specifically, she mentioned that Police Chief Duane Lovello is lobbying for the department to acquire body cameras.

The town budget represents 24% of Darien’s overall budget for the 2016-2017 fiscal year, while the education budget comprises 68%. The special meeting schedule can be found here.

[email protected]