From left, Supreme Court Justice Elena Kagan, Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Justices Anthony M. Kennedy, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen G. Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor at this year’s State of the Union address. (Evan Vucci/Associated Press)

Who would have predicted that the last true democrats in Washington might be found on the Supreme Court?

As partisanship and jockeying for electoral advantage become all-consuming, Congress refuses to do its job, while the White House reaches perilously toward doing Congress’s job as well as its own. The Senate majority and minority leaders no longer work together. President Obama and House Speaker Paul D. Ryan long ago gave up on finding common ground.

When Justice Antonin Scalia died, it seemed a safe bet that the court, too, would fall victim to partisan paralysis.

Already reviled by the left for Bush v. Gore and Citizens United v. FEC, and by the right for not blocking Obamacare, the court instantly rose to the top of the presidential campaign agenda. Candidates boasted of litmus tests for appointing judges that, until recently, no self-respecting politician would have admitted to. The justices found themselves evenly divided and are likely to remain so for a long time — a scenario, if there ever was one, for gridlock and point-scoring.

But so far we have seen the opposite. The justices, Republican- and Democrat-appointed alike, seem determined to insulate their institution as much as possible from the poison flowing through the other two branches. In this brave attempt, they are providing an example of how adults behave in a democracy.

More than 40 people set up camp outside the Supreme Court the day before it hears a case about Texas’s abortion clinic regulations. They waited in line through the pouring rain for a chance to sit in the courtroom on March 2. (Jenny Starrs/The Washington Post)

The first sign came in response to the latest challenge to the Affordable Care Act. Obama wants to give all Americans access to contraception. Catholic employers say doing so offends their faith. Attempts at compromise failed, and the Little Sisters of the Poor ended up pleading their case before the court.

The court’s response was, essentially: Seriously? You guys can’t work this out? The administration had agreed that the Little Sisters wouldn’t have to pay for birth control coverage: The charity only had to certify its unwillingness to do so and provide enough information to allow someone else to offer coverage. The Little Sisters said even providing that information violated their conscience.

In a highly unusual move, the justices declined to rule, as though they couldn’t believe they were being asked to issue a major opinion on religious freedom over something so manageable. They ordered the parties to the case to look again for a compromise. Amazingly, all sides of the dispute welcomed the parental intervention.

Last week, in a case that could have riven the country along partisan lines, the justices again found a better way.

Conservatives in Texas had asked them to throw out the rule by which the nation has long apportioned legislative districts — one person, one vote. The challengers said that every district should have not an equal population but an equal number of eligible voters.

As a question of political philosophy, the case was fascinating: Do children merit representation? How about undocumented immigrants, or felons, or people who choose not to register to vote?

But the practical effect was not complicated: A win for the plaintiffs would have been a win for the Republican Party. Maybe it was no surprise, then, that liberal Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the majority opinion, approving the traditional method of counting.

What was striking, though, was the modesty of her opinion: She wrote that one person, one vote is constitutional, but she did not rule out other methods as unconstitutional. And her opinion was joined by Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, making clear that liberals and conservatives on the court can and will work together.

None of this sits well with the poisonmongers, of course. Roberts has been attacked by Sen. Charles E. Grassley (R-Iowa), chairman of the Judiciary Committee, because (before Scalia’s death) Roberts spoke regretfully of the increasing politicization of the confirmation process. And he has been attacked by the left for refusing to call directly for the Senate to confirm Judge Merrick Garland to the court.

Obama has been attacked by both sides, too: by the right, for daring to nominate a successor to Scalia; by the left, because he declined to treat Scalia’s death as an opportunity to mobilize the Democratic base by nominating a liberal firebrand. Instead, admirably, he nominated a superbly qualified judge who would be committed to working with colleagues as the justices are doing this spring.

None of this means the court will always find a route to compromise; the next inflammatory decision could come tomorrow, for all I know. The justices disagree profoundly. Roberts, for example, is suspicious of affirmative action because he sees it as allowing the government to discriminate on the basis of race; Justice Sonia Sotomayor will always be reluctant to limit government’s ability to help victims of past discrimination.

But while remaining faithful to their core principles, the justices are trying to find a way to make their institution work for the good of the country. That’s the definition of democracy, which so many others have forgotten.

Read more from Fred Hiatt’s archive, follow him on Twitter or subscribe to his updates on Facebook.