MTV star Jenelle Evans publicly confirmed she was single over the weekend. According to a June 1 report by OK! Magazine, the Teen Mom 2 star stepped out without her engagement ring days ago — just after joining the dating website Tinder.

“[The MTV star] and a gal pal were spotted out in Myrtle Beach, SC this weekend where she was not wearing her engagement ring. Jenelle’s been ring-less for quite some time now, but this is the first public appearance she’s made without her ring since her arrest last week. Not surprisingly, it seems like her fight with Nathan and the subsequent charges were the final straw in the relationship.”

As the Inquisitr previously reported, the MTV star was taken into custody last week after turning herself in on charges of a domestic assault. Although the Teen Mom 2 star denied any wrongdoing in since-deleted tweets, she is still facing a charge of assault in regard to an alleged altercation between herself and Griffith, which reportedly occurred last Tuesday. According to the police report, which was shared on Twitter, Griffith suffered visible injuries from the incident.

“Consistent with the victim’s story of the choking and pulling of the shirt, the victim left side of his face also had a slightly red bruising consistent with being slapped or punched. Photographs were taken and will be dropped into the recording drive for further court purposes.”

Also included in the MTV star’s since-deleted tweets were allegations, which claimed Griffith ran over her with his truck. Speaking to fans, Evans said she was ran over — and stated she had eyewitnesses in the area, which has seen the dispute take place. However, during her recent outing, Evans certainly didn’t show any signs of being run over, nor was she limping or walking as if injured.

Evans and Griffith split in early March, but even after their fight, which resulted in Griffith’s arrest, reports swirled regarding a possible reconciliation. Then, days ago, as OK! Magazine reported, the MTV star joined Tinder, with a profile bio offering the following information.

“Surfside area. Graduating in July for Medical Assistant. Mother of 2 boys. Going back to school for Surgical Tech. Want to know more? Ask away.”

For more of MTV star Jenelle Evans, as well as her ex-fiancé, Nathan Griffith, tune into Teen Mom 2 Season 6, when the series premieres on July 9 at 10 p.m. on MTV, and check out the trailer below.

[Photo via Twitter]