Topics: Bowe Bergdahl, don lemon, Editor's Picks, Homeland, Lost, malaysia airlines, Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, Entertainment News

After a critically pilloried third season, Showtime’s “Homeland” needed a little juice heading into Emmy season. And now CNN is providing plenty in the form of its coverage of Bowe Bergdahl, the American prisoner-of-war who was recently freed in a prisoner swap with the Taliban. With a straight face, the network keeps comparing Bergdahl to fictional POW Nicholas Brody of “Homeland.”

For anyone who watched the video of a shaky, ashen Bergdahl being released to American forces, the visual parallels to “Homeland” were certainly hard to miss. But for hard-news CNN to repeatedly compare this real-world news story — one that allegedly led to the deaths of six soldiers looking for Bergdahl, and spurred an angry and vituperative political debate — to a TV show has been bizarre, to say the least. CNN’s Don Lemon invited “Homeland” executive producer Gideon Raff, who also created the Israeli drama on which “Homeland” is based, to discuss the similarities between real life and TV drama. It was the latest tone-deaf misstep in what, for Lemon, has become a career full of them — and an example of just how surreal CNN’s news coverage has become.

“Were you surprised at the parallels between [‘Homeland”s source material, the Israeli show ‘Prisoners of War’] and Bergdahl’s release?” Lemon asked. Raff said that he wasn’t, because of all the research he’d done on prisoners throughout his television career. Mainly, Raff said, his research taught him that prisoners’ “physical and mental condition” is “not so good.”

To say that the Bergdahl case is reminiscent of “Homeland” is the opposite of useful; “Homeland” is a fictional television series about a POW returned to the U.S. after years in captivity and widely regarded as a menace to his country, while Bergdahl is a real human being embroiled in an ongoing diplomatic mess. And the fact that Nicholas Brody, as we learn when he attempts to blow up the vice president, turned to become an anti-American terrorist while in captivity lends Bergdahl comparisons a dangerous tinge of accusation without outright accusing — as happened in a segment on MSNBC’s “The Cycle” in which host Krystal Ball recapped the entire first season of “Homeland,” casually adding that of course Bergdahl wasn’t a confirmed terrorist.