Sen. Mark Pryor is seeking his third term in office. (Photo: Danny Johnston, AP)

AD SPONSOR: National Republican Senatorial Committee

THE RACE: U.S. Senate

STATE: Arkansas

ANALYSIS:

An ad from the National Republican Senatorial Committee claims Sen. Mark Pryor of Arkansas is responsible for "new regulations that cripple job creators, killing Arkansas jobs." On screen, it reads, "Mark Pryor, 55,000 manufacturing jobs lost."

The ad does not mention, however, that manufacturing jobs were in steady decline for several years before Pryor took office, or that most of those job losses occurred during the presidency of Republican George W. Bush.

It's true, according to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, that Arkansas has lost 54,700 manufacturing jobs between January 2003, when Pryor took office, and August 2014, the latest data available. However, manufacturing jobs were in a steady skid long before Pryor joined the Senate. In the two-and-a-half years before Pryor took office, Arkansas lost 30,700 manufacturing jobs. And most of the manufacturing jobs lost while Pryor has been in office — more than 36,000 of the 54,700 — came during Bush's presidency. Presidential administrations write the federal regulations, though legislators often pass laws that require them.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share An NRSC ad says Sen. Mark Pryor is responsible for "new regulations that cripple job creators, killing Arkansas jobs," but fails to mention the decline in jobs before he took office, reports FactCheck.org. Go to USATODAY.com for more.

Whether Pryor – who is being challenged by Republican Rep. Tom Cotton -- is a net regulator or deregulator is a matter of debate.

In 2011, Pryor was co-sponsor of the Senate version of the bipartisan Regulatory Accountability Act, which would have required federal agencies to assess potential costs and benefits of proposed regulations, as well as alternatives. It also would have expanded judicial oversight of agency rule-making. The House version passed, but the Senate bill was never considered.

The Pryor campaign also points to Pryor's work to ease regulations related to oil spills on farms and to exclude farm runoff from some anti-pollution provisions, as well as his vote to protect farmers from Clean Water Act regulations.

The NRSC, meanwhile, cites a number of votes Pryor cast against relaxing various regulations. For example, in June 2012, Pryor voted against a motion to consider a joint resolution to nullify an EPA rule relating to mercury and air toxic standards for utilities. And in November 2011, Pryor voted against a resolution to nullify an EPA rule regarding cross-state air pollution.

The NRSC also points to Pryor's vote for the Affordable Care Act, which it claims will hurt job growth (a claim we looked at in-depth and found independent, nonpartisan experts projected "minimal" impact on jobs); and his 2008 vote to consider a plan to cap greenhouse gas emissions and set up a trading system for companies to buy and sell emissions allowances (though the bill never passed, and therefore could not have affected job losses).

Ultimately, whether one is a net regulator or deregulator is difficult to assess. Both sides can point to examples of laws Pryor has supported that would have resulted in an increase or decrease in federal regulations. However, the ad's suggestion that Pryor's record on regulation is responsible for the loss of 55,000 manufacturing jobs ignores the decline of such jobs in the years before Pryor took office and the fact that most of the 55,000 jobs were lost during the Bush presidency.

By Robert Farley, FactCheck.org

This is an edited excerpt from FactCheck.org's article, "Settling the Dust in Arkansas." Click here to read the entire article and to view citations and links to original sources.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1vBDZHW