Editor's Note: NOLA.com/The Times-Picayune is writing stories on how the front-running Senate candidates can win. This story spotlights incumbent Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu. A story on the path to victory for Republican Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, will run on Thursday.

WASHINGTON - In Jeanerette, Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., told local reporters last week that by working with top Obama administration officials she was able to get the federal government to expedite an order for 44 additional patrol boats produced by Metal Shark Boats, ensuring the company's workers won't lose their jobs.

In the New Orleans area, Landrieu regularly brings up her legislation that got federal loan forgiveness for nearly $400 million in emergency disaster loans to local governments and school systems from hurricanes Katrina and Rita -- averting big tax increases, service cuts or both.

Campaigning in an increasing Republican state and hit constantly with ads criticizing her support of an unpopular president and his signature health law, Landrieu's re-election prospects seemingly hinge on whether she can convince voters that keeping a senior member of the Senate, one who chairs the Senate Energy Committee and an Appropriations Subcommittee, is too important to give up -- even if some voters don't like all her votes.

James Carville, the veteran Democratic political consultant who now teaches at Tulane University, concedes the prevailing view among pundits is that Landrieu, after winning three straight close elections, will finally fall short in 2014.

"I know people are saying you are a Democrat so of course you are going to say she is going to win, but I honestly believe that she can win this race," Carville said said.

The how, he says, is by Landrieu turning the focus toward her centrist, pro-business record and what she can continue to do for the state. "She should say that everybody in Washington is fighting, but I can work with members of both parties to get things done."

Even so, he concedes it's going to be a tough fight for Landrieu to win a 4th term in a state where every other state-wide elected official is a Republican.

Her re-election wasn't helped by revelations that her Senate office had charged taxpayers for charter plane flights that included some campaign events, leading Landrieu to order an internal investigation that resulted in her campaign reimbursing taxpayers $33,000 for those flights. Moreover, a new poll by the LSU Public Policy Research Lab saying Republicans are more motivated to vote than Democrats this year isn't good news for Landrieu.

And Republicans are continuing to bring up Landrieu's residency in Washington D.C. Rich Masters, who worked on previous Landrieu campaigns, said that charge is going to be a hard sell because anyone who is a parent understands her desire not to be an absentee parent on days the Senate is in session and know of her family's long service in the state.

In 2008, Landrieu for the first time in her three runs for the Senate won a majority of votes in Jefferson, Plaquemine and St. Bernard parishes, no doubt fueled in part by her success, with other Louisiana lawmakers, of getting substantial post-Katrina funding to the region.

A strong turnout in New Orleans, which she carried 84 percent of the vote in 2008 and winning, or at least staying close in Jefferson, Plaquemine and St. Bernard, could help her surprise the pundits and keep her Senate seat.

In Baton Rouge, which Landrieu carried with 57 percent of the vote over Republican John Kennedy in 2008, the senator is going to have a hard time holding that margin -- with her top challenger, Rep. Bill Cassidy, a long-time resident and physician. But she'll need to break even.

In Lafayette, Landrieu lost 54 percent to 44 percent to Kennedy, better than her 59 percent to 41 percent deficit in the 2002 runoff against Republican Suzanne Haik Terrell. She's counting on her chairmanship of the Energy Committee improving her prospects in the area's energy sector, though it's not certain her domination in energy-related campaign contributions will carry over to strong support from rank-and-file oil-field workers.

In 2002, a tough election for a Democrat given that Republican President George W. Bush had 75 percent favorable ratings after his response to the 2001 terrorist attacks, Landrieu prevailed. Her win was boosted by winning some conservative rural parishes in part because her staff discovered an article in the Mexican press about a Bush administration plan to allow more sugar imports from Mexico.

Landrieu lashed out at the plan, saying she was in the best position to fight it. Republican hopes for a strong Bush administration denial never materialized.

Terrell, who was state elections commission when she ran against Landrieu in 2002, and lost the runoff, said Republicans shouldn't assume that because of the unpopularity of President Barack Obama, and the Affordable Care Act, which Landrieu supported, that victory is inevitable.

"Mary is a known quantity," Terrell said. "She has had the opportunity to define Cassidy and he has not been able to define her. People who do not like her know what she stands for but they do not know what he stands for; just what he is against?

"While negative campaigns are effective, it will be more effective if they know what the alternative is ... the people that they need to pull out to vote for Cassidy are toss up voters who do not vote straight party lines and those voters do not know who Cassidy is."

The prevailing logic is Landrieu's re-election hopes hinge on her winning the primary outright, securing more than 50 percent of the vote and avoiding a December runoff, presumably against Cassidy, her top Republican challenger.

"Landrieu has to be worried that in recent polling she has not come close to reaching the 50 percent mark," said Brian Brox, a Tulane University political scientist. "Her best path to reelection is to win outright in the primary on November 4. If she is forced into a runoff she will not have the benefit of two Republican candidates splitting the conservative vote. In addition, a runoff in December will have low turnout, and only the most extreme partisans will likely participate."

University of New Orleans Political Scientist Edward Chervenak said Landrieu needs strong turnout by voters who supported President Obama in 2008 and 2012, even though Obama lost the state by large margins in both contests.

"She's going to have to convince the Obama voters who showed up for his two presidential elections to show up for her midterm election," Chervenak said. "This translates into getting young people, minorities, and single women who supported Obama to turnout for her upcoming election. That's not an easy task since they don't typically vote in midterm elections."

She'll also have to carry over her tradition of crossover votes, such as in 2008, when she picked up the votes of about 200,000 people who cast presidential ballots for Republican John McCain over Barack Obama.

Her best shot in a runoff would be if the Senate majority is already determined. If Democrats are assured of another majority, she can ask voters why in the world they'd want to vote out the chair of the Energy Committee. If the Republicans have already won the majority, she can argue that as the top Democrat on the Energy Committee she can still do plenty for the state, while helping keep check on extreme GOP policies.,

If control of the Senate is still at stake Dec. 6, Landrieu might have a harder time -- given that a lot of voters seem motivated to bring an end to Democrat Harry Reid reign as majority leader.