Another Chance for Mental Health Parity and Cost Containment

With newly proposed mental health parity requirements, Medicaid is joining the decades-long payment reform effort that has sought to boost access to mental health services.

As cost-consciousness spreads throughout the healthcare industry, awareness is rising about the steep price of unmet mental health needs.

Statistics compiled at the Arlington, VA-based National Association on Mental Illness illustrate the crushing cost impact on healthcare providers and payers.

For youths and adults under the age of 45, mood disorders such as depression are the third most common cause of hospitalization.

Serious mental illness has been linked to many chronic diseases, with the life-expectancy of the seriously mentally ill 25 years lower than other Americans

About half of all chronic mental health conditions start by age 14, but years pass before care is provided at higher costs than early interventions.



For the healthcare industry, part of the solution to this daunting economic problem is mental health parity, a visionary goal for healthcare coverage that policy makers in Washington began pursuing in earnest nearly two decades ago.

How Payers Are Curbing Behavioral-Health Cost Drivers

The tentative first step toward parity in group insurance coverage began during the Clinton administration, with passage of the Mental Health Parity Act of 1996. The law's requirements included equating the coverage caps for physical health conditions and mental health conditions, but huge parity gaps remained, such as exempting substance abuse services from provisions of the law.

A leap forward came in 2008, when President George W. Bush signed the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act. The law embraced and extended the provisions of the 1996 legislation, including coverage parity requirements for substance abuse services.

In 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act introduced mental health parity requirements to the individual insurance market.

The latest advancement for mental health parity came this month, with federal officials proposing mental health parity requirements for Medicaid and the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP). "The goal is to align as much as possible with the approach taken in the final [federal mental health parity] regulation to create consistency between the commercial and Medicaid markets, according to a Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services fact sheet released with the proposed rules.

The proposed rules include two crucial provisions: