BOULDER — With 3 or 4 miles left in the 2001 Ironman World Championship, Tim DeBoom had a huge lead but was so focused on the sport’s biggest prize that he ran right past his wife without noticing her.

Nicole DeBoom was on the outward portion of the marathon that day in Kona, Hawaii, running her own race. She tried to get his attention, waving her arms in vain, but he missed her because he was determined not to be distracted by those running in the opposite direction.

“Right by her,” Tim recalled last week. “Of course they catch it on the TV coverage. Al Trautwig (said), ‘Oh, he’s going to catch hell for that when he gets home.’ “

It was that kind of single-minded focus that made DeBoom a two-time Ironman world champion — no American has won there since he repeated in 2002 — but after he retired from triathlon there was a hole in his life he had a hard time filling. Only now is he starting to come out of it.

“Getting there, getting much better,” said DeBoom, who was inducted into the USA Triathlon Hall of Fame last weekend. “The cutting back on exercise has been tough. I truly love the feeling of being outside and working out. I’ve been able to cut back the number of hours pretty easily, because my days are filled with other stuff and with my daughter. But I still feel that craving to do something (physical) a couple times a day.

“It’s the same as any other addiction, but people associate it with being healthy. I’m trying to get to that point where I’m healthy. I don’t think racing Ironmans is healthy, I really don’t.”

Adjusting to life after his triathlon career wasn’t just a matter of making do with reduced physical activity.

“I think for four or five years it’s been a struggle to find a passion that would consume him a bit,” Nicole said. “You don’t just create a passion. Somehow something happens and you’ve got a new passion. It’s a hard process to watch someone go through.”

At age 44, Tim has decided to get his degree from the University of Iowa. He left there two decades ago with one semester remaining to focus on triathlon. He’s going to finish up with online classes.

“It will be a nice monkey to get off my back,” DeBoom said. “It was almost shame, where I didn’t tell people I hadn’t graduated from college. Even with everything I accomplished, I found it stupid that I left school.”

Now he takes a camera when he goes on long runs and bike rides. He loves to post pictures of Colorado’s natural majesty on Instagram, seeing it as a photo journal he can share with the world. He has cut way back on the amount of time he spends working out — only “an eighth or a quarter of what I used to do,” he says — and hasn’t been in a swimming pool in almost three years.

“I never thought I would say that, because from the age of 6 to 40, the most time I had spent out of the pool was maybe two weeks,” DeBoom said. “I don’t really miss the black line when I have trails and roads to ride and run. I’m after more of an overall health. It’s become more social. I used to love solo five- to seven-hour rides. Now I really can’t imagine doing that without someone. You’re having fun, but you’re not focused on your heart rate and your watts (power output).”

An Ironman consists of a 2.4-mile swim, a 112-mile bike ride and a marathon run (26.2 miles). It’s not that DeBoom was obsessive, but he was all in.

“Obsessive is maybe the wrong word,” Nicole said. “Tim never came home and talked about triathlon all day. We weren’t that kind of couple. But it was this underlying rule that the workout ruled your life. Holidays weren’t traditionally holidays like we knew them growing up. We went for four- or five-hour bike rides. The workout ruled.

“To that extent, it was sort of obsessive. The job never ended.”

Nicole’s post-triathlon transition was easier because of the successful sportswear company she founded, Skirt Sports.

“For a while I was like, ‘Oh, great, that will happen to me too, I’ll have something,’ ” Tim said. “What I didn’t realize was how she was one of the rare and lucky ones that found something that she probably enjoys even more than racing.”

Tim was 31 when he won his second Ironman. The following year, he was in contention for another win when he was felled by excruciating back pain late in the race, later to discover he had passed a kidney stone. He kept going back to Kona in subsequent years, competing until he was 41.

“Once you have success at Kona, that’s the only race that matters,” DeBoom said. “That’s all your sponsors care about, that anybody cares about. I could have skipped the whole season, shown up at Kona, had a good race and would have been fine. Then you have a bad race and all of a sudden that’s all anybody remembers. And that’s all you remember.”

It was tough for Nicole to watch.

“His career never rebounded to the point of winning again,” Nicole said. “It was kind of a very slow decline for a good five to 10 years.”

Recently the DeBooms moved from north Boulder to south Boulder to put a little distance between them and the elite triathlon scene there. He still loves to work out, but he calls it exercise, not training. There is freedom in that. It’s apparent in the pictures he takes.

He’s not sure what comes after he gets his degree. He may become a physician’s assistant or go to work for a clinic that combines sports medicine and performance training.

“I’m starting Act 2,” DeBoom said. “I’m looking for an Act 2 that will be my book, that will be my story.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer