ISTOCK

MARK MURO: Regional tech leaders and city economic-development people keep asking: How can we keep more of the beneficial growth of homegrown innovation gains local?

Too often, technology insights fly out of local research centers and university labs and into the global production system with no stop for job creation anywhere near to home. The result is a missed opportunity—both for nations and local places but also tech companies, which may be losing out on the powerful synergies of co-located innovation and growth.

However, a recent workshop I led at Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee suggested there may be another way. Populated by two dozen technology, business and regional economic-development leaders, the session probed the question of what factors allow tech growth to occur near tech innovation. Several insights emerged:

The local ecosystem matters intensely. Even though decisions about where and how to scale up technology innovations are made entirely by individual firms with often a national or global perspective, key local factors matter—and can tip the decision. Local cities or metro areas can become compelling platforms on which to grow as well as innovate if they assemble the right assets, talent, infrastructure and networks.

Local leaders need to listen to the customer. To have a chance to hold on to the commercialization of innovation, places need to understand what tech companies (whether software- or hardware-oriented) really need to stay put with growth. In almost all cases, the need begins with an adequate pool of relevantly trained technical workers, whether software developers or IT-literature machine operators. But it also often includes responsive, practical, scale-up oriented laboratory or university units ready to work on industrial process questions, siting issues or specialized training topics. Would-be scale-up regions need to learn and provide what would allow innovations to stay home and to do that they need to ask the firms—again and again.

Authenticity and true relevance are essential. Ultimately, generic pitches and programs won’t cut it. Tech and advanced manufacturing companies will scale up wherever they can achieve critical, specific objectives. If that place lies near the research center or university out of which their intellectual property came, then they will scale up there. If it doesn’t, they won’t. Which is why local places won’t be able to fake it. To the extent their technical competencies, labor force, cluster attributes and supply chains are truly relevant, growth will occur close to home.

The upshot: Regions very much can “make innovation sticky”—that is, more likely to be locally commercialized. However, success will depend on making sure the local ecosystem caters to what tech companies actually want and need.

Mark Muro (@markmuro1) is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and the policy director of the Metropolitan Policy Program there.

Read the latest Leadership Report.