Hillary Clinton has flip-flopped on free trade, changed her policy on Iraq, renounced key laws signed by her husband and proved unwilling or unable to handle the 3 a.m. phone calls from Benghazi.

Her two signature achievements — HillaryCare, later reborn as ObamaCare, and her management of the State Department — both look like dismal failures.

There is only one attribute left that she can’t bungle, switch sides on or turn into a scandal: having double-X chromosomes. So that’s now what her campaign is about. “Hey, America,” Hillary is saying. “Did you realize I’m a woman?”

She’s got to be the first candidate ever to deploy the motto “Vote for the Skirt!” while wearing a pantsuit.

A canned campaign line she keeps using (rolling it out again on NBC’s “Today” show Monday) is, “Folks want an outsider in this election. Who can be more of an outsider than a woman president?”

It’s the kind of line that kills with the campaign consultants. Yet when When Hillary first arrived in Washington, “Cheers” was still ruling Thursday nights. She has been in town longer than the Capital Grille.

Providing more detail on her fitness for the White House on “Face the Nation” last month, she said, “All these mothers and fathers bring me the place mats with all the presidents, and they bring their daughters, and they say, my daughter has a question for you. And the daughter says, ‘How come there are no girls on this place mat?’ ”

She’s got to be the first candidate ever to deploy the motto “Vote for the Skirt!” while wearing a pantsuit.

Place-mat politics isn’t working for Hillary.

Sure, Hillary stands to do better among women than men — but that’s true of Democrats in general. Men have leaned Republican more than women have, by 12 to 20 points in every presidential election since 2000.

In the three races in which a woman was on the ticket — 1984 and 2008, when Geraldine Ferraro and Sarah Palin were vice presidential candidates, plus I’ll throw in 1992, when Hillary herself was billed as a kind of potential co-president by her husband — the gender gap actually shrank.

More women than men voted Democratic in 1984, 1992 and 2008 by eight, four and 12 points. All other years since 1980, the gap has been at least 14 points.

Hillary’s current gender gap? Six points over Jeb Bush, according to CNN September polling.

Clinton’s explanation on “Today” to Savannah Guthrie of why being a woman was so important to the presidency was this: “We live that in a much more real, you know, day to day way, and I will bring all of those, you know, feelings and experiences with me to the White House.”

So, women’s lives are “more real” than men’s. Uh-huh. Even if this were true, the woman seen as PoliBot 3000, with an uncanny cladding of synthetic skin over her steel endoskeleton, is the wrong person to convince voters she is “real” and in possession of “feelings.”

Contrary to received opinion, playing the gender card is nothing new for Hillary.

Hillary first started attracting the attention of the American public in March of 1992, when California Gov. Jerry Brown, who was running for president against Bill Clinton, asked perfectly valid questions about the conflict of interest in her family: She represented clients who also had business with her husband, then the state’s governor, in the Whitewater scandal that wound up sending several Clinton cronies to jail.

Her tack was to frame the question as sexist.

“I suppose I could have stayed home and baked cookies and had teas,” she said, “but what I decided to do was to fulfill my profession which I entered before my husband was in public life.” As if she couldn’t possibly have been the kind of lawyer who did not represent sleazy felons who were lobbying her husband.

The tactic worked to distract the press, though not the way she intended. As Jeff Cohen and Norman Solomon wrote in a column for the liberal group Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting, stay-at-home-moms were insulted.

“Within a week, Whitewater was virtually dead as a campaign issue. With press attention shifting to…discussions about ‘cookies’ and ‘teas’ — the issue of candidate Clinton’s links to corporate power in Little Rock disappeared.”

Hillary has been a shady dealmaker for almost as long as she has been a woman, and the one persona has sunk in a lot more deeply than the other.

“Clinton is clearly more comfortable than the average person with violating norms and operating in legal gray areas,” wrote Matthew Yglesias on Vox.com this week. “She can’t credibly portray herself as the kind of outsider who’s going to clean up a broken and corrupt Washington system, because she is very much a part of that system and has been for years.”