South Carolina governor Nikki Haley with Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) on stage at a presidential campaign event for Rubio at the Marriott hotel in Columbia, S.C., Feb. 19, 2016. Also with them was Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.) and Sen. Tim Scott (R-S.C.). (Eric Thayer/The New York Times)

South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley described as “scary” the prospect of a Donald Trump nomination as the Republican candidate for president. Speaking to George Stephanopolous on ABC’s This Week on Sunday morning, the second-term governor also compared the New York billionaire to Democratic front-runner and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

“There are two presidential candidates right now undergoing legal issues: Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. There are two presidential candidates right now not disclosing information: Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump,” Haley said.

“We’re seeing a lot of things with Donald Trump with no answers.”

Earlier, on CNN’s State of the Union, Trump made more news by failing to distance himself from the endorsement of former U.S. Rep. David Duke, a white nationalist and former Ku Klux Klan grand wizard, and the support of groups like the KKK.

“I don’t know anything about David Duke,” Trump told CNN’s Jake Tapper. “I know nothing about white supremacists.”

Haley said it would “impossible” for Trump to win in the general election, and called on the Republican candidate to release his tax returns. She continued to hit Trump over his many controversial remarks since jumping in to the presidential race.

“Donald Trump is everything we teach our kids not to do in kindergarten,” Haley said. “We have seen behavior over and over again that is just unacceptable.”

Haley defended Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, who has gone after Trump in recent days over a whole host of issues, saying the man she endorsed in South Carolina was right to go negative.

“I think what we saw from Marco is what we tell our children also: If a bully hits you, you hit back,” Haley said.

Haley, frequently mentioned as a potential vide presidential candidate on the GOP side, said Rubio’s rise since New Hampshire is built on the kind of voters Republicans ought to be courting heading into the 2016 general election.