SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump tweeted that Hillary Clinton wants to disarm average Americans–while living her life surrounded by security who are “fully armed.”

Trump tweeted, “Crooked Hillary wants to get rid of all guns, and yet she is surrounded by bodyguards who are fully armed.” He suggested Clinton needs to apply the same rule to herself that she seeks to apply to everyday Americans and proclaimed, “No more guns to protect Hillary!”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Crooked Hillary wants to get rid of all guns and yet she is surrounded by bodyguards who are fully armed. No more guns to protect Hillary! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 21, 2016

Trump’s tweet comes the day after he stood in front of thousands at the NRA Leadership Forum in Louisville, Kentucky, where he described Clinton as “the most anti-gun, anti-Second Amendment candidate ever to run for office.”

He added, “And as I’ve said before, she wants to abolish the Second Amendment. She wants to take your guns away.”

Trump said:

Hillary wants to disarm vulnerable Americans in high crime neighborhoods. Whether it’s a young single mom in Florida or a grandma in Ohio, Hillary wants them to be defenseless, wants to take away any chance they have of survival. And by the way, you have men and you have women sitting in an apartment, and outside is tremendous crime–tremendous crime of all kinds–and they need to be protected. And you know, the only way they are going to be able to protect themselves, and if you take that gun away from them, it’s going to be a very unfair situation. And that’s why we are going to call her “Heartless Hillary.”

Trump went on to call for Clinton’s body guards to “immediately disarm” so she can feel the way the defenseless single mom in Florida has to feel on any given night.

AWR Hawkins is the Second Amendment columnist for Breitbart News and political analyst for Armed American Radio. Follow him on Twitter: @AWRHawkins. Reach him directly at awrhawkins@breitbart.com.