PORTSMOUTH – The School Board approved a tentative agreement on a four-year contract with the Association of Portsmouth Teachers Tuesday evening at its meeting at New Franklin Elementary School.

The agreement was approved unanimously after committee member Dexter Legg outlined the cooperative effort it took to complete this contract agreement over nearly two years.

“We spent a lot of time figuring out what we want the district to look like,” Legg said. “We want it to be the best in New Hampshire. The only way to do that is to have the best staff in the classroom.”

One of the more significant changes in the agreement was the change from raises in compensation from a longevity basis to one where raises in compensation are determined by teachers hitting different achievement units, which, according to Legg, better connect with how teachers are doing in the classroom with compensation.

“I feel good that the framework of compensation is consistent with moving the district forward,” Legg said.

Other changes include moving the health care options for teachers from five plans to two, which will save the district money that will be invested back into compensation for teachers.

“They will be consumer-driven health care plans that are in accordance with the Affordable Care Act,” Legg said.

Prior to the roll call vote, School Board Chairwoman Leslie Stevens commended the effort of Legg and board members Tom Martin and Ann Walker on the work done negotiating these terms.

“We’re in a great spot moving forward,” Stevens said.

At the beginning of the School Board meeting, New Franklin Principal George Shea reported to the board regarding the school’s summer learning programs that were instituted last summer.

“We came up with a plan for three summer learning camps for elementary students that were at no cost and with transportation provided,” Shea said, adding that the venture cost about $5,000 and was funded through private donations.

“This was not a summer school,” Shea continued. “We’ve discussed the significance of learning lost during the summer months and the impact it has on students. There’s a lot to be said about the power of momentum.”

The summer programs offered three classes that were Monday-Thursday from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. and were “Track Math,” which focused on the kinetics and math behind athletics; “Comic Book Camp,” which looked at the combination and collaboration of art and writing; and “How Stuff Works,” where students got their hands dirty tinkering with their favorite objects, including computers and vehicle parts.

“Before students can learn, they need a level of engagement,” Shea said. “Boredom didn’t ensue at all.”

Shea, along with New Castle resident Bill Duncan, who was one of the private donors for the program, asked the board to consider funding and expanding the summer learning programs, an idea that the board generally seemed to be interested in pursuing.

“It’s so low cost, it would be ideal if the board could budget the program and make it part of the core mission for years to come,” Duncan said.

Shea said the programs are open to students all across the learning spectrum, but that some high-risk kids were targeted to provide them a summer activity. Altogether 29 students participated, and Shea said that 79 percent of those students entered school in the fall at higher reading levels than the previous year, while the other 21 percent were at the same level.

“We are used to seeing significant drop off during the summer months,” Shea said. “If we can provide experiences, we can activate brains.”

The board said it would appreciate a proposal on how the summer learning program could see itself growing and what type of budget that may entail.

“This could be an inexpensive solution for something people already spend so much money for,” Martin said.

In other news

The School Board unanimously approved the hiring of Anne Salloom as a Latin teacher starting next semester to replace the retiring Joe Arnstein, who teaches Latin and Spanish at Portsmouth High School.