Slide Show

TOKYO — Jun Aoki is not your average real estate developer.

On his company’s website, the photograph that accompanies his profile shows his eyes scrunched up and his mouth open in a laugh. He is wearing a burgundy scarf and a navy sweater with a red-stripe accent rather than the traditional dark suit and white shirt of the Japanese businessman.

“I didn’t like renting,” he wrote in the website’s introduction. “Renting is so strict that it isn’t fun. There is no blank canvas for expressing one’s own personality.”

It was this kind of frustration that led Mr. Aoki, now 39, to take over his father’s company, Maison Aoki, in 2011 and to build one of Tokyo’s most unusual rental properties, Aomame House. Construction began in spring 2013, and it officially opened to residents in March 2014.

Passersby immediately notice Aomame House, which is located in a quiet residential neighborhood in western Tokyo, a 30-minute subway ride from the buzz of the city center. First they see a large community garden, which is owned by the city, and the development’s own communal patio space. Behind is the eight-unit development itself, its four decorative columns rising and intertwining like magic beanstalks. (In fact, Mr. Aoki said he took inspiration for the design from beanstalks, and aomame means blue bean in Japanese.)

The earthquake and tsunami that devastated parts of Japan in 2011 prompted the project.

“After the earthquake, I started thinking about how it can be difficult to live alone,” Mr. Aoki said. “It’s more fun and convenient to live together with others. You can help each other out, and you enjoy life more that way.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He decided that he wanted to build the modern version of a row-house neighborhood, and to do it in Japanese cypress and cedar, rather than the more common concrete, so he could change the internal layout in the future without much difficulty.

Working with Yoshihiko Oshima, an architect with the firm Blue Studio, he eventually settled on a plan that featured a central staircase leading up from the ground floor to a plaza-style space. The apartment entrances open onto this space, so residents see one another come and go, often crossing paths when leaving for work in the morning and returning home in the evening. It has even become a popular hangout when the weather is nice.

Downstairs is another communal space. Built into the patio is a long table with stools and, before moving into the building, the residents all helped to build an outdoor brick pizza oven, which they use for parties. They also planted tomatoes, herbs, blueberry bushes and other edible and ornamental plants in the space along the patio’s perimeter. They work together to care for the plants, which do not belong to any one person or family.

“I wanted to cultivate a community,” Mr. Aoki said, adding that he had been motivated by the work of Le Corbusier. “This is the smallest-sized community, but if the residents enjoy it, their happiness will spread and the entire town will improve.”

Each one-bedroom apartment totals about 60 square meters, or 646 square feet, spread across three floors, and the design is such that the apartments are interlocking, rather than stacks or blocks of space. For example, one family’s kitchen may be directly below another’s bedroom. The units’ large windows look out onto the central staircase and the building’s ground-level entrance. Each unit also has two balconies.

Monthly rents range from 159,000 to 174,000 yen, or about $1,350 to $1,480, rates considered quite reasonable by Tokyo standards.

“When we first moved in, I would feel embarrassed because our neighbors could see into our apartment, so I was always closing the curtains,” said Kenichi Okada, 34, who lives in Aomame House with his partner, Kunie Hiyamizu, 32. “But now that I know everyone I don’t mind if they see me in my pajamas.”

Mr. Okada and Ms. Hiyamizu run a business together, specializing in design and photography, and before finding Aomame House — which is now both their home and their office — they had been looking for a studio space that they could share with others.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We didn’t want to share a house, but we wanted a shared space,” Mr. Okada said. “We wanted to have a connection with the people around us.”

Mr. Aoki, who moved into the development himself with his family, has organized events to cultivate such connections. Before construction started, he held a public festival at the site to mark its groundbreaking, with food, games and other activities.

Once construction began and all the apartments had been spoken for, he had another event for the future residents to choose the finishings for their apartments. They even painted the walls and put up wallpaper together, a concept Mr. Aoki also used at one of his other buildings, Royal Annex, which opened in 2008. Finally, just as residents were beginning to move in, they organized a market, selling food and handicrafts to 350 visitors.

“I always wanted this kind of life but I wasn’t able to have it before,” said Yukie Haguri, 36, another resident. “I have become even better friends with my neighbors than I expected to. It’s a big positive in my life.”

Just as Ms. Haguri finished speaking, Mr. Aoki’s 7-year-old son, Taiga, walked past her living room window on his way home from school. It wasn’t long after hearing him bound up the stairs that he burst into her apartment — the door was unlocked — with a huge smile on his face, exclaiming, “I’m home!”

“You see?” Mr. Aoki said. “This is exactly the kind of place this is.”