With three extraordinary golf courses featuring three unique, award-winning clubhouses, each with its own distinctive ambiance, there’s more to golf at The Club at Cordillera – there’s a lifestyle. To broker that lifestyle, LIV Sotheby’s International Realty (LIV SIR) recently announced their exclusive association with The Club at Cordillera in the Vail Valley.

“The Club is truly a unique opportunity for us to provide all-encompassing real estate services for club members and homeowners at the Cordillera development,” said Dan Fitchett Jr. managing broker of LIV SIR’s Vail Valley, Beaver Creek and Edwards offices. “The elegantly appointed homes located in Cordillera are magnificent and fit naturally within the Sotheby’s International Realty brand. We are proud to represent them.”

LIV Sotheby’s International Realty will serve as the on-site real estate liaison to Club homeowners, providing direct, all-encompassing, real estate services to owners, in addition to providing Cordillera Club members and Club visitor’s access to tour and preview Cordillera listings with ease.LIV Sotheby’s International Realty broker, Eric Wagenknecht, will lead real estate operations for LIV SIR at The Club at Cordillera.

“I am very excited about strengthening the relationship between two of the Vail Valley’s most iconic brands, LIV Sotheby’s International Realty and The Club at Cordillera,” said LIV SIR broker, Eric Wagenknecht. “The unmatched marketing and internationally recognized appeal of the LIV Sotheby’s International Realty organization and the luxury ski and golf lifestyle embodied by the Cordillera experience represent an exciting future for both of these dynamic organizations. I’m honored to play a role in their continued success.”

Each Clubhouse within The Club at Cordillera will feature high definition television screens showcasing local Cordillera listings, in addition to Sotheby’s International Realty listings from around the world, providing Club at Cordillera members and residence owner’s maximum world-wide exposure.

The LIV Sotheby’s International Realty brokerage is the exclusive Board of Regent for the Who’s Who in Luxury Real Estate, and has multiple offices spanning Denver Metro and the surrounding areas, including Boulder, Castle Pines Village, Cherry Creek, Denver Tech Center, Downtown Denver, Evergreen and the resort communities of Breckenridge and Vail.

From three world-class championship golf courses, designed by Jack Nicklaus, Hale Irwin and Tom Fazio, to unparalleled cross country ski trails and access to downhill skiing, The Club at Cordillera offers an unlimited supply of endless beauty and recreation.

Away from the fairways and greens, enjoy swimming, tennis, fitness, incomparable dining, and an infinite array of other social activities.Excited to bring infinite residential and lifestyle options to those new and familiar to The Club at Cordillera, LIV Sotheby’s International Realty is pleased to announce their exclusive association with the Club.

“We are pleased to have begun a relationship with a partner and brand like LIV Sotheby’s International Realty,” said The Club at Cordillera, general manager, Mike Henritze. “We feel like our company and brands will complement each other very well. The future is promising.”

For more information, contact LIV Sotheby’s International Realty managing broker, Dan L. Fitchett, Jr., Vail Valley, Beaver Creek and Edwards, at 970-471-1208. For membership inquiries, please contact The Club at Cordillera director of club membership, Suzanne Morgan, at 970-470-9415. Visit LivSothebysRealty.com.