NYPD can always be counted on to fight real crime.

New York City police line up on Jan. 4 after the funeral service for officer Wenjian Liu. (Photo: Eric Thayer, Getty Images)

New York City police respond to approximately 4.5 million calls for service a year, ranging from the mundane to the most detestable crimes imaginable, and 80,000 involve weapons.

The vast majority of those calls were handled with professionalism and respect and ended successfully. With all that opportunity for something to go horribly wrong, there were only two questionable fatalities. While any death that results from police action is regrettable and should be thoroughly investigated, the numbers speak for themselves.

OUR VIEW: Slowdown disrespects profession

If someone had asked me 25 years ago whether murder in New York could be reduced by 85%, I would have said that was crazy. I was wrong. The NYPD did it while showing remarkable discipline and restraint. In 2013, the NYPD had record-low firearm discharges.

When protesters chant, "What do we want? Dead cops. When do we want them? Now," and carry signs equating the police department with the Ku Klux Klan, it's offensive and demoralizing. There are far more effective and less destructive ways to argue a point.

When police officers first turned their backs on Mayor Bill de Blasio inside the hospital where officers Wenjian Liu and Rafael Ramos had been brought after being shot to death, it was not a calculated political statement but a gut reaction to the mayor — who they feel does not respect them — being in the same room with two of their beloved dead brothers.

Recently, the mayor called the NYPD the greatest police department in the world. He was a few weeks too late. He should have touted our extraordinary accomplishments when the anti-police rhetoric grew out of control. Instead, by his words and deeds, he clearly sided more with the protesters.

As for the work slowdown, the NYPD can always be counted on to fight real crime, as evidenced by the two officers shot in the Bronx last week while stopping an armed robbery. I concede there is a slowdown on writing summonses, but I never heard citizens complain about not getting enough parking tickets. Enjoy it while it lasts.

I woke up early on Christmas morning unable to sleep. The deaths of officers Ramos and Liu hit me especially hard, and I felt the need to be with them, so I drove out to Brooklyn to the scene of the shooting. I expected to be alone while I paid my respects, but I wasn't. A non-stop stream of teary-eyed cops and civilians, some with young children in tow, placed flowers and lit candles.

It was a Christmas morning I'll never forget. I just wish it hadn't taken the death of these two brave men for the city to come together and realize what a difficult and dangerous job a police officer has.

Steve Osborne is a retired NYPD lieutenant and author of the forthcoming bookThe Job: True Tales from the Life of a New York City Cop.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1IDccKy