Republican Congress moves to defund Planned Parenthood

America's biggest abortion corporation has so many tendrils in We the People's paychecks that it's hard to determine all the steps necessary to uproot it. But that is not stopping the new Congress from moving to end public funding of Planned Parenthood. LifeNews reports that 80 members of Congress have reintroduced the "Title X Abortion Provider Prohibition Act" for consideration in the House of Representatives. The head sponsor is Rep. Diane Black (R-Tenn.), a regular leader on pro-life and freedom-of-conscience legislation.

As Black puts it, "[t]his legislation would simply clarify the original intent and spirit of the law to ensure that Title X federal funded grants will no longer be awarded to 'health care' providers that fail to protect life by providing abortions." Title X is not the only vehicle by which Planned Parenthood uses the government to dip into Americans' income. The corporation received $655,000 in public money to be a "navigator" for Obamacare in 2013, plus $75 million through the Personal Responsibility Education Program (PREP), a creature of Obamacare, allegedly for sex education. (Parents should keep in mind that even if this money is on the level, Planned Parenthood's version of sex education is horrifying.) In its latest annual report, Planned Parenthood quantifies the total tax money it received at $528.4 million, or 41% of its total revenue, with 327,653 abortions committed. At a conservative estimate of $451 for the average abortion, that makes about $150 million in revenue directly from ripping children apart. The chances of Barack Obama signing the Title X Abortion Provider Prohibition Act, assuming it gets through the Senate, are nil. Candidate Obama in 2008 promised Planned Parenthood that if he was elected, the "first thing I'd do" is sign the Freedom of Choice Act, a bill to "codify Roe v. Wade" by nullifying every abortion restriction in America. At another speech to Planned Parenthood in 2013, Obama, the first sitting president to officially address that corporation, closed by saying, "Thank you, Planned Parenthood, and God bless you." But the strategy of daring Obama to veto a host of pro-life bills could pay dividends. Americans out of the loop on this issue may then get the opportunity to see how radically pro-abortion Obama is, and perhaps get a primer on how science indisputably shows that pre-born children are in fact innocent human beings. Those who are for snuffing out those lives, be it by vacuum aspirator (pictured), by forceps, or by poison, should be given every possible opportunity to defend that position. Drew Belsky is American Thinker's deputy editor. Contact him at drew@americanthinker.com, and follow him on Twitter @DJB627.