As somebody who really loves to sleep, I was intrigued by a study in the journal Science this month that strongly suggests an inverse relationship between the quality and quantity of your snoozing and your risk of developing dementia in later life.

"Sleep puts the brain in another state where we clean out all the byproducts of activity during the daytime," said study author and University of Rochester neurosurgeon Maiken Nedergaard. Among these toxins flushed out overnight is beta-amyloid protein, the substance that sticks together in those plaques that are found in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients.

Neuroscientists are still in the middle of a high-stakes debate about whether the Alzheimer's-afflicted brain is making too much beta-amyloid, or — a more subtle possibility — producing normal amounts that just aren't efficiently eliminated. The University of Rochester study offers strong evidence that it's the brain's ability to take out its own trash that will prove crucial in treating and preventing the disease.

"There's been a number of sleep studies that have shown how absolutely critical sleep is to our health," says Michael W. Hoffmann, director of the Stroke and Cognitive Neurology Program at James A. Haley VA Hospital, and a consultant in cognitive neurology at Sarasota's Roskamp Institute. "Even one hour's loss of sleep in mice causes a buildup of amyloid in the brain."

Hoffmann will give a talk on "Sleep Evolution, Architecture and Its Critical Role in Brain Health," from 9 to 10:30 a.m. Nov. 15 at the Community Foundation of Sarasota County. The lecture is sponsored by Sci-Brain, a for-profit brain health venture affiliated with Roskamp; Hoffman serves as its medical director.

Ask this neurologist why he's so interested in sleep, and he immediately takes you back millions of years to the plains of Africa.

"If you look at your sleep cycles, there are five different stages that we cycle through over 90 minutes, for about six cycles a night," he says. This "sleep architecture," he explains, probably "relates to a tradeoff between the best possible sleep and predator detection."

Monkeys and baboons, Hoffman points out, sleep high up in trees or on the edges of cliffs to lessen their chances of becoming a midnight feast.

"We were able to improve on that when we figured out how to make a fire and sleep in groups, and make that tree-to-ground transition," he says. "But we still see the evolutionary remnants of our heritage in our Stage Two sleep cycle — when we're very easily aroused."

Getting past that stage six times a night is essential, Hoffman says.

"If you don't get enough sleep, you don't prune your brain; you don't wash out the garbage," he says. "This is particularly critical in teenagers; they need 91/2 hours of sleep a night, and they're not getting it."

(School board members who insist on early hours for high school students, are you listening?)

Hoffman's message may be sweet to those of us who fall asleep instantly and get up with the sun. And he agrees that keeping your body clock in synch with the earth's rotation is the optimal approach. But those whose sleep is troubled have options, he says — some of them simple.

"We preach that alcohol is healthy," he says, "And it is if you have one or two drinks. But many people have more, and it interferes with their sleep architecture. Cutting back from three to two drinks a night can rectify that for so many people."

He concedes it's not easy to convince people to change their health habits. That's why he likes to romance his patients with the fascinating neuroarcheology of sleep.

"Once people get told an interesting story of how things happened and evolved, they're much more likely to follow the recommendations that we make," he says.

To hear more of Dr. Hoffman's bedtime stories on Nov. 15, call Dee Newberry at 556-9900, or email dee@scibrainhealth.com.