Boys Basketball: Rochester Lourdes ends Bombers' surprise run

Cannon Falls' Ryan Dirckx (right) tries to drive around a Rochester Lourdes defender during the first half of Saturday's Section 1AA-West championship game at the Mayo Civic Auditorium in Rochester. Dirckx had a team-high 12 points in the Bombers' 49-42 loss. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

Cannon Falls' Jordon Flemmons (13) gets swarmed by Rochester Lourdes defenders Noah Hillman (32) and Nick Hanson during the first half of Saturday's Section 1AA-West championship game at the Mayo Civic Auditorium in Rochester. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

ROCHESTER – Cannon Falls had to run through the gantlet of the best teams in Section 1AA-West. The Bombers already took out No. 3 seed Dover-Eyota and No. 2 seed Byron, and for 24 minutes of Saturday’s West sub-section championship, Cannon Falls was tied with top-seeded Rochester Lourdes.

But after battling with the sub-section’s best for the past week, the Bombers finally ran out of steam. With the duo of James Ustby and Nick Hanson pounding the ball inside, the Eagles advanced to the section final with a 49-42 victory at the Mayo Civic Auditorium.

“We were a little bit out of gas,” said Cannon Falls head coach Josh Davisson. “The guys have played hard the last week-and-a-half, and they competed well today.”

Even with Lourdes controlling the pace of the first half with its strong defense, Cannon Falls managed to nearly go shot-for-shot, trailing 21-18 at the half.

“You know what to expect with Rochester Lourdes. Against them, you have to take care of the basketball,” Davisson said. “They make you work for everything you get.”

The Bombers managed to tie the game at 31-31 with 12 minutes, 25 seconds to play following a three-point play from freshman guard Ryan Dirckx, who had eight of his team-high 12 points in the second half.

“He certainly doesn’t play like a freshman,” Davisson said of Dirckx. “He’s come a long way this year.”

Lourdes’ inside presence proved invaluable in helping the Eagles pull for a 38-33 lead. The Bombers never got closer than four the rest of the way. Ustby provided a game-high 19 points while Hanson scored 15 in the victory.

“They did a nice job with their roll guys Nick and James. Both guys can get to the hoop when they want to and they’re like a bull in a china shop,” Davisson said. “We had a hard time matching up with that. They were a little much for us.”

Tanner Carlson had 10 points and five rebounds for the Bombers, who finish the year at 10-18 overall. Jordon Flemmons finished with six points. Kyler Banks and Zach Siebenaler each tallied five points, with Banks hauling in four rebounds.

“We found a path to get here (to the sub-section final), it’s just not the one you’d want to choose,” Davisson said. “Credit to (the players) for not getting down when we were losing earlier in the year.”