ENLARGE Roma captain Francesco Totti celebrates scoring a penalty against Inter Milan on Saturday as teammate Alessandro Florenzi takes a ride on his back. European Pressphoto Agency

On a blindingly sunny day last August, James Pallotta, the Roma ASR 1.07 % owner, watched his team go through its preseason routine on a college campus in suburban Boston. He reflected how, after focusing on attacking players, his team was trying to be more balanced, an approach that would hopefully yield better results.

Almost two months into the Italian season, the numbers suggest he's been thoroughly vindicated.

Roma, a club that many bookmakers rated as only the seventh best in Serie A when the season began, is off to its best start ever, having won all seven of its games. Nobody wants to get too excited, but of the seven teams that have won their first seven matches to start a Serie A season, just one, Inter in 1966-1967, failed to win the title.

What's more, Roma has scored 20 goals this season, at a clip of almost three a game. In the top five European leagues, only Barcelona—which, along with Atletico Madrid is also enjoying a perfect season so far—has done better, with an average of 3.5 per game.

But we knew Roma could score: last year, despite a sixth-place finish, it notched 71 goals. That was just two off the league's high scorer, Napoli.

The remarkable bit of the turnaround has been defensively. Roma has conceded just once, proving to be more watertight than anyone else among Europe's elite leagues. Contrast this with last season, when only three of the 20 teams in Italy's Serie A allowed more goals.

Now, it's true that before Saturday night's 3-0 away win at Inter, Roma's schedule had been somewhat soft, apart from the derby against crosstown rival Lazio.

But it's equally true that when you compare fixtures year on year, the improvement has been staggering. Against the five opponents they've faced this season (the other two were newly promoted clubs) Roma has accumulated 15 points. Last year, in the corresponding fixtures, it managed just four.

So what's behind the turnaround?

Certainly not massive spending in the summer. Roma sold players for a total of $140 million—among them, pricey stars such as defender Marquinhos and forwards Erik Lamela and Dani Osvaldo —while shelling out close to $90 million on newcomers. The positive net spend is impressive, given the results. It suggests that rather than buying big, Roma bought smart.

Dutch midfielder Kevin Strootman, a $22.5 million pickup from PSV Eindhoven is a case in point.

Big, strong and tireless, the 23-year-old Strootman is the kind of guy who will only appreciate in value. He was pursued by a number of top clubs, but Roma got the deal done early, probably saving itself a few million in the process.

It was a similar story with the French-born Moroccan central defender Mehdi Benatia.

A former youth standout who lost his way a bit, Benatia had resurfaced at provincial club Udinese where, over the past three seasons, he had quietly established himself as one of the better central defenders in Europe. Roma snapped him up almost as soon as the transfer window opened for a very reasonable $18 million.

The real value-added seems to have come from Roma's new boss, the Frenchman Rudi Garcia.

His appointment itself was criticized among the "what-have-you-done-for-me-lately" brigade. In 2010-2011 he guided Lille to the French League and Cup double, while playing some sparkling football. But after that victory Lille slipped to third and then sixth and he was no longer flavor of the month.

In fact, Lille's decline probably had more to do with the fact that his squad was gutted as his star players ( Eden Hazard, Mathieu Debuchy, Yohan Cabaye, Moussa Sow and Gervinho) were sold and replaced with lesser players.

Garcia continued to raise eyebrows in preseason. First, he urged Roma to sign Gervinho. The Ivorian forward had excelled for him at Lille, but had been a bust at Arsenal in the previous two years. With a hefty contract, the 26-year-old wasn't exactly cheap either at $10 million. And yet, reunited with his old mentor, Garcia, he's been devastating this season.

But it was Garcia's approach to preseason training that was a real shock.

Italian clubs, more than most, are known for their summer boot camps, where players are pushed to physical limits in an attempt to build up the stamina required to last the season. Indeed, Garcia's predecessor, Zdenek Zeman, used to revel in making his players run up and down the stadium steps, Bear Bryant-style.

Garcia, who has a background in fitness, opted instead for a less-is-more approach. His preseason camp only lasted nine days and his weekly training schedule is extraordinarily light by Serie A standards—conditioning is only done on Wednesdays.

And yet it seems to be working. It's not just Roma's results. It's also the fact that 70% of the club's goals this season have come in the second half, suggesting the team stays strong while the opposition flags.

The new manager has also done a sterling job at keeping a lid on controversy and getting homegrown veteran stalwarts like Daniele De Rossi and Francesco Totti —who between them have 37 seasons' and 1,105 games' worth of service to the club—to buy into his methods. And that's something which, over the years, has been crucial to anyone wishing to manage this club.

The recipe for success obviously goes well beyond this. Roma had arguably the second best squad in Serie A last season and underachieved. This year, perhaps the side is overachieving.

But few would have expected it to reach this level so quickly or Garcia to have such an impact.