Hillary Clinton's first week after announcing her presidential candidacy has featured the former first lady and secretary of state attempting to peel back her reputation as an entitled and inevitable candidate. Melina Mara/The Washington Post

TGIF, the 108th day of 2015 and the 54th year since 1,400 Cuban exiles landed in the island nation’s Bay of Pigs, a hapless attempt to overthrow Cuba’s El Presidente, Fidel Castro. It’s also the third month, to the day, since President Obama delivered a brief speech essentially declaring that the Cold War was over, the U.S. won and it was time to normalize relations with Cuba. And it’s the sixth day since the president shook hands with Castro’s successor, Raul Castro, at a Latin American summit; he followed that gesture by recommending Cuba be removed from the list of nations that sponsor terrorism -- the second step towards opening up bilateral trade. Here’s your Three-Minute Briefing, all the News You Can Use in 180 seconds or less:

Whitewash: When Obama swept into the White House in 2008, it was a triumph heralded across the globe, evidence America had transcended, sort of, its race problem and elected an African American Democrat -- twice, ultimately. But Bloomberg Politics’ Dave Weigel reminds us that Obama’s brown skin, not his helpful policies, caused white, rural, working-class voters to flee from the party they’d embraced for generations and either vote GOP or sit out the next two election cycles. Now, they’re really, really Ready for Hillary Clinton to replace “the black guy” and finally assume her rightful place as their champion. So much for color-blind liberalism (see below).

Black Power Outage: Clinton’s got a race problem of her own, writes The Nation’s Dani McClain: even though her husband, former President Bill Clinton, at one point was widely known as the first black president, African American voters have rethought that designation after looking more closely at his record (“ mend it, don’t end it,” anyone? Or maybe a Sister Souljah moment?) and spending six years with the real thing. Along with the fact that some of her dog whistles from 2008 still echo, Hillary Clinton’s got work to do if she wants to show she’s not taking the black vote for granted -- and that’s a big “if” (see above).

Duuuuude: Fresh off his 2014 re-election, and a star turn (and a straw vote win) at the big Conservative Political Action Conference meeting in February, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker looked like the fresh-faced slayer of Hillary Clinton that Republicans had longed for. But a new Bloomberg poll shows that, if the presidential election were held tomorrow and Walker and Clinton were the nominees, Clinton would leave him in the dust -- in Wisconsin.

Il Papa and Mother Earth: First he condemned wealth inequality, then he helped Obama broker a deal to bring Cuba in from the Cold War. Now, Pope Francis, the Action Pontiff, is going to hold a climate-change summit in Rome later this month, framing it as the defining moral issue of our time. No word on whether he’s set up an exploratory committee to run for president, or whether the Draft Elizabeth Warren people see him as an alternative to push Hillary to the left.

Death and Taxes: There’s been much talk about how Republicans have found religion, so to speak, on wealth inequality and the growing class gap. On Thursday, however, the GOP-controlled House voted to repeal the estate tax, a levy on property -- cash, stock, real estate and the like -- that passes from the deceased to his or her heirs. Republicans say it’s a burden on small businesses, but Dems say it removes a tax burden for the super-rich, and is a way for the GOP to reward their one-percent patrons.

Tweet of the Day:

Cruz, Paul and Rubio, all running for President. Hey, I thought I was supposed to write the horror stories. — Stephen King (@StephenKing) April 16, 2015

Advise and (Future) Consent: So this was unexpected: Jeb Bush, who’s testing the waters for a possible decision about seriously running for president, says his Republican brethren in the Senate should confirm Loretta Lynch, Obama’s nominee to replace Attorney General Eric Holder. But he did it in a kind of measuring-the-Oval-Office-drapes kind of way, declaring that a president (like himself, possibly?) should have the right to choose who he wants in cabinet jobs, and the Republicans should let Holder go, already.

Sexism? Overcame it With My Mind: At a breakfast confab in Washington Thursday, Washington Times columnist Paul Bedard asked guest of honor Carly Fiorina another potential Republican presidential contender, an unusual question served up with some gender topspin. “I’ve never met a presidential candidate with pink nail polish on.” Fiorina, the GOP’s lady candidate for this cycle, walked by the cringe-inducing setup to answer Bedard’s main point: gender bias is everywhere, especially on the campaign trail, but she’s evolved enough where it doesn’t bother her if she pretends it doesn’t exist.

Your Morning Video: A youthful, groundbreaking president changes history by messing with Cuba, and has to explain himself to the press:

Stat of the Day:Percentage of last meals requested by male death-row prisoners that include salad or vegetables: 11. Of those requested by female death-row prisoners: 62 (courtesy of Harper’s Index).

Duly Noted: On this date in 1861, Virginia seceded from the Union and joined the confederacy in the opening of the CIvil War. Four years later, Mary Surratt, a friend of John Wilkes Booth, was arrested and charged in the conspiracy to assassinate President Abraham Lincoln; she was tried, convicted and hanged, the first woman put to death in the U.S. In 1905, the U.S. Supreme Court, in Lochner v. New York, struck down, 5-4, a New York State law limiting the number of hours that bakers could be made to work. In 1970, Apollo 13 astronauts James A. Lovell, Fred W. Haise and Jack Swigert splashed down safely in the Pacific, four days after a ruptured oxygen tank crippled their spacecraft while en route to the moon. In 1993, a federal jury in Los Angeles convicted two former police officers of violating the civil rights of beaten motorist Rodney King; two other officers were acquitted.