Democrat announces run for northern Wisconsin congressional seat

A former labor representative from Wausau has entered the race for Wisconsin's 7th Congressional District seat, currently held by Republican incumbent Rep. Sean Duffy.

Democrat Phil Salamone said he's running because he'd like to see more help for workers.

"I'd like to see (the) minimum wage raised," he said. "I'd like to see some improvements to the (Affordable Care Act), which it could use."

Salamone said the ACA is a step in the right direction, but he believes a single-payer health-care system makes the most sense. He said he also supports free education and scaling back U.S. military involvement in the Middle East. If elected, Salamone said he'd like to improve Social Security by eliminating the cap on taxable income.

According to a biography on his campaign Facebook page, Salamone spent eight years working in the General Motors factory in Janesville, Wis. He then spent two decades as a labor union representative for the AFL-CIO and AFSCME in northern Wisconsin.

Salamone said he currently is a small business owner, and a farm mediator for the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture. According to that agency, its mediators help resolve conflicts over environmental concerns, government programs, agricultural contracts, farm tenant-landlord disputes and other issues.

Salamone has scheduled several campaign kickoff announcements across the district this week, including at 10 a.m. Thursday at the Government Center in Superior.

Duffy is seeking re-election to a fourth term serving the district that includes Northwestern Wisconsin. He was first elected to the seat in 2010, replacing Democrat Dave Obey, who stepped down after 42 years in Congress.

Along with Salamone, Wausau resident Ethel Quisler has filed to run for the seat this year as a Democrat. The Ashland Daily Press reported that Quisler works for Innovative Services, an organization that helps people with disabilities and mental health issues — and that her work experience inspired her to seek public office.

"I believe that government needs to help our citizens have a more equal footing with each other, and not pit people against each other," Quisling told the Daily Press.

Marathon County Board Supervisor Joel Lewis also plans to run against Duffy.

A previously announced Democratic candidate, Minocqua-area businessman, opera singer and cancer activist Kirk Bangstad, dropped out of the race in November, citing an "unsustainable" electoral system that he said would require him to raise at least $1.5 million for the campaign.

Democrat Kelly Westlund of Ashland, who ran against Duffy in 2014, announced last year that she would not run for the seat in 2016.

Wisconsin Public Radio can be heard locally on KUWS-FM 91.3 and online at wpr.org.