WASHINGTON, June 8, 2014 – Are your fiscal conservative views the same as someone who is a religious conservative?

The priorities are different for all types of conservatives. The banner the Conservative tags falls under is not so much a philosophy as an attitude. There is no single set of policies that are universally regarded as conservative.

The meaning of conservatism depends on what is considered traditional in a given place and time. Thus, conservatives from different parts of the world uphold their respective traditions and may disagree on a wide range of issues.

Who among us is a perfect human being? Better yet, who can spin it to their advantage that “they – not you” are the truest of true conservatives? You can try to spin it however you want, he did this, or she didn’t do that. She voted against that, he voted for that.

An all time favorite is “He or She is the closest thing we have to a true conservative” Really?

READ ALSO: Eric Cantor, John Boehner and the House GOP Rebellion



The content of your character speaks volumes about who you truly are. Where do your motives lie and what is your driving force? It doesn’t make your fight any more “conservative” than the next person claiming it.

Are you a birther? Pro-Lifer? Gun clinger? Bible toter? Does it really have to come to blows on what is the most important? So, Joe Conservative doesn’t jump on the birther bandwagon, you throw him under the bus.

You have a degree in Constitutional Law and now you’re the self proclaimed “think tank” for every representative in the United States. Your presidential candidate wasn’t chosen and now you’re on a personal mission to lash out at anyone who speaks against them running again in 2016?’

The hate never ends. It is live and in our faces. The democrats never change their message. We Conservatives have too many chiefs , too many banners, too many self-appointed know it all’s. Too many personal agendas and not enough people to stand together and take back our Republic.

The fight for our beloved Conservatism is vital to preserve our country for the next generation. But to do that, Conservatives need to recognize the my conservatism may not be exactly yours. GOP politicans need to recognize, before they speak, that what the stand to say, and that is picked up by news and social media, many not be the message that best represents an undefined Conservative message.

READ ALSO: GOP vs. GOP – The fight for the soul of the Republican Party



And defining that message – the overall position of the GOP that does not pit one patriot against another – needs to be an immediate goal for the GOP. Say what you will about the Democrats, but you don’t find them arguing over social issues like Marriage Equality, immigration, and abortion.

They don’t have one politican, like Todd Akin, standing up with their personal social viewspoints that become viral sound bytes of derision for the party.

Our main goal is the same. We have to stop the counter-productivity and gear up for the remainder of the 2014 elections and the next presidential election in 2016. No one is asking you to give up your personal stand, but there is too much at stake for things to continue down the road in opposite directions. Be the grown up.

READ ALSO: 2014 Elections: Three things the GOP must do to win



Stand up for the party, speak for the GOP and stop waterboarding the message. But first that message needs to be defined. Because if we don’t know ourselves, how can we battle our opponent?