More Video...

Out-the-door forecast: Expect the sun to fade behind clouds Friday. Also expect cool temperatures. There's an expected chance of spotty Friday afternoon showers. Highs will hang in the upper-50s to near 60 degrees.

Here are the top seven headlines in northcentral Wisconsin to get you out the door for this Friday, Sept. 11, 2015:

1. Friday marks 14 years since the terror attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Family members will read the names of the victims Friday morning in lower Manhattan, New York. The 9/11 Memorial Museum will be open for family members, beginning at 7 a.m. In Shanksville, Penn., people gathered Thursday night to honor the 40 victims who died on United Airlines Flight 93 in a silent tribute with lumanaria. For a list of local events, visit the homepage under "Community Calandar."

2. The White House said the U.S. plans to accept 10,000 Syrian refugees this year. Hundreds of thousands of migrants already arrived in Europe so far this year. Refugees who want to resettle in the U.S. will undergo an intense screening process by the Department of Homeland Security.

3. Democratic Presidential Candidate Hillary Clinton framed women's issues, such as equal pay as economic issues that affect everyone in Milwaukee Thursday night. Clinton also spoke about foreign policy and climate change at the rally. Clinton's speech marked her first trip to Wisconsin since announcing her run for President.

4. In an effort to boost declining poll numbers, Governor Scott Walker continued to promote what he calls his "day one plan." Speaking in Illinois Thursday, Walker said he wants to repeal Obamacare the Iran nuclear weapons on his first day in office if he's elected. Walker said his sons motivated him to join the race for the presidency.

5. Wisconsin's last living Medal of Honor recipient from the Korean Conflict has died. His daughter said Einar Ingman died Wednesday in Tomahawk, Wis. In 1951, President Harry Truman awarded Ingman the Medal of Honor for single-handedly destroying two enemy machine-gun nests after he was shot in the face. Einar Ingman was 85.

6. Educators at the state level considered whether to replace the Badger Exam given to public school students throughout Wisconsin. The Department of Public Instruction hopes to launch a new assessment. called the Wisconsin Forward Exam. The agency said the new exam should be shorter and less expensive than the Badger Exam, and will be offered online. Students will start taking the test next spring.

7. Students in Weston will stay active with help from the Green Bay Packers. The Packers Youth Football Outreach Camp brought practice equipment to the Weston Elementary School as part of a nationwide campaign promoting physical activity among children.The Packers will open the season Sunday in Chicago taking on their rivals the Bears.