Become a fan of the Political Gabfest on Facebook. We post to the Facebook page throughout the week, so keep the conversation going by joining us there. Or follow us @SlateGabfest!

To listen to the discussion, use the player below:

Advertisement



For this week’s Slate Plus bonus segment, the hosts discuss the Alabama Supreme Court’s bizarre move to stop gay marriage in that state—again. Slate Plus members get an ad-free version of this podcast with bonus segments. Visit slate.com/gabfestplus and try it free for two weeks.

On this week’s Slate Political Gabfest, Emily Bazelon and David Plotz discuss the fallout from Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s controversial speech to Congress and the possible scandal surrounding Hillary Clinton’s use of a personal email account in her official capacity as U.S. secretary of state. They also analyze the oral arguments in the King v. Burwell Obamacare case before the U.S. Supreme Court.

Here are some of the links and references mentioned during this week’s show:

Advertisement



Emily chatters about Alix Spiegel and Lulu Miller's wildly popular NPR podcast, Invisibilia, which explores the tangible forces that shape human behavior.

David Plotz chatters about Kavitha Cardoza and Eleanor Greene’s article on other countries’ snow day equivalents.

Slate’s Political Gabfest is coming to Brooklyn on April 8! Doors open at 7:30 p.m. for the live show. If you are a Slate Plus member, you will receive 30 percent off your ticket purchase (use the Upcoming Events tool in the Slate Plus dashboard on the right side of the Slate Plus homepage to receive your individualized discount code). If you’d like to become a Slate Plus member, visit slate.com/gabfestplus.

A Slate Plus Special Feature: The Slate Podcast Endorsement-O-Matic (Almost) every product recommended on every Slate podcast since the dawn of creation.

Topic ideas for next week? You can tweet suggestions, links, and questions to @SlateGabfest.

Join the discussion of this episode on Facebook.

The email address for the Political Gabfest is gabfest@slate.com. (Email may be quoted by name unless the writer stipulates otherwise.