The Eye

'Masters Of Sex' Season 3 SPOILERS: Creator Teases A Time Jump, Plus You Can Now Dress Like The Characters

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : "Masters of Sex" Facebook) "Masters of Sex" season 3 is rumored to return in the summer of 2015.

"Masters of Sex" left off at the end of season two with Bill and Virginia trying their best to keep their clinic up and running and their research on the physiological effects of sex relevant. What direction will the storyline take us in season three?



According to Showtime President David Nevins, we should expect the show to take a time leap in season three (season two ended in 1961). The characters will also be enjoying the success of their research, which is a significant change from where season two left off.



"Last season was kind of a down period for them," Nevin explained. "This season will be [about] fame and celebrity, and the effect of what they've done has started to have on the world."



The show is expected to return sometime in early to late summer 2015. That means fans will also have to wait to see what happens with Flo and Austin and their little sex games, which includes a "Gone with the Wind" act.



Additionally, fans are also determined to see if Libby will finally break out of her proper housewife routine after she cheated on her husband. But the biggest question by far is if Bill and Virginia will finally get together.



While fans eagerly wait for the series to start again, they can still enjoy some of the show's more fashionable items, which can now be purchased online. As racy as the show's plot can be at times, it is equally as stylish.



Men wear their dapper suits while the women stick to sweaters, pencil skirts, cigarette pants and A-line dresses. Naturally, the show also includes some incredible vintage lingerie styles that include high-waisted briefs, satin slips, garter strapped bodysuits and waist clinchers.







SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.