Jack Black appeared yesterday for a Reddit AMA to answer fan questions about his music, his previous roles and his deep belief in Sasquatch.

Jack’s AMA was packed with inquiries from fans who had been dying to see the School of Rock star appear on the popular Q and A format. Black did not disappoint with his responses, with most of the pressing questions engagingly answered by the Tenacious D rock star.

Redditors rushed in to ask Jack about his previous roles, especially Bernie, where Black’s performance was critically lauded by netizens and professional reviewers alike. Redditor jeallybeam asked:

“Hey Jack. I saw Bernie recently and was just amazed at how different your character was from your other films and was absolutely astounded at how great your performance was. So my question is, how does it feel to you to play a serious character in a drama? Was the experience one that you had to prepare a lot for?”

Jack answered:

“You know I didn’t have all that much time because it kinda came together really fast. Richard Linklater gave me the script and I loved it and it was just like, let’s do it. I didn’t have much time to get very in depth in my research but I had an amazing experience. It definitely was one of the highlights of my career. Not that many people saw it, but as an artistic endeavor, it was amazing.”

Another intriguing question came from deadlysin687, who asked if Jack voiced a character in the upcoming zombie game Dead Island 2. Jack, who has had experience with video game voice roles before, quickly denied his participation although he praised the game’s trailer, describing it as the “best” he’s seen:

“I’m looking it up right now…Dead Island 2 trailer. I’m just going to watch this real quick. Is this a video game? Oh my god. It’s a video game. Very real looking! Yeah, it’s not me, but now I’m so into this. I can’t stop watching a trailer. This is not a trailer, this is a short film. Holy sh*t, is he a zombie? I want to see if they got a voice impersonator. Oh my god. This is like the best trailer ever. It’s almost over guys. That’s infuriating. Yeah, I can definitely guarantee that’s a Jack Black impersonator. It sounds like the dude that plays me in the Kung Fu Panda TV show.”

On the subject of Sasquatch, GRXVES asked:

“Do you believe in the existence of Sasquatch?”

Jack Black answered:

It goes without saying, I’m a believer.

That may have been a reference to an episode of Black’s old HBO show, Tenacious D, where he appeared with the band’s other half, Kyle Gass – although we’d like to maintain our belief that he does sincerely believe in Sas.

Read the rest of the AMA here. Jack Black’s next film, Kung Fu Panda 3, brings back Jackie Chan and Angelina Jolie and will be shown in theaters next year.

photo credit: brianjmatis via photopin cc