Throughout the NHL, players and coaches gush about how good goaltenders have become. They’re typically 6-foot-2 or taller and possess among the best vision and most athleticism on the team. Positioning and determination to stay within strict boundaries defines their strength.

For shooters, a highlight-reel shot or a fortunate bounce often is the only avenue to score.

“All the goalies are so good, you have to beat them on perfect shots or rebounds. That’s the only way,” Avalanche forward Matt Duchene said with slight exaggeration.

The goaltenders’ value has increased despite the fact shooters have advanced equipment technology on their side. One-piece stick manufacturers continue to produce revolutionary products that put more whip and zip on shots. Never before have players shot the puck more quickly, faster or with more disguise, and pure skill is at an all-time high.

“I’m just looking at the stick and the curve,” Avs goalie Semyon Varlamov said. “And then I try to, before the shot, make good position, try to get set before the shot and try to stay on top of the crease. That’s it.

“Some goalies say they usually are looking at the eyes or the body control position. I’m always looking at the stick. If you’re going to look at them in the eyes, they might look left and shoot to the right side. That’s not me.”

Tracking the puck always will be a key component for any goalie. But in today’s game, goalies don’t often make the read until the puck has left the stick.

In the past, a closed (downward) stick blade on the puck would suggest a low shot, and an open (upward) stick blade would mean it’s going high — particularly if the puck is on the heel of the stick.

But stick technology has aided in disguising shots.

“Some players have weird shots,” Avs’ second-string goalie Reto Berra said. “Even if the puck is on the heel, it comes straight on the ice.”

Berra says the great puck stoppers such as the Rangers’ Henrik Lundqvist have rare tracking abilities.

“You see Lundqvist playing so deep because he tracks and reads the shots so good,” Berra said. “You have to be really focused and sharp with your eyes to watch the puck on the blade, because at this level, it goes really fast.”

Lundqvist is a relatively small goalie at 6-foot-1, the same listed height as Kings standout Jonathan Quick. They are the exceptions in a league trending toward 6-4 goalies such as Berra. The NHL’s tallest goalie is 6-7 Ben Bishop of Tampa Bay. Minnesota Devan Dubnyk, Arizona’s Anders Lindback and Scott Darling of Chicago are 6-5. The Coyotes’ Mike Smith (6-4) and Lindback make up the league’s tallest goaltending tandem.

Big isn’t always better. Shorter goalies such as Lundqvist, Quick and up-and-coming Avs 6-1 goalie Calvin Pickard might track the puck better because their eyes are closer to the ice, thus they can locate the puck’s trajectory. Varlamov is 6-2.

University of Denver goalie Evan Cowley, a 6-5 draftee of the Florida Panthers, alternates starts with undrafted Tanner Jaillet, who is listed at 5-11 but probably is closer to 5-10. Cowley said he never has seen a goalie track the puck better than Jaillet.

Whatever size of a goalie in net, he’s focused on stopping a slap shot or snap shot. Wrist shots are a thing of the past, primarily because of stick technology that promotes heavy whip on a quick release.

Avs coach Patrick Roy, one of the greatest goalies ever, said in his career, he gave shooters more net to shoot at from his left.

“I always tried to give a bit more on the glove side than on the blocker,” said Roy, who is 6-2. “I’m not saying I was cheating, but I felt that it was easier for me to make saves on my glove side than on my blocker side. I’m not saying I was weaker on the blocker side than on the glove side, but I felt that it gave me a little bit of an idea where the players were going to shoot. This is how I was playing my angle. And then only on short side, I always tried to give the far side as much as possible.”

Avs forward Jarome Iginla, who is approaching 600 career goals, said disguising a shot is key to scoring in the NHL.

“If you can come up with a little different release or shoot it through traffic or turn your blade over — anything to get them to try to move in a little bit different direction — you’re trying it,” he said.

Versatility is also a must, which is why goalies typically don’t study shooting habits from a particular player. Berra says he rarely anticipates what a shooter will do.

“Most goalies I talk to — especially about shootouts — they like to just react because they don’t want to have something in their head before the guy does it,” Duchene said. “Let’s say a guy has seen a lot of my shots go high and if he expects that and I throw one low or five-hole, he’s screwed.

“I think it’s the same in games. If they see a guy scoring a lot of goals top-corner, they may know that’s their favorite spot to shoot, but it’s dangerous to anticipate that.”

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or @mikechambers