On Tuesday, voters elected Republican governors and state legislatures around the nation. They also gave control of the Senate to the GOP and elected the largest Republican majority in the US House since 1928. On thing to remember is that a year after Republicans celebrated their 1928 victory with boot-legged bubbly, the stock market crashed and the Great Depression began.

There is so much spinning going on over the election it has almost reversed the rotation of earth. Republicans are crediting President Obama for their wave victory. Democrats are blaming Obama for their loss. News correspondents and pundits are also blaming Obama. Pollsters, all of whom were wrong about the margins if not the outcome, are blaming gridlock in Washington for the Republican wave. They are blaming Obama for the gridlock despite the fact gridlock was mostly caused by Republicans obstruction.

So what really happened? The Obama coalition did not show up Tuesday. Since 2008, the Obama coalition only shows up when Obama is on the ticket. Obama is the leader of that coalition and he alone can inspire it. Granted, turnout is historically lower in off-year elections, but this wave defied history.

In 2010, and 2014, Democrats distanced themselves from Barack Obama, and they lost. Candidates who needed African-Americans to win were overly-critical of the first African-American president. This turned off many black voters. Candidates who needed Hispanics to win never mentioned immigration reform and Republican efforts to block it. This offended Hispanics.

Ron Reagan, son of the patron saint of the Republican Party with the same name, got it right. He said Republicans did not win, Democrats lost. In his view, Democrats lost because they lacked the strength of their convictions.

In 2009, Democrats passed the Affordable Care Act, which no one had been able to do in 100 years. In 2010, they ran away from it and many lost. In 2014, Democrats ran away from President Obama and lost. In both cases, Democrats were snatching defeat from the jaws of victory. The Affordable Care Act has provided healthcare to over 10 million who previously did not have it. It has resulted in the lowest increase in health care costs in 50 years, and reduced the deficit. Yet Democrats ran from the issue and its namesake.

Even though Obama came into office in the middle of the worst recession in history, his policies have turned the economy around and created ten million jobs. GDP is up, manufacturing is up, dependence on foreign oil is down, the stock market is at record highs, unemployment has fallen, and new layoffs are at historical lows. Yet, Democrats refuse to stand with the Democratic president whose policies worked. Does this sound like Al Gore in 2000?

In many ways, losing Democratic Senators and Representatives created their reality. They began openly criticizing Obama on one issue after the other beginning in 2013. This not only gave comfort to Republicans, it helped bring the president’s approval ratings down. News commentators eagerly pointed out every night that Obama’s own party was attacking him. Now, they blame Obama’s low approval ratings for their loss. They are largely responsible for those low ratings.

Perhaps the biggest self-inflicted wound is that Democrats in Congress pressured Obama from issuing the executive order on immigration before the election. Against his better judgment, the president consented. Immediately Hispanics attacked him causing his ratings to fall even further.

Immigration activists began heckling Democratic candidates even though Republicans have blocked immigration reform. Democrats gave this edge on immigration to Republicans which caused Hispanics to turn out in lower numbers and support Democrats in smaller numbers than 2012. This most likely caused the defeat of Senator Udall in Colorado, an Obama critic who never mentioned immigration reform. He lost Pueblo County, a Hispanic and Democratic strong hold, to Tea Party Republican Cory Gardner.

Governor Hickenlooper won Pueblo and eked out a victory.

Had Democrats stood with Obama and their own record; had Democrats allowed the president to join them on the trail, doing what he does best, firing up young voters, African-Americans, and Hispanics; had they shut up and allowed Obama issue the executive order, perhaps Tuesday would have been a different night.

Will Rogers said that he did not belong to an organized political party—he was a Democrat. Ron Regan was right. Democrats need to stand up for their convictions, and stop eating their young on nation-wide TV. If they have an appetite for eating their young, they should do it behind closed doors, like Republicans did in 2004.

If you like this article, share it and find me on Facebook and Twitter.