The Obama administration, unsatisfied with merely rewriting the Affordable Care Act numerous times, has branched out into God-like territory — rewriting the principles of biology.

In a new guidebook, a federal agency says the sex of an individual should not be determined until after birth.

The traditional question after an ultrasound — do we have a boy or girl? — is no longer relevant. The answer is up to the individual’s way of thinking and has nothing to do with his plumbing, according to the Office of Personnel Management, CNS News reported.

Gay and lesbian rights are so passé. Move over for transgender rights.

The Office of Personnel Management’s “Guidance Regarding the Employment of Transgender Individuals in the Federal Workplace” spells it all out.

“Transgender individuals are people with a gender identity that is different from the sex assigned to them at birth,” it says. “Someone who was assigned the male sex at birth but who identifies as female is a transgender woman. Likewise, a person assigned the female sex at birth but who identifies as male is a transgender man.”

So gender assignment has nothing to do with the criteria all members of the animal kingdom have used to determine sex for millennia — it’s all in the head. And the classification can change at any time on a whim, apparently.

“Some individuals will find it necessary to transition from living and working as one gender to another,” the document said.

CNS reported:

The guidelines say the last phase in this transition is called “real life experience.” “As the name suggests, the real life experience is designed to allow the transgender individual to experience living full-time in the gender role to which he or she is transitioning,” say the guidelines. “Completion of at least one year of the real life experience is required prior to an individual’s being deemed eligible for gender reassignment surgery.” The guidelines call for the government to take certain steps to accommodate a federal worker going through a transition.

Transgender employees should be allowed to dress according to their preferred gender identity, and their coworkers should use pronouns appropriate to the transgender employees’ identity, according to the guidelines.

Sarah Palin takes an awkward call from ‘Vlad Putin’ on The Tonight Show

But the biggie, of course, is the bathroom issue.

“For a transitioning employee, this means that, once he or she has begun living and working full-time in the gender that reflects his or her identity, agencies should allow access to restrooms and (if provided to other employees) locker room facilities consistent with his or her gender identity,” the guidelines say. “While a reasonable temporary compromise may be appropriate in some circumstances, transitioning employees should not be required to have undergone or to provide proof of any particular medical procedure (including gender reassignment surgery) in order to have access to facilities designated for use by a particular gender.”

I may be a bit old-fashioned, but could we all just get back to the birds and the bees, please? I really kinda liked that part.