Transcript for Battle of the Body: Fit Mom Takes on Curvy Girl Lingerie Owner

We're going to move on. Here's the photo from a few weeks back. The what's your excuse mom? She is at it again. A smackdown with the founder of curvy girls, who is on a campaign to show real women in lingerie. Abc's linsey davis has the story. Reporter: It's fit versus full-bodied, in a faceoff between this woman who, again, stands accused of fat shaming. And this woman, who is encouraging women to embrace their curves. The gloves are off. And now, so, too, are the clothes. You may remember maria kang, a.K.A. Fit mom this controversial photo she posted on her facebook page in september. Baring sculpted abs by their three kids by her side. Asking what's your excuse? I'm not a bully. Reporter: Now, she's at it again. This time going up against the owner of curvy girl lingerie. The store owner recently encouraged women to bare it all online, stripping down to lingerie, to prove real women are beautiful. As soon as we got pictures on our facebook page, we got kind feedback. Reporter: But kang reacted by posting online, I woke up this morning to news stories about how overweight, nearly obese women, should be proud of their bodies. I think we should all accept how any healthy body, through good nutrition and exercise, manifests. But I'm starting to get annoyed. By normalizing something, we're saying accept yourself. But at the same time, you're creating a level of comfort. If you're comfortable, you can't desire to change. Reporter: The two moms took it a step further on cnn. You cannot tell if I work out. You cannot tell how healthy I am by looking at a photo of me. Reporter: The irony, these adversaries have the same intent, to empower women. To love yourself. And to love yourself, you will progress yourself. The more you love yourself, the more it's going to be reflect in all of the areas of your life. Reporter: The debate continues. But fit mom has apologized. She told us last night, if any women are feeling bad about themselves as a result of her position, she is sorry. And says, that is not her intention. But her contention is still that you can tell how healthy person is, just by looking at them. Maybe true. Perhaps not. Certainly debatable. Exactly. That's what's happening here.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.