Buy Photo Jack Conway, shown with running mate Sannie Overly, announces his bid for Kentucky governor in May 2014. (Photo: Scott Utterback/The CJ)Buy Photo

The early gubernatorial campaigns of Democrat Jack Conway and Republican Hal Heiner appear to be pushing at least one other candidate toward getting in.

Agriculture Commissioner James Comer said Thursday the campaigns, especially Conway's, probably mean that other candidates need to decide more quickly than he previously thought when he said he would probably announce his intentions after the November election.

"Anybody who wants to get in will probably have to move up their time table by a couple of months," Comer said. "I'm going to be making my decision very soon."

MORE POLITICS: Rand Paul to propose federal felon voting bill

MORE POLITICS: Alison Grimes focuses on Elizabeth Warren, college costs

MORE POLITICS: McConnell seeks VA answers; Grimes shifts gears

Comer had said that he planned to wait until after the November election so as to keep Republican emphasis in 2014 on winning control of the state House of Representatives, which Democrats have held for more than 90 years.

Comer said his biggest concern is that Conway is out raising money, but, more importantly is busy uniting the Democratic party, which he said would make it difficult on a Republican who waited too late to begin campaigning.

On Thursday, Conway announced that former Sen. Wendell Ford, U.S. Rep. John Yarmuth and former state Auditor Crit Luallen were endorsing him. That gives him a powerful trio of surrogates from Western Kentucky, Louisville and central Kentucky.

"It appears the Democrats are rallying around Conway," said Comer.

Heiner is trying to do the same thing on the Republican side as Conway is on the Democratic side — traveling the state, raising money and lining up support while Comer is somewhat limited because he hasn't announced a running mate and therefore is prohibited by law from raising campaign money.

Both Heiner and Conway must report in July how much they have raised and contributed to their campaigns over the last three months. If they announce staggering figures, it could serve to convince others not to run.

MORE POLITICS: McConnell asks VA leader for answers on patient waits

MORE POLITICS: Alison Grimes' campaign calls Mitch McConnell desperate

Already, some of the top Democrats have opted out.

Luallen, current Auditor Adam Edelen, and Lt. Gov. Jerry Abramson have all said they wouldn't run. Gov. Steve Beshear is prohibited by term limits from running again.

Former Lt. Gov. Daniel Mongiardo is leaning toward challenging Conway. House Speaker Greg Stumbo has not ruled out a run. Others being mentioned on the Democratic side are Lexington banker Luther Deaton and former U.S. Rep. Ben Chandler.

On the Republican side, former U.S. Ambassador to Latvia Cathy Bailey, of Louisville, is weighing her options and state Supreme Court Justice Will T. Scott, of Pikeville is mentioned as a possibility.

But before Comer gets in, he must find a running mate. He said he's talked with a number of possibilities, including Kelly Knight, of Lexington, the girlfriend of billionaire coal executive Joe Craft and a political fundraising rival of Bailey.

"She is a very good friend of mine and she would make an excellent lieutenant governor," said Comer, who said his top priority in finding a running mate is choosing someone Kentuckians would vote for for governor.

Joseph Gerth can be reached at (502) 582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com. His mailing address is 525 W. Broadway, P.O. Box 740031, Louisville, KY 40201-7431. Follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1lBnMyq