Jersey City police seized nearly 80 pounds of suspected marijuana that had been shipped to a city warehouse from Arizona and arrested two men and a woman, all from Pennsylvania, on Thursday, according to authorities.

Desmond A. Lewis, 48, and Benjamin Tyson Jr., 54, both of Philadelphia, and Tyshea Tyson, 32, of Upper Darby, Pa., all made their first court appearance on the related charges yesterday in Central Judicial Processing court in Jersey City.

"I commend our Jersey City police officers for stopping a crime right in the act," Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop said in a statement. "This was fast thinking and solid police work by patrol officers and detectives and a large amount of marijuana was taken off the streets. We will not tolerate our city being used as a destination for drugs."

On Wednesday at 10 a.m., officers on patrol were dispatched to the warehouse after police received a call about a suspicious package there.

The officers discovered three boxes at the warehouse appearing to contain an estimated 78 pounds of marijuana, officials said.

Detectives waited at the location for the person receiving the package to pick it up, but no one came that day.

On Thursday, Benjamin Tyson arrived with a receipt for the boxes and he was arrested along with Lewis and Tyshea Tyson, who were with him in a van, officials said.

Police seized the suspected marijuana, including a small amount found in a bag, along with the van and various other evidence, officials said.

In court yesterday, Benjamin Tyson's bail was set at $150,000 cash or bond. Officials said he has a drug conviction in New Jersey and has been arrested 17 times in Pennsylvania.

Lewis' bail was set at $100,000 cash or bond. Court officials said he has been arrested twice in Maryland and has been arrested once by the FBI.

Both men appeared via video link from the Hudson County jail in Kearny.

Tyshea Tyson had apparently posted bail already and she appeared in Central Judicial Processing court in person.

It was not known if Tyshea Tyson and Benjamin Tyson are related.