So much remains surprising about the Broncos’ undefeated start. They won their first game without scoring an offensive touchdown. They won an NFL record 13th consecutive divisional road game at Kansas City after trailing by 14 points. Given the shocking nature of the victory, shouldn’t Rihanna, Kanye West and Paul McCartney record “EightNineSeconds” to fumbling? A game like last Thursday’s deserves a nickname.

Perhaps “Burnt Ends.”

There were plenty of seething Chiefs fans following the loss, as evidenced by the strewn trash and broken bottles in the Arrowhead Stadium parking lot. They deserve to be mad. The Broncos? Well, they are balancing a perfect record with an unnerving blemish.

Lost in the endless chatter about Peyton Manning’s age and arm strength is the underwhelming performance of the offensive line. The premise of marrying Manning’s no-huddle, shotgun acumen relies on Denver’s ability to run the ball. Through two games, they are running in place, or worse, into tacklers in the backfield.

According to Pro Football Focus, the starting linemen represent five of the team’s six lowest-graded players on offense. A learning curve was expected, but not this steep. Opponents have sacked Manning seven times. He was sacked 17 times last season. The Broncos enter Sunday averaging 2.7 yards per carry, second worst in the NFL. And there’s no blaming Montee Ball anymore.

In coach Gary Kubiak’s 20 seasons as an offensive coordinator and coach, his rushing attack has averaged a 10th-place ranking.

So, yeah, this is jarring. But it isn’t a reason to abandon the running game. Though known as a players’ coach, Kubiak boasts success because the players know he is consistent and tough.

“It just has to be demanded,” said Kubiak on reviving the ground game. “If you’re going to be a physical football team, then you’ve got to stay committed. It’s not good enough right now. I am very disappointed. I look at myself.”

Kubiak accepts blame for mistakes. This fix, however, lies with the men in the trenches. The addition of Evan Mathis, an all-pro performer, was supposed to stabilize the group. The Ravens and Chiefs are stout up front, but the Broncos shouldn’t have this many mistakes and missed blocks. Mathis insists the problems involve technique issues that can be addressed through additional reps this week.

“We have what it takes personnel-wise (to be a good running team). And everyone is committed to it. We haven’t been successful. But I don’t hear anybody complaining,” Mathis said. “Everyone is accountable to what they are doing and doing everything they can to correct it.”

The linemen represent a proud group. The performance the past two weeks stings. That’s a good sign. But admission remains hollow without improvement. The Broncos have forged a fascinating story in two games. Regardless of Denver’s nastiness on defense, it won’t matter if the Broncos can’t run well. It sets up play action — bringing the tight ends back into play — and opens up routes Denver currently can’t use because teams aren’t respecting quick pops from C.J. Anderson or Ronnie Hillman.

The Broncos are 2-0. The temptation to use Manning’s offense lingers for fans, but it’s a short-term solution. To play their best when it matters most, the Broncos can’t pass on running the ball.

“We want to contribute in a more meaningful way. We all know how to run the ball. With a combination of extreme focus and extreme willingness, we are going to get this done,” right tackle Ryan Harris said. “We want to get this taste out of our mouth.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck

Spotlight on …

Rex Ryan, coach, Buffalo Bills

When: Rex Ryan became a dead man walking with the New York Jets when the team failed to address its offensive shortcomings. Typical of a Ryan-led team, the defense remained stout, creating problems with exotic looks. But they weren’t the 1985 Chicago Bears, and even that unit would struggle to make Geno Smith look passable. The Jets fired Ryan after six seasons. He won four playoff games his first two seasons then posted a record 12 games below .500 over his final four years. Just when it looked like Ryan might end up in Atlanta, Buffalo scooped him up.

What’s up: After a season-opening ear-boxing of the Indianapolis Colts, the Bills host the defending champion Patriots. They heightened animosity by selling football pumps at the team store.

Background: Ryan brings energy, enthusiasm, banter and bravado. The brash talk lacks substance when directed at the Patriots. Ryan fashions himself as a Patriots-killer, but he owns a 4-9 record against New England. Ryan, for all the bluster, is 1-7 since 2011 against New England. That’s the thing about rivalries. They don’t exist if one team always wins.

Renck’s take: The AFC East would be a lot cooler if any team emerged as a threat to the Patriots. They represent football’s villains. Bills beastly defensive tackle Marcell Dareus blurted, “Don’t nobody like the Patriots. Let’s just be honest about it now. Put it out there.” OK, I did. Now put it on them or pipe down.