LANSING, MI -- Michigan will be a hotspot for political television advertising this year, according to national media experts, who say residents here could be inundated in the run-up to the November general election.

With pundits predicting competitive statewide elections for governor and U.S. Senate, along with a handful of closely-watched U.S. House races, interest groups from around the country are expected to invest in Michigan as they look to inform and influence voters.

Larger states such as California could see higher dollar amounts, according to Elizabeth Wilner, vice president of Kantar Media CMAG in New York. "But in terms of the intensity of ads -- the number of ads per market -- Michiganders will see as many as anyone else in the country, if not more," she said.

Kantar, building off analysis by the Cook Political Report, identified five television markets in the United States that could be home to the "trifecta" of competitive races for governor, U.S. Senate and U.S. House. Four of those markets -- Detroit, Grand Rapids, Lansing and Traverse City -- are in Michigan.

Voters across the state will also decide races for attorney general, secretary of state and three seats on the Michigan Supreme Court, which has drawn considerable outside "issue ad" spending in recent years. All state House and state Senate seats are also up for grabs and will be decided by district voters.

A new law signed last month by Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder could give state candidates more to spend by allowing them to accept larger campaign contributions from individuals and PACs. The law also allows issue ad backers to avoid campaign finance disclosure requirements by not using words like "vote for" or "vote against."

Jack Poor, vice president of political research for the Television Bureau of Advertising (TVB) in New York, said it is highly unusual to see two competitive statewide races at the top of the ticket in a non-presidential year.

Michigan's 1st Congressional District race, pitting Republican incumbent Rep. Dan Benishek against former Kalkaska County Sheriff Jerry Cannon, could be one of the state's most competitive general elections, according to Poor. Republican Reps. Justin Amash and Kerry Bentivolio are also facing significant primary challenges in August.

"There's going to be a lot of spending in primaries where you have the tea party guys competing with the establishment Republicans," Poor said. "That's definitely going to be a big fight and that's going to be well funded."

While voter turnout is higher in presidential election years, experts say that broadcast and cable television stations have also seen steady growth in political ad spending in off-year elections. President Barack Obama is not on the ballot, but Wilner said Michiganders are sure to see ads linking Democratic candidates to the president's signature health care law.

"The economy is going to be the number one issue again," she said, "it pretty much always is. Democrats say they're going to be making a big push on minimum wage. In Michigan, I'm sure the auto bailout will come up again in some way, but in terms of a specific piece of legislation, the Affordable Care Act will once again be the biggest issue."

TOP OF THE TICKET

Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder hasn't formally announced his own re-election plans, but his campaign committee is already active and raised eyebrows by airing its first television ad of the 2014 cycle back in late September -- more than a full year before the general election.

Snyder is not alone, according to Wilner, who said that Republican governors facing challenges in states like Pennsylvania and Georgia have also already aired ads without directly referencing upcoming elections. "It's starting earlier than we've ever seen before," she said.

Inside Michigan Politics reports the Rick Snyder for Michigan committee also is planning a $166,000 cable ad buy on Fox News for the day of the Super Bowl.

On the Democratic side, former Congressman Mark Schauer hasn't aired any television ads yet, but his campaign has been buying Facebook ads and Google search words for months.

Schauer spokesperson Zack Pohl said the campaign does not discuss strategy but noted "this will undoubtedly be one of the most competitive governor's races in the country," pointing to the governor's relatively low approval ratings.

The Democratic Governors Association has released a series of online videos targeting Snyder and is planning to remain active in Michigan. The Republican Governor's Association spent roughly $3.6 million on issue ads to help Snyder get elected in 2010 and filed paperwork for a new Michigan PAC last month.

In the U.S. Senate race to replace retiring Democrat Carl Levin, a newly-formed PAC run by a retired businessman from the Saginaw area has already run television ads criticizing Democratic candidate and U.S. Rep. Gary Peters without explicitly endorsing Republican hopeful Terri Lynn Land.

The National Republican Senatorial Committee also targeted Peters by passing out "Black Friday" flyers, and spokesperson Brooke Hougesen confirmed the NRSC plans to highlight the Congressman's support for the Affordable Care Act. Land has acknowledged that Super PACs are likely to play a large role in the Senate race.

Peters has not yet run any ads of his own, but manager Julie Petrick said the campaign plans on "reaching voters across multiple platforms including building a strong grassroots operation and engaging folks online and through ads." If the race is close, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee is sure to invest in Michigan as well.

Update: The Republican National Committee this week began running Obamacare-related radio ads targeting Senate seats in Michigan and other 11 states, according to the Associated Press. But records reviewed by MLive show that the Michigan buy, for an ad set to air Detroit and Grand Rapids, totals less than $300.

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Google+ or follow him on Twitter.