LOS ANGELES, Nov. 18, 2013 /PRNewswire/ --

WHAT: Following the recent rollout of the Affordable Care Act, Baldwin Hills Crenshaw has teamed up with Covered California and Senator Holly Mitchell's office to help connect neighbors to health care options offered through California's new health insurance exchange. A Covered California booth located on the mall's Macy's bridge will be unveiled on Wednesday with an official ribbon cutting ceremony.





Covered California is the state's official marketplace managed under the federal Affordable Care Act. Coverage under the new exchange will launch in January 2014, which will feature competitively priced plans for individuals and small businesses. Under this system, interested participants can compare their options and choose the plan that best fits their needs and their budget. At Baldwin Hills Crenshaw, customers can receive personal guidance from Covered California representatives and purchase the plan that is right for them.





This is the first time Covered California is offering this individualized service within a retail center. Representatives are available, offering free assistance to the public seven days a week through March 2014. Booth hours are 4pm-9pm Monday through Friday; 3pm-8pm Saturday; and 1pm-6pm Sunday.



WHO: The Hon. Holly Mitchell, California State Senator

Ken Lombard, Principal with Capri Urban Baldwin, LLC, owner of the mall

Patricia Santana, Covered California

Virginia Franklin, Covered California



WHEN : Wednesday, November 20, 2013

10:00 a.m.



WHERE : Baldwin Hills Crenshaw

3650 W Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd.

Los Angeles, CA 90008





Macy's Bridge, Located on the 2nd Floor of Baldwin Hills Crenshaw

About Baldwin Hills Crenshaw (BHCP)

Baldwin Hills Crenshaw is an 870,000-square-foot retail destination located at the intersection of Crenshaw Boulevard and Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard in Los Angeles, California. Anchored by Macy's, Sears, Wal-Mart and Rave Theaters, plus more than 100 specialty stores and dining options, BHCP has long been recognized as the hub of the surrounding communities. From a signature concert series known as BHCP Live!, the monthly Kid's Club and a weekly Farmers' Market, to the many public services offered at the mall, it is clear that BHCP is more than just a place to shop— it is a central gathering place for the local community. BHCP is committed to making this neighborhood an even better place to live, work, shop and just BE! BHCP has teamed up with several community-based partners to support a variety of events and continue to support efforts and programming that reflect the history and interests of local residents.

Baldwin Hills Crenshaw is managed and leased by Primestor Development, Inc. Primestor is a full-service commercial real estate firm specializing in the management, revitalization and development of shopping centers in urban locations.

SOURCE Baldwin Hills Crenshaw