Other June events • The constant dripping and drizzling of waterfalls produces miniature gardens featuring emerald mosses, maidenhair ferns and brook saxifrages. Magenta Parry's primrose, blue chiming bells and white bittercress bloom in luxuriant clumps along the banks. Pink fairyslippers bloom in profusion en route to Ouzel Falls, and brownie lady's slippers hide not far away. • Fireflies glimmer from the grasses at Sawhill Ponds and other low-elevation wetlands from late June to early July as frogs stutter and croak. • Many mammals bear young. If you're lucky, you may stumble upon a crouching fawn or see a line of twittering baby raccoons following their mother or a pair of young skunks tussling together.

Waterfalls crash over a cliff — more than enough force, you would think, to crush any living thing below.

Yet a small, sooty bird flies through the torrent to nest on inaccessible niches and ledges. With feet too weak to perch or walk with ease, it clings to sheer walls beside the thundering water.

This intrepid bit of fluff is the black swift, whose mossy cup-like nests remained a secret to most scientists until 1901 when one was documented on a sea cliff near Santa Cruz, Calif.

Advertisement

Black swift wintering grounds were not documented until 2010 when ecologist Jason Beason used tiny backpack geolocators to track four fall migrants to Brazil, 4,350 miles away — where, up until then, the birds didn't even appear on the country's species checklist. Until Beason and other ornithologists from the Rocky Mountain Bird Observatory made this astounding discovery, black swifts were the last breeding birds in the United States whose winter whereabouts were unknown.

Another bird intimately associated with waterfalls is the American dipper, a gray, wren-like insectivore that also nests behind the falls and walks under water to dine on aquatic larvae. Dippers, also called water ouzels, often stop to sing a bubbling cadenza that seems to imitate the cascade itself.

American dippers occur only in western North America, but in their chosen habitat they're not hard to find as they zoom back and forth along mountain streams. In Boulder County, look for dippers nesting behind the rainbows in the spray of falls above Hessie, feeding their young under bridges along Boulder Creek or bobbing up and down on rocks in the middle of almost any watery tumult.

Black swifts, however, deserve their secretive reputation. Al Knorr became fascinated by the elusive birds in the 1950s and found 25 nesting colonies in Colorado, often using rickety ladders to reach "swifty-looking waterfalls" and wet caves. He said he "never found a nest upon which the sun shown." Black swifts have a high fidelity to nesting sites, and 50 years later, 24 sites remained active. The birds may choose remote locations to keep their single egg safe from predators.

The only documented black swift nests in Boulder County are at Ouzel Falls, where the first nest was discovered by Mike Figgs and Dave and Chana Alles in 1982. Figgs theorized that there may be more nests in both Wild Basin and below Arapaho Glacier "as we often see six or more adults in the area."

These neotropical migrants usually return to Colorado in June. Watch for them near waterfalls and in canyons swiftly diving after aerial insects. In his book "The Coolest Bird," the late Rick Levad said that after sunset is the best time to see them because adults often forage far from the nest during the day, storing captured insects in their crops. Levad also recommended looking for them after mid-July when the young have hatched.

Nevertheless, when spring runoff peaks in June, waterfalls reach their rambunctious best. And a sunny June day is a lovely time to start searching for "waterfall birds." Even if you don't find a nest, just seeing scythe-winged swifts flying above the falls or hearing a dipper sing is miracle enough.

Ruth Carol Cushman and Stephen Jones are authors of "Wild Boulder County" and "The North American Prairie."