I hear it everywhere I go: America’s colleges and universities are the envy of the world. From universal access to ground-breaking research, our system of higher education, as a whole, is unmatched in scope, quality, productivity and innovation. And yet, listening to some elected officials, it seems as though some believe our system is broken and in need of “fixes” from Washington, D.C.

In an address at the University of Buffalo in August, President Obama declared the cost of higher education is too high and colleges have not done enough to control costs over the past 30 years. During the same period, he continued, state legislatures have heavily divested in public higher education. Ergo, students and families now bear a substantially greater portion of the cost of a college education than ever before, resulting in record-high student debt.

The president’s answer to this dilemma? Lower the cost of higher education, graduate more students, reduce borrowing, and ensure that graduates get good-paying jobs. Noble pursuits, all. Unfortunately, like virtually every other public policy issue facing our state and nation, the ills of higher education cannot be viewed — or solved — in isolation.

Using Colorado as an example of this systematic de-funding of higher education, it is plain to see that other public policy priorities such as Medicaid expansion have won out in budget-balancing debates over underwriting the cost of higher education for students and families. I do not make this point to suggest that expanding Medicaid is a bad thing. Rather, I make it to remind policymakers that it is an expensive thing.

In 1982, Colorado taxpayers picked up roughly 70 percent of the cost of a college education at public state universities, leaving the student with a tuition bill that represented the remaining 30 percent. Fast forward to 2012: Students picked up 80 percent of the cost of a college education with Colorado taxpayers picking up the remaining 20 percent.

Think about that swing for a moment: In 30 years, students and families went from paying a 30 percent share of their college education to paying 80 percent. And, while tuition and fee inflation at colleges and universities is a very real problem, the relative cost of higher education in Colorado has remained relatively flat over the past decade when adjusted for inflation. In short, tuition increases have gone substantially toward backfilling declining state support. Most recently, signs from the current administration reflect the possibility of an increase in state support, which in turn should allow Colorado colleges and universities to have very modest tuition increases next year.

While it is quite simple for elected officials in Washington to suggest that complex issues surrounding student loan debt, retention and graduation rates, job placement and college affordability are just one federal regulation away from being “solved,” I prefer to put faith in our students. Because higher education is such a competitive marketplace, I know that students vote with their feet because they have so many choices at their fingertips.

When Colorado Mesa University eliminated deans to avoid expensive middle-management costs, we didn’t do it because the federal government told us to; we did it to focus finite resources in the classroom instead of administration. When we hired staff to counsel students on the perils of taking on too much student loan debt, we didn’t do it because the federal government told us to; we did it because it was the right thing to do. And the list goes on.

To be sure, higher education is a marketplace that needs thoughtful, clear and concise regulation. In order to preserve the quality of the world’s greatest system of higher education, policymakers should hold institutions accountable and seek out ways to free colleges and universities from duplicative regulations — not rush to devise new ones in order to score political points.

Tim Foster is the president of Colorado Mesa University in Grand Junction.