HERE’S A LOOK AT THE DAY AHEAD

OBAMA ADMINISTRATION: President Barack Obama participates in a conference call on gun violence prevention at 2:05 p.m. at the White House. U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman holds a round-table with small businesses on the economic benefits of the Trans-Pacific Partnership at the annual Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas at 1 p.m. EST. Senior Obama administration officials including Attorney General Loretta Lynch, Federal Bureau of Investigation Director James Comey, White House chief of staff Denis McDonough and Director of National Intelligence James Clapper will hold high-level discussions with Silicon Valley CEOs, an escalation of their attempts to persuade the executives to do more to block terrorists from using the Internet to recruit and incite violence.

ECONOMIC INDICATORS: The Labor Department releases employment data for December at 8:30 a.m., providing the first major measuring stick of how the economy fared for all of last year. Here are five things to watch for in the report. The Commerce Department releases wholesale trade inventories for November at 10 a.m.

ELECTION 2016: Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton attends fundraisers for her campaign in San Francisco, while her husband attends fundraisers in Arizona and Washington state. Sen. Bernie Sanders, her main rival in the Democratic race, is back in Iowa for a four-day swing through the early-voting state. He’ll hold a press conference on paid family leave at 11 a.m. EST. Democrat Martin O’Malley, former Maryland governor, is in Iowa. On the GOP side, front-runner Donald Trump, who won’t attend Saturday’s Kemp Forum in South Carolina, will be in the state for a rally at Winthrop University in Rock Hill at 7 p.m. EST. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie will attend a fundraiser in Baltimore; Sen. Marco Rubio is in South Carolina; Sens. Ted Cruz and Rand Paul are in Iowa; and Carly Fiorina and Ohio Gov. John Kasich are in New Hampshire. On Saturday, several GOP candidates will attend the Kemp Forum in Columbia, S.C., hosted by House Speaker Paul Ryan and Sen. Tim Scott.

CONGRESS: The House committee investigating the 2012 terrorist attacks in Benghazi, Libya, interviews former Defense Secretary Leon Panetta behind closed doors.

TOP STORIES FROM WSJ’S CAPITAL JOURNAL

GOP HEALTH PLANS ARE WORKS IN PROGRESS: President Barack Obama’s expected veto of Republican legislation to repeal his signature health law is a reminder that as long as there is a Democrat in the White House, the Affordable Care Act isn’t going away. It is a point Republicans on the campaign trail are happy to make. The question is what their alternatives would be. Every GOP presidential candidate’s health-policy platform begins with repealing the law, but for most, that’s also where it ends, at least for now.

JONATHAN ERNST/REUTERS

Among the 12 candidates still in the GOP race, only two, ex-Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, have posted health plans, and both use broad brush-strokes. Mr. Bush proposes reducing federal health-care regulations and creating new tax credits to help people buy coverage; Mr. Carson wants to expand tax-protected health-savings accounts. Florida Sen. Marco Rubio has described his health-policy ideas in a few paragraphs in an op-ed piece that also indicates support for such measures. Louise Radnofksy reports.

JERRY SEIB’S EARLY HIT: PAUL RYAN BRINGS A DOSE OF KEMP OPTIMISM INTO THE 2016 CAMPAIGN

Back in 1993, the late Jack Kemp—fresh from a career in Congress and a seat in the Cabinet, and having established himself as heir to Ronald Reagan’s brand of optimistic conservatism—set up a new advocacy group called Empower America. He hired as an economics assistant a bright young 23-year-old from Wisconsin.That assistant’s name: Paul Ryan. This weekend’s Kemp Forum event in South Carolina raises the question of whether there is anyone in the Republican Party, other than Mr. Ryan, capable of carrying to a national audience the sunny Kemp message of what he called bleeding-heart conservatism. Read Jerry Seib’s full column in Washington Wire.

Bill Clark/CQ Roll Cal/Zuma Press

WSJ STORIES YOU SHOULDN’T MISS

NATI HARNIK/ASSOCIATED PRESS

CLINTON OFFERS NEW DETAILS ABOUT PAID FAMILY LEAVE PLAN: Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton‘s campaign offered new details about her paid family leave plan Thursday, and continued to reject the leading proposal in Congress because it relies on a small increase to the payroll tax. The Clinton campaign said its plan would closely resemble the pending legislation, called the Family Act, in other ways. Like that legislation, it would include 12 weeks of paid family and medical leave and a minimum two-thirds wage replacement rate. Her announcement came a day before her rival for the nomination, Sen. Bernie Sanders, plans a news conference in Iowa to discuss his paid family leave program. He has been highly critical of Mrs. Clinton for her rejection of the pending bill, which he supports. Anna Louie Sussman and Laura Meckler report.

Plus: Bill Clinton brushed off Donald Trump’s latest effort to draw attention to the former president’s dealings with women, suggesting the Republican presidential front-runner would have to get closer to capturing the GOP nomination to merit a response … Mr. Trump’s attempt to limit his sold-out rally in Vermont Thursday night to those who had pledged to support him for president didn’t work out exactly as planned … The State Department’s internal watchdog found that the department gave “inaccurate and incomplete” answers to groups seeking access to former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton‘s records … If the Clintons are nervous how their family foundation will play on the campaign trail, they aren’t showing it … If the loudest supporters translate to the most votes, then say hello to President Bernie Sanders …

CHRISTIE SLAMS U.S.-IRAN NUCLEAR DEAL: Chris Christie on Thursday said Iran is a bigger threat than Islamic State terrorists and those who support the nuclear deal negotiated by President Obama’s administration have “tarnished” their reputation on foreign policy. “They made the world a darker and more dangerous place,” the Republican presidential candidate said in an appearance before the World Values Network, a conservative Jewish group that includes billionaire GOP donor Sheldon Adelson. In 2012, Mr. Christie referred to “occupied territories” in the region after a trip to Israel. Some Republican Jews condemn the phrase, as it gives credence to the view that Palestinians have a right to live in disputed Israeli lands. Mr. Christie later apologized for his remarks. Heather Haddon reports.

More on 2016: Republican Ted Cruz has added a new megadonor to his ranks of supporters: Richard Uihlein, a Wisconsin-based shipping magnate…What’s up with Mr. Cruz being born in Canada?… Ben Carson wasn’t fast enough for a group of fifth graders Thursday.

ETHAN MILLER/GETTY IMAGES

MISSING U.S. MISSILE SHOWS UP IN CUBA: An inert U.S. Hellfire missile sent to Europe for training purposes was wrongly shipped from there to Cuba in 2014, said people familiar with the matter, a loss of sensitive military technology that ranks among the worst-known incidents of its kind. The unintended delivery of the missile to Cuba has confounded investigators and experts who work in a regulatory system designed to prevent precisely such equipment from falling into the wrong hands, said those familiar with the matter. For more than a year, amid a historic thawing of relations between the U.S. and Cuba, American authorities have tried to get the Cuban government to return the missile, said people familiar with the matter. At the same time, federal investigators have been tracing the paper trail of the wayward Hellfire to determine if its arrival in Cuba was the work of criminals or spies, or the result of a series of blunders, these people said. Devlin Barrett and Gordon Lubold report.

ALSO IN THE NEWS

Senior Obama administration officials will hold high-level discussions with Silicon Valley CEOs on Friday, an escalation of their attempts to persuade the executives to do more to block terrorists from using the Internet to recruit and incite violence.

The Obama administration so far is making little progress in getting more young adults to sign up for health policies on the federal insurance exchange, according to figures released Thursday.

Top military doctors are warning that medical advances won on Afghan and Iraqi battlefields might be lost unless Secretary of Defense Ash Carter orders the Pentagon to make these techniques, drugs and devices mandatory for military physicians, nurses and medics.

Federal officials issued new dietary guidelines Thursday, urging Americans to sharply cut back on sugar and eat less saturated fat and sodium.

The Texas state trooper who pulled over Sandra Bland, a black woman who died in jail, turned himself in to authorities Thursday afternoon and was later released on bond, a day after he was indicted on a perjury charge.

Saudi Arabia is considering selling shares in its state-owned oil company, a move that comes amid a broad privatization effort afoot in the kingdom, but also at a vulnerable time for Riyadh because of tumbling energy prices.

Deepening turmoil in China shook markets world-wide on Thursday, sending oil prices plummeting to new lows and driving U.S. stocks to their worst-ever start to a year. On Friday, Chinese stocks closed up 2% after the government suspended its trading-halt mechanism overnight and European shares edged higher as markets stabilized.

North Korea’s nuclear test sent shock waves around the world. For the Pyongyang regime, the impact is just as crucial at home. Plus, South Korea said it would start loudspeaker broadcasts of messages critical of the North Korean regime into the isolated state in response to Pyongyang’s latest nuclear test.

Iran on Thursday accused Saudi Arabia of bombing its embassy in Yemen during an airstrike, heightening tensions between the regional rivals after the kingdom’s execution of prominent Shiite cleric Nemer al-Nemer.

Islamic State’s spokesman was critically injured in an Iraqi airstrike in the western province of Anbar several days ago, Iraq’s joint operations command said Thursday. Police shot dead a man they say tried to attack a Paris police station while brandishing a meat cleaver and wearing a fake explosive device Thursday, the one-year anniversary of the deadly assault on satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo.

Officers in San Bernardino were praised after December’s mass shooting, but the California city’s fiscal woes mean that plaintiffs in excessive-force lawsuits could get just 1% of promised settlements.

TODAY’S VIDEO

SEIB VIDEO: 2016 AND THE WAR OVER WOMEN

The race for the White House has sparked a bitter battle between front-runners Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton as they exchange barbs over their record on women. Washington Bureau Chief Jerry Seib explains.

WHAT WE’RE READING AROUND THE WEB

The slowdown in China’s economy is so worrisome for the government in Beijing because it faces an unprecedented “fiscal crisis” in which tax expenditures figure to fall well below spending required on social programs and assistance to local governments, writes John Lee for Forbes.

The Middle East has entered a dangerous and unpredictable period in which the region is wracked by a series of “all-out” and “would-be” civil wars, while “Iran and Saudi Arabia now lead rival coalitions waging proxy wars—figuratively across the region, and literally across Syria, Yemen, and (to a lesser extent) Iraq,” writes Kenneth Pollack of Brookings.

​Without a court case, there isn’t an absolute definition of who is a “natural born citizen,” writes Byron York in the Washington Examiner. Ted Cruz, he says, isn’t likely to settle that.

In the WSJ’s Think Tank, Robert Litan writes that he isn’t betting on a series of Federal Reserve interest-rate increases because newly released minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee show members there realize “the risks to the U.S. economy over the next year outweigh the potential gains.”

MILESTONE

26%

The percentage of people 18 to 34 who signed up for health-insurance coverage on the federal insurance exchange as of Dec. 26 in the 38 states that use the exchange.

TWEET OF THE DAY

@SenJohnMcCain: Miles Davis would be rolling in his grave over DOD spending $2.3M to build jazz playing robots #AmericasMostWasted​

FEEDBACK: The Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter is The Wall Street Journal’s morning rundown of the biggest news stories and exclusive features from Washington on politics, policy, financial regulation, defense and more. Send your tips, feedback and suggestions for recommended reading to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com.

SIGN UP: Capital Journal Daybreak, straight to your inbox http://on.wsj.com/CapitalJournalSignup