To the Editor:

Re “The Death of Kalief Browder” (editorial, June 10):

As a youth advocate for the Southern Poverty Law Center’s Louisiana office, I’ve spent nearly three years interviewing young people as young as 12 in detention facilities in Louisiana and Mississippi. Like Kalief Browder, who committed suicide after being held at Rikers Island for three years without trial, many of these young people are held for extended periods in solitary confinement, sometimes for days, weeks, even months at a time.

For young people, either in juvenile or adult detention facilities, this includes being locked down in a small windowless cell for nearly 23 hours a day, and typically being allowed out of their cells for court appearances, a shower and an occasional phone call.

As a consequence of this very destructive practice, many of these youths tell me about instances of psychosis and suicidal thoughts. Such an approach to housing our young people amounts to torture, and impedes their ability to grow to become healthy adults.

In a series of cases since 2005, the Supreme Court, in rejecting harsh sentences for children under the Eighth Amendment ban on excessive punishment, emphasized that children have a greater capacity to reform.

Still, our jails seem profoundly indifferent to the health of our young people, especially when they subject youths to harmful practices like solitary confinement. Our criminal justice system failed Kalief Browder; in his memory, we must move forward and end this destructive practice.

Photo

THEODORE SHAW

New Orleans

To the Editor:

The sad death of Kalief Browder should have taught us a lesson, but the criminal justice system plods on, impervious to the continuing reality and injustices that define it. Two prisoners escape, and a thousand New York State workers are hunting for them.

A hundred prisoners will be released through the front door this week, returning to New York City, but the state has no re-entry plan for them other than a list of parole warnings.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

When Kalief Browder left Rikers after three years of beatings and solitary confinement, the city had no plan for him. We paid at least $68,000 a year to hold him in jail, but no state or city support system was provided upon release.

Mr. Browder was unable to overcome the trauma inflicted on him by an unjust system. It has happened before, and it will probably happen again because the prison system is broken and the court system is stacked against the poor.

DAVID ROTHENBERG

New York

The writer is the founder of the Fortune Society.

To the Editor:

Our hearts break for the family of Kalief Browder, a young man who lived with mental illness. His tragic story is reported in “Man Held at Rikers Jail for 3 Years Without Trial Commits Suicide at 22” (news article, June 9). Our system of justice turned a blind eye and allowed a 16-year-old to be jailed at Rikers, where he was terrorized, beaten and placed in solitary confinement, and began to lose his mind.

New York is one of two states that prosecute children under 18 as adults. A bill pending in the State Legislature would raise the age of criminal responsibility to 18. The New York Legislature must pass this bill and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo must sign it immediately before we send one more child to jail.

WENDY BRENNAN

New York

The writer is executive director of the National Alliance on Mental Illness of New York City.