By Tom Steward | Watchdog Minnesota Bureau

GOLDEN VALLEY, Minn. — The prognosis for Minnesota’s state health insurance exchange, MNsure, took a turn for the worse this week, as the provider offering some of the lowest premiums in the country opted out of the program, amid financial concerns.

PreferredOne, the insurance company with MNsure’s most private insurance enrollees and cheapest rates, pulled the plug on participation in the state exchange at the end of the year.

“Continuing to provide this coverage through MNsure is not sustainable,” PreferredOne CEO Marcus Merz wrote in a letter to MNsure officials.

The development leaves some 24,000 PreferredOne customers, 53 percent of MNsure’s private insurance enrollees, scrambling to find another provider by Jan. 1. Health care analysts say PreferredOne’s departure stands out as one of the biggest provider failures among state health insurance exchanges to date.

“The thing that makes this more newsworthy than normal, I suppose, is that they were the lowest price in the country and they couldn’t make it go,” said Stephen Parente, director of the University of Minnesota’s Medical Leadership Institute. “They made a bet probably, I think, to get market share. A lot of folks, myself included, thought that’s pretty bold, we’ll see what happens.”

Administrative MNsure glitches that led to unwarranted coverage of enrollees in other states, along with higher than anticipated costs, drove what a spokesman told KSTP-TV was strictly a “business decision.”

“Our MNsure individual product membership is only a small percentage of the entire PreferredOne enrollment but is taking a significant amount of our resources to support administratively,” the company added in a statement. PreferredOne did not respond to repeated inquiries from Watchdog.org.

At a quickly assembled press conference Tuesday, state health exchange officials declined to address the reasons behind the loss of MNsure’s biggest provider.

“You ought to talk to PreferredOne to find out what was behind their decision, but certainly it’s a business decision for them and encompasses more than just the administrative,” said Brian Beutner, MNsure board chairman, at a press conference.

At the same time, MNsure executives sought to portray the development as evidence that competition between providers on the exchange works.

“This indicates to us that the work we’re continuing to do in terms of providing a competitive marketplace is working and that we’re going to have a robust set of plan offerings in the fall and that we’re going to continue to be collaborative partners with the health plans,” said MNsure CEO Scott Leitz.

The decision to bow out marks a dramatic retreat from PreferredOne’s upbeat posture of a year ago, heading into MNsure’s October 2013 roll-out.

A small company with only 3 percent of Minnesota’s individual health insurance market in 2012, PreferredOne gambled big on the Affordable Care Act mandate.

“We believe that our excellent networks, flexible coverage options and lowest-cost premiums will make PreferredOne a great choice for Minnesotans who are shopping for a new plan,” a September 2013 news release stated.

By August, PreferredOne controlled more than twice as many customers as its closest competitor, Blue Cross Blue Shield. Kaiser Health News credited PreferredOne with offering some of the lowest-cost policies among state exchanges, leading to “a noticeable effect on the competitive landscape in the state.”

But with open enrollment for MNsure’s second year looming in November, the Golden Valley company called it quits.

MNsure aimed to reassure PreferredOne customers they will be eligible for coverage by another provider in 2015, hoping to avoid a repeat of an online backlog that hampered thousands attempting to sign up a year ago.

“Both organizations understand that MNsure is still an evolving partnership,” said MNsure’s Leitz and PreferredOne’s Merz in a statement. “…Consumers still have at least four, well-known, Minnesota based carriers who are committed to providing important health coverage to Minnesotans through MNsure, including people who qualify for tax credits and public programs.”

Yet significant premium price hikes could be coming in October, just in time to become a front-burner issue in the waning weeks of the 2014 gubernatorial campaign.

“Six out of 10 people who’ve purchased insurance through MNsure will now have to go through the nightmare process of purchasing another plan all over again-thanks to Mark Dayton,” said GOP gubernatorial candidate Jeff Johnson in a statement.

Polling shows Dayton may be most vulnerable over issues stemming from the $155 million online Obamacare state exchange, including bonuses to MNsure executives, the resignation of the former executive director following a trip to Costa Rica and technical glitches.

“The question now is whether PreferredOne can afford to continue to offer such low rates. If not, its continued participation in MNsure would distort the Exchange’s average rates, which last year were the lowest in the nation,” said Dayton in a statement.

Another issue surfaced on Twitter, involving a discrepancy in the number of Minnesotans covered in MNsure private insurance plans. In an exchange with a reporter, MNsure officials appeared to lower the total by 15 percent, from 55,000 to 46,500 enrollees. It’s not clear why 8,500 enrollees no longer participate in MNsure. Fewer enrollees could lead to higher administrative costs for taxpayers because fewer people will be paying into the system.