A surfer grabs a wave at Steamer Lane Monday morning in Santa Cruz County, where the natural environment received generally superlative grades in the 2014 Community Assessment Project's comprehensive report. (Shmuel Thaler -- Santa Cruz Sentinel)

2014 Community Heroes Every year, the public nominates community leaders whose work helps realize the Community Assessment Project’s goals. In health: • Silvia Austerlic has increased awareness of end-of-life care and grief support services for Latinos through Mensajeros de Confianza. • Laura Marcus is the director of Dientes Community Dental Care and provides low-cost dental services to the most vulnerable county residents. • Guillermina Porraz has worked to ensure residents have equal access to health care and nutrition for 20 years with Salud Para La Gente. • Kate Hinnenkamp, Rosalba Contreras, John Frigon and Gary McNeil are honored as the Affordable Care Act Outreach and Enrollment Campions of Santa Cruz County. In natural environment: • Alan Schlenger’s role as treasurer for the Santa Cruz County Community Farmers Market has been instrumental in helping the organization become self-sustaining. • Charles Kieffer has served as a volunteer education for Santa Cruz State Parks for more than 25 years and is the chair of the Castro Committee for Friends of Santa Cruz Parks. In economy: • Brent Haddad is the director of UCSC’s Center for Entrepreneurship, where he fosters internship programs that educate students and infuse businesses with innovative talent. In education: • Carol Polhamus served as an instructor with the County Office of Education Alternative Education Programs for more than 25 years, and she motivated students to meet their potential. • Lawrence P. Drury has been a leader in early education and influenced policy at the state level. In public safety: • Nereida Robles and Fe Silva are sisters who founded the folkloric dance group Centeotl Groupo de Danza y Baile, which provides positive after-school activities, school assistance scholarships and mentoring for free. • Clotilde Sanchez volunteers with a number of Watsonville neighborhood and safety groups and works with first-time offender youth. In social environment: • Peter Connery and Maggie McKay are members of the Project Homeless Connect Steering Committee, which has an annual event that connects homeless individuals with vital services. • Maria Virgen provides peer-led nutrition education and social support through her volunteer work with the Second Harvest Food Bank’s Passion for Produce program at Starlight Elementary. • Mary Masters is the director of Bridge of Hope, which connects volunteers with disabled residents of nursing facilities. To view the report, which will be online soon, visit http://www.unitedwaysc.org/community-assessment-project Source: Community Assessment Project

APTOS >> Despite an improving economy, the divide between the haves and the have-nots persists in Santa Cruz County, according to an annual survey.

More than 70 percent of white residents surveyed as part of the 20th annual Community Assessment Project said they were “very satisfied” with their quality of life. However, just half of the county’s Latinos said the same about their well-being.

Sponsored by United Way and several other groups, the report captures a snapshot of the quality of life in the county. It was released Monday at an event well attended by nonprofit and local government leaders, who use the report to tailor services to meet the county’s needs.

To view the 2014 Community Assessment Project The full report will be posted at unitedwaysc.org/community-assessment-project.

Data from the report highlights the disparities between the county’s whites and Latinos in jobs, health, housing and education. Latinos are more likely to forgo basic necessities than their white neighbors.

“Latinos are twice as likely to go without food and 10 times as likely to go without rent or housing or utilities,” said MariaElena De La Garza, executive director of the Community Action Board.

Regular access to health care is a struggle for more than three-quarters of the Latino community, versus 92 percent of whites.

“We have to make sure there are services where they need them and where they live,” said Lisa Hernandez, health officer and medical services director at the county’s Health Services Agency.

While more of the county’s residents have health insurance, fewer people have dental coverage.

Children in the county also have lower rates of immunizations than the rest of the state, and residents are pretty good at eating fruits and vegetables, but also “pretty good at eating junk food,” Hernandez said.

The report also showed unemployment continues to decline and the median family income is rising.

In the last two years, the median sale price of a home increased 32 percent to $535,000.

However, the kinds of new jobs in the county are raising concern. The high cost of living and the prevalence of low-wage jobs in major industries, such as agriculture and service, contribute to a widening gap between whites and Latinos, said Tonée Picard, executive vice president and chief development officer of Bay Federal Credit Union, who presented the report’s economic findings.

“A whole sector of our community continues to feel challenged,” Picard said, adding that education and training are key to improving the county’s workforce.

Advertisement

Overall, the report outlines several positives.

Despite water concerns and dissatisfaction with traffic, crime and increased homelessness, survey respondents reported an overall satisfaction with the quality of life. People are happy with schools, organic farming continues to grow and crime rates are down.

“We’ve managed to decrease our arrest rates in Santa Cruz County without increasing the population in the jails,” said Craig Haney, a professor of psychology and legal studies at UC Santa Cruz.

And the juvenile arrest rate has decreased more than 62 percent since 2008.

In other good news, protected land makes up a third of county lands and nearly half of the survey respondents reported shopping at a farmers’ market or produce stand once a week.

To view the 2014 Community Assessment Project

The full report will be posted at unitedwaysc.org/community-assessment-project.

2014 Community Heroes

Every year, the public nominates community leaders whose work helps realize the Community Assessment Project’s goals.

In health:

• Silvia Austerlic has increased awareness of end-of-life care and grief support services for Latinos through Mensajeros de Confianza. • Laura Marcus is the director of Dientes Community Dental Care and provides low-cost dental services to the most vulnerable county residents.

• Guillermina Porraz has worked to ensure residents have equal access to health care and nutrition for 20 years with Salud Para La Gente.

• Kate Hinnenkamp, Rosalba Contreras, John Frigon and Gary McNeil are honored as the Affordable Care Act Outreach and Enrollment Campions of Santa Cruz County.

In natural environment:

• Alan Schlenger’s role as treasurer for the Santa Cruz County Community Farmers Market has been instrumental in helping the organization become self-sustaining.

• Charles Kieffer has served as a volunteer education for Santa Cruz State Parks for more than 25 years and is the chair of the Castro Committee for Friends of Santa Cruz Parks.

In economy:

• Brent Haddad is the director of UCSC’s Center for Entrepreneurship, where he fosters internship programs that educate students and infuse businesses with innovative talent.

In education:

• Carol Polhamus served as an instructor with the County Office of Education Alternative Education Programs for more than 25 years, and she motivated students to meet their potential. • Lawrence P. Drury has been a leader in early education and influenced policy at the state level. In public safety: • Nereida Robles and Fe Silva are sisters who founded the folkloric dance group Centeotl Groupo de Danza y Baile, which provides positive after-school activities, school assistance scholarships and mentoring for free. • Clotilde Sanchez volunteers with a number of Watsonville neighborhood and safety groups and works with first-time offender youth.

In social environment:

• Peter Connery and Maggie McKay are members of the Project Homeless Connect Steering Committee, which has an annual event that connects homeless individuals with vital services. • Maria Virgen provides peer-led nutrition education and social support through her volunteer work with the Second Harvest Food Bank’s Passion for Produce program at Starlight Elementary. • Mary Masters is the director of Bridge of Hope, which connects volunteers with disabled residents of nursing facilities.

Source: Community Assessment Project