Activision

The common fantasy that childhood classics like “Toy Story” and “Calvin and Hobbes” represent is a dream in which toys are more than just toys. People look back at Activision’s beloved Skylanders series as the cultural artifact that turned this fantasy into a reality. But as far as Skylanders and its peers in the “toys to life” category are concerned, it’s actually the other way around. Skylanders is a video game that combines physical action figures with virtual gameplay, sure. But if the first two games had a major flaw, it was that the physical Skylanders didn’t feel enough like toys. They looked impressive as colorful, almost ornamental statues, but they only truly came to life onscreen.

With the new Skylanders installment Swap Force that launched over the weekend, publisher Activision and developer Vicarious Visions have done something important: the two companies have managed to make the Skylanders toys actually feel like toys.

As the name Swap Force suggests, the biggest change from previous Skylanders titles is the introduction of a new mechanic called “swapping.”The core Skylanders framework is still intact—you plug a small plastic platform known as the “portal of power” into your video game console of choice and plop down a Skylanders action figure who then appears onscreen to join in the action.

I couldn’t help but crack a smile when I first dropped “Tree Rex,” the ent-like character from 2012′s Skylander’s Giants, onto the new Swap Force portal and saw that he was still wearing the silly hat I unlocked from him in the previous game. I was transitioning from playing Giants on the Xbox 360 to Swap Force on the Wii U, and it’s an impressive technological feat in its own right that Activision discovered a way to imbue these little critters with a vibrant sense of history that grows as you continue to play with them.

Giants was already a great game, but Swap Force does Skylanders one better thanks to its new tech. A handful of the new characters added for Swap Force come in two distinct parts: a top and a bottom that are connected by a surprisingly strong magnet and can be mixed and matched for colorful combinations.

The Skylanders are broken down across the same elemental lines as in previous games (earth, fire, water, et cetera), but the interchangeable parts give more depth and complexity to your choices of which Skylanders to use than ever before. Bottoms offer different types of movement, while tops all have unique attack moves. Both have special abilities that are unlocked as you play with the Skylander. The “Wash Buckler,” for instance, is a Pirate-themed Octopus with tentacles for a bottom and a sword and musket pistol for weapons. “Hoot Loop,” meanwhile, is anowl that can teleport a few feet at a time and wields a magic wand. Switching the two can give you a wand-wielding owl with tentacle legs known as “Hoot Buckler” or “Wash Loop,” a sword-and-musket wielding octopus that, however illogically, floats above ground with a feathery bottom.

If that sounds silly, that’s the point. The Skylanders video game is as zany as its predecessors, which is a good thing. Each area in the game’s lengthy single-player campaign is lush and beautiful, with even the most seemingly mundane objects brimming with life in one way or another. The blocks you have to move back and forth to get to out-of-reach platforms have faces etched on them that grimace at your touch, and much like its corporate relative Diablo III, every level is packed with breakable tchotchkes that turn into gold coins when you smash them.

At face value, the video game is the part of Swap Force that seems the most similar to its two predecessors. But Vicarious Visions brought one major addition into Swap Force: for the first time in the console series, the on-screen Skylanders characters can jump up and down.It may sound like a small adjustment, but like the swapping mechanic, it’s a seemingly negligible tweak that vastly improves Swap Force’s gameplay. Now the levels don’t just look good, they actually feel accessible to a number of different types of exploration.

Simply put: it’s never been as fun to play Skylanders as it now. That is an achievement for Vicarious Visions no doubt, but it’s also important for Activision in another way. Seeing the success of Skylanders, a number of different competitors have started to launch their own “toys-to-life” titles to try to snag a piece of the toy-game hybrid pie. Disney released a Skylanders lookalike known as Disney Infinity over the summer, which allows players to mix and match the company’s iconic film and television characters. Nintendo also introduced an optional toy component to one of its Pokémon games for the Wii U this summer. Meanwhile, Rovio Entertainment, creators of the insanely popular mobile game series “Angry Birds,” partnered with Hasbro to create a line of adorable little figurines that can be scanned into Angry Birds Star Wars 2, which was released last month.

Chalk it up to the first mover advantage Activision has had, but none of these rivals measure up to Skylanders. Disney Infinity and Angry Birds Star Wars 2 both have more recognizable characters, but Hasbro and Disney Interactive both seem to have missed something that Activision is finally realizing with Swap Force: toys are meant to be played with, not collected. The Disney Infinity figures might look beautiful, but they feel more like the high-end statues you’d find at a comic book store than the well-worn box of Legos you tell your children to clean up every night before bed.

The new Skylanders, in comparison, just look like things you want to pick up and start messing around with. The interchangeable parts may make them easier to break or misplace, sure. But if you’re not putting your toys at some sort of risk when you’re playing with them, I don’t think you’re playing with them in the right way anyways. Activision already set the standard for this emerging genre with the first two Skylanders. With Swap Force, it has set a new one.