PHILADELPHIA — DeAngelo Hall sustained what may be a serious left leg injury in the third quarter of the Washington Redskins‘ 37-34 loss at Philadelphia.

“They think I tore my Achilles,” Hall said as he left the locker room on crutches, noting that he expected to undergo additional examinations on Monday.

Hall, one of the Redskins‘ starting cornerbacks, left the game with 10:36 to play in the third quarter while dropping back to cover Eagles wide receiver Jeremy Maclin. He appeared to get the leg caught in the grass and did not put any weight on the leg when he was helped to the sideline and then to the locker room.

SEE ALSO: Baker ejected in fight between Eagles and Redskins

Rookie Bashaud Breeland finished the game in Hall’s place. He made two of his three tackles after replacing Hall and nearly had an interception, though a replay revealed he did not secure the ball before it hit the ground.

“I definitely feel like Breeland came in with the right mindset and definitely stepped up and made some plays for us,” said cornerback David Amerson. “We all knew he can play, so we don’t feel like we missed a beat or anything like that. We just know moving forward, we don’t know how long D’s going to be out, but us as a group — the secondary, period — we’ve got to step up and take it to the next level.”

A torn Achilles’ tendon would cost Hall the remainder of the season. After surgery, the general prognosis is a six-month recovery.

He was one of 10 Redskins players who missed part of the game because of injury. Coach Jay Gruden said defensive end Jason Hatcher will be day-to-day after straining a hamstring in the fourth quarter, while left guard Shawn Lauvao also left in the third quarter when his right knee, which he initially hurt Sept. 14 against Jacksonville, began to swell.

“It’s good, it’s good,” Hatcher said. “It just caught on me a little bit, it’s tight. It didn’t pop or nothing like that. Hopefully, we can get it loosened up this week and be ready for Thursday.”

Outside linebacker Brian Orakpo injured the middle finger in his left hand in the third quarter and thought he got it stuck in a player’s shoulder pads. Center Kory Lichtensteiger missed a series with an unspecified injury, while right tackle Tyler Polumbus returned after injuring his right knee and running back Alfred Morris returned to the game after injuring one of his knees.

Strong safety Duke Ihenacho did not return after injuring his left foot, though Frank Kearse was back on the field after sustaining an unspecified injury in the fourth quarter.

“The guys battled their [rears] off,” Lauvao said. “It’s frustrating because you want to go out there and help your teammates. We have a quick week. Have to make sure I do what I got to do.”

Special teams woes not only culprit

Washington’s special teams units made several gaffes for the second time in three weeks. In addition to a missed 33-yard field goal by Kai Forbath with 10:07 remaining, the Redskins also allowed a touchdown on a 102-yard kickoff return by Chris Polk, which was the third-longest kickoff return in Eagles history.

“I wouldn’t point the finger just at special teams,” Gruden said. “We all had our hand in this — coaching also — in this defeat, so I’m not going to point my finger at special teams. But we do have to find a way to cover kicks better.”

Forbath earlier made field goals of 49 and 44 yards.

Golston misses 2nd straight game

Defensive end Kedric Golston, hampered by a strained left groin, did not play for the second consecutive week. Golston, listed as doubtful on the injury report, strained the muscle in the season-opener at Houston and missed the game against Jacksonville last week.

Four other injured players were inactive: Quarterback Robert Griffin III, tight end Jordan Reed, cornerback Tracy Porter and inside linebacker Akeem Jordan. The healthy scratches were wide receiver Santana Moss and rookie left tackle Morgan Moses, who made his debut against the Jaguars.

Extra points

The Redskins were called for 10 penalties for 131 yards, which is the most total yardage they’ve surrendered in a game since Dec. 12, 2004, when they gave up 137 yards in a 17-14 home loss to the Eagles. … Officials flagged strong safety Akeem Davis for a horse-collar tackle on Darren Sproles as the Eagles running back returned a punt in the third quarter, though it appeared they waited to throw the flag until watching the replay on the stadium video boards. … Punter Tress Way kicked off again with Forbath nursing a strained right groin. … Rookie wide receiver Ryan Grant worked on catching punts before the game. Moss and DeSean Jackson are the two back-up punt returners. … Griffin, who is on crutches and has his left ankle in a hard cast, did not make the trip.