Protected and served

Waukegan Ald. Larry TenPas was perfectly within his right to destroy that raccoon. I'm sure when he became an alderman he took an oath to protect and serve the citizens of this city.

TenPas Part II

I'm glad Ald. TenPas put that raccoon out of its misery. Raccoons are never out during the day so it's obvious something was wrong with that animal.

Enjoy retirement

One of the mail carriers in Waukegan is retiring in March and he will be deeply missed. Thank you for all your good service over the 30 years and walking the eight miles to deliver our mail. He always had time to say hello with a smile on his face. He loved his work and was always on time with his deliveries. I hope he has a great retirement and enjoys the rest of his days. We'll all miss him, thank you.

Snowed in

In response to "Shovel sidewalks in Waukegan, it's a law." That's a joke. People can shovel their sidewalk but once the pedestrian reaches the intersection they can't cross the street because the snowplows have plowed the snow so high that it'd be incredibly dangerous to continue the walk. What difference would it make if the people shoveled their sidewalk if the snow banks prohibits them from walking any further?

Saving money and memories

I'm glad the state is not sending out renewal notices anymore because now the state can save some money. Once a year people need to remember to get their license plate tags and start being responsible. Come on, people, mark it on your calendar if you can't remember.

Gliniewicz fatigue

In response to the article about Lt. Joe Gliniewicz, enough already. There's nothing new in that article, it's just a rehash of information that we already knew about him. Quit giving the man and his grieving family more ink.

Enforce sticker law

Regarding the article "License plate stickers renewal reminder dropped." People have to be vigilant to remember to get a sticker. I see at least five cars a day with expired stickers on their cars. Why am I spending over $600 a year on license plate stickers if the police aren't going to enforce the law?

Obamacare blues

In response to the article "Getting health care act together." I thought Obamacare was supposed to save us money. All this health care is doing is costing the taxpayers big dollars so the people on welfare can receive free Medicaid. Rather than these people fending for themselves or being told they have to buy a policy, the government gives it to them free of charge. If everybody has Obamacare why do we need free clinics sponsored by the taxpayers?

'Make America Great Again'

Please, please, please let it be Donald Trump.

Twitter @newssun

Editor's note:

Talk of the County is a reader-generated column of opinions. If you see something you disagree with or think is incorrect, please tell us. Call us at 312-222-4554 or email talkofthecounty@tribpub.com. For a continuously updating blog of Talk of the County comments, visit newssunonline.com/talk.