Business Honors for May 17, 2015

Business Honors for May 17, 2015

BATON ROUGE AREA

X design Inc. and Kean Miller LLP won a national second-place award from the Legal Marketing Association in the social/interactive category for the Kean Miller Community Connect mobile app and website as part of the law firm’s ongoing “People First” branding campaign.

The goal of the campaign is to articulate the firm’s collaborative culture, its “people first” approach to business and contributions to the community that encourage others to participate in civic and charitable causes and events in the region.

UtiliWorks received the Best Smart Infrastructure Project of the year award at CS Week 2015 on behalf of its client, the South Carolina city of Orangeburg’s Department of Public Utilities.

UtiliWorks helped Orangeburg design a smart grid system that provides the utility system with operational improvements through advanced technology for the benefit of its customers.

Utiliworks is a graduate of LSU’s Louisiana Business & Technology Center incubator.

NEW ORLEANS AREA

Dr. Gustavo Coutin, of New Orleans, was named by the Louisiana Dental Association as a member of the 2014 class of LDA Stars to acknowledge his contributions and leadership to the organization.

Coutin was cited primarily for his volunteer time, skills and expertise he used in serving the association as chairman of the 2015 New Orleans Dental Conference and LDA Annual Session.

Michael W. Kearney, founder, chairman and chief executive officer of The Kearney Companies Inc., was selected by the World Trade Center of New Orleans to receive the 2015 C. Alvin Bertel Award.

The annual award recognizes an individual who has made significant contributions to the Louisiana port community. Kearney has extensive experience in the global shipping industry and has been involved in the development of trade and commerce in the Port of New Orleans for over 40 years.

The Kearney Companies Inc., founded in 1996, is a third-party logistics company that serves the supply chain needs of large importers and exporters at the Port of New Orleans. It services include warehousing and distribution, rail transloading and import/export freight forwarding in New Orleans and Savannah, Georgia.

Kearney is active in a number industry associations, having served as an officer of or lead various groups. Kearney will be honored at a ceremony and luncheon on June 24 at the Sheraton New Orleans Hotel.

Louisiana Health Cooperative Inc. has earned a three-year accreditation from the National Committee for Quality Assurance.

The award recognizes the organization’s exceptional performance and quality standards in serving health care providers, producers and members. It is based on a comprehensive review.

Students from Loyola University New Orleans earned first place in the national Bateman Case Study Competition held by the Public Relations Student Society of America.

Teams are asked to tackle a full-scale public relations campaign.

For 14 of the past 15 years, Loyola has placed in the top three in the country and earned its ninth national title.

Students worked with Home Matters, a nonprofit aimed at building awareness for affordable housing and better communities nationwide. Katie Collier, Chelsea Cunningham, Kenny Motley, Martin Quintero and NiRey Reynolds, students in the School of Mass Communication, created the “Geaux Home” campaign and events to highlight how important home is to public education, safety, health and other issues critical to strong communities.

James R. Logan IV, a preservation activist and attorney, received the Harnett T. Kane Award from the Louisiana Landmarks Society.

The award recognizes an individual or organization for significant lifetime contributions to historic preservation, locally or regionally.

Logan was cited for developing a specialized law practice with recognized expertise in historic preservation litigation and administrative procedures. He has represented numerous individual and organizational clients over the last several decades in lawsuits involving the National Historic Preservation Act and related federal, state and local historic preservation laws.

He has served on the boards of numerous neighborhood associations, historic preservation organizations and planning groups.

AROUND LOUISIANA

Five area business executives have been named finalists for the EY Entrepreneur Of The Year 2015 award in the Gulf Coast Area.

They are Jay H. Campbell Jr., president and CEO of Associated Grocers Inc., Ed Tinsley, CEO of Bernhard Energy/TME/Bernhard LLC and Sean E. Reilly, CEO of Lamar Advertising Co., all in Baton Rouge; Troy Collins, CEO of Quality Companies in Youngsville; and Dennis N. Stine, CEO of Stine Lumber Co. in Sulphur.

The awards program recognizes entrepreneurs who demonstrate excellence and success in such areas as innovation, financial performance and personal commitment to their businesses and communities.

Award winners will be announced June 25. Regional award winners are eligible for the EY Entrepreneur of the Year national program.