Fall is one of my favorite times of year, and it’s not just the taffy apples. I’m talking crispy cool days that make my cheeks red and my toes tingle, a seasonal shift to a longer night, a shorter day, and great sales on outdoor patio furniture.

“Every leaf speaks bliss to me, fluttering from the autumn tree,” writes Emily Bronte.

“This is the season of the harvest,” writes Elson M. Haas, “the fruition of all the growth of spring and summer.”

How did you grow this spring and summer? Did you spend more time shopping at farmer’s markets, getting enough sleep, taking long walks to ward off shortening attention spans?

“These days of seasonal change around the equinox are a perfect time to cleanse your body and lighten yourself for fall’s work,” writes Haas in “Staying Healthy With The Seasons,” a reminder that changing with the seasons makes us more in tune with nature.

In fall, he writes, “Through a daily discipline of inner attention and physical exercise, you can create a more open, resilient and supple body; a mentally and physically relaxed state; and a stronger resistance to disease.”

Ah, yes. Inner attention and physical exercise. A more open and supple body. A relaxed state, mentally and physically. A stronger immune system. All that, and a cup of hot chocolate, sounds to me like the perfect run-up to winter.

Sadly, fall is when many people’s fitness programs fall off a cliff. It’s colder outside, it gets darker sooner, and our summertime push to play outside and look good in shorts gives way to an overwhelming urge to hibernate indoors and overdose on video games.

Resist!

Harvest your best intentions, and consider the following:

■ Start a journal. I’ve said this a few (thousand) times before and here I go again: Keeping a journal is an easy and powerful way to help you create positive change.

Your doctor can’t make you exercise. Health care reform can’t keep you from eating junk. Personal change is a personal choice. Keeping track online, or on paper, will strengthen your resolve, make you accountable, reinforce your intention.

■ Set a goal. Give yourself the next three months to reach a goal that is meaningful to you. Touch your toes? Run or walk a half-marathon in less than three hours? Wean yourself off sugary drinks and processed foods?

Be realistic. Create a goal that is small, measurable, totally doable. That’s the key to success. Decide on a detailed plan to realize your goal, write it down, and keep track of your progress — daily — in your journal.

Change is not linear. Expect backsliding. Don’t judge, just do. Go back and reread the opening quote from Elson Haas. Journal keeping is what “a daily discipline of inner attention” looks like.

■ Reap your reward. Every time you decide to eat a meal at home this fall and winter, instead of eating out, put $5 into a box. Then one chilly January day count it up and spend it on a fitness-related treat for spring.

A better bike? Private lessons with your favorite yoga teacher? A walking trip through Scotland? Rewards work wonders when it comes to motivating change.

■ Prepare an indoor refuge. In spring, we clean; in fall, we find balance. Don’t fight the urge to spend more time indoors in fall, if that’s what your body is telling you. Instead, create a space in your home that is a true refuge, a place of calm where you can retreat, relax, renew.

Choose a corner, or dedicate a room. Incorporate soothing colors (pale blue for peace, pale green for balance) and use photos, quotes, stones, candles, or incense to create an environment that is separate and apart from the stress and strain of daily life. Go there every day, to sit, to breathe. If you did nothing more than establish a 10-minute meditation practice this fall, you'll have changed your life in a profound and healing way.

■ Try something new. Before the autumn leaves disappear, sign up for something that will stimulate your synapses in the coming months. Bridge lessons? Spanish classes? Ballroom dancing? Lifelong learning is part of a healthy lifestyle. It falls to you to make it happen.

Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com.