The dire news released earlier this year when it came to the shortage of primary care doctors in Western New York came as no surprise to Dr. John Fudyma.

Fudyma is a clinical associate professor and chief of general internal medicine at the University at Buffalo School of Medicine, and an associate medical director at Erie County Medical Center.

He’s also on the front lines when it comes to recruiting primary care doctors, which include internists like himself, family physicians, pediatricians and OB/GYNs.

In can be a heavy lift for a variety of reasons, he told me. They include:

The pay disparity between front line doctors and specialists. (Think roughly $180,000 a year vs. $600,000 or more in some cases.)

Growing access to health insurance under the Affordable Care act, which is pushing more patients into the system.

Sliding reimbursements from insurers, particularly in Medicare and Medicaid.

The growing costs involved in establishing and maintaining a medical practice.

Solo practices of the kind our parents and grandparents visited years ago are fast becoming a thing of the past, Fudyma said, in part because converting an office for electronic record-keeping can cost tens of thousands of dollars alone.

Many Western New York doctors near, or over, retirement age have decided to call it a career rather than continue to practice in such a health care climate, he said.

So it was with a knowing nod that Fudyma and others familiar with health care in the region greeted the following news last June from Sen. Charles Schumer:

The state’s four westernmost counties had 74 primary care physicians per 100,000 people in 2010. By last year, that figure had dropped to 57 for every 100,000, a nearly 25 percent decline.

As is the case across the country, nurse practitioners and physician assistants are helping to plug the gap. Find out how in today’s cover story in WNY Refresh.

Fudyma said those health specialists may become particularly important in rural areas, where the primary care physician shortage is most pronounced.

“There are many issues behind the doctor shortage,” Fudyma said, “but one of the ways to address that shortage is to use managed care teams for primary care patients. There is definitely a role for nurse practitioners and physician assistants.”

But even the current stronger supporting cast won’t be enough, those interviewed for the Refresh story said.

In fact, two nurse practitioners interviewed bemoaned that UB has eliminated its pediatric N.P. program.

Schumer has introduced the Resident Physicians Shortage Act, which would bolster number of Medicare-supported physician training slots by 15,000 nationwide over the next several years.

UB, Kaleida Health and ECMC also look to do more. Those medical leaders are working to “develop a strategy around primary care recruitment,” as well to attract more nurse practitioners and physician assistants, Fudyma said. He said Paul Wietig, core curriculum coordinator for the UB School of Public Health and Health Professions, is leading the effort.

“They’re looking to develop opportunities for interprofessional education, where physicians, mid-levels, therapists, pharmacists, nurses all train together.”

The goal is to create medical “care teams” to treat and educate patients, as well as prevent illness.

“We see the need in the future – and actually now – of care teams providing the majority of the care delivered to our patients,” Fudyma said. “It’s all focused on chronic disease management and quality care improvement. The physician is captain of a team. The team consists of nurses, nurse practitioners, P.A.s and other office staff. What the team is supposed to do is better manage highly complex patients, to improve access for more patients and to look at overall quality and cost of care provided to patients.”

Fudyma said N.P.s and P.A.s are “very good at specific tasks and they’re very good at primary preventative care and basic chronic disease management.

“You can’t replace the physician with medically fragile, complex patients,” he added. “Physicians training is such that we are better at identifying early on issues in medically complex patients. We’re much better at managing multiple medications, multiple chronic diseases and seeing potential medical trends earlier than later.”

The role of primary care physicians in large part is to make sure these medically complex patients are not falling through the cracks and that P.A.s and N.P.s who are working for a practice “are developed, trained and kept up to date – that they’re providing state-of-the art care for their patients.”

How should a patient look at treatment from one of these highly trained professionals?

“Get to know the care team,” Fudyma advised. “Get to know the physician who’s overseeing the care team and the nurse practitioner and the P.A., and you want to be assured that the physician is overseeing your care and involved in that care, even from a distance. That team-based care provides a level of comfort for patients.”

Here’s what patients should keep in mind should they decide to visit a nurse practitioner-led primary care practice:

“There are ranges of physicians out there, from very good physicians to mediocre physicians,” he said, “and the same is going to be true of any other health care provider. What patients have to recognize from a primary care point of view – screening for certain disease, providing immunizations, and the care of some very basic, urgent visits – nurse practitioners and P.A.s are very capable of addressing that. Once you get into some more medically complex conditions, you may want to assess whether you may want to switch to a physician-led team where all of the information coming in from specialists or other providers is being assessed properly and handled properly. But for people who are healthy and getting routine preventative health maintenance, a nurse practitioner led team will be fine.”

email: refresh@buffnews.com

Twitter: @BNrefresh