The doctor-turned-state-senator challenging Sen. John McCain for his U.S. Senate seat brought her plucky, long-shot campaign to Payson with an appearance before the Payson Tea Party last week.

Staunchly conservative, Mohave County state senator Dr. Kelli Ward attacked McCain as out of touch and too liberal, while blasting the Affordable Care Act, Common Core academic standards and any attempt to regulate firearms.

Pollsters say McCain is vulnerable in the Republican primary, despite having served for 30 years in the Senate and as the Republican presidential candidate against Barack Obama. He has been censured by the Gila County Republican Party, as well as the Maricopa County Republican Party — mostly for supporting comprehensive immigration reform.

The Duke University educated primary care physician said, “We really need to change the status quo in Washington, D.C. But if we keep electing the same people — and Senator McCain has been there for 30 years — can we expect a different outcome? You guys know the definition of insanity — and that’s just insane.”

She spoke for nearly two hours, fielding a variety of questions. She heads the Senate Education Committee and got involved in a complicated and sometimes bitter confrontation between State Superintendent of Public Instruction Diane Douglas and Gov. Doug Ducey, both Republicans. The two have clashed about who controls the staff at the state department of education and whether the state should completely withdraw from Common Core standards or modify them to suit state needs.

Common Core

Sen. Ward carried a bill that would have clarified who controlled the department of education staff, but the effort at conciliation fell apart when the rift between Ducey and Douglas deepened into a lawsuit.

One questioner said he’d heard that the funding for Common Core comes from Saudi Arabia and that students would end up reciting Muslim prayers under its provisions.

Ward responded, “Common Core is an example of a federal takeover — if not an international takeover — of education. They don’t call it Common Core in China, but it’s exactly the same.”

When she tried to explain the idea behind the national academic standards developed by educators and consultants under the umbrella of the National Council of Governors she said, “(My) friend said, ‘That’s communism, that’s communism straight up’ and he lived under it.

“He said, ‘I lived in a place where people could knock on your door and take you away and no one would ever see you again.’”

She added that many people who listen to left-wing talk radio programs are unabashed socialists. “When you listen to how extreme they are you understand why we’re going in a downward spiral.

“I want to fight for our representative Republic, our system of the free market, our great Constitution.

“You have to have people who are willing to fight for that against the extremes — the people who want to be Europe — or worse — want to be communists. I want to pull Common Core up by the roots.”

Immigration reform

She also took a strong position against comprehensive immigration reform as supported previously by McCain, which would combine tough enforcement measures on the border with a guest worker program and some means by which people who have lived her for a long time illegally could seek to eventually legalize their status.

“I don’t want to hear about comprehensive immigration reform — it’s a code word for amnesty,” she said. “I don’t think we can reward people who have come here illegally. We have to secure our borders so we know who is coming and going.”

One questioner asked whether she considers criminal checks for people who buy guns an infringement of constitutional rights.

She said she had sponsored a state law that would essentially bar regulation of guns, which didn’t make it through the Legislature. She said of the Second Amendment guarantee of the right to bear arms, “That right shall not be infringed and it comes from our Creator and that’s that.”

Clive Bundy trip controversy

She also talked about her trip to Nevada to talk with Clive Bundy and his supporters during a standoff with federal authorities, after the rancher for years refused to pay grazing fees for his cattle to graze on public lands.

“It’s common knowledge I was here. That’s one of the things the opposition has already polled and they think it’s a bad thing. I went there to support our Constitution. I support our First Amendment right to free speech — that’s why it’s so great to be in the United States. Look at what happened in China in Tiananmen Square. So I went up there to do just that. There were people with guns. They were not pointing guns at the federal government. They were just armed. It was kind of scary.”

Health care reform

Ward also spoke strongly against Arizona’s participation in the health exchanges, which have provided health insurance for millions of people through the Affordable Care Act. The legislation allowed states to set up insurance exchanges, but provided for federally run health exchanges if states decided not to set up their own. A federal lawsuit now before the U.S. Supreme Court would deny insurance subsidies to people that have a federal, rather than a state exchange — including Arizona. Another lawsuit brought by state lawmakers seeks to repeal Arizona’s decision to expand eligibility for health coverage through the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System for people making up to 100 percent of a federal poverty wage.

“If the court case passes and I think it should, those subsidies will go away and Obamacare will crumple in on itself. It cannot stand. Guess what: As soon as that court case comes through, we are going to be pressured to take the federal heroin — the money. Heroin is a very dangerous substance. One time of using it can leave you addicted and dead. That’s where we are as a society. But there’s a chance to make it crumple if we are strong.”