Marc Andreessen, co-founder and general partner of Andreessen Horowitz, believes companies are in danger of being “vaporized” when the market turns. Bloomberg News

Marc Andreessen is one of the most influential people in venture capital. He’s also one of the top evangelists of technology and tech investing in general, using his massive Twitter megaphone to argue almost daily about the transformative powers of emerging technology trends and generally dismissing talk of a bubble.

So when he injects a note of measured caution, it’s worth paying attention.

In one of his patented numbered Tweetstorms–this one went from #1 to #18–Andressen today joined the debate started last week by Bill Gurley, who in a Wall Street Journal interview sounded the alarm bells about excessive spending by startups.

Andreessen agrees, and said that the environment of the last ten years, in which startups could easily raise money at ever-higher valuations, “will not last.”

He also said this:

4/When the market turns, and it will turn, we will find out who has been swimming without trunks on: many high burn rate co's will VAPORIZE. — Marc Andreessen (@pmarca) September 25, 2014

And this:

16/Eighth: When market turns, M&A mostly stops. Nobody will want to buy your cash-incinerating startup. There will be no Plan B. VAPORIZE. — Marc Andreessen (@pmarca) September 25, 2014

He ended the Tweetstorm with an ominous warning to those companies that think they are special and not subject to these forces:

18/Worry. — Marc Andreessen (@pmarca) September 25, 2014

In later tweets Andreessen went on to say that his firm, Andreessen Horowitz, had pulled away from growth-stage investing, largely because hedge funds and other public-market investors have been pumping up valuations by crowding into private deals (he has been outspoken about the way these out-of-towners have come into Silicon Valley deals and in his view behaved poorly).

Andreessen was careful to emphasize that these thoughts apply to the normal ebb and flow of capital and do not mean we’re in a bubble. Still, you can bet that most venture capitalists will be talking about this today, and at their Monday morning board meetings.

The warnings from Andreessen, Gurley and other VCs are reminiscent of alarm bells sounded in 2008 by venture firm Sequoia Capital when it told its portfolio companies to take a hard look at expenses ahead of a prolonged downturn. The difference there was that the presentation, “RIP: Good Times,” was designed only for Sequoia’s companies–it subsequently leaked out–and came during the financial crisis.

Since then we’ve seen Silicon Valley get back to partying, and it has grown into one fine party indeed. Andreessen’s words, and Gurley’s too, are a reminder to startups that all parties eventually end.

Write to Zoran Basich at zoran.basich@wsj.com. Follow him on Twitter at @zoranbasich