Adventist Bolingbrook Hospital, one of the emptiest hospitals in the Chicago area, wants to swap 24 traditional inpatient beds—17 percent of its total capacity—for a psychiatric unit.

The 138-bed Adventist Bolingbrook is one of nine hospitals in Amita Health, the joint operating company formed Feb. 1 by Adventist Midwest Health and Alexian Brothers Health System.

Adventist Bolingbrook would join a growing number of hospitals opening inpatient psych units. The trend is due in part to more people getting insurance under the Affordable Care Act. The law also means people no longer can be denied health insurance coverage for having a mental illness. So hospitals can get paid for care that previously might not have brought in any revenue.

At the same time, Illinois has been closing state-operated mental health centers, and Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel shuttered city clinics, pushing some mental health patients into hospital emergency rooms.

In response, hospitals are repurposing their own space and beefing up outpatient care. For Adventist, creating an inpatient unit for patients who likely will need follow-up outpatient care creates a new pipeline of revenue, experts say.

“Hospitals are being cut in general,” said Barbara Otto, CEO of Health & Disability Advocates, a Chicago nonprofit. “They're trying to avert hospitalizations because we know it's the most costly care. How do I build up my outpatient practice? I build it by looking at what is an underserved population that has long been a challenge to my ED or my ER.”

An Adventist spokeswoman did not return messages seeking comment.

Adventist Bolingbrook was the first new hospital in the state in 25 years when it opened in 2008. It has struggled to find patients from the start. During its first year in operation, 58 percent of beds staffed by doctors, nurses and other providers were empty. The situation improved only modestly through 2013, with 55 percent of beds routinely empty that year, the most recent year for which state data were available.

REDUCING PATIENT TRANSFERS

The hospital is proposing to establish an inpatient psychiatric unit by renovating existing space, according to an application it filed with the Illinois Health Facilities and Services Review Board this month. The board, which regulates new health care projects in the state to prevent duplication of services, must approve the proposal.

The hospital would convert 24 of its 106 medical-surgical beds, the most common general-purpose hospital beds, into adult psychiatric beds. The project is estimated to cost about $3.5 million.

In its application, Adventist Bolingbrook said the project aims to improve access to care and keep patients in their community. The move also could reduce revenue lost when insured patients leave to get treatment elsewhere.

Patients now are initially seen in Adventist Bolingbrook's emergency department, then referred to another hospital. The ED referred more than 500 patients to psychiatric units during the year ended Sept. 30, 2014.

“The necessity to refer/admit these patients to another hospital compromises the patients' continuity of care,” Adventist Bolingbrook said in its application.

The hospital expects many of the inpatient psychiatric patients will be referred from its own emergency department. It aims to reduce adult psychiatric patient transfers from the emergency department to other hospitals by 80 percent within 18 months, the application said.