One of the more intriguing — and disturbing — aspects of Barack Obama’s presidential behavior is his stubbornly persistent belief that saying something, anything, makes it so. Even in the face of bold facts to the contrary.

ObamaCare state exchanges are failing one after the other and he routinely informs both domestic and foreign audiences that it’s a huge success.

Thanks to his virtual international coalition of 65 countries, now minus Canada, Obama says on national TV that ISIS is contained. Hours later, its operatives kill 130 in Paris, an horrific slaughter the Democrat dismissed as a “setback.” Yes, especially for the dead people.

The United Nations — that once well-meaning, now feckless body of talkers — assembles scores of delegates to emit hot air in Paris about global warming, which Obama says was a sharp rebuke to ISIS’ killers. At least two of its adherents apparently missed the rebuff and killed 14 Americans in San Bernardino.

Obama repeats that the greatest threat to American national security is global warming, which Army leaders don’t even include among top threats.

Against overwhelmingly negative public opinion, Obama says he’ll admit to the United States at least 10,000 alleged refugees from Syria, dismissing doubters as needless worriers or perhaps religious bigots.

He assures that’s because each one of the newcomers will be thoroughly vetted first by that same U.N. and then by U.S. security agencies. The FBI director says thorough vetting of paperless refugees from a chaotic war zone is impossible.

Now it emerges that the thorough U.S. vetting of the fortunately deceased female San Bernardino terrorist from Pakistan did not include even checking her jihadist social media postings. No “Likes” for that negligence.

In his reluctant Dec. 6 Oval Office Address, Obama said things like: “Since the day I took this office, I’ve authorized U.S. forces to take out terrorists abroad precisely because I know how real the danger is.”

Inquiring minds wonder to what effect? How did terrorism’s leadership, which he said was “decimated” in 2012, reconstitute itself so effectively? And why is Obama intellectually incapable of calling Islamic extremists what they are?

He talks of increasing allied air assaults. But we’re 17 months into the assaults. Why does it take new terrorist attacks to ramp up what he said we were already doing? And why do 75% of the sorties return without dropping their ordnance? (Hint: Obama’s strict rules of engagement prohibit collateral casualties and require advance leaflet drop warnings.)

In his weekly remarks Saturday Obama said “Our airstrikes are hitting ISIL harder than ever.” Which wouldn’t take much.

He also stated, accurately, that Special Ops forces are in action, but neglected to mention they total about 250 against an ISIS army estimated at 40,000.

Then, in a jaw-dropping self-parody, the president said he would continue his fight against terrorism by visiting two government offices this week, the Pentagon and Counter-Terrorism center. No doubt ISIS leaders are quaking in their sandals.

The respected Thomas Lifson over at American Thinker wrote: “No wonder so many in the public actively distrust and disbelieve what they are told by the nation’s elites.”

Then, there’s the Iran nuclear deal. You may recall, although you’re not supposed to, the interminable negotiations were touted as preventing the world’s largest national exporter of terrorism from developing nuclear weapons. We now know Iran hasn’t even signed the agreement.

And Iran has violated existing U.N. resolutions in recent weeks by testing not once, but twice, ICBMs capable of carrying nuke warheads. The second test came as the U.N. was still discussing the first violation.

Last week Obama’s U.N. Ambassador, Samantha Power, was asked in a Senate committee hearing what action the administration has taken about the obvious Iranian violations. She said it had presented the case to the U.N. where there had been “multiple discussions.”

“Discussions are a form of U.N. action,” Power explained.

Well, such Obama team thinking is a form of irresponsible inaction — and frightening delusion.

RELATED:

The Incredible Shrinking President

News Flash for Obama: Terrorism isn’t scaring Americans; You are

Finally, someone in office says it: ‘We are at war with militant Islam’

Defiant Obama vows unchanged ISIS strategy, more Syrian refugees