8 Western Pennsylvania hospitals penalized over infections

Not making strides Eight hospitals in Western Pennsylvania have not reduced hospital-acquired infections: • ACMH Hospital, Kittanning • Butler Memorial Hospital, Butler • Conemaugh Valley Memorial Hospital, Johnstown • Heritage Valley Health System, Beaver • Magee Womens Hospital, Oakland • St. Vincent Hospital, Erie • UPMC Presbyterian-Shadyside, Oakland and Shadyside • UPMC Passavant, McCandless and Cranberry Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Eight hospitals in Western Pennsylvania were penalized by the federal government because patients were infected while being treated at their facilities.

The hospitals are among more than 700 across the country whose Medicare reimbursement rates will be cut by 1 percent for not reducing hospital-acquired infections (HAC), the Department of Health and Human Services announced Thursday.

The penalties are part of a program implemented under the Affordable Care Act, President Obama's health overhaul, which is meant to improve quality at the nation's hospitals and lower spending on preventable complications.

“The HAC reduction program builds on the administration's efforts to achieve better patient outcomes while slowing health care cost growth,” HHS said in a statement.

In addition to focusing on bloodstream and urinary tract infections that patients can get from catheters, the program is intended to cut readmission rates.

HHS said an earlier version of the program to reduce infections saved the Medicare program about $30 million a year.

Among the eight hospitals being penalized for 2015 were three owned by UPMC: Magee Womens, UPMC Presbyterian-Shadyside and UPMC Passavant. Spokeswoman Wendy Zellner said hospital officials are reviewing the data and could not provide specific comment. She noted that the health system has “been working vigorously to address these issues.”

One of seven hospitals in rival health system Allegheny Health Network was penalized: St. Vincent in Erie.

Spokesman Dan Laurent declined to comment.

Alex Nixon is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-320-7928 or anixon@tribweb.com.