Hundreds of people, including many dressed in police uniforms, attended a vigil Saturday for a police officer seriously injured during a student march near East High School earlier this month.

“John (Adsit) opened his eyes last week, and it was incredibly emotional and encouraging when he was able to smile and mouth ‘I love you’ to his family this week,” a woman identifying herself as Adsit’s cousin told the gathering.

Numerous police officers, citizens and a parent of an East High School student spoke at the vigil at Sunken Gardens Park near Elati Street.

People cheered encouragement for Adsit and gathered in small groups to pray on his behalf. Meantime, during the vigil, someone stole the Adsit family’s vehicle, a silver 2012 Hyundai Sonata.

“I guess someone took the opportunity to steal the family car,” said Mary McIver, Denver police spokeswoman.

The car was reported stolen around 1 p.m. from the 600 block of Speer Boulevard.

Adsit was injured Dec. 3, along with three other officers, on East Colfax Avenue as they escorted students from East High School who had marched to protest the lack of an indictment in a fatal police shooting in Ferguson, Mo.

A car ran up onto a sidewalk, hitting the bicycle officers.

Adsit suffered the most severe injuries and faces more surgeries.

“John remains in critical condition at this time, having undergone eight surgeries, repairing crushed ribs, punctured lung, severed arteries, multiple broken bones, skin and organ loss, pneumonia, fever and infection,” his cousin announced at the vigil.

“His fight to live has been unbelievable, and we want you to know that your prayers have made a difference!”

Denver Police Chief Robert White, who attended the vigil, said the turnout Saturday demonstrates that people recognize the sacrifice that officers like Adsit make while risking their lives in the line of duty.

“It really speaks to a community who really cares,” White said. “We’re all here to pray for a speedy recovery.”

Alex Burney, father of an East High student, said East students and their family members have raised $10,000 for Adsit’s family.

Ralph Gallegos, a Jefferson County Sheriff’s Office investigator and a state police chaplain, cried as he addressed the crowd over a microphone.

“Too often this doesn’t happen,” he said, referring to a gathering in support of a police officer. “It’s a blessing to see all of you here today.”

Adsit’s family statement described him as a man of faith.

“John is a loving father of four and husband, a son, a brother to 11 siblings and thousands of officers, nephew, cousin, coach, teammate and loyal friend,” the statement said.

No charges have been filed in the crash.

Christopher Booker, 41, was driving the car that hit the officers, and police said at the time they believed the crash was caused by a medical incident.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, kmitchell@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kirkmitchell, denverpost.com/coldcases