ARVADA — The Arvada Center’s exuberant, muscular production of “Memphis: The Musical” celebrates the black roots of rock ‘n’ roll through a story tackling the stuttering process of integration in 1950s Memphis, Tenn.

As Felicia, the aspiring singer plucked by a foresighted disc jockey from a rhythm & blues nightclub, Aisha Jackson is dazzling, with a voice to match her beauty. The DJ, twitchy Huey Calhoun (Jim Hogan), recognizes Felicia’s potential and is besotted with her, determined to make her a star despite the reservations of his boss.

The local African-Americans who frequent the Beale Street nightclub owned by Felicia’s intimidating brother (Keith L. Hatten) know Felicia is gifted, too. Their displeasure is clear when Huey walks into the club, but softens when he makes his case with “Music of My Soul.”

Huey’s street cred solidifies when, during a tryout at a radio station, Huey yanks a smarmy Perry Como tune and replaces it with “Scratch My Itch,” a hot-blooded number by Wailin’ Joe (Sidney Dupont, channeling both Prince and Little Richard).

The infectious music, by Bon Jovi founding member David Bryan, pays homage to the gospel and blues roots of rock. “Make Me Stronger” is such a siren call that you almost expect converts to approach the preacher.

Not everyone’s got the beat. Huey’s mother (Melissa Swift-Sawyer, whose magnificent voice is showcased in the transformative “Change Don’t Come Easy”) is a bigot who can’t grasp her son’s fascination with “race music,” and is even more appalled upon learning of his romance with Felicia. And the radio station owner (a pompous, avaricious Robert Michael Sanders) tolerates Huey’s playlists only because the music rakes in the advertising dollars.

“Memphis” tackles race more directly and honestly than, say, “Hairspray.” The N-bomb drops a couple of times in Act I, but the story also pulls some punches. Felicia and Huey survive a vicious encounter with some racist thugs.

But it’s left to the audience to imagine other slights, like venues that require “colored” acts to use a back door, or whether the big-city producer actually cuts a fair deal with Felicia. (One example: The white producers famously cheated songwriters Herman Santiago and Jimmy Merchant out of royalties for “Why Do Fools Fall in Love?”)

In the wake of the shootings and riots in Ferguson, Mo., it’s a little hard to accept a finale that seems to tidily unite everyone through music. Indeed, the last number, “Steal Your Rock N’Roll” suggests more than one meaning, especially when Huey can’t resist grabbing the microphone for one more chance to broadcast his name.

Kitty Skillman Hilsabeck’s crisp choreography shows off Chris Campbell’s dynamic costumes to advantage, as well as the nimble cast. Mathenee Treco’s gymnastic flexibility made the audience gasp.

If you see “Memphis,” try to attend one of the two performances featuring a post-show talkback (Sept. 19 and 24). The cast was in its last weeks of rehearsal when a white policeman killed Michael Brown , and the cast and crew members’ thoughts on that confluence should be riveting.

Claire Martin: 303-954-1477, cmartin@denverpost.com or twitter.com/byclairemartin

MEMPHIS Book and lyrics by Joe Dipietro, music and lyrics by David Bryan, based on a concept by George W. George. Directed by Rod A. Lansberry, choreography by Kitty Skillman Hilsabeck, scene design by Brian Mallgrave. Featuring Aisha Jackson, Jim Hogan, Keith L. Hatten, Mathenee Treco, Vincent Smith, Robert Michael Sanders and Melissa Swift-Sawyer. Through Sept. 28 at Arvada Center. Tickets $53 and up arvadacenter.org. 720-898-7200

Memphis