The long and grand goodbye to the late Cardinal Francis George just wrapped up with 400 priests, 30 bishops and nine cardinals singing a farewell in Latin.

Over the week thousands have lined up to mourn the death of the Catholic leader who rested in an open coffin in Holy Name Cathedral, where Archbishop Blase Cupich officiated at the funeral Mass.

George died April 17 after struggling for years with cancer. He was 78.

Days of mourning culminated with the funeral. Catholic parishioners who were able to secure tickets from their parishes lined up at 9 a.m. to get seats at the standing-room-only funeral.

Notable names came a bit later. They included Gov. Bruce Rauner, Mayor Rahm Emanuel and his wife, Amy Rule, Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle, Chicago Police Superintendent Garry McCarthy, Ald. Ed Burke, and Cook County Commissioners John Daley and Bridget Gainer. There were numerous nonprofit and business leaders, including Big Shoulders Fund CEO Josh Hale; Sister Rosemary Connelly of Misericordia; Thomas Grusecki, president and CEO of Northern Builders; Richard Driehaus, founder and chairman of Chicago-based Driehaus Capital Management; Wintrust CEO Ed Wehmer; and William Blair's James O'Connor.

The traditional Catholic funeral Mass included a homily by Seattle Archbishop Peter Sartain, who considered George a friend and mentor. Sartain was bishop of the Joliet diocese from 2006 to 2010.

George “lived a life of faith, hope, conviction and courage,” said Sartain, who recalled George's “brilliant mind” and “devotion to prayer.”

Numerous leaders of other faiths stood at the altar during the noontime service.

Appointed to Chicago in 1997 by Pope John Paul II, George was a leader within the church and a Catholic spokesman for issues outside the church. He fought against Obamacare and led a group of U.S. bishops to persuade the Vatican to address the issue of priests accused of sex abuse.

Cupich spoke briefly at the end of the Mass, thanking the many volunteers who helped prepare for the funeral and all the accompanying services that drew thousands from “all ethnicities, religions and walks of life.” He also thanked the mayor for his support and spoke to George's family, saying, “Thank you for the influence you've had on his life and your support as it enhanced his passion."

Some more scenes from inside the cathedral earlier:

400 priests, 30 bishops and 9 cardinals have gathered for Cardinal George's funeral. pic.twitter.com/0TNUZ7vZIn — Shia Kapos (@ShiaKapos) April 23, 2015