“Healthiest Nation In One Generation” by 2030 National Public Health Week Starts April 6, 2015

Date Posted: Wednesday, April 1st, 2015

Categories: Delaware Health and Social Services Public Health

“HEALTHIEST NATION IN ONE GENERATION” BY 2030;

NATIONAL PUBLIC HEALTH WEEK STARTS APRIL 6, 2015

During National Public Health Week 2015 (April 6-12, 2015), the public health community is rallying to make the U.S. the “healthiest nation in one generation” by 2030. According to the United Nations, although the U.S. spends more per capita on health care than any other nation in the world, U.S. residents have a life expectancy of 77.9 years, lower than 28 other countries. As we focus on becoming a healthier nation, the Division of Public Health (DPH) urges Delawareans to remember that health choices and challenges are woven into every day, and are profoundly impacted by where people live, work, pray, and play.

“Much of a person’s overall health is determined outside of a doctor’s office, “ said DPH Director Dr. Karyl Rattay. “And, while one’s choices fundamentally impact a person’s health, the things they cannot choose also make a difference. DPH celebrates this public health week as a reminder that health is more than health care.”

Each year public health professionals honor National Public Health week with a different theme Monday to Friday, and this year’s celebration focuses on ambitious and global ideas:

• Making the grade (Monday, April 6): What does the data reveal about America’s health?

o Obesity, smoking, and sedentary lifestyles among youth and adults are linked to escalating chronic diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and certain cancers. The 5-2-1 Almost None campaign is a simple way to remember to make smart choices: eat 5 or more fruits and vegetables each day, have no more than 2 hours of recreational screen time each day (includes TV, computer, gaming), get 1 or more hours of physical activity each day, and drink almost no sugary beverages.

• Starting from Zip (Tuesday, April 7): Your ZIP code says far too much about your health.

o Within the United States, there are unacceptable disparities in health, state-by-state and even county-by-county. The effort to make the U.S. the Healthiest Nation in One Generation starts with ensuring equity across all communities. DPH is working with community partners to achieve health equity by working with communities that have the poorest health outcomes to address their most important determinants of health. And, in 2014 DPH was pleased to honor nine communities who have made investments that promote healthy behaviors through infrastructure, events, and policies, and which won “healthy community” recognition from Governor Jack Markell’s Council on Health Promotion and Disease

• Building momentum (Wednesday, April 8): The Affordable Care Act (ACA) brings health care and preventive services to the front and center.

o Access to health care is vital to good health and now Delawareans have more access than ever before to health insurance. To learn more, visit http://www.choosehealthde.com.

• Building Broader Connections (Thursday, April 8): It really does take a village.

o In the work to become the Healthiest Nation in One Generation, no one agency or provider can do it all on their own. Through strategic planning and the State Health Improvement Process (SHIP), DPH has sought input and guidance from multiple partners to help identify what they see as the most pressing health problems in the state. And, as an agency, DPH has begun to take the “health in all policies approach,” and is striving to grow partnerships with education officials, local governments, state agencies, public, private and for-profit organizations – everyone who impacts health.

• Building upon success (Friday, April 10): Improve DPH performance in all areas and seek national accreditation.

o Public health agencies across the country are evolving. Rather than being mostly a direct service provider, DPH is strategically leveraging resources and partnerships to build the agency’s vision of healthy people in healthy communities. DPH and the newly established Delaware Public Health Institute are leading a collaborative process with health stakeholders to improve population health. The SHIP is addressing two core health issues: improving access to mental health services; and assuring an infrastructure to promote healthy behaviors.

To learn more about national public health week visit, visit http://www.nphw.org To learn more about the DPH SHIP plan, visit http://dhss.delaware.gov/dhss/dph/files/shaship.pdf.

Delaware Health and Social Services is committed to improving the quality of the lives of Delaware’s citizens by promoting health and well-being, fostering self-sufficiency, and protecting vulnerable populations. DPH, a division of DHSS, urges Delawareans to make healthier choices with the 5-2-1 Almost None campaign: eat 5 or more fruits and vegetables each day, have no more than 2 hours of recreational screen time each day (includes TV, computer, gaming), get 1 or more hours of physical activity each day, drink almost no sugary beverages.

###

Rita Landgraf, Secretary

Jill Fredel, Director of Communications

302-255-9047, Cell 302-357-7498

Email: jill.fredel@state.de.us

Delaware Health and Social Services – Division of Public Health

Related Topics: