If anyone had asked me a year ago if I was excited about being able to vote in the 2016 presidential election, I would have said “yes” with a big, bold smile.

If anyone were to ask me now, it would be difficult for me to give the same answer with a straight face.

I was looking forward to learning about the real plans candidates have for the future of this country. I wanted to know what each candidate thought about immigration reform, health care, trade, the minimum wage and all of the other issues the American people care about. I wanted to invest time listening to the solutions candidates have. I wanted to fact-check candidates from both sides of the aisle to form solid opinions, and decide which political party best represents my ideals and values.

HOWEVER, INSTEAD of learning about differences in policy, I’ve been bombarded with headline after headline about the Republican Party’s embarrassment of a presumptive presidential nominee: Donald Trump.

When the billionaire businessman announced his candidacy for president, I watched as political pundits fought to hold in their laughter at what most considered the biggest joke of a presidential campaign launch speech in modern history. Many totally denounced his campaign and doubted he would pose a threat. In a field with candidates such as former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and U.S. Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky, he wouldn’t last a month (they thought).

LOOK AT HIM now. Trump has defied all odds. He has won a majority of the delegates in the race and is well on his way to getting more than the 1,237 delegates needed to receive the Republican Party’s nomination. He has survived countless attacks from folks on all points of the political spectrum for making so many controversial comments that further alienate women, military veterans, Hispanics, African-Americans and those of Islamic faith. He has poured a bucket of cold water on establishment Republicans who went from doubting his capabilities to worrying and panicking that their efforts to stop him were too little, too late – to now having to deal with the fact that he very could be the party’s nominee.

The “Trump Train” is on the move, and it will be very interesting to see how he works to unify the party ahead of a likely general election match-up between him and Hillary Clinton.

Looking back, it’s funny to me how some Republicans worked so hard to stop something that most of them created in 2014.

I remember the constant bashing of President Obama and other Democrats before the 2014 midterm elections. Things were really tense in Washington, D.C. All of the anger over Benghazi, immigration reform, government shutdowns, filibuster rules and the embarrassing rollout of the Affordable Care Act had reached its peak. I remember conservative talk-show hosts such as Rush Limbaugh and Bill Cunningham riling up anger to get people to go vote.

It worked quite well. It was a blow to Democrats and was seen as the beginning of another anti-Obama movement. Republicans took back a majority in the Senate and strengthened their majority in the House of Representatives. They won control of Congress again with more Americans under Republican representation than there have been in decades.

Republicans then thought that same kind of energy would be the key to victory in 2016. They intended to capitalize on the revolutionary feeling they had instilled. Folks were upset with a do-nothing Congress that was out of touch with its constituents. They were upset with Obama and other politicians who had betrayed them and continued to make promises they never kept. It was a raging fire of anger and frustration – a burning desire for change in Washington.

Unfortunately, it was a fire that was allowed to burn too long. That same fire now has raged out of control and has produced a nightmare for the Republican Party. Trump has received all kinds of support from grassroots conservatives who want something different – someone who drops the political correctness for blunt, straightforward talk. He tells his supporters what they want to hear, and they like that. He’s a familiar, confident, commanding force that resonates with them – a rule-breaker. He’s an outsider who knows the business world inside and out (despite his eight bankruptcies), works it to his advantage and says he can do the same for the U.S. economy. He’s a man who says he can get our jobs back from China and Japan; make fantastic trade deals; build walls and get rid of illegal immigrants who take our jobs; and defeat ISIS.

He’s a man who says he can “make America great again!”

IN REALITY, the embarrassing rhetoric Trump spews is causing more harm than good. He has divided the Republican Party and has hurt the party’s chances of winning the presidency so badly that I can’t foresee him beating Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders in a general election. His favorability numbers among key demographics are lower than former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney’s were in 2012. He may have conjured enough support from angry Republicans to win the nomination, but I don’t think that alone is not enough to win in a general election.

This primary season has been full of surprises, and Trump may have defied all odds, but there won’t be any surprises in November. The odds of there being a Trump presidency are about as slim as Ohio Gov. John Kasich’s chances were of winning the Republican nomination before he dropped out. It just isn’t going to happen.

REPUBLICANS HAD the potential to turn true anger and frustration into positive results, and they blew that by not taming that anger. The ugliness of the party now shines bright as the new face of the party. Rest assured, Americans who took issue with Trump’s comments will show up at the polls in November.

I mentioned in the beginning of this piece that I want to decide which political party best represents my ideals and values. Well, if Donald Trump is the best that the Republican Party could produce, I think I’ve already made my decision.