New York (CNN) Two GOP presidential aspirants called for a drastic shift in U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East and sought to prove their pro-Israel bona fides on Thursday, speaking to an audience that included Republican mega-donor Sheldon Adelson.

Cruz predicted Iran was likely to be "on the verge" of acquiring nuclear weapons by 2017 and declared the next president must immediately re-impose sanctions on Iran and move the U.S. embassy in Israel to Jerusalem.

"That president in 2017 should stand up to the world and explain very simply: either Iran will stop or the United States of American will stop it," the Texas senator said.

Christie, meanwhile, charged that President Barack Obama's policies have drastically weakened America's leadership role in the world and that Obama is "unwilling to stand up to anyone" -- with the exception of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.

"The President only has the resolve to stand up to our friends and not to stand up to evil," Christie said. "As long as Iran believes that Israel doesn't have the right to exist and that America should die as well, they are not a part of the civilized world."

The comments from Cruz and Christie came as Adelson, a staunch supporter of Israel, has not yet publicly indicated which Republican candidate he will back in the 2016 primary. Approached by CNN at the gala, Adelson said he was not interested in discussing politics.

"No politics," Adelson said.

19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush has said his decision to run for the Republican nomination will be based on two things: his family and whether he can lift America's spirit. His father and brother are former Presidents. Hide Caption 1 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker has created a political committee that will help him travel and raise money while he considers a 2016 bid. Additionally, billionaire businessman David Koch said in a private gathering in Manhattan this month that he wants Walker to be the next president, but he doesn't plan to back anyone in the primaries. Hide Caption 2 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal is establishing a committee to formally explore a White House bid. "If I run, my candidacy will be based on the idea that the American people are ready to try a dramatically different direction," he said in a news release provided to CNN on Monday, May 18 Hide Caption 3 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Sen. Bernie Sanders , an independent from Vermont who caucuses with Democrats, has said the United States needs a "political revolution" of working-class Americans looking to take back control of the government from billionaires. He first announced the run in an email to supporters early on the morning of Thursday, April 30. Hide Caption 4 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates On March 2, retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson announced the launch of an exploratory committee. The move will allow him to raise money that could eventually be transferred to an official presidential campaign and indicates he is on track with stated plans to formally announce a bid in May. Hide Caption 5 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham has said he'll make a decision about a presidential run sometime soon. A potential bid could focus on Graham's foreign policy stance. Hide Caption 6 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Hillary Clinton launched her presidential bid Sunday, April 12, through a video message on social media. She continues to be considered the overwhelming front-runner among possible 2016 Democratic presidential candidates. Hide Caption 7 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Sen. Marco Rubio announced his bid for the 2016 presidency on Monday, April 13, a day after Hillary Clinton, with a rally in Florida. He's a Republican rising star from Florida who swept into office in 2010 on the back of tea party fervor. But his support of comprehensive immigration reform, which passed the Senate but has stalled in the House, has led some in his party to sour on his prospects. Hide Caption 8 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Lincoln Chafee, a Republican-turned-independent-turned-Democrat former governor and senator of Rhode Island, said he's running for president on Thursday, April 16, as a Democrat, but his spokeswoman said the campaign is still in the presidential exploratory committee stages. Hide Caption 9 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Jim Webb, the former Democratic senator from Virginia, is entertaining a 2016 presidential run. In January, he told NPR that his party has not focused on white, working-class voters in past elections. Hide Caption 10 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Vice President Joe Biden has twice before made unsuccessful bids for the Oval Office -- in 1988 and 2008. A former senator known for his foreign policy and national security expertise, Biden made the rounds on the morning shows recently and said he thinks he'd "make a good President." Hide Caption 11 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has started a series of town halls in New Hampshire to test the presidential waters, becoming more comfortable talking about national issues and staking out positions on hot topic debates. Hide Caption 12 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Rep. Paul Ryan, a former 2012 vice presidential candidate and fiscally conservative budget hawk, says he's keeping his "options open" for a possible presidential run but is not focused on it. Hide Caption 13 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Sen. Rand Paul officially announced his presidential bid on Tuesday, April 7, at a rally in Louisville, Kentucky. The tea party favorite probably will have to address previous controversies that include comments on civil rights, a plagiarism allegation and his assertion that the top NSA official lied to Congress about surveillance. Hide Caption 14 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Texas Sen. Ted Cruz announced his 2016 presidential bid on Monday, March 23, in a speech at Liberty University. The first-term Republican and tea party darling is considered a gifted orator and smart politician. He is best known in the Senate for his marathon filibuster over defunding Obamacare. Hide Caption 15 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Democrat Martin O'Malley, the former Maryland governor, released a "buzzy" political video in November 2013 in tandem with visits to New Hampshire. He also headlined a Democratic Party event in South Carolina, which holds the first Southern primary. Hide Caption 16 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Republican Rick Perry, the former Texas governor, announced in 2013 that he would not be seeking re-election, leading to speculation that he might mount a second White House bid. Hide Caption 17 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, a social conservative, gave Mitt Romney his toughest challenge in the nomination fight last time out and has made trips recently to early voting states, including Iowa and South Carolina. Hide Caption 18 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Political observers expect New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo to yield to Hillary Clinton's run in 2016, fearing there wouldn't be room in the race for two Democrats from the Empire State. Hide Caption 19 of 19

The casino magnate's endorsement is highly sought after -- a board member of the Republican Jewish Coalition, Adelson backed former House Speaker Newt Gingrich in 2012 before pouring tens of millions of more dollars into efforts to defeat Obama's re-election.

National Republicans seeking Adelson's approval are keenly aware of just how closely he scrutinizes candidates' views and comments about Israel.

Earlier this year, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush came under pressure from pro-Israel conservatives, including Adelson, to speak out against comments made by former Secretary of State James Baker. Baker, who is an adviser to Bush, had spoken critically of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu at an event hosted by the advocacy group J Street.

Christie fell in hot water last year when he used the phrase "occupied territories" in a speech to the Republican Jewish Coalition, ultimately resulting in the governor apologizing to Adelson.

Guests attending the gala included notable Jewish Americans including Nobel laureate and Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel and Jacqueline van Maarsen, the childhood friend of Anne Frank.