A one-kilogram gold bar is seen in this arranged photograph at Gold Investments Ltd. bullion dealers in London. Bloomberg News

South Korea’s stock exchange on Monday began offering physical gold trades in the spot market for the first time, to help Seoul curb the transactions in the black market that deprive it of hundreds of billions of won in tax revenue each year.

South Korea is one of the world’s toughest places to tax physical gold trades, more than 60% of which go undocumented through black-market transactions valued at about $3 billion every year.

The gold spot market was launched Monday with 57 securities firms, refiners and jewelers as members. Korea Exchange Inc. said in a joint statement with the Financial Services Commission that traders would receive tax benefits as a reward for making transparent transactions in the open market.

Traders on the Korea Exchange will pay no import duties on gold and also enjoy corporate- and income-tax reductions on transactions made on the trading platform. Trades that don’t involve the delivery of gold bullion also won’t be subject to the 10% value added tax on the exchange that applies to taking physical delivery of gold, it said.

Gold is traded in one-gram units and delivery is done in one-kilogram units on the spot market that runs from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. on weekdays.

FSC Chairman Shin Je-yoon said in a speech that the development of the gold spot market might take “a considerable amount of time as well as trials and errors” but its launch was the right step to take.

The opening of the gold spot market is part of the government’s efforts to boost revenue by exposing the “underground economy”–accounting for one quarter of the country’s output–to taxation.

FSC data show that as much as 110 tons of gold are traded every year in South Korea, and up to 70 tons, valued at about 3.3 trillion won ($3 billion), are bought or sold without being taxed properly at home.

Buying gold on the black market is a popular way to hide income or dodge taxes in South Korea. Gold owned by South Korean individuals is estimated at about 700 tons in total.

During the 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis that almost emptied the nation’s foreign-exchange coffers, millions of South Koreans came forward with a total of more than 200 tons of gold to join a nationwide campaign to help the government pay back the sovereign debt.

The Bank of Korea holds 104.4 tons of gold as part of its foreign-exchange reserves.

Follow Kwanwoo Jun on Twitter @Kwanwoo

————————————————————————-

Also popular on Korea Real Time now:

A New Car From Hyundai-But First, and Apology

Wired Korea Trips Over ’90s Relic