More Video...

Kolby Hopkins was killed in the early Monday morning shooting outside of a Wichita club.

Monday, September 23, 2013

UPDATE:

Wichita Police have new information on a deadly shooting that happened in Old Town early Sunday morning.

Police say the shooting happened outside of a night club in the 100 block of North Mead around 2 a.m. Sunday.

At this point, officers believe it may have started as an argument between two people, and that one of them pulled out a gun and began firing into a crowd of hundreds. Officers initially found three victims, then three more down the street. The seventh showed up at a hospital later.

During a briefing Monday morning, police identified the victim who died as 25-year-old Kolby B. Hopkins of Wichita. He suffered a single gunshot wound to the head.

The others who were shot were all men, ages 25, 27, 28, 35 and 2 26-year-olds.

Wichita Police Chief Norman Williams said there's no indication that the shooting was provoked, calling it "a cowardly act."

Police believe some witnesses may have taken cell phone video of the shooting, and are hoping they will come forward. Anyone with information is asked to call 911 or Crime Stoppers at (316) 267-2111.

Previous story:

Sunday, September 22, 2013

UPDATE:

As bars are letting out early Sunday morning, police say about 10 gunshots rang out. Seven men between the ages of 25 and 35 were shot. One of them, a 25 year old man, died.

It happened in 100 block of north Mead in Old Town. The street was filled with flashing lights and blocked off by caution tape until late in the afternoon.

"Actually I was walking our dogs by and just saw the police out here and everything roped off so you knew something happened,” Becky Kimminau said.

"First thing you want to know is everybody OK? Did anybody get really hurt?" Phyllis Freeman said.

Kylie Calvin says she was in old town early Sunday morning picking up a friend. She didn't see the shooting or hear any gunshots but says she got closer to the crime scene than she wanted.

"It is very terrifying,” Kyle Calvin said.

She says as she started to walk to her car, she saw a man's body lying in the middle of the street.

"It makes me sick. It just makes you feel as though your life could end at any moment. It's just heartbreaking,” Calvin said.

Others who live in within walking distance, only heard about the deadly shooting hours later.

"It made me think a more about our safety, about walking around so much you know,” Mother and daughter Lacie Johnston and Mandy Robertson said.

"It is kind of scary but on the other hand I'm not usually out at 2:00 in the morning,” Freeman said.

People who live nearby tell us the deadly shooting was shocking news to wake up to but they say it's been nearly a year since shots rang out in Old Town and they say they still feel safe living here.

"You hate to hear it and it's awful but having lived down here seven years, these things happen all over town,” Rick Kimminau said.

Previous story:

Sunday, September 22, 2013

UPDATE:

One of seven people who were hurt in a shooting early Sunday morning in Old Town has died.

The shooting happened around 2 a.m. in the 100 block of North Mead. Wichita Police Sgt. Bob Gulliver said officers were on Rock Island assisting in getting people to their vehicles as the bars closed when they reported hearing gunshots.

"They heard approximately 10 shots fired from the 100 block of Mead," Gulliver said.

People who live in an Old Town apartment building a block away say they also heard the shots. They say they saw people scatter. They say they then saw police officers running toward the scene.

"I was really concerned," Melissa Mulsow said. "I knew the bars had just let out. I was concerned for all the bystanders and everyone trying to get home for the evening."

She had reason to be concerned.

Police say they soon learned six people had suffered gunshot wounds.

Officers found three of the victims on N. Mead. The other three victims fled the scene and were able to track down police on Rock Island.

Three were taken by private vehicles to hospitals and three remained on scene. They were taken to Via Christi on St. Francis in critical condition. One of them, a 25-year-old man, died around 4:30 a.m.

A seventh victim arrived at a Wichita hospital later Sunday morning.

"So, we have a total of seven people shot," Sgt. Scott Brunow said.

Of the six remaining victims, one 26-year-old man is listed in serious condition, and two other men, ages 28 and 25, are in fair condition, hospital officials said. A 27-year-old man was treated and released. Information on the two others wasn't available. No names have been released but police say all the victims are men between the age of 25 and 35.

Police did not talk Sunday about a possible motive for the shooting or what may have led up it.

But some people who were in the area at the time of the shooting say it seemed there was an argument in the street. People in Old Town Sunday afternoon say that's unfortunate that a night of fun had end in such a violent and tragic way.

"I don't think any altercation after a night of drinking is worth somebody's life," Mulsow said. "I think it's just a really sad event."

No arrests have been made. Anyone with information is asked to call 911.