Audrey Scott-Hynson

BANKING

David Ferguson, the vice president of commercial lending in the Rehoboth Beach office of Artisans’ Bank, recently was featured in the July issue of Independent Banker, the monthly magazine published by the Independent Community Bankers Association. Ferguson was profiled as one of six exceptional lenders who represent the best and brightest in the community banking industry, as nominated by their peers.

Sallie Mae recently announced Charles P. Rocha has been named executive vice president. Rocha will continue to serve as the company’s chief marketing officer, a position he has held since 2013. In that role, he oversees product development, sales, marketing and communications for Sallie Mae’s consumer business, including private education loans, retail banking and the Upromise college savings and rewards program. Rocha joined Sallie Mae in 2009 as senior vice president of student lending and sales. He helped introduce the company’s Smart Option Student Loan and led efforts to develop the company’s suite of free online college planning tools and enhance Upromise’s save-for-college offerings. Before joining Sallie Mae, Rocha was a strategic integration executive for Bank of America and held several management roles at MBNA America and NationsBank. He earned a bachelor’s degree in international economics and finance from Georgetown University.

EMPLOYEE BENEFITS

Three partners in the Wilmington-based employee benefits firm Weiner Benefits Group recently completed the requirements to become Certified Healthcare Reform Specialists. Louis D. Memmolo, Michael D. Reckner and Debra S. Shears each completed eight classes and passed a rigorous 100-question exam to achieve the designation. The certification shows they have educated themselves to the intricacies and regulations of the Affordable Care Act and know how to ensure plans remain in compliance with the new law. The designation also is endorsed by the Healthcare Reform and Policy Institute.

HEALTH CARE

Diane Ferry, CEO and founder of the health information management company Star-Med, recently joined the 10-member board of directors for the National Association of Women Business Owners. The 40-year-old organization is the only dues-based organization that represents the interests of all women entrepreneurs across all industries. Ferry launched her company in the Hockessin area more than a decade ago. She previously served as director of health information management at several academic medical centers and as the chief operating officer of a national company serving more than 400 facilities.

HUMAN RESOURCES

Patricia M. Buhler, a longtime professor at Goldey-Beacom College, recently was honored with a Lifetime Achievement Award during the 15th Annual Delaware Valley HR Person of the Year awards event. Buhler has taught at Goldey-Beacom since 1989 and serves as a consultant and speaker with more than 25 years of experience in all aspects of management and strategy. She has received many professional awards and honors in recognition of her excellence in teaching and dedication to the human resources field over the years, including the Ron Shane Lifetime Achievement Award from the Delaware Society of Human Resource Management in 2005.

LAW

Michael Houghton, a partner at the Wilmington law firm Morris, Nichols, Arsht & Tunnell, recently was elected to the Delaware Public Policy Institute’s board of trustees. The nonpartisan research organization identifies emerging issues in the state and offers solutions for problems affecting all residents. A leader in the Delaware legal and political community for more than 30 years, Houghton received the A.R. Morris Board Member of the Year award from the Delaware State Chamber of Commerce in January and the Award for Outstanding Service to the Courts and the Bar from the Delaware State Bar Association in November. He also recently was appointed by Delaware Chief Justice Leo Strine to the new Judicial Strategies Committee tasked with conducting long-term strategic planning for the Delaware courts.

MENTORING

Audrey Scott-Hynson, president and CEO of A. Scott Enterprises LLC, recently was honored by Wilmington city government as a small business champion for her work with the minority and disabled owners of small businesses. Scott-Hynson is an adjunct professor at Delaware State University, program manager for the university’s Food Business Incubation Center and director of the Center for Business Growth (CBG) at the Delaware Financial Literacy Institute, formerly the Money School. In her role at the CBG, she recruits and mentors aspiring micro- and small business owners, working them over 18 months to help them build the skills and confidence they need to succeed. In addition to her work with adults, Scott-Hynson also provides mentoring through DSU’s Delaware Center for Enterprise Development Junior Entrepreneurs in Training program and the Delaware Adolescent Program.

REAL ESTATE

Dustin Parker has joined the Seaford real estate firm Callaway, Farnell and Moore as a licensed Realtor. Parker has experience in both real estate and marketing. A native of Sussex County, he lives in Laurel with his wife Rachel and the couple’s baby daughter Avery. Parker also is a member of several community organizations, including the Bridgeville Lions Club, Sussex Academy’s board of directors and the praise team for St. John’s United Methodist Church in Seaford.

Numerous sales associates with Patterson-Schwartz Real Estate recently were ranked among America’s best real estate agents by REAL Trends. Individuals and teams receiving top honors for number of transactions included Brian Hadley (the Hadley Group), Marcus DuPhily (DuPhily Group), Dave Landon (Team Landon), George Manolakos, Lisa Mathena (Lisa Mathena Group), Matt Brittingham, Jeff Stape, Steve Crifasi (Steve Crifasi Group), Dan Logan (Dan Logan Group), Bonnie Ortner (Ortner Group) and Jan Patrick (Team Patrick). The top teams and individuals recognized for high sales volume included Marcus DuPhily (DuPhily Group), Steve Crifasi (Steve Crifasi Group), Victoria Dickinson (Victoria Dickinson & Associates) and Jan Patrick (Team Patrick).

Patterson-Woods Commercial Properties/CORFAC International in Wilmington recently added Michael Willey to its commercial real estate team. Willey has experience with a diverse set of companies in the technology, business consulting, product sales and food service sectors. A Delaware native and Salesianum School alum, he earned a bachelor’s degree in business administration from St. Joseph’s University. Prior to joining Patterson-Woods, Willey worked as a business analyst at Omnitracs Inc., a quality assurance analysts with Collections Marketing Center Inc. and a business analyst with Dunloe Ventures LLC.

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1MMMXsA