BUENA PARK – On the second day of a four-day swing through California, Hillary Clinton took the stage at a Buena Park union hall and focused attacks on presumptive Republican nominee Donald Trump.

“The final test is whether the (next) president will unify us,” the Democratic front-runner told a pumped-up crowd of 500 that nearly filled the room.

“I’ve seen a lot of evidence that Donald Trump is a divider, not a uniter. We have a decision to make whether we’re going to move ahead together or build walls instead of bridges.”

Among those listed as being targets of Trump were women, Muslims, the disabled, Great Britain and two Republicans, Sen. John McCain and New Mexico Gov. Susana Martinez.

“He is scapegoating everyone,” she said. “That’s good for reality TV. But you’ve got to work with people.”

Clinton’s California visits come as rival candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders is barnstorming the state – including two Orange County visits in the past five days – as he pushes for a strong June 7 primary showing.

Analysts say it’s virtually impossible for Sanders to catch Clinton in the delegate race, but Sanders believes a strong showing in the remaining states will give him the leverage to woo superdelegates who have previously indicated support for Clinton.

Some California polls have shown Clinton with a double-digit lead over the Vermont senator, but a Public Policy Institute of California survey released Wednesday evening showed the two neck and neck in the state. In polling of likely Democratic voters and independents who planned to vote in the Democratic primary, Clinton led Sanders 46 percent to 44 percent.

Comparing Clinton, Sanders

Clinton, who was introduced by actress Jamie Lee Curtis, did not attack – or even directly mention – Sanders in her 35-minute speech. But her platform displayed more similarities than differences between the two.

Clinton and Sanders share proposals for large-scale public works program to rebuild the country’s infrastructure and put more people to work. Both want a path to citizenship for those living here illegally.

Both want more attention to mental health and addiction problems. But though Clinton wants to improve Obamacare, Sanders wants Medicare for all Americans.

Though Sanders has called for tuition-free public colleges and universities, Clinton will push for tuition-free community colleges and tax credits for unions that have training programs.

She also touted her own experience as secretary of state and called for a massive project to power all homes with renewable energy within eight years.

But her shots at Trump sparked the strongest response from the crowd Wednesday.

“Donald Trump has put forth an economic plan by billionaires, for billionaires,” she said.

The crowd responded with boos.

She also reiterated her attack on Trump’s comments suggesting that he sought to profit from the housing crash. He defended those comments Tuesday, saying it’s “the kind of thinking our country needs, understanding how to get a good result out of a very bad and sad situation."

In the crowd

John Nelson and Dan Stifler, both 32, found standing-room spots near the speaker dais and took their shirts off, prompting Clinton to say she would keep her eyes elsewhere.

Afterward, they called Clinton “the perfect candidate.”

“You’d have to be stoned to believe Bernie Sanders,” Nelson said.

Others agreed with Nelson’s and Stifler’s assessment of Clinton and their skepticism of Sanders.

“She’s the most qualified person who has ever run for this office, her husband included,” said Santa Ana’s Mark Wagner, 57. “I don’t think half of the stuff (Sanders) talks about can get done. (Barack) Obama had the same problem.”

Laguna Beach’s Barbara McMurray, a marketing consultant, voted for Obama in 2008 but is siding with Clinton this time.

“I felt like she had to get the secretary of state job under her belt,” said McMurray, 56. “She did that job and did it well.”

She said she liked Sanders but was growing frustrated with him for remaining in the race long after he appeared to have a chance at the nomination.

“I like everything that he says but when you drill down, there doesn’t seem to be a lot of detail of how he’s going to do the things he wants, like breaking up the banks,” she said, adding that she was optimistic that the party eventually would unify behind a single candidate.

“If we don’t, we’re going to have much bigger problems,” she said.

If Clinton and Trump are the nominees, it will be a matchup between the two most unpopular candidates in the history of ABC/Washington Post election polls, dating back to 1984.

An ABC-Post poll released Sunday showed 53 percent of Americans view Clinton unfavorably and 60 percent view Trump unfavorably.