Two rafters have died in the Arkansas River so far this season

A view of the Arkansas River from the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park on June 5. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

A Colorado Springs man died Saturday after he was tossed out of a commercial raft while negotiating rough waters in the Royal Gorge section of the Arkansas River.

At about 1:30 p.m., Fremont County Sheriff's deputies were notified by Colorado Parks and Wildlife rangers that they were performing CPR on a rafter who was being brought out of the Royal Gorge aboard the Royal Gorge Route Railroad train.

According to a press release issued by the FCSO, the rafter, identified as Christopher Sevilla, 44, had apparently been having "some type of respiratory problems before he and five other rafters were tossed out of a commercial raft while negotiating rough waters in the gorge."

Sevilla floated down river some distance before he was pulled to shore unresponsive. Rescuers immediately began resuscitation efforts and were able to flag down the tourist train which was headed back to Cañon City. Sevilla was pronounced dead when the train arrived at the South First Street crossing.

The FCSO said the rafting company is Raft Masters. Sevilla was wearing a helmet and a personal flotation device, the release stated. It is believed that Sevilla was not with any other family members on the raft trip.

According to the United States Geological Survey's website, the Arkansas River was running at 3,220 cubic feet per second at Parkdale Saturday afternoon.

The river was running at about 3,400 cfs when Van Hodges, 48, of Enid, Okla., drowned in a commercial rafting accident in Bighorn Sheep Canyon on Tuesday.

Fremont County Sheriff's Office Capt. Don Pinover said the raft Hodges was in "went up on its side as it was going through some rough water." A press release issued by the FCSO stated that the raft hit a stretch of rough water, causing five of the seven people in the raft to be tossed into the river.

The release stated that four of the rafters were able to be assisted back into the raft, but "Hodges was apparently pulled under water for several minutes by the river's current before he surfaced and was pulled to shore by rescuers from the rafting company." Efforts to revive Hodges were unsuccessful.

The release identified the rafting company as Royal Gorge Rafting. The rafters were wearing their safety gear of helmets and personal flotation devices and two safety kayakers were accompanying the group of rafters.