.......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ..........

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Mexico will no longer sell to individuals through the health insurance exchange because it was not allowed to raise its rates 51 percent. Insurance Superintendent John Franchini found that the company could justify an increase of no more than 24 percent.

The big question is still unanswered: Of all the insurers selling on the exchange, why did Blue Cross alone request such a big increase? The four other companies selling exchange products to individuals requested increases ranging from zero to 6 percent, according to Franchini.

Blue Cross has blamed what is known in the industry as adverse selection. Company officials say that, somehow, far more really sick people found their way to Blue Cross than to other insurers, which inflicted big financial losses on the company. The Journal’s Rosalie Rayburn reported Thursday that Blue Cross lost more than $42 million selling to individuals on the exchange but recovered all but $19.2 million from federal programs designed to support companies facing unexpected losses during the early years of the Affordable Care Act. The programs are funded by mandatory insurance-company contributions.

Every company has some number of very expensive cases every year. It is possible Blue Cross was simply unlucky. Market research firms say Blue Cross and Blue Shield is one of the most recognizable national brands, which means anyone buying insurance for the first time might have been inclined to go Blue simply because the name was familiar. If these newly insured customers had been struggling with untreated medical problems for some years because they couldn’t obtain coverage before the ACA took effect, it is possible their care was more costly.

Blue Cross also gets many of the customers who don’t want to use the Presbyterian Healthcare Services network of providers and, therefore, don’t buy Presbyterian insurance. It’s possible more of those customers are sicker for some reason than customers who want to use Presbyterian for care and insurance.

However, a number of insurance experts have told me over the past couple of weeks that inadequate cost management might also be at work. The company’s problem isn’t just expensive patients, the people I talked with said. The problem is expensive providers of medical care.

To begin with, Blue Cross has a supply and demand issue. The company is the state’s largest insurer, but thanks to a dispute dating from 2003, Blue Cross does not have contracts with the Presbyterian Healthcare Services network in the Albuquerque area. Blue Cross has a big presence in some of the less populated areas of New Mexico. Compared to the Albuquerque area, there are few physicians, therapists, pharmacists, nurse practitioners and other professionals to serve these patients, and few hospitals. When it comes time to negotiate payment rates, providers of care have the leverage that comes with a supply shortage.

Everyone I spoke with said Blue Cross depends more on fee-for-service payments than its competitors do. Providers prefer fee-for-service because it compensates them for every approved service they deliver and usually pays better than managed care arrangements. Providers who have leverage will likely demand a fee-for-service deal.

Patients on New Mexico’s east side often get their care in Texas, especially hospitalization. There was a time when Blue Cross owned that market because it had provider deals with hospitals in Lubbock and other Texas cities. These days, New Mexico Health Connections competes for that east region business because it secured its own provider contracts with the Texans.

In fact, Health Connections, which was licensed to do business in 2013, has aggressively recruited providers outside of Presbyterian’s network. Within a radius of 20 miles from Santa Fe, for example, Health Connections covers 3,792 people; Blue Cross insures 20,688, according to the Office of the Superintendent of Insurance. But Health Connections has contracts with 1,235 primary care practitioners in that market, including physicians, nurse practitioners, physicians assistants and other professionals. Blue Cross has contracts with 374.

Health Connections is equally aggressive at trying to avoid fee-for-service and promoting better care management. I’m told that the result, so far, is better cost control.

When New Mexico Health Connections was founded, I wrote that it was difficult to see what value it would bring to the market. Other than its ownership structure – a consumer-owned cooperative financed by federal loans – Health Connections was just another insurer. By withdrawing from the individual insurance exchange, Blue Cross has handed Health Connections a chance to add some serious value as an increasingly significant alternative to Presbyterian.

UpFront is a daily front-page news and opinion column. Comment directly to Winthrop Quigley at 823-3896 or wquigley@abqjournal.com. Go to www.abqjournal.com/letters/new to submit a letter to the editor.