We all have tons of questions about the Affordable Care Act and the new policies surrounding health insurance, so who better to turn to than someone who truly knows it all?

That someone is Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Here she helps explain the major changes and what we all need to know, heading into 2015.

When are the deadlines for health insurance enrollment?

Burwell: "So the two most important dates that I think your readers should be aware of are January 15, because those that either enroll for the first time or reenroll can get that coverage to kick in February 1. And it's important for those who are coming back, because, as you know, many people have been auto-reenrolled,??but those people still have the ability to go and shop, and make sure that they have the plan that is best for them, and that their financial plan is updated, so that we can give them the best subsidy possible. The other date that is hopefully a blinking sign is February 15, and that is when open enrollment will end. That's the period in which people will have time to sign up and it's very important that people do it by then because the only other way to get into the system is if you have a condition or something that leads to the ability to be in a special enrollment period. Say, for instance, if you change your job. So, if you're in your regular course of event, you need to have done it by that period of time or you won't be able to access coverage through the marketplace and may be subject to the penalties."

__What are the best ways people can enroll?

Burwell:__ "There are three different ways. One of the big things that we have focused on this year is meeting the consumers' needs, and that started with making sure that we have a website that works, and trying to make things easier. You probably know that for people who are new enrollees coming in, 70 percent of them can use an application that went from 76 screens down to 16...much easier. For people reenrolling, what we do to try to make things easier is prepopulation of data. In other words, you don't have to reenter your name and address, you just have to read through (and if you need to change it, please do), making it much simpler and easier, making it much easier to use mobile apps, or mobile devices, not applications, but mobile devices. It was hard; you would go on the site and sometimes the way it would appear on mobile screens would be difficult, and so we worked on that. We want to meet the consumer where they are, and there are three different ways that consumers can engage to find out if they're eligible, shop, and enroll. The first way is the website, healthcare.gov. There's also cuidadodesalud.gov, which is important for your Spanish-speaking readers. The second is 1-800-318-2596; that's our customer service line that will lead people in either English or Spanish through the process. Third: Some people want in-person assistance. There's local help all around the country, and what you can do is go on our website, localhelp.healthcare.gov, enter in your zip code, and you'll find out the nearest local assistance. And the other thing is, there are other ways that you can do this—I was just with CVS in Cleveland, Ohio, and they're doing 5,300 events, and so in your local CVS you might be able to find an event, where you can see someone in person."

Can you explain coinsurance?

Burwell: "Coinsurance is the question of how much your insurance bill for particular services you're going to pay. When people think about it, you'll think about the question of 'My insurance company pays this much of the cost of something—a procedure or a visit—and I pay this amount.' I think the issue of coinsurance, should be put in the broader context of total out-of-pocket costs for healthcare. I think what people need to think about is: 'I want to get health security and financial security. I want to take care of myself—whether that is prevention or something goes wrong—I need to be able to do it from a health perspective and from a financial perspective. So, how do I go about doing that in a way to get the benefits I need at the price I need to pay?' And so the issue of coinsurance kind of fits into the broader issue of total costs. When people think about total costs, they should think about their premium cost, their deductible, their co-pays, and this issue of coinsurance—how much of a percentage of a service they need to pay. The coinsurance issue for Glamour readers...I think it's nested in the broader issue of total costs. That's why even when you go 'window shopping' on the site, you can shop by deductible or you can shop by premium. We're trying to add as much transparency to the system to give consumers that ability to have the knowledge they need to make quality decisions for them and their families."

__So these may be terms that people may not have been really thinking about before now.

Burwell:__ "Yes, and think about them all. For some people, they actually don't know what a deductible is and how it works, and some people also don't understand the issue of the premium and how it works. And also people don't know the copay term, and so you learn one by one, 'Oh, I have to learn about this term' and 'Oh, I have to learn about that term.' We're trying to help people try to get to that level of understanding: How do I think about the quality of the benefit, how do I think about the cost of the benefit."

Are there any additional benefits we can expect from our health insurance?

Burwell: "There's no longer any gender-based discrimination when it comes to health insurance. Before, as a woman, your health insurance would generally cost more. But now, that doesn't occur. There's a big emphasis on prevention: mammograms, maternity coverage, prenatal care and delivery are all essential, so all Food and Drug Administration-approved contraceptive methods prescribed by a doctor are covered: Barrier methods (such as diaphragms and sponges); hormonal methods (like birth control pills and vaginal rings); implanted devices (such as IUDs); emergency contraception (like Plan B); sterilization procedures; education and counseling. Plans aren't required to cover drugs that induce abortions or services related to a man's reproductive capacity, like vasectomies."

What do you see as some of the biggest health issues facing young women in this country?

Burwell: "Understanding that staying in a healthy place and taking care of your health is extremely important. We need to care for ourselves and take the right preventive steps; thinking about the kinds of things you need to do—such as making sure to get your flu shot and understanding how it affects your health and productivity. We need to be sure we're aware of how to care for ourselves; getting the info we need, looking toward prevention and partaking in screenings."

__How can we pay less for prescriptions?

Burwell:__"The best way to make sure you're getting the best deal on prescriptions is to make sure you know what your plan covers. You can visit your insurer's website to review a list of prescriptions your plan covers; see your Summary of Benefits and Coverage, which you can get directly from your insurance company, and review any plan materials that your plan mailed to you; or you call your insurer directly to find out what's covered. Make sure to have your plan information available."

__ What if our doctors aren't in our new plan's network?

Burwell: __"Depending on the plan you choose in the Marketplace, you may be able to keep your current doctor. Still, different plans have different networks and providers. Most health insurance plans offered in the Marketplace have networks of hospitals, doctors, specialists, pharmacies, and other health care providers. Networks include health care providers that the plan contracts with to take care of the plan's members. Depending on the type of policy you buy, care may be covered only when you get it from a network provider. When comparing plans in the Marketplace, you will see a link to a list of providers in each plan's network. If staying with your current doctors is important to you, check to see if they are included before choosing a plan."