Recently, the future of our traditional employer-based system of healthcare insurance has come into question.

Specifically, there is much speculation about where U.S. employers are headed -- or being driven by the Affordable Care Act (ACA) -- with respect to providing employee health plan coverage.

The often-conflicting predictions are based on well-respected national surveys and analyses; I've summarized findings from a few below.

Looking back at trends in private employer-based health insurance over the past decade, an analysis by the venerable Commonwealth Fund found that premiums for family coverage increased 73% (a faster rate than family median income). However, the study also found a slowdown in the growth of employer health insurance premiums and deductibles since the passage of the ACA, a modernization that is consistent with trends in premiums for plans offered through the ACA's marketplaces in 2014 and 2015.

Looking ahead, a May 2014 analysis by S&P Capital IQ concluded that the ACA will result in profound changes in how health benefits are offered; i.e., it projected that 90% of employees currently receiving health insurance through their employers will be shifted to individual health insurance and private and public exchanges by 2020.

On the other hand, trends revealed by the Mercer National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans 2014 suggest a different future scenario:

Fewer employers are considering terminating health insurance plans -- even the number of small employers (50-199 employees) considering an exit strategy fell from 23% in 2013 to 16% in 2014.

Employer wellness and prevention initiatives (such as financial incentives for participation and outcomes, worksite primary care clinics) are on the rise with large employers; more than 56% now offer health management programs.

So, what are we to make of all this? Will employer-sponsored health insurance go the way of the defined-benefit pension plan that is now effectively supplanted by the 401(k)?

Realistically speaking, the mechanics of health insurance design and coverage have become too complex; as private health insurance exchanges become increasingly attractive, even large self-insured companies are likely to focus more on keeping their workforces healthy and subsidize employees who purchase insurance on the open market.

My intuition tells me that, eventually, employers will opt out of the healthcare business and shift their focus to the prevention and well-being business!