Topics: Biology, Celebrity, Evolution, Nautilus, obsession, primatology, Science, social hierarchy, Social News, Media News, Entertainment News

This piece originally appeared on Nautilus

I had such fun the other evening. LeBron James, Anne Hathaway, J.K. Rowling, and I had gone ice skating in Central Park. My dear friend Koko the sign-language gorilla was there, ice-dancing with Ryan Gosling, who is always good for a laugh. Afterward, we all got hot chocolate and ran into Lady Gaga and Freeman Dyson, who had just flown in from Cabo. Koko and Ryan had a hilarious arm-wrestling contest (we called it a draw). Things got even crazier when we went to get sushi and met up with Hillary Clinton, Justin Bieber, and Lucy theAustralophithecus. Eventually, we all wound up at Hil’s apartment, where we played Twister half the night. What fun.

Now who wouldn’t want an evening like that?

We all feel the magnetic pull of celebrities—we track them, know their net worth, their tastes in furniture, the absurd names of their pets and children. We go under the knives of cosmetic surgeons to look like them. We feel personal connections with them, are let down by their moral failings, care about their tragedies. As I write, my family of musical fanatics is mourning the death of Cory Monteith. We not only feel for the pointless loss of a talented young actor, and for his girlfriend, Lea Michelle, but in some confused, inchoate way, also feel heartbroken for Finn and Rachel, the characters they play on Glee.

Why the obsession? Because we’re primates with vested interests in tracking social hierarchies and patterns of social affiliation. And celebrities provide our primate minds with stimulating gyrations of hierarchy and affiliation (who is sleeping with, feuding with, out-earning whom). Celebrities also reflect the peculiar distance we have traveled culturally since our hominid past, and reveal how distorted our minds can become in our virtual world. We obsess over celebrities because, for better or worse, we feel a deep personal sense of connection with people who aren’t real.

For all primates, no matter how rich the ecosystem, resources are finite and competition can be fierce. Numerous primate species have evolved dominance hierarchies, which ritualize unequal resource distribution. Take savanna baboons, a species I have studied in Africa for 30 years. They live in groups of dozens of animals, and the most defining fact of life for a baboon is his or her rank in a sex-specific dominance hierarchy. Social status is always on a baboon’s mind. Even when going about their daily business, baboons are frequently glancing at dominant individuals.

Why is rank so important to a baboon? For one thing, a stable dominance system is a huge social convenience—it insures bloody teeth and claws don’t reign each time a potential conflict arises. Instead, everyone knows his or her place, and if, say, something to eat is discovered, a dominant individual typically needs to do nothing more than glare at a subordinate to get the prize. The dominance ranking system also influences who a baboon mates with, whose genes are going to be passed on in their offspring. It greatly influences who a baboon will form a coalitional partnership with. After all, who’d you want to have your back in a fight—the schlub of a low-ranking baboon snoozing by the bushes, or the alpha male who’s been on the cover of Baboon magazine?

Humans don’t have the strict dominance hierarchies seen in baboons. For one thing, we simultaneously belong to multiple hierarchies and most value the hierarchy in which we rank highest (think of the lowly clerk in a corporation who captains the company softball team). Still, over the course of human evolution, assessing social dominance and subordinance has been a ubiquitous feature of our interactions; it’s deep-set in our brains. In a study by Nicholas Rule, a University of Toronto psychology professor, subjects viewed pictures of faces with either stereotypically high- or low-status expressions. People could correctly identify the status even when viewing pictures for 40 milliseconds. That’s 40-thousandths of a second.

Ten-month-olds are already attuned to dominance, as shown in a cool study by Lotte Thomsen of Harvard. On a computer screen, a big square and little square independently move from one side of the screen to the other. To tap into the infant’s social brain, the squares have eyes and a mouth—they’re personified, they want to get to the other side. At some point, they come from opposite sides and head straight toward each other—they’re going to bump! Will one of them give way? Infants look more intently at this scenario than when the squares don’t get in each other’s way—social conflict is interesting. Half the time it would be the little square which would lie down and give way to the big one, half the time the big one would give way. When it’s the big square groveling in the dirt submissively, infants look far longer—hey, that guy’s supposed to win the interaction, he’s bigger. (The study includes subtle controls that show the 10-month olds are responding to status and not just the fact that big objects exert more physical force on small objects).

Brain-imaging reflects our fascination with dominance relations. When subjects evaluate social status from facial cues, they activate the fanciest, most recently evolved part of the brain, the frontal cortex (more specifically, subregions called the ventrolateral, ventromedial, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices). These regions are activated when people are figuring out consistent status relations, where Person A always trumps Person B. As shown by Caroline Zink of the Lieber Institute for Brain Development, if A and B keep flip-flopping in their relationship, there’s also activation of the amygdala, central to processing fear and anxiety. We’re unsettled if we’re not sure who in our social world gets ulcers and who gives them. We seem to need to be clear about social hierarchy for our well-being.

Primate brains, in fact, developed in relation to social activity. Anthropologist Robin Dunbar has shown a correlation exists between the average size of the neocortex and the average size of a primate’s social group. In other words, big neocortexes and the ability to keep track of numerous dominance relations evolved hand-in-hand.

So we think a lot about status relations, and bring considerable neural firepower to the task. That’s part of our primate legacy. It’s only natural, then, that we see celebrities in terms of social status, and rank them, given their fame, as high-status individuals, and we their subordinates. On the savanna, the high-ranking baboon draws other baboons’ glances. In the supermarket checkout line, the celebrity grabs our attention.

But fame and high status are not always synonymous. The latter is about the real world, how we interact with people at the water hole or water cooler. In contrast, with rare exceptions, we don’t interact with the famous; instead, they dwell on another planet. That difference goes a long way toward explaining why our brains do all sorts of distortive things with celebrities. Without face-to-face feedback in a community—reality testing—our compass drifts.