As she campaigns across the Florida Panhandle in her first House bid, Leon County Schools official Gwen Graham (D) wants voters to know "they can count on the Graham legacy" -- something Florida Democrats are hoping to believe in, too.

Graham, daughter of former Florida Gov. and Sen. Bob Graham (D), is looking to take on Rep. Steve Southerland (R) in the state's Tallahassee-based 2nd District.

"I'm going to make sure that I'm dedicated to letting the people of this district know that they can count on the Graham legacy," she told the Florida law firm Tripp Scott in a videotaped interview in June. The Graham campaign declined requests for an interview with E&E Daily.

But while Graham has launched an aggressive campaign -- she led Southerland in fundraising in the third quarter and narrowly edged the incumbent in cash on hand at the end of September with $666,000 -- it will be difficult for Democrats to win back the seat that seven-term Rep. Allen Boyd (D) lost to Southerland in 2010.

Florida State University political science professor Charles Barrilleaux noted that the district was redrawn after the 2010 census to give Republicans an edge.

Advertisement

"The district is kind of odd. It's gerrymandered to be a Republican district, but Tallahassee is very Democratic," Barrilleaux said.

Voters in the Panhandle-based district went 52 percent for GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election and 47 percent for President Obama. The district split along the same lines when Obama faced off with then-GOP presidential nominee John McCain in 2008.

"The best thing she has going is that she is Gwen Graham, and Bob Graham is still pretty popular in Florida. They're already on the road. She's there. He's working it. And so that's good name recognition," Barrilleaux said, but he added: "It's going to be tough to unseat" Southerland.

Graham will need to turn out the district's black voters to win, Barrilleaux said, but she could face a hurdle if former state Senate Minority Leader Al Lawson, who is black, opts into the Democratic primary. The district is about one-quarter African-American, and black voters make up a substantial portion of the Democratic primary electorate.

Lawson, who has yet to announce his plans, lost to Southerland in 2012 with 47 percent of the vote. Southerland took 53 percent. Lawson also took on Boyd in the 2010 Democratic primary, narrowly losing to the incumbent.

But even if Graham avoids a competitive Democratic primary, the political scion will need to keep her fundraising machine in top gear.

Southerland, a former funeral home operator who is personally wealthy, spent nearly $1.7 million defending his seat in 2012, and outside groups injected another $3 million into the district to attack both candidates.

The conservative group Americans for Prosperity, which is associated with Koch Industries executives David and Charles Koch, is already on the air in the 2014 contest.

The group launched a 30-second spot in October praising Southerland for his opposition to Obamacare, or the Affordable Care Act. The Koch Industries Inc. Political Action Committee donated $10,000 to Southerland's campaign as of April.

Criticism of the health care reform law is likely to be a major theme in the contest. Boyd lost his seat in 2010 after taking criticism from both liberals and conservatives for a series of opposing votes he made on the health care law.

"Florida families are seeing firsthand how devastating Obamacare is, and they know that Steve Southerland is the only person in this race fighting to protect them in Washington," National Republican Congressional Committee spokeswoman Katie Prill told E&E Daily. "The last thing the 2nd District of Florida needs is someone like Gwen Graham, who has willingly joined the team of extreme liberal Washington politicians and that will continue to force on them bad policies like Obamacare."

Graham has acknowledged that Obamacare is "controversial" but said she would only work to amend the health care reform and would not repeal it.

"There are many positives about the law. There are problems with the law as well. One of my commitments is to stop fighting it, which I think is an exercise in futility," Graham said in the June law firm interview.

Democrats plan to hammer Southerland as too partisan for the district, latching onto voter dissatisfaction with Congress in the wake of October's federal government shutdown.

"Congressman Steve Southerland's reckless and irresponsible agenda shut down our nation's government, torpedoed the farm bill and is jeopardizing economic opportunity -- epitomizing everything that Floridians hate about Congress," said Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee spokesman David Bergstein. "North Florida families are tired of Congressman Southerland's reckless, radical agenda that is standing in the way of solutions at every turn, and they are hungry to elect a proven, bipartisan problem solver like Gwen Graham."

Although Graham herself has not previously sought office, she's not exactly a political novice.

During the 2004 presidential election, Graham worked first for her father's short-lived Democratic primary bid and then for former Vermont Gov. Howard Dean's (D) campaign.

She also knows something about bipartisanship: Graham and her husband, Mark Logan, sold a Washington, D.C., home they owned in the early 1990s to then-Sen. Connie Mack (R-Fla.) when they returned to Florida.

Graham, 50, earned a law degree at American University in 1988 before she joined the law firm Andrews Kurth. Her biography notes that she worked on energy and environmental issues for the Houston-based firm before decamping for the Sunshine State.

Bob Graham, who is now 77, is warmly regarded by most environmental groups. As governor, he worked to protect endangered lands and preserve the Everglades. In the Senate, he served on the Environment and Public Works Committee, among others. More recently, Graham was co-chairman of the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling.

As a presidential candidate, Graham pledged "to be the most pro-conservation and pro-environment president in American history," he said during an interview with the liberal group MoveOn.org. "I've spent a good deal of my public life working on this critical issue and I am proud of the progress that I helped make in Florida to protect our treasured Everglades and coastlines."

Southerland, who was elected with tea party support, has taken some positions that have brought criticism from environmental groups. A member of the Natural Resources Fisheries, Wildlife, Oceans and Insular Affairs Subcommittee and the Transportation and Infrastructure Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Subcommittee, he amended a spending bill last year to curtail the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's ability to limit overfishing. He also criticized a proposal designed to prevent invasive snakes from entering the Everglades.

The environmental group Ocean Champions last year named him "Oceans Enemy No. 1." But it's not clear if green groups will make his defeat a priority this election cycle.