As a bit of American musical theater, “Chicago” gets away with murder. Not just because its main character, the narcissist with moxie named Roxie Hart, is acquitted for a killing she clearly committed.

It’s because the play manages to succeed wildly without all the trappings touring Broadway shows rely on to impress audiences. No sets to speak of, the smallest of costumes and hardly a prop, save the occasional pompom or reporter’s notebook.

What this show sells is its songs, and it sells them hard starting right from the top with “All That Jazz.” The music and lyrics by John Kander and Fred Ebb, written in 1975, are clever and catchy, and everybody knows them by now.

Of course, it sells dancing, too, with impossibly difficult, tightly constructed choreography originally created by Bob Fosse and enhanced by Ann Reinking for the current revival, which has been running in New York since 1996.

And, finally, it sells sex. The musical’s own lyrics point out the “shimmy shake,” but there’s also the rump roll, the crotch launch and the thigh fly, and plenty of them.

Those three commodities come together just right in the production now on stage at Denver’s Buell Theatre. After so many days on the road, this incarnation of the play knows exactly what make a hit and lives up to the promise.

If you’ve got a good Roxie, you’ve got a good Chicago. After all, if you’re gonna root for a gal you know is guilty of murder, she’s got to earn your love.

This tour has Bianca Marroquin, a tiny powerhouse of a performer who sings, taps and tells a joke with charm. She keeps the material fresh and sets a tone the cast follows.

Everyone gets it and goes for it: Terra C. MacLeod as Velma, Carol Woods as the jailhouse Mama, John O’Hurley as slimy lawyer Billy Flynn. Some of these people you have heard of, some not.

It doesn’t matter: The dancers wearing next to nothing. The band set up center stage, and wailing. Chicago in the ’20s. The music, the lyrics, the sex. This version delivers on all of that.

Ray Mark Rinaldi: 303-954-1540, rrinaldi@denverpost.com or twitter.com/rayrinaldi

musical: 3 stars. Presented by Denver Center Attractions. Music and lyrics by Johnn Kander and Fred Ebb. Book by Ebb and choreographer Bob Fosse. Broadway revival directed by Walter Bobbie. Featuring Bianca Marroquin, Terra C. MacLeod Carol Woods and John O’Hurley. Recommended for ages 13 and up. Through March 23, at the Buell Theatre, 14th & Curtis streets, Tickets $20-110, via denvercenter.org or 303-893-4100.