Kentucky gubernatorial candidate Jack Conway

National political news sites are dominated by a few topics these days: the presidential primaries, congressional squabbling, pending Supreme Court cases. That focus may be understandable, but for state politics junkies (like myself), there has been a dearth of coverage about upcoming state elections.

There are actually a number of structural reasons for this, the primary one being that the 2015/2016 gubernatorial map is less – for lack of a better word – eventful than the 2014 map.

Specifically, the new map is narrow, polarized and nationalized. To some, that makes it sound boring: There will be fewer gubernatorial races this year and next than there were in 2014, and some of these elections may end up looking like ideological carbon copies of the national ones, just pasted onto highly red or blue states.

But what some observers do not notice is that the gubernatorial map provides a backstop for Republicans against a Democratic wave – that is, if Democrats were to win the presidency, make big gains in Congress and make up significant ground in state legislatures, structural factors could bar them from making equally large gains in the governors’ mansions.

The Map Is Narrow

Unlike the Senate map, the gubernatorial one is not divided neatly between presidential election years and midterms. There are regularly scheduled elections for governor every year, and some years there are quite a few.

These maps display the partisan lean of states that held gubernatorial elections in 2013 and 2014 or will do so in 2015 and 2016 (cross-hatched states did not hold a regular gubernatorial election in that year, and the formula used to calculate partisan lean is detailed in the next section). Two features of these maps jump out:

First, a commanding majority of gubernatorial elections are held during the midterms. Since every state (aside from Vermont and New Hampshire) elects its governor to four-year terms, 29 of the 31 governors elected during the 2014 Republican wave are schedule to stay in office through 2018 – meaning that they will hold their offices until the next midterm election, regardless of who wins in 2016.

Second, the states that will be up in 2015 and 2016 are not the perennial swing states in which neither party dominates. While North Carolina and New Hampshire could be fairly characterized as swing states, most of the presidential battlegrounds (e.g. Ohio, Florida, Pennsylvania, Colorado, Virginia and Nevada) do not have gubernatorial contests during the presidential cycle. So even if Democrats win a big victory in 2016, their easiest targets will not have had gubernatorial elections. If they were to capture North Carolina and hold New Hampshire, Missouri and West Virginia (where the party still has some strength – on the state level – but is quickly losing it) Democrats would have to start burrowing into pretty conservative states like Indiana or North Dakota. In other words, the ceiling for Democratic (or Republican, for that matter) gains in governorships is relatively low.

The Map Is Polarized and Nationalized

The gubernatorial “map” is also becoming increasingly polarized and the contests are more nationalized.

In this context, the term “map” refers not only to which states are holding elections but to other fundamental factors such as the partisan lean of the state and if there’s an incumbent in the race.

This graph displays the partisan lean and incumbent party for every gubernatorial election cycle since 1964. In other words, it shows 50 years of gubernatorial “maps.”

The points are color-coded for party – a red point indicates a Republican-held the seat at the time of the election; a blue point indicates a Democrat held it; and a green point indicates a third party candidate held it.

I boiled the partisan lean of a state down to a single number based on state legislative election results and presidential election results. More positive values indicate that, when state level elections and national elections were both taken into account, the state leaned more towards Republicans than the rest of the country. More negative values indicated a Democratic lean. We used state legislative as well as presidential results to try to capture the strength of state parties along with the state’s partisan alignment on national issues.

Each state’s partisan value is a weighted sum of four different quantities (if you’re not worried about the math, skip this paragraph). The first component is the Republican share of the two-party vote in a state subtracted from the Republican share of the national popular vote in the last presidential election. That captures how much more Republican or Democratic the state was compared to the rest of the country, and this component received 37.5 percent of the overall weight. The second component is almost identical: It’s the Republican share of that state’s two-party popular vote subtracted from the Republican share of the national two-party popular vote in the second most recent presidential election. This component gets 12.5 percent of the weight. The third component is the difference between the average Republican seat share in the 49 partisan state Senates (Nebraska is nonpartisan) and the Republican seat share in the last state Senate election in that state. The fourth component is the same quantity for the state House, and both this one and the state Senate component get 25 percent of the weight.

At first glance, this graph looks confusing. But when we break it down by party, an interesting trend appears.

The black line is the median partisan value of all the governorships held by Democrats heading into each midterm election from 1966 through 2014 (midterms were used because that’s when most gubernatorial elections occur; the trend for presidential election cycles is similar). The recent downward trend basically means that more Democrats have been occupying governorships in blue states.

A similar trend appears in the Republican map – Republicans are winning more governorships in red states. While GOP candidates still do win in some blue states (e.g. Charlie Baker in Massachusetts, Paul LePage in Maine) and Democrats do win in some red states (Steve Bullock in Montana, Earl Ray Tomblin in West Virginia), the overall trend is toward more partisan sorting in these elections.

This divergence – where red states and blue states increasingly elect governors from their own party – is occurring alongside increased nationalization of these races. As Georgetown Prof. Dan Hopkins ably notes, voters – despite knowing that their governors’ policies affect their day-to-day life – tend to focus primarily on presidential news in these elections. Hopkins also points out that since the 1970s, county-level presidential vote has become an increasingly powerful predictor of county-level gubernatorial vote.

In other words, red states and blue states now tend to elect more Republicans and Democrats, respectively, and information about national politics rather than state politics informs voting in gubernatorial elections.

This means the very red and very blue states (which the relatively narrow map in 2015 and 2016 comprises) will be harder for the opposing party to claim. A Democratic wave, were it to materialize, would not only occur on a relatively narrow map – it would also occur on a map that, beyond a few pickups, might be more resistant to Democratic candidates.

In that way, the gubernatorial map presents a problem for Democrats – if their dreams come true and Hillary Clinton leads her party to a big, nationalized victory, she will still likely face tough opposition from governors in a majority of states. And when it comes to some top Democratic priorities – like repealing voter identification laws, ensuring the Affordable Care Act is fully implemented, and reinvigorating ailing unions in states like Wisconsin and Michigan – these governors could seriously stall those efforts.

And in any of the other highly plausible scenarios – a large Republican wave or a narrower victory for either party – the GOP will be still happy it had this extra padding in the states.