Media liberals and liberals in general find great (and justified) glee in mocking some conservatives for failing basic biology. Whether it's Todd Akin not quite grasping how babies are made, or Catholic Rick Santorum refusing to endorse what appears to be even his own church's comfort with evolutionary theory, too many conservatives flunk the facts of life.

But the great irony is that many media liberals display equally profound ignorance when reporting on the Affordable Care Act. While conservatives often botch biology, their liberal critics often mangle basic math.

The American health care system had serious cost problems prior to passage of the ACA. We were paying more than virtually every society on Earth. But the real problem was that like almost every other industrialized nation, health care costs were regularly outgunning inflation.

Read that last sentence again, because the math behind it was and remains the most important issue we confront regarding health care. Nearly every Democratic politician, most political liberals, and 90 percent of the journalists who write about health care cannot seem to grasp it.

The math they are ignoring is both simple and ugly. While the United States started from a higher baseline of health care spending decades ago, health care inflation here has not been significantly worse than most of the 'single payer' societies some think we should emulate. In fact, during the seven years prior to the 2008 Presidential campaign, health care inflation in the United States was actually lower than both Canada and the United Kingdom, the two Western nations most like our own.

Nothing will become affordable by copying them. The ACA took a system spending more per person (insured or not) than every nation on Earth, threw even more money at it, and yet did nothing to fix the underlying inflation problem. Every journalist writing kind words about the "Affordable" Care Act is leaving readers more ignorant if this simple mathematical fact isn't acknowledged.

The media's numerical ignorance is worse regarding the uninsured population and the goal of providing universal coverage. Even after full implementation, the ACA is designed to still leave 10 percent of the nation with no insurance coverage.

The preceding number is another mathematical fact often missing from media coverage of the ACA. All of this national drama, which won't fix our healthcare inflation problem at all, only fixes a little more than half of the uninsured challenge.

But as John C. Goodman points out recently in Forbes, we really could achieve near universal coverage by wiping away all current health insurance subsidies (including the tax distortion locking many of us into employer coverage), and simply give it all back in the form vouchers for everyone to purchase individual insurance. This annual payment would work out to $2,500 for each adult and $8,000 per family of four. Goodman notes this is roughly the cost of enrolling in Medicaid, and thus a huge step toward almost or total universal coverage.

The Goodman math has been around for a long time. When confronted with its elegant path to universal coverage, and the failed media coverage of the ACA's many destructive mathematical fictions, an ACA apologist might be heard to say "well, we could have done that if Republicans would have been on board with it."

But the Goodman math is the very proposal John McCain ran on in 2008. ObamaCare's subsequent tax hikes and additional subsidies now make even richer vouchers possible. What prevents us from getting from the health reform many media liberals foolishly think we have, to the health reform they say they wanted, is just politics, not math.

Ken Braun was a legislative aide for a Republican lawmaker in the Michigan House and worked for the Mackinac Center for Public Policy. He has assisted in a start-up effort to encourage employers to provide economic education to employees, and is currently the director of policy for InformationStation.org. His employer is not responsible for what he says here, on Facebook, or Twitter ... or in Spartan Stadium on game days.