Colorado earns first victory in seesaw battle with UMass

Colorado quarterback Sefo Liufau (13) and wide receiver Bryce Bobo (4) celebrate with teammates and mascot Chip after beating UMass on Saturday in Foxborough. ( Michael Dwyer / Associated Press )

2-minute drill Turning point: Trailing by three late in the third quarter, CU quarterback Sefo Liufau connected with wide receiver Nelson Spruce for a go-ahead 70-yard touchdown pass. Notable number: 115 — The number of rushing yards the Buffs gained in the second half, six yards fewer than they averaged per game last season. Difference maker: Spruce seemed to make a big play each time the Buffs needed him to. He is on pace to make 102 catches for 1,464 yards and 18 touchdowns this season. Inuries: Defensive end Christian Shaver (ankle) is day to day.

FOXBOROUGH, Mass. — Plenty of football coaches wouldn't have been encouraged entering a locker room at halftime with their team down 21-20 on the road against an opponent from a lesser conference that had won two of its past 25 games.

Colorado coach Mike MacIntyre liked what he saw from his Buffs in that situation Saturday afternoon at Gillette Stadium in what became a 41-38 CU victory.

Trailing a UMass program universally considered one of the worst in major college football, the Buffs not only still had a spring in their step, they were jumping around "getting hyped" without any prodding from coaches.

"I didn't know what to expect when I came into the locker room," MacIntyre said. "I was hoping what I saw I would see, and when I did, I felt really good.

Advertisement

"Even when we got down I felt there was energy and fight and belief that we could get it done, which is something you cannot coach. It's something you try to instill. It's something you try to develop every day and when they catch it, they've kind of caught it. So they can always go there again. That's a great thing."

Perhaps it was a product of a players-only meeting at the team hotel Friday night in Providence, R.I., that kept the Buffs' spirits up when the defense surrendered the go-ahead drive to the Minutemen just before halftime.

Something definitely kept the Buffs focused in a way they haven't usually been in similar situations in recent years and even in the season opener a week earlier against Colorado State. The situation even got worse before it got better because UMass defensive back Randall Jette picked off a pass from CU quarterback Sefo Liufau early in the second half returning it to the Buffs' 2-yard line. Running back Jamal Wilson scored on the next play and the Minutemen held a 11-point lead early in the third quarter.

A CU offense led by Liufau, wide receiver Nelson Spruce and running back Christian Powell composed itself and began to find holes in the UMass defense. They found enough to produce a victory in the first road game of the year for the first time since 2004.

Powell, who ran for 60 of his 80 yards after halftime, scored on a 14-yard run to get the momentum back on the CU sideline. Then Liufau connected with Spruce on two scoring plays of 70 and 3 yards to help put CU up by 10 heading into the final minutes.

The defense also tightened up, began playing more aggressively and curtailed its mistakes after halftime. CU allowed just 35 yards of offense to UMass in the fourth quarter.

"We just showed a lot of heart this week and that's good to see because we're going to be in some battles this year," Liufau said. "The guys, compared to last week, did a lot better after going down of putting our noses down and fighting back."

The Buffs overcame a rough first half on defense, an ugly day for its coverage teams and that double-digit second half deficit to beat the Minutemen in front of an announced crowd of 10,227. It looked like roughly half the crowd wore CU colors and it sounded like the Buffs owned the stadium at times in the second half.

MacIntyre and his players said having that backing so far from home helped boost the Buffs as well.

"Our Colorado faithful were awesome," MacIntyre said. "They were loud, they were into it, they kept us going. I was really pleased with that."

Spruce had a career day with 10 catches for 145 yards and two touchdowns. On the heels of an offseason spent wondering who would replace the explosive plays in the offense once produced by Paul Richardson, Spruce seems to be filling the role with a pair of touchdown receptions that covered more than 50 yards in the first two weeks of the season.

Liufau completed 26 of 42 passes for 318 yards and three touchdowns.

Colorado snapped a nine-game losing streak in the Eastern Time Zone dating back to its 1994 victory at Michigan on the pass from Kordell Stewart to Michael Westbrook on the final play of the game. Saturday's win was the first for CU in the northeast section of country since a 1977 win at Army.

UMass is now 2-24 since the start of the 2012 season, but the Minutemen are showing signs of improvement under coach Mark Whipple. The 38 points the Minutemen scored against the Buffs were the most they have scored against a team from a power five conference in their history.

Contact staff writer Kyle Ringo at ringok@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/kyleringo.