The issues I hear most while walking door are jobs, healthcare, and education, with an underlying concern about the direction of our nation. I think our biggest problem is a culture that has rejected Biblical principles of ownership authority and personal responsibility that has led to out of control spending and government overreach. From my perspective, the economy is struggles because of over-regulation and over-taxation. We need personal freedom to live life without an overbearing government. Most everything the government does to try to help ends up hurting the very people it tries to help.

First I will oppose all tax increases. Instead of adding new programs and new regulations, I will vote to repeal unnecessary programs and regulations, such as overbearing insurance regulations and forced labor representation. We need to defend Kentuckians against overbearing federal regulations like Obamacare and the anti-coal regulations coming from the EPA. We can do that by refusing to participate in or outright oppose these unconstitutional actions.

The best way to create jobs is to get government out of the way of job creators. We can do that with lower, simpler taxes across the board. We need to reintroduce freedom into the labor market to encourage job creators to create the best possible jobs for Kentuckians.

Market forces, not government, set the true minimum wage. If government tries to raise wages artificially, the weakest members of the workforce will be hurt. Those with fewer skills, single mothers, and young people getting their start will face higher hurdles to finding any jobs and higher prices for necessities like food and gasoline.

We have great teachers that do their best to provide the best education they can. Outsourcing curriculum decisions to an unelected group through Common Core is dangerous. Local communities, especially parents, know what is best for their children and should be allowed any opportunity to seek the best for them. This is best accomplished by local funding and local control.

Since Obamacare was passed, insurance costs have gone up and services provided have gone down. Forcing people to buy products they don’t need has been disastrous. We have a financial healthcare crisis is because we abandoned the free market in healthcare decades ago. No one goes to the doctor and asks, “How much does this procedure cost?” There is no competition therefore prices skyrocket. Frivolous lawsuits are driving up costs, too. Doctors are now playing defense in their practices rather than treating patients in innovative ways. Some version of tort reform needs to occur to return to a mindset of personal responsibility.

The 2nd Amendment is very clear: “the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.” Law-abiding citizens have the right to carry weapons in defense of themselves and their neighbors. I support Constitutional Carry which allows the 2nd amendment to take the place of a conceal carry permit for law-abiding citizens. A- Rating with the NRA

Gun Owners of America endorsed

Many people see casino gambling as a way to raise tax money or to pay off corporate interests with monopoly protections. We cannot gamble our way out of our current financial mess in Frankfort. We have a spending problem, not a revenue problem. I would be in favor of changing the Kentucky Constitution to allow gambling in the state, but I oppose the current proposals for implementing gambling because they choose industry favorites and create new gambling monopolies, which is not a free market solution.