Blue Cross of Northeastern Pennsylvania members likely will see lower premium increases and improved quality of care if the insurer joins health insurance giant Highmark Inc., an economist who analyzed the proposal said Wednesday.

Highmark’s lower administrative costs — about $12 less per member a month — would result in savings that dent the operating losses that two of Blue Cross of NEPA’s main insurance entities are projected to post through 2017, said Cory Capps, Ph.D., a partner at Bates & White LLC.

Capps, who spoke on behalf of Highmark, shared his analysis before a panel of three state Insurance Department officials at a public informational hearing held at the Hilton Scranton & Conference Center. About 30 people attended the hearing, which is part of the department’s review of Highmark’s proposal to acquire Wilkes-Barre-based Blue Cross of NEPA.

If approved, the acquisition would push Highmark’s membership to about 5 million across 62 of the state’s 67 counties.

“From BC NEPA’s perspective, with challenges on the cost side, they would have to ... close the operating loss primarily through sharp premium increases,” Capps said.

Despite carrying a surplus of about $348 million, Blue Cross of NEPA’s long-term sustainability is threatened by industry changes and market shifts, a 2011 independent review found.

Based on rising medical care costs and Affordable Care Act requirements, among other factors, the company projects negative operating returns in the coming years, President and CEO Denise Cesare said.

A consultant recommended Blue Cross of NEPA seek a partner to provide between $40 and $150 million in capital support and help expand its footprint beyond the 13-county service area in order for the insurer to remain viable in the long-term.

“Merging with Highmark, a much larger company with significant capital and enhanced capabilities, provides the resources needed to offer a wider array of products and services for consumers, develop programs and tools to support the transformation to accountable care ... and make available significant IT investment,” Cesare said.

Under the proposal, which Highmark submitted to the state Insurance Department in February, Highmark commits to “substantial continued employment” in the region for at least four years. Blue Cross of NEPA has about 750 employees.

State Insurance Commissioner Michael Consedine said regulators evaluate a number of factors, including the competitive impact and the affect on policyholders.

He said there is no timeline for a decision.

“The hearing really starts the process of winding us to a conclusion,” Consedine said. “So the next step will be to leave this public comment period open for an extended amount of time. We will also get very in-depth reports from our outside experts, which will talk about the competitive and financial aspects of the deal.”

To comment, email cbybee@pa.gov.

miorfino@timesshamrock.com, @miorfinoTT