National news:

An unusually heavy winter storm was blanketing Kansas with what forecasters said could be up to 10 inches of snow today, and the deluge was expected to make a quick march eastward across the Midwest and into New England. (Reuters)

Camden, N.J., tops the list of the nation's most dangerous cities, according to an annual report based on FBI data that tracks both violent and property crimes. Cleveland is sixth on the list. (CNN Money)

Given the new incentives offered by the Affordable Care Act, people will choose to work less in the coming years, nonpartisan budget analysts say -- shrinking the workforce by the equivalent of 2 million full-time workers by 2017 and by 2.5 million by 2024. (CBS News)

The Obama administration has deported more than 1.9 million immigrants, aggressive enforcement of current law that fails to sway several House Republicans who blame distrust of President Obama for GOP reluctance on immigration legislation. (Associated Press)

U.S. District Judge Arenda L. Wright Allen said today she will rule quickly on a challenge to Virginia's ban on same-sex marriages, but gave no clue about what her decision might be. (Washington Post)

Police say a man who held a 13-year-old boy hostage for nearly 18 hours in suburban Denver was fatally shot by police. (Associated Press)

Sixteen teenagers ranging in age from 13 to 17 were recovered by law enforcement in a crackdown on child trafficking surrounding the Super Bowl last weekend. (ABC News)

A terminal at LaGuardia Airport was temporarily evacuated after a report that smoke was coming out of a bag today. (New York Daily News)

Sandra Fluke, the women's rights activist whom Rush Limbaugh derided in 2012, has filed with the California Party seeking its endorsement for the race to succeed retiring Rep. Henry Waxman. ( Christian Science Monitor

International news:

Afghan President Hamid Karzai has reportedly been in secret discussions with the Taliban about reaching a peace deal before he leaves office. (Fox News) Exploratory peace talks between Pakistan's government and the country's extremist Taliban militants hit a last-minute hitch. (Financial Times)

Russia said its ally Syria would soon ship more chemical weapons abroad for destruction after being accused of dragging its feet, while activists said civilians in Aleppo were fleeing deadly barrel bomb raids by President Bashar al-Assad's air force. (Reuters)

Tunisia's National Guard stormed a suspected militant hideout in a seaside suburb of Tunis after a daylong standoff today, killing seven radicals. (Associated Press)

Thailand's opposition is moving ahead with legal challenges to Sunday's election, which failed to resolve a months-long political standoff. (Voice of America)

For the third consecutive day, low-income Iranian families lined up today in harsh winter weather outside government-run distribution centers to pick up free food parcels. (Los Angeles Times)

U.S. Ambassador Michael McFaul, who engineered Washington's "reset" of relations with Moscow but riled Russia during his tenure as envoy, said today he would soon leave his posting and the administration of President Obama. (Reuters)

Russian President Vladimir Putin has taken senior Olympics officials on a tour of a Persian leopard sanctuary ahead of the Winter Games in Sochi. (BBC News)