Auto insurers keep unhappy customers

Posted: 1 pm ET

Consumers may be unhappy about rising auto insurance rates, but not very many of them are switching carriers.

Of the drivers who shopped for lower premiums last year, about 3 out of 10 switched auto insurance companies, according to a new J.D. Power survey. That's down from 37 percent in 2013.

Another type of window shopping

Still, 39 percent of auto insurance customers shopped around for a better deal in 2014, up from 32 percent in 2013. That was as rates rose 2.1 percent last year, according to California-based insurance consulting firm Perr & Knight.

So what's holding consumers back from switching? Valerie Monet, director of J.D. Power's insurance practice, provides some insight:

"Customers are being pushed into the market due to rate increases, but unless they can find a policy that will save them money, they're not switching providers," Monet says, in a statement. "In fact, many of those customers can't find a better deal and ultimately don't switch insurers."

Swerving to more savings

Drivers who decide to kick their current auto insurer to the curb for a new one report that they are keeping more cash in their pockets. They saved an average of $388 on their premium, compared to $340 in 2013, J.D. Power reports.

Other findings from the study:

Customer satisfaction with auto insurance purchases increased.

Pennsylvania-based Erie Insurance ranked highest for consumer satisfaction with the purchasing experience.

Beware the 'loyalty tax'

Consumers should be cautious about sticking with their current insurance company for the sake of keeping things simple; that loyalty may come with a price. According to some consumer groups, your insurer could be using data-mining techniques to determine the likelihood that you'll switch. If you stay put, you may end up getting hit in the wallet.

Very young drivers tend to draw very high premiums. Is it true things change at 25? Read this story to learn the answer.

Follow me on Twitter @CrissiPonder.