Story highlights Starting Monday, congressional staffers will use the Obamacare health care exchanges

Some staffers participated in two information sessions on Thursday

They are concerned about higher premiums, especially for older workers

Many also want information on insurance plans that exclude abortion

In the U.S. Capitol basement, an auditorium full of congressional staff grapples with the consequences of how their bosses upstairs wrote the Affordable Care Act.

Starting Monday, they will have to choose a health care plan.

"A lot of employees are planning to separate because of this," one man stood up and declared at the first-ever congressional orientation for Obamacare. By "separate," he meant quit. It was one of many sharp moments of concern at the two information sessions set up by House administrators Thursday.

Both were closed to the press, but CNN was able to watch on an in-house TV channel. The camera faced the stage, not the audience and staff members who spoke could only be heard, not seen in the broadcast. They did not identify themselves and as a result, we cannot name them.

Several expressed doubts and fears about leaving their familiar federal employees plan and switching to the exchange, including a little-known but potentially costly issue.

JUST WATCHED Political fallout over Obamacare site Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Political fallout over Obamacare site 03:45

JUST WATCHED Democrats on edge over Obamacare Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Democrats on edge over Obamacare 02:11

JUST WATCHED CMA hosts riff on Obamacare Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH CMA hosts riff on Obamacare 00:10

18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Rep. Darrell Issa, R-California, is the chairman of the House Government Oversight Committee. On October 31, Issa's committee issued a document subpoena to Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius for documents and information related to HealthCare.gov. "I've lost my patience," Issa said to CNN's Wolf Blitzer in explaining the decision to use a subpoena. Issa also said his committee has sent a document subpoena to website contractor Optum/QSSI. Hide Caption 1 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Speaking soon after the Health and Human Services secretary testified before Congress on October 30, President Obama took responsibility for fixing the troubled Obamacare site. "I'm not happy about it and neither are a lot of Americans who need health care," Obama said at a Boston rally. "There is no excuse for it and I take full responsibility for making sure it gets fixed ASAP. We are working overtime to improve it every day." Hide Caption 2 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Amid Republican calls for her resignation, Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius provided a personal mea culpa October 30 as she testified before the House Energy and Commerce Committee. "In these early weeks, access to HealthCare.gov has been a miserably frustrating experience for way too many Americans," she said. Speaking directly to Americans confronting the site problems, Sebelius added: "You deserve better. I apologize. I'm accountable to you for fixing these problems." Hide Caption 3 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Marilyn Tavenner is the administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, which is part of HHS. Tavenner testified October 29 before the House Ways and Means Committee about the Obamacare enrollment website and became the first administration official to apologize for the site's performance problems. "I want to apologize to you that the website does not work as well as it should," she said, adding that HealthCare.gov "can and will be fixed." Hide Caption 4 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Rep. Fred Upton, R-Michigan, is the chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, the first congressional committee to hold hearings on the troubled Obamacare enrollment site. Upton opened the committee's October 30 hearing by saying news about Obamacare "seems to get worse by the day." "Americans are scared," he said. At a previous hearing, Upton called the launch of the website "nothing short of a disaster." Hide Caption 5 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Rep. Henry Waxman, D-California, is the top Democrat on the House Energy and Commerce Committee. During the committee's October 30 hearing Waxman said that "the worst abuses of the insurance industry will be halted" by Obamacare. The California Democrat said the health care law's reforms mean better plans are available at lower premiums, and he urged his Republican colleagues to "stop hyperventilating" about problems with the website. Hide Caption 6 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Rep. Mike Rogers, R-Michigan, sits on the House Energy and Commerce Committee and is also the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee. During Sebelius' October 30 testimony, Rogers accused the HHS secretary of putting the private information of Americans at risk by failing to properly test security measures on the Obamacare enrollment site. "This is a completely unacceptable level of security," he said. "You know it's not secure." Hide Caption 7 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Rep. Steve Scalise, R-Louisiana, leads the Republican Study Committee, a caucus of conservatives in the House of Representatives. Scalise has an undergraduate degree in computer science and is a former systems engineer. During an October 24 hearing of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, Scalise told witnesses, "There's a saying in computer programming: 'Garbage in, garbage out.'" Hide Caption 8 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Rep. Frank Pallone, D-New Jersey, made waves on Twitter when he called the October 24 hearing on the Obamacare enrollment site's problems a "monkey court." Pallone made the comment when a Republican lawmaker at the hearing interrupted Pallone and asked him to yield his remaining allotted time to speak. Hide Caption 9 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Cheryl Campbell is a senior vice president of CGI Federal, a contractor for the troubled website. "In principle, it worked," Campbell said at the October 24 hearing when asked by a lawmaker about the product her company delivered for use by the public on October 1. "It's not working great, and we're working to improve it. But it is enrolling people." After Campbell testified, CNN obtained a confidential September 2013 report from CGI to CMS that warned of a number of open risks and issues for the site even as company executives were testifying publicly that the project had achieved key milestones. Hide Caption 10 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Andrew Slavitt is group executive vice president of Optum/QSSI, another contractor for the site. "The system didn't receive adequate end-to-end testing," Slavitt told lawmakers on October 24. Soon after Slavitt testified, his company was named by the Obama administration as the new general contractor charged with overseeing efforts to fix HealthCare.gov. Hide Caption 11 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Lynn Spellecy, corporate counsel of website contractor Equifax Workforce Solutions, testified before the House Energy and Commerce Committee on October 24. Hide Caption 12 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – John Lau, program director of website contractor Serco, also appeared before the House Energy and Commerce Committee on October 24. Hide Caption 13 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Rep. Dave Camp, R-Michigan, is the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee. During the committee's October 29 hearing, Camp raised concerns about the administration's projection of initial low enrollment in Obamacare's new exchanges. "I fear we can see a fundamental breakdown of the insurance market where premiums will skyrocket, pricing millions of Americans out of health care," Camp said to CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner. Hide Caption 14 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Rep. Sander Levin, D-Michigan, is the top Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee. Hide Caption 15 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Rep. Aaron Schock, R-Illinois, confronted Tavenner on October 29 with anecdotal evidence from a constituent about changes to the individual insurance market linked to the implementation of Obamacare, changes that undermine Obama's oft-repeated pledge that "if you like your plan, you can keep your plan." "She has health insurance that she likes. She's been paying her premium. She wants to keep it. But she can't," Schock said. "Isn't that a lie?" Hide Caption 16 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Rep. Bill Pascrell, D-New Jersey lambasted Republicans on October 29 for choosing to pile on the website woes instead of working with Democrats to improve Obamacare. Pascrell pointed out that his party worked with the GOP to improve the Bush administration's Medicare prescription drug benefit even though Democrats opposed the new program. "We lost the policy fight" then but chose to help make the program work instead of trying to discredit or undermine it. "How many of you stood up to do that?" the Democrat asked of his GOP colleagues, "None. Zero. Zero." Hide Caption 17 of 18 18 photos: Key players in the health care hearings Key players in the health care hearings – Jeff Zients, former acting director of the White House Office of Budget and Management, has been tapped by the administration to provide advice to HHS as the federal agency works to resolve the problems with the Obamacare enrollment site. Hide Caption 18 of 18

"I think the federal government needs to seriously look at whether it is contributing to age discrimination (by forcing staff onto the exchange)," one women said. "The monthly formula for older workers is a serious, serious hit," she went on. "In addition to what I'm paying now, it will be another $300 to $400 a month."

Under the federal employee health plan, premiums do not vary by age. That's possible because the federal benefits system includes millions of employees and negotiates with insurers for that massive group, spreading out the costs widely. But in the exchange, Congress acts as a small business and insurers view it more by individual health needs, charging different premiums for higher-risk staff, like older employees.

Example: Under one BlueCross BlueShield plan available to congressional staff, the premium for a 20-year-old is $262.48 a month, versus $842.41 a month for a 60-year-old. That's not unique to congressional workers. But it is new for them.

Compounding the "hit" they feel is how much Congress kicks in to help with the premium, its employer contribution. It maxes out at $426 a month. The Office of Personnel Management official told CNN that those two things result in much higher premiums for older workers in the exchange than they are paying now under the federal health plan. Of course it also means lower relative premiums for younger workers.

"You should look into that," one man said at Thursday's orientation.

The issues for congressional workers are not just financial.

Some staffers want to select a plan that excludes abortion, "but we've had difficulties figuring out (which one that is)," said one staffer in Thursday's first session. "Which plans are more pro-life?" asked another at the second session later in the day.

In response, insurance company representatives pointed to one multistate plan with BlueCross BlueShield and all eight plans offered by Aetna.

More than 100 plans in total are offered to congressional staff. Those forced into the exchange have just under a month to pick one, starting Monday when the enrollment window set by congressional administrators opens.