To the Editor:

David Brooks’s Oct. 28 column about “partyism” mixes apples and oranges. Bias based on skin color is clearly wrong because people are born that way. Political beliefs, on the other hand, are explicitly chosen.

If a political party in the United States advocated hate and violence in the streets, and other people shunned its members, no reasonable person would call this “discrimination.”

Likewise, if a political party consistently commits harm by its actions, and you consistently vote for that party, it is reasonable for others to judge you for your votes.

DANIEL BARRETT

Newtonville, Mass., Oct. 28, 2014

To the Editor:

David Brooks seems to think that party affiliation is a cancer that is degrading civil discourse and has become the new face of discrimination. But it is more a question of partisan ideology that morphs into extremism than party identity.

Ideological extremism has replaced party affiliation. When people question the scientific validity of global warming and adhere to the ideology of unfettered free markets as the solution to all our problems, our “partyism” becomes extremism.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

LARRY HOFFNER

New York, Oct. 28, 2014

To the Editor:

“Partyism” can be extremely oppressive. In my Savannah gated community of 8,500, mostly retired people, 98 percent are registered Republicans. We few Democrats and progressives have learned, sometimes in harsh circumstances, to remain quiet on many issues.

A year ago, after I scrounged around to find female Democrats, seven of us gathered for lunch and to talk freely. The relief was palpable. Many of us had no outlet for our thoughts.

In three months the lunch ladies grew in number to 94, and we named ourselves “the Abigails,” after Abigail Adams, who prevailed upon her husband, John, “to remember the ladies” when writing the Declaration of Independence, even though he didn’t remember the ladies and it took almost 150 years to get the women’s vote.

There are now 233 members of our group, and another group meets in Charleston, S.C. We have quietly found our cohort.

BRENDA TURNER

Savannah, Ga., Oct. 28, 2014