When President Obama finally signed the health care reform legislation on March 23, 2010, it included a 55-page addendum called the “Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act” which officially finalized Obamacare legislation.

Included in that addendum was an overhaul of the student loan program, which was taken away from Sallie Mae and other private lenders, who had been making a lot of money with very little risk. This saved the government $35 billion which was then used to increase Pell grants for low-income undergraduates, and begin a student debt relief program.

According to “The Nation He Built,” Vol. 3, No. 2, by Michael Grunwald: “He has engineered quite a few revolutions.”

Here are some more.

Obamacare created the biggest increase in health care access since Medicare and Medicaid by insuring 18 million more uninsured Americans. And it closed many loopholes used by insurers to deny coverage to the insured when they got sick, such as “pre-existing condition.”

Three wasteful programs he eliminated were: (1) the F-22 fighter jet; (2) an absurdly expensive presidential helicopter; and (3) a useless bank regulatory agency called the Office of Thrift Supervision.

Since 1979 the Department of Energy has set standards to cut energy wastes of all kinds of products sold in the United States, and they have worked. For example, the average refrigerator sold today, though considerably bigger than 1970 models, uses only one-quarter of their energy! That program for some reason (guess why) sputtered to a halt during the Bush administration. In his third week as president, Obama visited the Department Of Energy and promised to wipe out the backlog of overdue standards. The DOE than finalized more than twice as many rules in 2014 as had been finalized during the entire Bush administration. Obama’s new standards for fluorescent lighting and electric motors have each produced record savings in electricity. “We’ll lead a revolution in energy efficiency,” he said.

He has developed a Climate Action Plan to avoid putting 6 billion metric tons of carbon into the atmosphere through 2030. That would be the same saving as taking every car on the American roads off for two years, or shutting every power plant in the country down for a year and one half. This is also a place where all of us middle class Americans, who own our own home, can help by installing a solar or wind energy unit on our homes. We can save money and offset carbon emissions at the same time. The proof that what we are already doing is working is that our U.S. Power demand after decades of constant growth is now virtually flat averting the need for new plants and saving consumers billions of dollars.

Also, a bunch of lesser known restrictions on soot, mercury, sulfur dioxide, smog and other coal-fired pollutants have helped force nearly one-third of America’s coal-fired energy plants into retirement.

Since President Obama took over, we have had 69 straight months of job increases — a new record. Medicare’s long-term solvency has been increased by 13 years; the deficit has shrunk by nearly a trillion dollars; federal contractors can no longer discriminate against gays; woman can now serve in combat; the rich are paying higher taxes; a Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is policing unscrupulous mortgage brokers, pay-day lenders and other rip-off artists and the financial system has much less risky leverage; oil imports are down 60 percent from 2008 levels; and he is credited by economists as helping to end the Great Recession.

What a record! And you didn’t find these things in the major media, did you?

Now, to try to find another president who might repeat such a record and continue the gains made, especially among the poor and middle class, is not going to be easy. And it won’t likely be one of those candidates who are talking about decreasing taxes for the rich or building walls between us and Mexico and Canada. On top of that, our current Congress with Republican majorities in both houses will not even consider President Obama’s legal appointment to the Supreme Court in the hope of electing a Republican president next November who will be able to make the kind of appointments the Republicans want. And, with nearly half of our total population living at, or a half-step above, the poverty level, we’d better be careful who we elect.

Also, Congress thinks a Republican president will not object to them continuing to keep the minimum wage and Social Security payments and COLAs below their legal levels as they are now. And remember that our last Democratic president, Bill Clinton, left office with a surplus in the treasury and the next president, Republican George W. Bush, oversaw the country going into the heaviest debt ever and shutting down, for the first time ever, in order to rearrange its finances so as not to go bankrupt.

So, if you vote for a Republican presidential candidate in the November election, don’t ever tell me “it doesn’t matter which party is in power, it’s all the same crap,” as many have in the past to excuse their not voting. They are just not good citizens.