Dare I raise it? Do I dare raise the incendiary topic of health care? I can practically hear the "thanks, Obamas" piping hot off the tongues of folks who are tired of a system failing them.

But this is not a column examining the successes or failures of Obamacare. Instead, I’d like to take a look at one care model that seeks to treat families when appointment-based care isn’t available and the waiting room at the ER appears interminable.

In the health care food chain, the urgent health care center is a rung above a retail clinic (such as a pharmacy’s walk-in clinic where you might get a strep culture). Urgent care centers are generally staffed and equipped for broken bones, burns and other conditions that retail clinics are not equipped to handle. Their copay is usually lower than an ER's, as is their waiting time.

But are these clinics good for Chattanooga? Do they skirt the long-term relationship that primary care physicians intend to have with their patients?

In Chattanooga, we have at least two urgent care clinics that specialize in pediatrics. These clinics are open late hours, as it is guaranteed that kids will invariably spike a fever, break an arm or develop uncontrollable diarrhea during hours when their primary care physicians have long since left the office. Would you like to be the "uncontrollable diarrhea, party of two" in the ER waiting room? The urgent care clinics can be a real gift for many parents.

In my case, the late-night pediatric clinic poses no threat to my kids’ relationship with their primary care physicians. We have visited both P.M. Pediatrics and the Beacon Health Pediatric Night Clinic, and received excellent care. We also received Popsicles in the cases when my kids had strep throat—love getting that copay’s worth.

I realize I’m speaking from a position of significant privilege, though. I carry health insurance through my employer that makes this care accessible for my family. Many urgent care facilities do not accept Medicaid/TennCare. Additionally, the two pediatric night clinics I’ve visited are within blocks of one another. They may be too much of a hike for many families in Chattanooga, especially those dependent on public transportation.

I don’t purport to be an expert in equitable health care solutions, so, I leave it to you, dear readers: What do you think of urgent care facilities in Chattanooga? Do you use them? Do you think they are disassembling the patient-primary care physician relationship? Does Chattanooga need more of these, or is there another health care model that can help fill in the gaps between appointment-based care and the ER?

Kendra Stanton Lee is a transplant to Chattanooga via Boston. She teaches journalism to university students and enjoys holding their millennial attention spans by jumping on tables and sweeping around like a whirling dervish. She lives with her husband and their young children, with whom she enjoys hiking, road tripping and supporting the ice cream industry. She blogs at kendraspondence.com and welcomes a Twitter follow @kendraspondence; or you can email her directly at kendrastantonlee@gmail.com. The opinions expressed in this column belong solely to the author, not Nooga.com or its employees.