We are hearing a lot about how difficult it is to access Primary Care in our area. Physician practices are impacted and don’t have room for many more patients. Or perhaps it’s simply difficult to take time off work to go to the doctor. Typically the last quarter is a busy time for many businesses, whether you are retail preparing for holiday sales, or others trying to squeeze in all of your work before year end. I often hear people say simply, “I don’t have time to get sick!”

Anthem Blue Cross has announced that beginning September 2, targeted members of their insured population will receive a series of communications (emails, phone calls and direct mailer) about LiveHealth Online. This campaign will include members of plans that include telehealth visits as a covered benefit as well as members of plans who do not. With this program, individuals can see a doctor 24/7, 365 days a year from their home or office.

In 10 minutes or less members can talk face-to-face with a doctor using the service on their computer or mobile device. How very convenient when your child wakes up in the middle of the night and you aren’t sure what to do. If you don’t want to use your health plan’s nurse line, you can step it up a bit and talk “live” to a board certified physician.

“No appointments, no driving, no long waits – it’s easy to use and more convenient than a trip to urgent care”, according to Anthem. After signing up, the individual will choose from a list of board certified physicians, and in a matter of minutes, they’ll be connected to that doctor who can evaluate their symptoms and make a diagnosis for many common ailments, like sinus infections, flu, and allergies. They can also prescribe medications, when medically necessary and as permitted by state law.

For members of participating health plans these visits are a covered benefit. The retail cost for the service is typically $49 and may be less if your plan covers it with a copay.

How does LiveHealth Online work?

The individual just needs a computer with a webcam or mobile device. The first time they use it, the individual should go to LiveHealthOnline.com or download the Android or iPhone app to sign up and set up their profile. Any time after enrolling, members can select a provider from the group of available doctors online right when they need to have access.

Next, they submit their symptoms and soon begin a live video conversation with their selected physician. LiveHealth Online maintains an electronic record of every visit, and members can forward this information to their primary care doctor as needed.

To access this service go to LiveHealthOnline.com or download the app from the App Store or Google Play. There is a video explaining the service called Doctor by Your Side video at the site.

Clearly this type of service is not intended to replace the relationship with a primary care physician (PCP). In fact, in my practice I encourage my clients to establish a relationship with a PCP. It always concerns me when they say they do not have one and simply use one of the walk- in clinics, as needed.

It has been my experience that a long term relationship with your PCP is invaluable. This person knows you, knows your medical history and if they are good–over time they know your personal support system and habits as well. I was spoiled by having the same PCP team for over 36 years. Time will tell how long it takes to rebuild that type of relationship with a new physician. At least this one is younger and statistically should be able to see my through the rest of my life!

(Personally, I can see where this can be a real benefit, particularly for the upcoming open enrollment season, when I will be lucky to sleep, let alone see a doctor if needed!)

One more shameless plus: Today is the Ducky Derby! Come on down to Caldwell Park and enjoy the Art show and the Duck Drop! The Duck Drop is at 1:30, come down and enjoy our beautiful park.