Casa, a wire-haired dachshund, relaxes in the grass Friday, having recovered after apparently eating from a rat poison-laced meatball that someone dropped or threw into its eastside Longmont owners' yard in May. ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

EDITOR'S NOTE: The original version of this story misspelled the name of Aaron Harber, who's promised $1,000 rewards for information leading to the arrest and conviction of dog-poisoning perpetrators in the Longmont and Gunbarrel incidents. That's been corrected below.

EDITOR'S NOTE: The Times-Call series Take Two revisits people we have written about in the past year. Take Two stories will run on Mondays.

The mysteries of two Boulder County dog poisoning incidents remain unsolved, authorities said last week, although the investigations remain open.

That's frustrating for Gail Schipper, whose husband Doedo Schipper discovered three fist-sized meatballs stuffed with what appeared to be green d-Con rat poison pellets as he prepared to mow the lawn of his home on the 400 block of Collyer Street in Longmont on May 31.

"Clearly, whoever thought that was the right thing to do is still out there," Gail Schipper said last week.

The Schippers initially concluded that their two wire-haired dachshunds hadn't ingested any of the poisoned meat after Doedo found the meatballs and when one of the dogs brought home a chewed-up plastic bag that also contained green pellets.

But one of the dogs, Casa, later began bleeding from the mouth and underwent hours of veterinary care, including a blood transfusion after apparently having eaten a contaminated meatball.

The other dog, Bücker, didn't show such extreme symptoms but the Schippers sought treatment for and monitored both.

"They've finished their medication," and both "are fine" now, Gail Schipper said last week.

Advertisement

She said there have been no further incidents of poisoned meatballs or sickened dogs in her eastside Longmont neighborhood that she knows of, but "we're trying to keep an eye on them" in case the perpetrator returns.

Said Longmont Police Cmdr. Jeff Satur: "At this point, we have no solid leads or suspects."

Gail Schipper said it's disappointing that no one has been caught.

"I would like to be able to use our back yard knowing that it's safe," she said.

In April, similar poison-laced meatballs were found in a Gunbarrel neighborhood park at 5150 Buckingham Road. As many as three dogs — a golden retriever puppy, a 6-year-old Labrador retriever and a 12-year-old beagle are believed to have ingested toxic chemicals in that incident, although all reportedly survived.

"We have no leads or suspects," Boulder County Sheriff's Cmdr. Heidi Prentup said last week of the Gunbarrel case. "The investigation is open but would only be actively worked if we were to get a lead to follow up on."

Authorities have said they don't believe the Gunbarrel park and Longmont neighborhood poisoned-meatball incidents are related.

The Schippers' dogs may not have been the first targeted in the Historic Eastside Longmont neighborhood. A neighbor who lives a few houses away from the Schippers has said her son's 6-year-old Corgi died May 7, just four weeks after it had arrived at their house, in a possible poisoning, although no testing was done on that dog.

Other residents of the 400 block of Collyer said they were out of the city in June 2012 when a neighbor caring for that couple's beagle and Manchester terrier saw them sniffing at something near a backyard fence. The neighbor found a meatball and picked it up and disposed of it before either of those dogs could eat it.

Awards have been offered in each of the two most recent known poisoning cases, with KCDO-TV host Aaron Harber offering $1,000 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the person who put the rat poison-laced meatballs into the Collyer Street lawn and $1,000 for the arrest and conviction of whoever left the poison-stuffed meatballs in the Gunbarrel park.

Longmont police have asked for anyone with information on the Longmont poisoned meatballs incidents to call police at 303-651-8501 or call Northern Colorado Crime Stoppers at 1-800-222-TIPS (8477).

Tips can also be provided to the Northern Colorado Crime Stoppers via the Internet at nococrimestoppers.com or by text to: 274637 (crimes) Keyword: NOCO (followed by your tip).

Boulder County District Attorney Stan Garnett said $4,675 total has been pledged for information leading to an arrest in the Gunbarrel case, mostly from anonymous sources. The DA's office is overseeing that award.

Anyone with information on the Gunbarrel poisoning attempts is asked to call the Boulder County Sheriff's Office at 303-441-4444.

Contact Times-Call staff writer John Fryar at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com