Nevada has made significant strides in reducing its uninsured population over the past two years, but now, as we are in our third open-enrollment season, determined more than ever to close the gap, there remains an alarming number of residents who are uninsured. I’m often asked, “Why should we buy health insurance?” Having health insurance is required by law, and those who don’t abide by it are subject to rising tax penalties, but can you really put a price tag on the invaluable peace of mind you can have by being properly covered?

Now through Jan. 31, Nevadans have the opportunity to sign up for health care coverage through Nevada Health Link, our online marketplace that helped more than 73,000 consumers choose and enroll in affordable health plans last year. Our free service provides individuals, families and small-business owners the opportunity to compare coverage options, determine their eligibility for subsidies that reduce monthly premium costs, and choose the plan and coverage best suited for their needs. Eighty-seven percent of our customers receive premium assistance, which, on average, cuts the monthly cost of their health insurance by two-thirds.

We’ve made some changes within our organization to better and more effectively serve our consumers. We are working to ensure our outreach is both continuous throughout the season as well as widespread throughout the state. On Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, our licensed insurance professionals will extend their office hours to discuss consumers’ insurance needs and concerns. These events will be advertised through our social media channels, our website and fliers mailed to targeted ZIP codes.

We want Nevadans to know in-person assistance is available near them. Also, we recommend they take advantage of the free face-to-face help offered by brokers, agents and navigators, and people who have been trained by Nevada Health Link to provide outreach and education about the enrollment process. These industry experts can help consumers choose the best, most affordable income-based health care plan option, as well as help determine whether they qualify for insurance affordability programs (including a premium tax credit, cost-sharing reductions, Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program) and enroll in coverage. Consumers can identify and choose a broker, an agent or a navigator in their area with the help of the in-person assistance search tool at Nevadahealthlink.com. They also can enroll online by going to healthcare.gov or carrier-specific sites.

Nevada Health Link was created to ensure all Nevadans have access to health insurance, no matter their income level. Only exchange-based plans such as ours can provide individuals with federal tax credits and subsidies to help cover their health care premium costs. I urge every eligible Nevadan to take the necessary measures to avoid the risk of penalties, and more important, to safeguard your family’s access to care in the event of an emergency or illness.

Bruce Gilbert is the executive director of the Silver State Health Exchange.