A lesser-known company formerly led by “pharma-bro” Martin Shkreli on Monday pledged more transparency around drug pricing.

KaloBios Pharmaceuticals said it will adopt a responsible pricing model for all of the company’s current and future products. That will include publicly sharing the key elements that make up the pricing of products, seeking input from stakeholders on what would make a reasonable return for the company. The company also said it would not arbitrarily increase the prices of products and will limit increases at no more than the rate of inflation or the consumer price index no more than once annually, if at all.

“Our new pricing model is a commitment to define and develop transparent, responsible pricing for the products we hope to bring to patients in the future,” Cameron Durrant, KaloBios’ chairman and CEO, said in a release.

KaloBios said it would make its profit margin “reasonable and transparent.” The company noted that it recently acquired Benznidazole, a drug used to treat Chagas disease, and it would not include research and development costs when it determines the drug’s price.

Shkreli resigned from KaloBios after he was arrested late last year on securities fraud charges unrelated to either of the pharmaceutical companies he led at the time. The company filed for bankruptcy in December.

Drug pricing is the top health care concern among voters this election cycle. Drug costs have come under signifiant political scrutiny both on the campaign trail and in Congress. Companies like Turing, also formerly owned by Shkreli, and Valeant have been vilified for drastically increasing the prices of rare drugs that are generally taken by small populations.

The pharmaceutical industry in general has tried to separate itself from companies like Turing and Valeant over the last several months, arguing that their actions don’t represent the majority of drug makers.

“Drug pricing is a big concern for all stakeholders in healthcare,” Durrant said. “We believe that our approach balances the needs of key stakeholders, including patients, clinicians, payers, NGOs, investors, policy makers and advocacy groups.”

Correction

An earlier version of this report misspelled Cameron Durrant’s name.