Jean Flanagan has been named to the new position of chief operating officer of Valley Medical Group, a multispecialty group practice with more than 30 medical and surgical specialties in northern New Jersey.

Flanagan, who has been with Valley Health System for 16 years, is responsible for the day-to-day operations of VMG, which has more than 50 locations and more than 700 employees. VMG is led by Chief Executive Marc Goldstein.



Valley spokeswoman Maureen Curran said that, given the rapid growth of the practice, it needed a COO to oversee day-to-day management and operations.



VMG was formed in 2013 and currently includes more than 200 physicians and continues to grow. All the physicians are employees of Valley Medical Group, which, along with the Valley Hospital and Valley Home Care, is part of Valley Health System.

Curran said: "Under the pressure of rising costs and changes in health care delivery associated with the Affordable Care Act, physicians are increasingly choosing to become part of larger group practices. Valley Health System was at the vanguard of this trend with the establishment of a multispecialty physician practice now known as Valley Medical Group. Today, VMG includes more than 200 physicians representing more than 30 medical specialties, and is continuing to grow."

Click here to subscribe to the NJBIZ e-newsletters



She said Valley’s acquisition of community-based practices “will ensure the seamless delivery of quality primary and specialty care for years to come in the communities we serve. It also fosters the development of physician leadership, strategic alignment of services and enables Valley to manage the cost and quality of services offered in the community-based practices.



“For the physicians, joining VMG offers practice managements and support for the practices; the ability to practice as part of a large, multi-specialty group; and greater financial security.”



Flanagan previously was the group’s executive director and was director of administrative services and manager of administration at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood before joining VMG.



Valley Medical Group includes doctors who practice at Valley Hospital, Valley’s Blumenthal Cancer Center in Paramus, seven urgent/primary care centers, and community-based practices.

ALSO ON NJBIZ

NJBIZ Power 50 Real Estate leaders revealed (slideshow)

Bringing military discipline to business practices

'Tis the season: Consumers can start browsing Obamacare plans in advance of purchase