Topics: Affordable Care Act, culture wars, Editor's Picks, GOP, Jack Kingston, Mike Enzi, Obamacare, The Right, Politics News

Many people think of the right’s Obamacare hatred as an outgrowth of straightforward partisan and ideological truths. Movement conservatives broadly oppose the idea of taxing wealthy people to subsidize the lower and middle classes. They don’t like regulating the private sector very much either. Add in the political incentives they faced to uniformly oppose President Obama’s agenda, the zero Republican votes for the Affordable Care Act, and you’ve planted seeds of lasting hostility.

But the hostility has become so deeply rooted that it now stands on its own, detached from the ideological and partisan antipathies that gave rise to it.

It has forced conservatives to blind themselves to the law’s positive, unobjectionable qualities, and police those within their ranks who dare to acknowledge them.

Talking Points Memo’s Josh Marshall called this reactionary phenomenon Obamacare McCarthyism. It ensnared Rep. Jack Kingston, R-Ga., who’s running for Senate in 2014 and had the temerity to suggest that Republicans shouldn’t just idly mock the law when it stumbles. A few years ago, Sen. Mike Enzi, R-Wy0., said he liked the concept of insurance exchanges — which are crucial components of GOP-backed Medicare privatization proposals and other conservative reform ideas — and now a hardline super PAC is using his words against him, as if he’d called for the creation of a public option.

But on the battlefields of partisan warfare, this sort of post-principled contempt, combined with the inception of benefits, has turned the fight over Obamacare from a dispute over first principles, into a culture war, in which signaling matters more than tactical victories.

The repeal campaign — once marked by earnest and sustained efforts to wipe the law off the books — has all but burned itself out. But the law remains a potent political organizing force — a rallying cry Republicans believe they can use to channel the right’s Obamacare obsession into voter turnout.

An astute friend remarked to me on Tuesday that the GOP’s position on Obamacare is coming to resemble its position on abortion in one key way: loudly, consistently, uniformly opposed, but ultimately not really driven to eliminate it. The backlash they’d face would be brutal, but they might stand to gain by fighting it on the margins and keeping the issue alive.