How often do you get the chance to spend your Easter playing with bunnies and baby chicks? Well this weekend hundreds of people did. Zoo World held their Eggstra Special Easter celebration and it's a party that's gotten bigger every year.

More than 500 people packed zoo world this weekend for their 9th Annual Eggstra Special Easter celebration.

"Our Easter celebration has grown tremendously over the years," said Stephanie Sinnett, Guest Services Director at Zoo World.

In fact, they've doubled their attendance from last year.

"We have some people who come for the first time each year and then we have people that come back every year too and make it part of their family tradition." said Sinnett.

And some visitors like Brandon Blanton have done just that.

He's been coming to the celebration for the past few years.

"This is more family oriented and it just gives you time to get good pictures and you don't have to put up with all the hustle and bustle that goes on on spring break," said Brandon Blanton.

Guests could get their faces painted, enjoy live music, meet the Easter bunny, and of course participate in an Easter egg hunt.

"I already found three golden eggs and they had golden coins," said Logan Aldridge.

The best thing about Zoo World on Easter is getting the chance to play with bunnies and baby chicks.

"It's nice for kids they can look at the animals and today's Easter so they get to look at the rabbits and learn. It's a learning experience just because we're on spring break doesn't mean they stop learning," said Chavon Jackson.

Kayte Wanko is the Director of Zoo World.

She says their goal is to give children hands on experience with animals.

"Easter is a great time to get your kids out and doing something active outside and the zoo is always a really fun active place and we give you the benefit of being up close and personal to animals that you probably don't get to see and touch on a regular basis," said Zoo World Director, Kayte Wanko.

One visitor plans on coming back again next year.

"We just like coming out to the local zoo and seeing all the stuff, Easter egg hunt where else can you go and do that and see animals you know?" said Kevin Rose.

Zoo World employees say they will now shift their focus to preparing for their summer camp.