BERNIE Sanders and the policies he advocates may represent the future for many Democratic primary voters, but his basic theory of government is very traditional, dating to the New Deal.

Mr. Sanders gets cheers for these ideas, as he did from voters in New Hampshire’s Democratic primary with his resounding victory. But his view is being challenged by a new, more incremental liberalism, which centers on advancing liberal goals without big, universal programs — an approach being invented by President Obama and Mr. Sanders’s opponent, Hillary Clinton.

The essence of Mr. Sanders’s version of liberalism is government programs. Expansive initiatives that provide benefits to “a broad cross-class constituency,” as the Harvard political sociologist Theda Skocpol puts it, such as Social Security and Medicare, are not only good policy, they’re at the heart of liberal politics. They remind citizens of the essential role of government in providing security and economic opportunity. And they anchor voters to the party that backs those programs.

That’s the theory, anyway, and it’s deeply embedded in Mr. Sanders’s approach. His proposals for single-payer health care, free college tuition and paid family leave financed through a small payroll tax reflect the view that successful programs should be universal and create a connection between individuals and government.

A program that covers everyone avoids the class conflict over who gets help and who doesn’t, as well as the refrain of “makers and takers” that Mitt Romney and Paul Ryan used in the 2012 election.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That’s in sharp contrast to the policy approach of the Obama administration since about 2011, and also to Hillary Clinton and most of Mr. Sanders’s congressional colleagues. Their agendas are most interesting and novel for the absence of big, universal programs that require legislative action. Instead, they test the limits of what government can do by rearranging the pieces of existing programs, using regulations, incentives to states, tax credits and “nudges” informed by behavioral economics in place of direct spending.

What does that say about the future of big programs? Unless Mr. Sanders can sweep to power with a mandate and wide congressional majorities that share his view — the “political revolution” he promises — the future of social and economic policy will involve, for better or worse, these complex, incremental and often invisible changes, instead of big programs.

Photo

Mrs. Clinton’s “compact” for college tuition assistance, which costs a fraction of what Mr. Sanders’s free college plan costs, illustrates the new method. There is no single new program. Instead, she promises, for example, to provide grants to states to help them provide free tuition at community colleges; to expand regulation of predatory loan servicers and education programs; to enact a “Borrower Bill of Rights”; and to allow students to refinance their loans at lower rates.

It’s all a lot more complicated — and for candidate Clinton, especially in the primary, a tougher sell — than a single new program in which government takes most of the responsibility. But it fits well with the methods employed by the Obama administration in the years since the president realized that he could not expect to achieve an ambitious program with a deeply partisan Congress and a Republican House.

The Obama administration’s proposed changes to overtime regulations, for example, are predicted to raise wages for up to five million workers. The MyRA retirement proposal will, without congressional action, set millions of American households up with low-risk, low-cost retirement savings accounts.

It’s more than just congressional intransigence and polarization that led liberals to move beyond big new programs. Passage of the Affordable Care Act finally put in place the last big piece of the New Deal’s agenda. And the cautiousness of most Democratic candidates about taxes makes it difficult to push for new programs. While Mr. Sanders acknowledges that his new programs will require tax increases, he uses the same rule as Mrs. Clinton and President Obama — no tax increases on households under $250,000 — in several of his initiatives, and claims that he will pay for the cost of others through taxes on the “billionaire class.”

But without new programs, it really is possible to deny the need for broader tax increases, as Mrs. Clinton does. There is no need for revenue to reduce future budget deficits; the best way to keep deficits under control is to keep the economy growing and to reduce health care spending, which again means more tinkering.

Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, The Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world.

These policy machinations should not be confused with “triangulation” — the modest, symbolic gestures adopted by the Clinton administration in the mid-1990s to show a recognition of conservative values. These are intended instead to make progress toward big goals by putting together various moving pieces.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

There are many downsides to building policy this way. It’s unlikely that the MyRA, for example, will be enough to meet the shortfall in Americans’ retirement savings or reduce inequality of wealth.

These efforts pull what the Cornell political scientist Suzanne Mettler calls the “submerged state” further under the waves. Citizens don’t see or feel these initiatives and may not know that they are benefiting from a government initiative at all.

But if this is the only way to drive reform — and in the current political configuration, it is — then politicians in both parties will have no choice but to find ways to achieve big change without big new programs.