Please enable Javascript to watch this video

Former Congressman Bobby Schilling announced he will not be running for the 18th Congressional district seat, after rumors of him possibly considering it.

On Saturday, at the GOP Headquarters in Peoria, Schilling said he wanted to spend more time with his family and fully endorsed Senator LaHood in his race for the recently vacated seat.

"I see Darin as what consider to be a reformer, a guy that's not going to do 'business as usual,'" said Schilling. "A guy that's not afraid to go against leadership, and that's what this United States of America needs, whether it's Democrat or Republican."

On March 17th, embattled Rep. Aaron Schock announced he would resign his seat at the end of the month, in the wake of a congressional ethics investigation into reports that he used taxpayer money to fund lavish trips and events.

LaHood, whose father served the 18th district of over a decade, said he's ready to serve the people in the place he calls home.

"We've all been sad about the tragedy that happened with Senator Schock," said LaHood. "What we need is somebody who's going to bring integrity to this seat."

"I take nothing for granted in this race, I know I'm going to have to work very hard," LaHood said.

Schilling, who was rumored to possibly be interested in running for the seat, said he is confident in LaHood's principles, and is looking forward to spending more time with his wife and ten children.

"As a member of Congress, you take a lot of time away from your family," said Schilling. "It was the first time I had missed birthdays of my children."

"You want to run to take somebody out [of the race] who's not going to work in best interest of the people," said Schilling. "When I look at [LaHood] and what he stands for, and his track record, it was pretty clear."

LaHood will formerly announce his bid in the race for the 18th Congressional District seat on Monday, March 30th. He will be running against attorney Mark Zalcman, from Normal, Illinois.