Customized TV Listings are available here: www.latimes.com/tvtimes

Click here to download TV listings for the week of Sept. 15 - 21, 2013 in PDF format

This week's TV Movies

SERIES

Teen Kids News The series premiere features music in Afghanistan and a report on the dangers of bounce houses. 2:30 p.m. Fox

Cupcake Wars Contestants who have previously gone home empty-handed bring their cupcakes to an event honoring the 60th anniversary of Marilyn Monroe's hand prints at the TCL Chinese Theater. 8 p.m. Food

Cops The unscripted series finds a new home. 8 and 8:30 p.m. Spike

Hell on Wheels A cholera outbreak hits and Cullen (Anson Mount) must locate fresh water in this new episode. 9 p.m. AMC

MOVIES

Parental Guidance Billy Crystal and Bette Midler are teamed in this family-friendly 2012 comedy that's about several generations of a family. Marisa Tomei, Bailee Madison and Tom Everett Scott also star. 8 p.m. HBO

Sins of the Preacher The death of a minister's wife (Bree Williamson) is ruled a suicide, but her mother (Gail O'Grady) starts piecing together clues and becomes increasingly suspicious of her daughter's husband (Christopher Gartin). Taylor Cole and James McDaniel also star in this new drama inspired by a true story. 8 p.m. Lifetime

Garage Sale Mystery A woman (Lori Loughlin) who frequents garage sales begins to suspect there's a link between the sales and a string of burglaries in her town. Andrew Dunbar, Rick Ravanello and Cameron Bancroft also star in this new mystery based on a novel by Suzi Weinert. 9 p.m. Hallmark

Robocroc A crocodile transformed into a metallic monster by a top-secret project in this campy science fiction made for TV movie. Corin Nemec, Steven Hartley and Dee Wallace star. 9 p.m. Syfy



WEEKEND TALK

SATURDAY

Good Morning America (N) 7 a.m. KABC

McLaughlin Group (N) 6:30 p.m. KCET

SUNDAY

Today "The Sound of Music" casting call. (N) 6 a.m. KNBC

Good Morning America (N) 6 a.m. KABC

State of the Union With Candy Crowley Syria: Rep. Adam B. Schiff (D-Burbank); Jason Chaffetz (R-Utah); Rep. Elijah E. Cummings (D-Md.); Rep. Mike Rogers (R-Mich.). Panel: Cornell Belcher; S.E. Cupp; former House Speaker Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.); Neera Tanden. (N) 6 and 9 a.m. CNN

CBS News Sunday Morning Ricky Gervais; Eileen Rockefeller; Earth, Wind & Fire. (N) 6:30 a.m. KCBS

Fareed Zakaria GPS Syria: National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski; former Sec. of State Henry Kissinger. WMDs: former U.N. weapons inspector Richard Butler. American Muslims: Ayad Akhtar; Aasif Mandvi. (N) 7 and 10 a.m. CNN

Face the Nation Syria: Elizabeth Palmer. Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.); Sen. Carl Levin (D-Mich.); Former Sec. of State Madeleine Albright. Panel: David Gergen; Michael Gerson; Peggy Noonan; Susan Page. (N) 8 a.m. KCBS

Meet the Press Syria and Russia: Sen. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.); Sen. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.). Syria: Tom Friedman; Robin Wright; Jeffrey Goldberg; Andrea Mitchell. The economy: Former Sec. of the Treasury Hank Paulson; former Rep. Barney Frank (D-Mass.); Maria Bartiromo. Panel: Bob Woodward; Richard Wolffe; Kathleen Parker; Ana Navarro. (N) 8 a.m. KNBC