7/7 widow who betrayed her son: Adam lost his dad in the Tube bombings - then found his mother had blown his £50,000 compensation on fancy cars, a Jacuzzi and SEVEN Chihuahuas



Richard Gray, 41, from Ipswich, was killed on a Circle Line train at Aldgate

Family was given a pay-out by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority



But his wife Louise, 42, squandered nearly all the cash on luxury items

Adam took his mother to a county court and she was ordered to repay him

But now Mrs Gray has appealed the decision, saying she has no money



Mr Gray, 20, said: 'First I lost my father and now I've lost my mother'



Adam Gray, 20, lost his father Richard, who commuted each day from Ipswich in Suffolk to London, in the 7/7 bombings

On Monday morning at exactly 8.50, Adam Gray will pause for a moment, close his eyes and think about his dead father.

Nine years will have passed since Richard Gray became one of the 52 people killed in the July 7 bombings.

The 41-year-old accountant was standing just a few feet away from suicide bomber Shehzad Tanweer when he blew himself up on a Circle Line train travelling between Liverpool Street and Aldgate.

Richard, a father of two who commuted from Ipswich, Suffolk, to London each day, was blown through the carriage doors by the force of the blast, the first of four suicide bombs in London that day.

Time is supposed to be a healer but for 20-year-old Adam, an 11-year-old at the time of his father’s death, this year’s anniversary will be more painful than ever.

Having lost his father in such horrific circumstances, he is now grappling with the fall-out of a terrible family row about money awarded to them by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority in recognition of the loss they suffered.

In what many will regard as a staggering act of betrayal, Adam’s mother, 42-year-old Louise Gray, has squandered not only the £250,000 awarded to her, but Adam’s £50,000 compensation as well.

How did she spend so much? Well, there have been several cars, meals in top restaurants, luxury holidays with her new boyfriend, lots of new clothes and improvements to her home in Ipswich, including an outdoor Jacuzzi.

Last but not least, she also bought seven Chihuahuas. When Adam found out his mother had blown his compensation, he felt he had no choice but to pursue her through the civil courts.

Last week, she was ordered by a county court judge to repay him £43,790. But former care worker Louise has decided to appeal against the ruling.

The relationship between mother and son is in tatters. ‘First I lost my father and now I’ve lost my mother,’ says Adam, in his first interview since the judgment was passed.

‘It’s hard to believe this could happen to us after all we’ve suffered.’

Louise Gray claimed this week that she had apologised to Adam but insisted that she doesn’t have the money to pay him back.

‘It’s all a mess,’ she said. ‘I’ve said sorry to my son over and over again, but he won’t listen to me. I want to talk to him and explain.’ Other relatives have also entered the family row.

One told the Mail that they were struggling to understand how Louise — who also sold the family home, spent the proceeds and now lives in a council house — could have betrayed her son.

‘You can imagine what it was like for him when he found out there was nothing left,’ said the relative, who did not wish to be named. ‘He was absolutely heartbroken.’ A bitter state of affairs, then. Adam says: ‘After my father was killed I had this feeling that life would inevitably get back to normal but it never did. It got worse and worse.’

Adam's mother Louise Gray, 42, and her daughter Ruby are pictured meeting the Queen at a memorial service for the 52 who were killed in the Tube bombings on July 7, 2005. Mr Gray this week took his mother to court to reclaim the compensation money she spent on a lavish lifestyle



Until July 7, 2005, Adam had been enjoying a typically middle-class childhood. He remembers his hard-working father, a tax expert, often leaving the house in Ipswich so early and returning so late that he didn’t see Adam and his sister Ruby, now 16, until the weekends.

‘He worked really hard to support the family,’ says Adam, who has now moved to Epping, Essex, and is working as a street canvasser for a charity. ‘He was always on the computer or looking at paperwork even at home. He was often exhausted.’

Some of Adam’s happiest memories are his father taking him to Ipswich and East Suffolk Hockey Club, where Richard was a talented player and founding member.

‘We used to listen to Seventies and Eighties music in the car,’ says Adam. ‘We’d sing along to Guns N’ Roses and Aerosmith. I used to borrow all Dad’s music.’

There were happy family holidays, too, particularly a trip to Luxor the year before Richard died. ‘I remember my mum smiling on a sun lounger and my dad larking around and trying to throw me and my sister in the pool,’ says Adam. ‘He was so loving, fun and kind.’

Adam’s memories of July 7 the next year are hazier, filled with pain and confusion. He was at school when news of the bombings began to emerge. ‘A teacher told us what had happened. My dad worked in London so I made the connection in my mind. But nothing more.’

It wasn’t until he saw his grandfather waiting at the school gate that he knew something was wrong. Adam arrived home to find the house full of relatives and his mother making frantic phone calls.

She had heard nothing from her husband since he left the house that morning at 7.15am. He remembers being told that his father was missing and remembers his mother, frustrated at the lack of information, setting off for London.

‘When she returned, she took me upstairs to her room,’ recalls Adam. ‘She told me straight that Dad was dead. It was like someone had taken a hammer and smashed my reality.’

Richard’s death was confirmed when Louise returned to London the next day and formally identified her husband’s remains.

Grief engulfed the Gray family but, initially at least, it appears to have brought them closer.

Adam’s impression of his mother at the time was of someone strong, capable and determined to put her family first. ‘She was devastated and there were a lot of tears but there was very much the feeling that life had to go on,’ he says.

Happier times: Adam, pictured bottom left aged 11, with his father Richard, mother Louise and sister Ruby, then aged 7, during a family holiday to Egypt. The family have been grappling with the fall-out of a terrible row over the money awarded to them by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority

Indeed, Louise Gray seemed the embodiment of emotional courage when she and Adam’s seven-year-old sister Ruby presented the Queen with a bouquet at a remembrance service at St Paul’s Cathedral four months after the tragedy, in November 2005.

But without their breadwinner, the Grays soon had money worries and were among hundreds of victims and relatives who applied to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority. They were awarded interim payments to tide them over.

After a few months Louise also received a lump sum from her husband’s life insurance policy, which settled the mortgage on the family home, and, says Adam, thousands of pounds in grants from the London Bombing Relief Charitable Fund.

Two years later the compensation amounts were settled at £250,000 for Louise, as well as £50,000 for Adam and £100,000 for Ruby (who, as the younger child, would suffer her father’s loss for longer). The children’s money was placed in trust in a Bank of Scotland account, to be handed to them on their 18th birthdays.

Early on, however, Adam noticed that his mother was spending more. It began with clothes and handbags. Then they had a new kitchen fitted, and the garden of their semi-detached house on a 1970s housing estate was professionally renovated. The house was decorated. New flooring was put down. Then Louise began dining at expensive restaurants.

Besides the seven little dogs, her purchases included at least five furniture suites, each replacing the last as its novelty faded. A crane was hired to lift a new Jacuzzi over the roof and into the garden.

Adam says his mother also bought three VW Beetles, a two-seater sports car and a seven-seater people carrier, as well as tanzanite jewellery from a TV shopping channel.

Some might suggest that enduring grief was behind her spending, but Adam disagrees.

‘She probably always had lavish tendencies but my father was there as a buffer before. Then suddenly she had all this money in her hands.

‘I kept asking her if we could afford all this stuff, but she just told me: “We’ve got the money, we’re fine.” ’

Mr Gray, 41, died when suicide bomber suicide bomber Shehzad Tanweer blew himself up on a Circle Line train travelling between Liverpool Street and Aldgate

Matters were further complicated by the appearance of Louise’s new boyfriend, 33-year-old Iraqi refugee Umar Shamshoom, around three years after her husband’s death.

Adam insists that at first everyone was happy about her relationship with the staff nurse from Ipswich Hospital, who fled Iraq with his Christian family as a child and was granted political asylum in the UK.

‘He seemed like a good person and I understood her need to move on,’ says Adam. So did my father’s family. They gave her their blessing.’

But when Umar moved into the family home, Adam says, the atmosphere deteriorated.

‘They used to fight all the time,’ says Adam. ‘There were huge rows. My mother kept saying it was over but then it was back on again. He was constantly moving in and out.’

Finally, in 2011, Louise sold the house and moved to West Sussex.

Adam recalls: ‘She said she was turning over a new leaf and stopping spending. She said the rent was more affordable and she’d be living close to my uncle and aunt, who would give her emotional support.’

Adam, 17 and studying music, philosophy and history for A-level at the time, remained in Ipswich to finish his studies and moved into council accommodation. ‘I was upset,’ he says, ‘but I tried to be adult about it. My mother said she needed a fresh start and I wanted the best for her.’

Louise’s on-off relationship with Umar continued and in December 2011 they became parents to a daughter, Violet, before moving back to Ipswich in 2012.

Louise continued to reassure Adam that her spending was in check. He trusted her — and asked her to look after his money when it was signed over to him on his 18th birthday in January 2012.

‘I didn’t want the responsibility of it at 18,’ he says. ‘I didn’t want to spend it, so I asked Mum to look after it. She said she would and I transferred it to her account.’

He thought no more about the money until November last year, when he decided to use some of it to move from Ipswich to London and look for a jewellery apprenticeship with a goldsmith.

When he asked, the answer he received from his mother was blunt: ‘I’m sorry, Adam. I’ve spent it.’

‘I tried to stay calm,’ he says. ‘She said she’d spent the money on rent and other stuff but she wouldn’t give me clear answers. She just said: “Give me time and I’ll sort it out.”’

Adam changed his plans and moved to Epping instead.

His drastic decision to take his mother to court came when he discovered that, as well as spending money on rent for her partner’s flat, she had bought him a car and paid for a holiday to Jordan.

‘It was obvious to me that she was going to make no effort to pay the money back if I didn’t take action,’ says Adam.



‘She probably always had lavish tendencies but my father was there as a buffer before. Then suddenly she had all this money in her hand s' Adam Gray

He was concerned, too, for Ruby, who still lives with her mother and will receive her £100,000 in two years’ time when she turns 18.

After Louise was ordered by a judge to repay her son, she wrote to Northampton County Court in May this year, claiming that she was living in council-funded accommodation and unable to find the money.

And yet, says Adam, she has booked a holiday to Morocco later this month.

Two weeks ago a package arrived in the post. Inside, Adam found his father’s watch and gold wedding ring — items he was wearing on the day he died — with a note from his mother that said: ‘I don’t want them to be taken by the bailiffs.’

Adam dismisses the gesture as emotional blackmail.

‘My father would be ripping his hair out if he was alive,’ he says. ‘He was very careful with money.’

Their story raises questions about how large compensation sums are administered to families and whether better support should be given when children are involved.