WASHINGTON — The nine most powerful jurists in the land are supposed to focus on the law of the land. And they’ll have plenty to chew on in that regard when they hear the latest Obamacare case Wednesday.

But striking down the federal subsidies at the heart of the law would have a huge impact on millions of Americans. That could give pause to some of the justices.

In Texas alone, 1.4 million residents could lose newly acquired health insurance if the Supreme Court sides against the administration.

With 1 in 4 Texans lacking coverage, the state still has more uninsured residents than any other.

“Obviously that’s extremely discouraging,” said Anne Dunkelberg, associate director of the Center for Public Policy Priorities, an Austin group that advocates for low-income Texans. “We’re going to be guaranteed to stay solidly in last place in terms of uninsured for the foreseeable future.”

A ruling in the case, known as King vs. Burwell, is expected by the end of June. If the court sides with King and against the administration, it will have profound implications in the 34 states with marketplaces run or facilitated by the federal government.

The case hinges on four words in a complex law that, among other things, authorized subsidies for people who buy insurance through marketplaces “established by the state.” Texas and other states refused to create their own marketplaces, so the federal government stepped in.

Conservatives contend that under the letter of the law, that wasn’t enough to trigger federal subsidies.

Obamacare defenders say Congress never meant to exclude residents of three-quarters of the states.

“There’s no precedent for Congress saying we’ll subsidize something in a bunch of states and not in others,” said Alice Rivlin, White House budget director in the Clinton administration. Even if the court does read the law that way, she said, “the necessity of finding a way to keep the subsidies going is pretty clear, because otherwise the thing falls apart.”

A recent Urban Institute study showed that the average subsidy lost in Texas would top $2,700 annually for individuals.

More than 85 percent of marketplace enrollees would find themselves having to pay full price. Most would drop coverage, health care experts say. Nationwide, the number of uninsured would rise by 8.2 million.

And that’s just the direct impact. With subsidies gone, a disproportionate number of people who drop coverage would be young and relatively healthy. Obamacare was crafted to entice or coerce such low-risk customers into the insurance pool to help offset the cost of older policyholders with more health issues.

With the risk pool transformed, premiums would rise for everyone, whether they buy through a marketplace or not. People who bought insurance at full price could see premiums spike from 35 percent (the Urban Institute’s projection) to 47 percent (per the Rand Corp. projection).

Some would drop coverage. Others would shift to cheaper plans that cost more and cover less.

Michele Jawando, a vice president at the Center for American Progress, a Democratic think tank, called it a “meltdown. … Everyone will be impacted by the chaos and the disruption to the health care system.”

Thomas Miller, a fellow at the conservative American Enterprise Institute and critic of Obamacare, called gloom and doom warnings overblown. But at a forum with health care reporters, he predicted that only about six to 10 states would try to protect their residents’ subsidies by modifying their marketplaces.

Even some critics of the law are concerned about the potential disruption if the court strikes down the subsidies. In a Wall Street Journal op-ed on Thursday, Sen. Ben Sasse, R-Neb., argued that Congress must plan for transitional coverage to protect the millions at risk of losing insurance on short notice if — as he hopes — the Supreme Court sides with King.

Sasse noted that the fine print in the Affordable Care Act lets insurers “dump Obamacare patients midyear” if subsidies are struck down, creating a real possibility that chemotherapy or dialysis patients lose access to treatment.

“The horror stories will be real,” he wrote.

And Texas will have more than other states.

On Twitter:

@toddgillman