Patients, providers, and healthcare reformers seem to be in completely different worlds when it comes to patient engagement. While health IT is proliferating, albeit it slowly, in healthcare organizations of all sizes and types, the majority of patient interactions with their providers take place the same way they have for decades: in person or by telephone, reveals a new survey by Salesforce. Where is the drive for patient engagement coming from, and why don’t expectations of a data-driven, web-enabled healthcare system match the reality of the current patient experience?

The survey of more than 2000 patients found overwhelming evidence that most healthcare interactions are still analog. Seventy-six percent of patients set up appointments over the whole, while only 13% use a web-based system or an email. Forty percent view their health information in person rather than through a patient portal, and 62% rely on their physicians to track their data for them. Just 29% of patients get test results online, and less than a third receive reminds through a portal or their email accounts.

“The Affordable Care Act encourages healthcare providers to use technology to better connect with patients and modernize the health system,” said Todd Pierce, senior vice president of Healthcare for Salesforce in a press release. “But this data shows that patients and doctors are still using tried-and-true ways of communicating, like phone, mail and in-person visits. We are really at the starting line of connected health.”

Despite the lack of internet-based patient engagement, healthcare consumers are convinced that their physicians are, perhaps, a little more data-savvy than they are. The average patient has 2.5 physicians overseeing some part of their healthcare, and more than three quarters of patients are “confident” that their physicians share health records between them. Yet truly effective health information exchange between providers is hardly universal, and may not be anywhere near as ubiquitous as patients think.

Building patient engagement infrastructure has not stayed at the top of providers’ priority lists, either, as a lack of effective vendor products and the ever-present threat of competing initiatives make the implementation of health IT to foster engagement an uninspired idea, regardless of the fact that patient portals and a 5% patient engagement level is mandatory for participation in Stage 2 meaningful use.

Providers may not be jumping at the idea of bolstering their patient-facing IT infrastructure, but they might not be able to get away with one-dimensional portals for long. A new generation of patients is providing the impetus for more robust, interactive, and mobile-friendly engagement technologies, and providers will need to catch up.

Millennials, that oft-maligned generation of 25 to 35 year olds, are eager to change the status quo of phone calls, answering machines, and letters in the mail. Three-quarters of younger patients would consider the availability of online appointment-making when choosing a physician, while similar numbers are interested in mobile apps for self-management and the integration of mHealth into the patient-provider relationship. More than 60% would provide their physicians with data from wearable devices, if possible, and 60% would pick a telehealth appointment over an in-person consult for routine care.

These findings are mirrored in other studies that show a growing interest in online patient engagement from consumers of all ages who use their smartphones for everything from hailing a cab to finding dates to ordering lunch. Physicians are not meeting these expectations quickly or efficiently enough to be effective, and may be shortchanging themselves of the benefits of engaged patients and better population health management as a result. Unengaged patients are more likely to shirk their financial responsibilities, suffer from poorly controlled chronic diseases, and maintain medication adherence.

“Patient engagement enabled by health IT is a major, untapped opportunity (particularly among marginalized communities) with the potential to improve inefficient communication methods and change the dynamic of the relationship between the patient and the health care system,” a report by the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) said in April. “Consumer trust must be fostered to alleviate patient and provider reluctance to use these tools. Although recognition of the value of engagement is growing, leadership and collaboration are necessary for sustained impact.”

Providers must develop more comprehensive strategies for patient engagement if they wish to see the rewards of an informed and empowered consumer base. Whether they adopt patient incentives to drive participation, roll out inventive strategies to explain and encourage patient portal use to recently discharged patients, or leverage the widespread interest in mHealth to stay connected through text messaging and self-management apps, providers have only to reach out and grab the available opportunities that will bring higher patient satisfaction and the potential for improved outcomes to their organization.