Survey the biggest stories from the past year, and you'll see the heat of conflict glowing red from start to finish. Polarization ruled, whether events happened overseas or in the United States.

Terrorist attacks in France and fighting in Syria led to arguments over the strategy in Syria and where refugees should go.

Shootings in the United States spurred the expected spats about gun control and lobbying, law enforcement, Confederate symbols and immigration policy.

Even when the Supreme Court tried to settle things, partisans still pushed back.

And all of it ended up as fodder for presidential debates.

Sports and business developments in our area seemed to provide rare exceptions to the fighting.

Here, in no particular order, are the stories Tampa Bay Times editors selected as the top 10 from 2015.

Terror attacks spread

Jan. 7: Gunmen said to be directed by al-Qaida in Yemen massacred 10 people in the Paris offices of the magazine Charlie Hebdo to avenge the honor of the prophet Mohammed, a frequent target of the magazine's satirical cartoonists. Two days of terror followed as security forces hunted and killed the brothers who staged the rampage and an accomplice who seized hostages in a kosher supermarket. #jesuischarlie (I am Charlie) was a popular slogan of support. French President Francois Hollande said, "The threats facing France are not finished."

Nov. 13: Coordinated attacks by terrorists aligned with the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, killed 130 people around Paris. Attackers took hostages and killed 89 patrons at a concert hall, exploded suicide vests near the Stade de France during a soccer match between France and Germany, and shot people at restaurants near some of the city's busiest intersections. Hollande, who was evacuated from the stadium, increased border controls and mobilized the military amid public appeals in France and Belgium to help find two men thought to be linked to the attacks.

July 16: Four U.S. Marines and a Navy petty officer were killed in shootings at a pair of military facilities in Chattanooga, Tenn., by a gunman investigated for ties to Islamist terrorist groups. The shooter, Mohammad Youssef Abdulazeez, 24, of Hixson, Tenn., was killed in a shootout with police after the attacks at a military reserve center and a nearby recruiting center. In December, FBI director James Comey said there was little doubt that Abdulazeez, a naturalized U.S. citizen from Kuwait, was inspired by unspecified foreign terrorist propaganda.

Dec. 2: ISIS-inspired terrorism erupted on U.S. soil when Syed Rizwan Farook, an American citizen, and his wife, Tashfeen Malik, killed 14 people in a mass shooting at an office party in San Bernardino, Calif. The FBI continues to investigate the shooting as an act of terrorism. The slayings, the deadliest terrorism in the United States since the Sept. 11 attacks, have colored the Republican presidential campaign, with front-runner Donald Trump saying that Muslims, at least temporarily, should be prevented from entering the United States.

Gay marriage legalized

In a 5-4 decision, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled June 26 that same-sex marriage is a constitutional right anywhere in the nation, reflecting a dramatic shift in public opinion. The decision directly affected 14 states that had same-sex marriage bans, including Kentucky, where a clerk still attempted to defy the court. In Florida, gay couples had been able to obtain marriage licenses, but efforts to defend the state's gay marriage ban were on appeal. The court's ruling came after decades of battles, and jubilant gay and lesbian couples promptly got their licenses.

Refugees flee Syria

More than 1 million refugees arrived in Europe, many fleeing the five-year civil war in Syria. Most came by sea, crossing from Turkey by rickety or overloaded boats trying to make it to Greece and, for some, ultimately Germany. Almost 4,000 migrants drowned trying to make the crossing. The dramatic influx of refugees led to anxiety in European capitals — and in the United States. But it was the figure of a drowned toddler cradled by a police officer in Turkey that put a human face on the tide of human desperation.

U.S. mass shootings

June 17: A young white man walked into Emanuel AME Church in Charleston, S.C., sat for about an hour with African-American parishioners in Bible study, and then pulled out a gun and shot the pastor, the Rev. Clementa Pinckney, and eight others. Dylann Roof, 21, was arrested after a manhunt and charged with nine counts of murder. The shootings, investigated as a federal hate crime, led lawmakers to remove the Confederate battle flag from State House grounds and caused other local and state governments to reconsider their Confederate displays.

Oct. 1: A gunman opened fire at a rural Oregon community college, killing nine people before police killed him in a shootout. Chris Harper Mercer, 26, invaded a classroom at Umpqua Community College in Roseburg, Ore., and started shooting. Mercer's barrage wounded seven others. Hours afterward, President Barack Obama angrily said the United States was becoming numb to mass shootings.

Affordable Care Act upheld

The U.S. Supreme Court issued a broad 6-3 ruling June 25 to preserve the health insurance subsidies underpinning President Obama's health care law. The ruling left little room for future legal challenges. In Florida alone, 1.3 million people would have lost their financial aid for health insurance had the ruling gone the other way. Still, Gov. Rick Scott continues his push to block Medicaid expansion under the law. And Republicans in Congress engineered a $2.5 billion shortfall in program funding for 2015.

Lightning's Cup run

Combine a coach with a magic touch, a set of Triplets with flash and finesse, and a stellar goaltender, and you have an electric run to hockey's Stanley Cup final. Coach Jon Cooper found a winner when he teamed Ondrej Palat, Tyler Johnson and Nikita Kucherov, and they led the Lightning to the top of the league in scoring. After winning two of the first three games in the final against Chicago, Tampa Bay seemed poised to bring home the Cup. But injuries to Johnson and goalie Ben Bishop dimmed the Lightning as the Blackhawks won four games to two.

Black Lives Matter

The Black Lives Matter movement — which has focused attention on the deaths of unarmed black men since the shooting of 17-year-old Trayvon Martin in 2012 in Florida — responded to two more high-profile killings: the deaths of Freddie Gray, 25, in Baltimore and Laquan McDonald, 17, in Chicago.

April 27: After the funeral for Gray, who was fatally injured in the back of a Baltimore police van, rioters plunged part of Baltimore into chaos. The governor of Maryland called out the National Guard, and a curfew was imposed in the city. Six Baltimore police officers were charged in connection with Gray's death. The first officer's trial ended in a mistrial Dec. 16. The other five are expected to be tried in January.

Nov. 24: A white Chicago police officer, Jason Van Dyke, was charged with first-degree murder in the death of McDonald. Authorities appealed for calm as they released video of the officer shooting McDonald 16 times as he lay on the ground. Mayor Rahm Emanuel fired the Chicago police superintendent, Garry McCarthy, and has apologized before the City Council for the shooting controversy on his watch.

Presidential race

Trumped in Republican fight: Here's something nobody predicted a year ago: Donald Trump heading into 2016 poised to win the Republican presidential nomination. Jeb Bush, the guy with vast financial resources and GOP establishment support, was presumed to be the overwhelming favorite. Turns out, rusty Jeb! couldn't compete against one-time protege Marco Rubio, let alone a billionaire real estate mogul whose penchant for outrageous statements has steadily made him more popular, not less, with GOP voters.

Troubles find Clinton: Hillary Clinton has had her own rocky year running for the Democratic nomination. She's struggled to get past questions about her use of a private email server while conducting government business as secretary of state. She's also had to fend off a strong challenge from Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, the Democratic socialist whose passionate fight against income inequality struck a chord in the Democratic base.

Vinik's big plans

The future of downtown Tampa continued to develop under the leadership of Tampa Bay Lightning owner Jeff Vinik and his venture with Microsoft billionaire Bill Gates. Vinik is donating an acre to USF for a new medical school, the Museum of Science and Industry may move downtown and Port Tampa Bay also launched an ambitious $1.7 billion development plan that includes two 75-story high-rises. One big thorn in downtown's side was solved when Publix announced it would open a store in the Channel District.

Resegregation takes toll

In just eight years, the Pinellas County School Board remade five decent elementary schools in the county's black neighborhoods into some of the worst in Florida. A Tampa Bay Times investigation, Failure Factories, found that the schools became hotbeds of violence and disruption as the board broke promises to steer resources to them. Black children were targeted for harsh punishments, and teachers fled. After the series was published, U.S. Education Secretary Arne Duncan visited one of the schools to blast the board for "education malpractice," and the district started reforms.

Times staff writers Michael LaForgia, Donna Richter, Adam C. Smith, Mike Stephenson and Chris Tisch contributed to this report. Contact John Timpe at jtimpe@tampabay.com or (727) 893-8308. Follow @johntimpe.