Kalvin Martinez / Sep 2nd, 2014

If you’re interested in Surgeon Simulator: Anniversary Edition, chances are you’ve seen Let’s Play videos online of the wacky simulation game from Bossa Studios UK. The Anniversary Edition adds eyeball and teeth transplant surgeries to the game, as well as some new tricks like co-op surgery and camera controls.

The game confounds and frustrates players with floaty controls and a lack of direction. However, the joy in Surgeon Simulator comes from discovering how best to proceed in a surgery and what instrument to use. Of course, the game’s greatest asset is messing around and murdering some poor soul who decided to choose you as a doctor (#obamacare).

I’m Not a Doctor, but I Play One on YouTube

Surgeon Simulator is broken down into different modes and surgeries. Performing each surgery unlocks the next, more complicated procedure. Completing all surgeries in each mode unlocks a new mode, which will add a unique twist to the core surgeries, including performing the procedure in a hospital hallway or the back of an ambulance or a spaceship. In total, there are five surgeries to perform.

At the beginning of each surgery, players face Bob, the poor schmuck who needs surgery, and are given simple instructions, such as “perform a heart transplant.” It is just you, Bob’s open chest cavity, a variety of medical instruments and an empty bottle of orange soda. How you pull off the complexities of open heart surgery is up to you. Players have their choice of using a laser or a bone saw to expose Bob’s heart. Most first attempts at surgery will result in horrific murder and an extreme violation of the Hippocratic oath.





After players explore different instruments and figure out how each behaves, surgery becomes a bit less confusing. Regardless if you know that the best way to complete a double kidney transplant is by making precise incisions to remove the large intestines before other organs, you will still have to contend with Surgeon Simulator’s controls. There is an extreme sense of relief to completing a surgery, even if it is not the most graceful of performances. The sense of discovery is one of the most enjoyable parts of gameplay.

Fighting for Survival

Describing exactly how Surgeon Simulator controls is a bit of a task despite their relative simplicity. Grabbing things is performed by the L buttons, while depth is controlled with the R buttons. Hand movement is tied to the left stick and hand rotation is tied to right stick, but can also be controlled using the Sixaxis motion controls or the PlayStation Eye. Two of these controls are not particularly effective and more of a novelty, but they will likely make for some funny hijinks.





Putting the controls into action is made difficult by the character’s lack of fine motor skills and hand-eye coordination. While performing surgery, the playable character seems to be experiencing numbness in the fingers, phantom limb syndrome and the effects of smoking angel dust. This may sound damning, but it is what makes the game so hilarious. Watching the wonky physics in action is magic, especially while trying to break through a rib cage with a hammer.





Fighting against the controls makes getting through surgeries a test of patience and fortitude. The Herculean tasks of ambulance or hallway surgeries are easy to deal, but space surgeries are silly and challenging.

Overall

Surgeon Simulator: Anniversary Edition is fun despite being exceedingly difficult. That is because part of the fun is in seeing how fast and grotesquely you can murder Bob. The floaty and noodley controls of Surgeon Simulator accurately recreate the difficulty of actual surgery without ever giving off the illusion that the surgery could ever actually be performed. Surgeon Simulator is the perfect game to stream to the world, and the PlayStation 4 makes it easier to do through Twitch and UStream.

tags: Bossa Studios UK , pc , ps4 , review , Surgeon Simulator , Surgeon Simulator: Anniversary Edition