Reuters President Obama has pushed for new regulations to rein in corporate excesses, but did it come at a cost to the U.S. economy? Critics say yes. Obama says no.

To hear President Obama tell it, the U.S. economic recovery under his watch is a resounding success. He saved the banks, he saved the auto industry and he helped revive a moribund housing market.

“I actually compare our economic performance to how, historically, countries that have wrenching financial crises perform. By that measure, we probably managed this better than any large economy on Earth in modern history,” he told the New York Times in an article titled “President Obama Weighs His Economic Legacy.”

The president’s claim is more modest than his boast during the 2008 campaign that his election would mark when “the rise of the oceans began to slow” — a call to fight global warming. But is it true?

Clearly, the U.S. has done better than most countries in the aftermath of the 2007-2009 financial crisis. Europe has struggled to cope with high debts and stop-and-start growth. And Japan has repeatedly fallen into shallow recessions. Among the world’s top economies, only China mostly escaped the worst of the fallout from the Great Recession.

The U.S. has grown steadily at about a 2% pace since a recovery began in 2010. Fueling the economy has been a surge in job creation — 14 million new jobs since 2010. Auto sales recently hit a record high and home builders are rushing to build new properties to meet rising demand.

“Anybody who says we are not absolutely better off today than we were just seven years ago, they’re not leveling with you,” said Obama, blaming Republicans in part for the failure of Americans to recognize how much the economy has improved. “They’re not telling the truth.”

A closer look at the U.S. recovery

Yet by other measures, the U.S. still falls short of its prerecession performance.

Business investment, for instance, has been below par during most of the recovery. Fewer able-bodied people are in the workforce as a share of the population and long-term joblessness is still unusually high. The economy has also failed to grow 3% or more since 2005, the longest stretch since the end of World War II. Historically the U.S. has grown at a 3.3% average.

What about the claim that Obama has managed the recovery better than any leader in modern times following a financial crisis? That’s impossible to judge. There have been very few financial crises like the one in 2008 and various countries have responded in different ways at different times, depending on their unique economic circumstances.

What’s more, all economies recover from recessions regardless of whether they are induced by financial panics. The critical question is, did a country adopt policies that achieve the best possible outcome?

Obama’s critics, including many in the corporate world, say no. They cite a wave of new regulations, higher income taxes, an outdated corporate tax code and the White House effort to reshape the massive U.S. health-care system under the law widely known as Obamacare.

Even some prominent Democrats don’t see eye to eye with Obama on the economy, the Times noted.

“Millions and millions and millions and millions of people look at that pretty picture of America he painted and they cannot find themselves in it to save their lives,” former President Bill Clinton said in March while campaigning for his wife Hillary Clinton. “People are upset, frankly; they’re anxiety-ridden, they’re disoriented, because they don’t see themselves in that picture.”

There’s no way to know if the policies that Obama's critics support would have led to stronger U.S. growth, of course. Counterfactuals don’t exist in politics and that means Obama’s economic legacy will be debated for years to come.

Perhaps the only way to find out is if a new president with dramatically different policies — say, Donald Trump — is elected. Even then, Obama supporters can always say the president laid the groundwork for future success.

Obama himself is deeply skeptical any Republican would succeed.

“If you look at the platforms, the economic platforms of the current Republican candidates for president, they don’t simply defy logic and any known economic theories, they are fantasy,” Obama said.

More from MarketWatch