One of the biggest advantages of working here is our dynamic culture — a product of our people. Year after year, they spearhead our recurring appearance on the Orange County Register list of ‘Top Workplaces

Alta Resources, a global provider of customer management business process outsourcing (BPO) for Fortune 500 brands, announced today that it plans to fill more than 2,500 jobs across its locations in Wisconsin, California, Florida and the Philippines. More than 700 of those jobs will be based at its Brea campus.

A majority of the hiring is to support several health-insurance clients, which have seasonal ramp-ups that require additional staffing in preparation for the Annual Enrollment Period (AEP), November 2014 through February 2015. As more consumers become eligible for health-plan coverage under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), Alta Resources’ health-insurance clients anticipate an increase in contact volumes during AEP. Alta Resources plays a strategically important role in assisting these clients with their year-round and seasonal needs, including servicing the increase in health-plan questions, leads and enrollment.

The seasonal positions range from full to part time, and the company noted that various regular full- and part-time roles are also available. Positions are immediate, and qualified applicants will start as soon as possible.

Lisa Schulze, vice president of human resources at Alta Resources, said, “We have core values that we call ‘Guiding Principles.’ We have seven of them. It’s difficult to attribute our growth to just one, but, if I had to, I’d say our Guiding Principle of Results is most fitting. We’re looking for people who, in embodying our Guiding Principles, are eager to learn, excel and deliver defined results for our leading client brands.”

Available opportunities include customer care; inbound sales, including licensed health-insurance sales; and team leadership. Alta Resources offers a variety of advantages to job seekers: flexible schedules completely tailored to individuals’ lifestyle, paid training, competitive pay, a team-based culture, skills development and advancement potential for high performers.

The company also pays for health-insurance sales licensing for qualified candidates; licensing will be for the specific state(s) a sales representative will service and is his/hers to retain for as long as the license is valid, meaning it can be reused in the future.

Steve Seidl, managing director of Alta Resources’ Brea location, added, “One of the biggest advantages of working here is our dynamic culture — a product of our people. Year after year, they spearhead our recurring appearance on the Orange County Register list of ‘Top Workplaces.’” In 2013, Alta Resources’ Brea campus ranked 13th in the “Midsized Companies” category and also received the Medallion Award for its work-life flexibility. The year 2013 was also the fifth-consecutive time that the company made the list of Orange County companies. The ranking is based on a third-party survey of nearly 60,000 employees across 1,000 area companies.

To fill the roles, the company is asking interested candidates to visit JoinAlta.com to search current openings, create a profile and apply. They can also get details pertaining to Alta Resources’ upcoming job events in the Brea area.

Schulze concluded, “Events like job fairs are unique opportunities for interested candidates to immediately and directly network with Alta Resources’ professionals. We have a number of events planned over the next few months at all our locations, and they’ll feature immediate interviews, a chance to learn more about Alta Resources and the available job openings, and so much more.”

About Alta Resources

Formed in 1995, privately held Alta Resources is a leading provider of customer management business process outsourcing (BPO) for many of the world’s best-known brands in a variety of industries, including consumer-packaged goods (CPG), health care and insurance, and entertainment. With its comprehensive service lines — care, sales, e-commerce, back office and fulfillment — working in tandem, clients can seamlessly integrate their core business processes through a single partner. In turn, Alta Resources helps clients improve and better manage their customer experiences across every touch point, online and offline, ultimately delivering results that provide sales growth and/or cost savings.

With headquarters, a main campus and a fulfillment facility in Neenah, Wisconsin, Alta Resources has additional operations in Michigan, California, Florida and the Philippines. To learn more, visit AltaResources.com.