What do Lehigh, Cal State Bakersfield, Quinnipiac, Portland State, Akron, Army, Idaho and Stony Brook have in common?

Answer: Each defeated a Pac-12 Conference men’s basketball team this season.

“That’s why I always talk about respect your opponents,” first-year California coach Cuonzo Martin said, “and don’t get consumed with what’s on the front of the jersey or their record.”

Martin’s Golden Bears lost 55-52 at home Sunday to a Cal State Bakersfield squad that entered the game 2-10 and was ranked No. 340 in the NCAA’s RPI computer power rankings among 351 Division I teams.

The Pac-12 made double headlines in a negative direction Sunday because Washington, ranked No. 13 nationally in the media and coaches polls, also laid an egg. The Huskies fell 62-57 at home to Stony Brook.

“This (loss) came as a total surprise to me,” said veteran Washington coach Lorenzo Romar.

Those Sunday shockers became emblematic of a conferencewide malaise. Other than eighth-ranked Arizona and No. 10 Utah flexing their talent, Pac-12 teams in general have sputtered toward Friday’s opening of league play.

Pac-12 teams won just six of 17 games against ranked nonconference opponents. In conference RPI, the Pac-12 is sixth, trailing the four other “power conferences” and also the new-look Big East. For team RPI, only two Pac-12 teams — Arizona (11) and Utah (12) — are among the nation’s top 30. And just two others — Washington (37) and Stanford (42) — are in the top 90.

Two of the Pac-12’s biggest disappointments meet Friday night in Boulder when Colorado (7-5) hosts UCLA (8-5) at 8 p.m. at the Coors Events Center.

Colorado, 23-12 last season, was picked in the Pac-12’s preseason media poll to finish third, behind Arizona and Utah. But the Buffaloes have not defeated a team likely to play in the NCAA Tournament this year.

UCLA was picked in the Pac-12 preseason poll to finish fourth. To their credit, the Bruins played Oklahoma, North Carolina, Gonzaga, Kentucky and Alabama in nonconference games but lost all of them.

Colorado is hoping to extend its string of three consecutive trips to the NCAA Tournament. But after losing five times in nonconference games, the Buffs are left with a small margin for error. Even going 12-6 in the Pac-12 regular season — which wouldn’t be easy — would leave CU a game shy of 20 victories.

Meaning no disrespect to other Pac-12 teams, Colorado coach Tad Boyle likes to say that turning things around “is about us” and not about who is next on the Buffs’ schedule.

“The way the basketball season plays out,” Boyle said, “is you’ve got your preseason (nonconference) schedule, your conference schedule and you’re guaranteed one game in the conference tournament. Other than that, nothing is guaranteed.

“The preseason is over and done with. It’s water under the bridge. We have to learn from it.”

Here is a brief look at Pac-12 teams that could make some noise as conference play gets ready to tip off:

Arizona (12-1): The Wildcats have impact players everywhere on the court, including the league’s top freshman in 6-6 forward Stanley Johnson. A loss at UNLV shows they can be beaten.

Utah (10-2): The Utes showed they’re for real with a win over Wichita State. Delon Wright is the Pac-12’s best point guard, and 7-foot freshman Jakob Poeltl provides an inside presence that had been missing.

Washington (11-1): Point guard Nigel Williams-Goss and 7-footer Robert Upshaw give the Huskies an outside-inside duo. Upshaw has blocked 55 shots.

Stanford (8-3): The Cardinal notched the Pac-12’s most impressive nonconference win at then-No. 9 Texas on Dec. 23. Key components are back from last year’s Sweet 16 run, and frosh Reid Travis hits the boards hard.

Colorado (7-5): Despite their disappointing record, the Buffs have one of the league’s top trios with center Josh Scott, forward Xavier Johnson and guard Askia Booker. If those three can get some help, the Buffs could make a run.

UCLA (8-5): The Bruins are in a process of a makeover after losing three players to the first round of the 2014 NBA draft. But a backcourt of Bryce Alford and Norman Powell (only returning starter) is a good start.

Oregon (10-3): The Ducks appeared dead in the water with offseason dismissals of key players. But the Pac-12’s top scorer, 6-2 James Young (20.3), returned. Newcomers Dwayne Benjamin and Jordan Bell work hard inside.

California (10-3): Junior swingman Tyrone Wallace is having a big year, but the loss to Cal State Bakersfield shows the points-starved Bears need injured Jabari Bird (ankle) back soon.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler