Buy Photo Downtown Menasha (Photo: Post-Crescent Media)Buy Photo

HOME SWEET HOME: We need more affordable housing. There are 120 to 150 people staying at Homeless Connections or the Fox Valley Warming Shelter on any given night. Most available housing is completely unaffordable to many folks in this population. Everyone deserves a place of his or her own.

Scott Peeples,

Appleton

IN CIRCLES: Get rid of all the extra roundabouts and get the roads fixed!

Laura Leimer,

Appleton

BE BETTER: I've lived on a farm, in a village, five small towns and three bigger to biggest cities, and have never found a better quality of life than I've found here. I'm not just talking parks and recreation facilities, good schools, all kinds of art, theater and music opportunities. I'm thinking about the countless church and community groups, government programs, policies and personnel that strive to be responsive to peoples' needs. The Flag Day Parade, Art in the Park, a Mile of Music, Octoberfest — all the activities that bring us together as a community. Maybe not always are we dear hearts and gentle people, but we do try to be good neighbors. Change? Yes, to be even better at doing what were doing and being who we are.

Michael Collins,

Appleton

CONSOLIDATE: I believe we have a major opportunity to achieve better and more cost-effective government by creating the "Fox-Metro-Plex." I heard the other day that when planning the new route for the Fox Cities Marathon, the organizers needed to contact 14 different jurisdictions to gain permissions. The cost of maintaining this level of "aged fiefdoms" is enormous. Several mayors, councils, fire departments, school boards, police departments, water departments, sewer systems, mass transportation and on and on. Not only are the costs and expenses we endure inordinately high, we do not receive the quality and professionalism we should have as we spread it over these "aged fiefdoms." We need to understand the savings and improvements from forming the "Fox-Metro-Plex." I believe the savings we would achieve are in excess of $10 million. But don't expect to get any mayors or councilman to study the concept as it would bring destruction of their fiefdoms.

Michael Muoio,

Appleton

From Facebook

Jenny Theuerkauf: Happy to see such amazing progress in the arts in the Fox Cities. It's quickly becoming an Artisan hub and I'd love to see that continue! The only thing I'd change is to see better collaboration between the cities and neighborhoods with events, businesses and programs. There's a lot of competition between cities instead of collaboration as the "Fox Cities." It's improving, but it could be so much better.

Jon Lee: Mass transit, specifically a commuter rail line connecting to Green Bay and Milwaukee.

Cassandra Choudoir: More parks and/or walking trails along the Fox River.

Deanna Garde Babino: Humanity. When was the last time you saw someone stranded on the highway and stopped to help? Twenty years ago, people helped each other. I moved back here after I had my children because I always remembered growing up with compassion in the streets and people said "thank you" when you opened a door for them, not "sorry," like your act of kindness was an inconvenience. I wanted my kids to know what it was like to live in a large city that felt like a small community. I'm not so sure that the community was able to deliver to them the same social values that I was taught by the community I got to experience.

Paul DeLabio: Someone actually enforcing the speed limits in school zones. I'm a cab driver that brings students to school and home after. I can't tell you the number of times I've been blown past by someone doing at least 10 mph over the limit. Why aren't there police doing anything about it?

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1bYj4IE