Accenture, the Irish consulting contractor hired to take rescue the Obamacare website, was accused last summer of being an “immediate risk of future fraud” at the Post Office.

It has no experience with federal health care systems, but plenty of experience cashing government checks. Since 2000, Accenture has had $10 billion in federal contracts; less than half of 1 percent have involved federal health care.

While it seems to be fine working in the private sector – where the money its clients spend actually matters — it has history of botching government work in Democrat priority areas like food stamps and voter registration systems – costing taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars.

That troubled history is hidden in plain sight in a remarkably soft-pedaled report in Sunday’s Washington Post passed along by Rat Nation.

In weirdly restrained language, and under the mollycoddling headline “Accenture, hired to help fix Healthcare.gov, has had a series of stumbles,” the Post reported Accenture’s history of:

Fouling up North Carolina’s food stamp program to the point where the Obama administration threatened to withhold funding for it (think about that for a second – how bad does it have to be for the Obama administration to withhold food stamp funding?);

Losing contracts with the Pentagon and four states to develop online voting or voter-registration systems because of flawed software and poor security (for the criminal candy store of Healthcare.gov, poor security might be a problem);

Being called a giant liar by the Postal Service’s Inspector General, which reported in an audit on June 19 that Accenture had “demonstrated an absence of business ethics” and recommended canceling $200 million in contracts with the company.

“The Postal Service should consider Accenture for suspension or debarment and review existing contracts to determine whether the contracts warrant termination. This action would protect the Postal Service’s financial interest from unethical, dishonest, or otherwise irresponsible supplier practices.”

The company, the inspector general wrote, presented “immediate risk of future fraud and abuse” at the Post Office.

(USPS officials dismissed the recommendation out of hand two days after it was submitted because its findings were “unwarranted,” according to Part & Parcel, which covers mail and express delivery issues. )

So this is Obamacare’s cyber savior: a company branded “unethical” and “dishonest,” according to the Post Office Inspector General; a company with a history riddled with failure in large, public computer systems; a company with no experience in federal health programs.

What could possibly go wrong?

HT: Rat Nation