Pols On The Street: Kane TV Ads Stress Family

John Kane launched his first television ad of the State Senate campaign running on broadcast and cable TV, and on the internet. The ad features John’s family, including his wife of 24 years, Lori; his daughters Gabby, 17, Sam, 22, and Maddie, 14; and his son Johnny, 20, literally inviting viewers into meeting his family. A plus effort.

In the ad, Kane says he is running for State Senate to “put back the $1 billion Corbett cut from education and make sure corporations and natural-gas drillers pay their fair share.” Kane goes on to say, “It’s time to close to loopholes for the tax cheats.”

The ad can be viewed at: http://youtube/J4E16ur54ds.

“I am incredibly proud of this ad, and so happy that my family was able to join me in making it,” said Kane. “As I cross the district, knocking on doors and talking to voters, I hear over and over again that people are angry that their schools are not getting the funding they need and their property taxes are going up, while corporations and shale drillers are getting sweetheart deals.”

Kane is the Democrat running for State Senate in the 26th Dist. that lies in Delaware and Chester Cos. His opponent is Tom McGarrigle, County Council Chairman. The 26th Dist. is viewed as the most-competitive legislative race in Pennsylvania this year. The seat is held by Republican State Sen. Edwin “Ted Erickson” who is retiring.

HUMANE SOCIETY PUTS $$$ BEHIND FITZPATRICK

The Humane Society Legislative Fund, the nation’s leading political advocacy organization for animal welfare, has endorsed Congressman Mike Fitzpatrick (R-Bucks) for reelection in the 8th Dist. It cited his strong leadership and advocacy on animal-protection policies.

Now if pet owners come out in response to the Society’s call, Mike will do well.

The HSLF publishes an annual Humane Scorecard of Congress to give voters a snapshot of every federal legislator’s record on animal-protection issues. Three times Fitzpatrick achieved a perfect score of 100 for votes in favor of animal-welfare measures before the US House.

WHEN ALL POLLS SAY THE SAME THING

Robert Morris University reports a new finding that confirms other bad-news polls for Gov. Tom Corbett. Although the election-day poll is the final poll, it is hard to continue to ignore polls when they all point in the same direction. The F&M poll wasn’t a “junk poll” as Team Corbett claimed, and a whole summer’s worth of attack ads haven’t bought the Republican Governor a better shot in November. National Journal is calling this race a “near-automatic pickup” for Democrats.

Even GOP firm Harper Polling says Democrat Tom Wolf holds an 11% lead over Republican Gov. Tom Corbett among Pennsylvania likely voters, giving voters a feeling he is the winner. It shows Wolf holds a comfortable lead (58-35%) in the Southeastern region, the race is a draw in the South Central (48% Corbett, 45% Wolf) and the Southwest (48% Wolf, 46% Corbett) regions. Sixty-one percent said, regardless of personal preference, they expect Wolf to win the November election, compared to 33% who expect Corbett to win. The polling memo says 8% of Corbett voters are supporting the Governor, despite expecting him to lose.

26th Ward GOP leader Jim Dintino wonders why Corbett’s campaign hasn’t played up his differences with President Obama, whose polls show he has no coattails for Dem candidates to hang onto. He cited Jul. 1, 2014 when income, payroll, capital gains, dividend, and estate taxes went up under the Affordable Care Act. He advises, “Not one Republican voted for these taxes.” This could be an ace up Corbett’s sleeve; but he must play it, not leave voters to guess at it, if he wants to reverse polling trends.

PHILLY CIGARETTE-TAX PASSAGE IS PRIORITY

The number-one priority for House Democrats when they return to voting session will be the swift passage of legislation authorizing a $2-per-pack cigarette tax for Philadelphia, which will go to help fund the Philadelphia School District.

“The most-important thing when we go back is making sure we get the Philly cigarette tax done so the next school year the School District can maintain what they have and keep people working,” said House Minority Leader Frank Dermody (D-Allegheny).

“Allegheny Co. was interested in looking at having that opportunity,” he said of a cigarette tax. “Right now, I think it’s important for us to take care of Philadelphia schools.”

He said extending the tax to other counties is a much larger issue better left for another day.

CHARTER VS. PUBLIC-SCHOOL LIMITS ON S.C. AGENDA

The Pennsylvania Supreme Court heard oral arguments this week in a case challenging Philadelphia School District’s decision to place limits on charter-school enrollment.

The School Reform Commission, a state-appointed body that runs the School District, set the enrollment limits in August of last year as part of a series of cost-saving measures that required the suspension of certain parts of the state’s public-school code. The West Philadelphia Achievement Charter ES filed a lawsuit in March challenging the enrollment limits.

BRAVO JOE HOEFFEL, NOW AN AUTHOR

Former Congressman Joe Hoeffel, immersed in politics for three decades, is how signing copies of his book, The Iraq Lie: How White House Sold The War.

He’ll be signing books at Abington Township Public Library, 2-4 p.m., this Sunday, with net proceeds going to the library, which is located at 1030 Old York Road in Abington.

ELLA BUTCHER WILL RUN AS G.O.P. COMMISSIONER

Ella Butcher, noted 36th Ward Republican activist, has revealed she will be among those seeking nomination for City Commissioner in the Republican primary.

She has a series of legislative amendments which she feels can become law if she promoted them from that position. Her group reported a host of irregularities in past elections, for which she found no existing legislation to curb those practices.

Another Republican seeking a seat is John Featherman, who was reported in local media as eyeing the GOP nomination for Mayor. He intends to run for it, should he not receive party endorsement.

DAILY NEWS SAYS NO TO 2ND CASINO

Supposedly worried over the impact another casino will have over the one now in existent because of casino closings in Atlantic City, the Philadelphia Daily News editorialized the Gaming Commission should not aware the second casino to Philadelphia.

Look at plans for one of the four bidders, Casino Revolution. It proposes to create a true entertainment revolution, turning no-use land in South Philadelphia into another Disney-type casino-hotel-golf course and amusement-park complex, providing hundreds of jobs six months earlier than any of the other casino applicants – just what Philly needs! Look at the taxes we have been losing without a second casino in operation!

So a dunce cap for the editorial department at the News for trying to protect the sandbox casino at Delaware & Frankford Avenues.

BROWNLEE GIFTS STUDENTS WITH SCHOOL BAGS, SUPPLIES

State Rep. Michelle Brownlee (D-N. Phila.), as others in the Democratic Caucus from Philly have done, distributed state-related materials and free bookbags with school supplies at five locations in her district on one day last Friday.

She also advised constituents not to expect legislative reports in the mail because of House rules that prevent the material going out for the next two months until election day. So we suggest you check here periodically. She is responsible for a great many benefits going to her district.

REPUBLICANS AT PHILLIES FUNDRAISER TONIGHT

Rick Heilberg believes the Phillies are plying their best, with new faces, and are exciting to watch. Which is why he states GOP Night this evening at the Phillies will draw many of the Republican faithful to this party fundraiser. Chairman John Taylor will be present from 5:30 p.m. on, at the rooftop in right field. Pregame party costs $65. Ticket for game are $38 or $20. For tickets call (215) 561-0650 or Rick at (610) 585-6789.

PA. SUPREME COURT TO RULE ON 8-YEAR VOTING CASE

A little over eight years ago, Pennsylvania Secretary of State Pedro Cortés found himself being sued to prevent counties from using electronic voting machines. Those suing said the machines do “not create a permanent record of each vote” and violates the Pennsylvania Election Code, as well as the Pennsylvania Constitution. A few months later, a divided Commonwealth Court rejected efforts by the Dept. of State to dismiss the legal challenge against touch-screen voting machines.

The Secretary of State appealed that decision to the State Supreme Court, but in late 2008, Pennsylvania’s high court denied that appeal, allowing the lawsuit to be considered by Commonwealth Court. A little more than two years ago, Commonwealth Court rejected several of the lawsuits’ claims. That ruling prompted an appeal to the State Supreme Court, with the State’s high court in late July agreeing to hear oral arguments.

The big question, if SC rules electronic voting no longer legal: Who pays the millions needed to replace them, and with what? Paper ballots?

FUMO BACK AS ADVISER TO TERMINAL OPERATOR

Kudos to former State Sen. Vincent Fumo, now working with major Port Terminal operator John Brown, Jr., as an advisor. Fumo’s services will come in handy especially now that Southport, the proposed new port terminal on an old Navy Yard site, is up for dibs with the Philadelphia Regional Port Authority studying whom best to lease the terminal to.

NO RESPECT FOR EX-CONS AS WORKING PA. LOBBYISTS

Montgomery Co. lawyer Mark Schwartz is urging members of the General Assembly to support legislation banning ex-felons from becoming lobbyists. Schwartz cites a number of them. Is he worried about competition?

No Pennsylvania law prohibits ex-legislators or their aides from lobbying, which offers a median salary in Pennsylvania of about $100,000 a year, according to human-resources data and those in the industry.

Schwartz is a former aide to the late Democratic Speaker K. Leroy Irvis of Pittsburgh.

PETTIGREW HOSTS DAUGHTER’S CHAMPAGNE SENDOFF

GOP Ward Leader Bill Pettigrew and wife Debbie are inviting friends to a champagne sendoff for the wedding of their daughter Nicole Pettigrew to John Stalmaster at Quaker City Yacht Club, 7101 N. Delaware Avenue. The event is Sep. 20 at 6 p.m. If you received an invite you need to RSVP at (215) 743-2000 ASAP. The couple will wed on Oct. 4.

NOW IF FATTAH AND JAMES WERE IN A DEMOCRATIC PRIMARY….

Republican 2nd Congressional Dist. candidate Armond James is finding out he is getting some traction in his challenge to Congressman Chaka Fattah. If he had some big donors, he could possibly make a difference in the general-election outcome. More voters are learning he is a Temple grad who has been mentoring at-risk children at an advocacy program for some time now.

RCC Exec. Dir. Joe DeFelice ponders the question, “Had this been a Democrat primary, would James upset Fattah as did Fattah in his uphill victory in the 1994 primary over Lucien Blackwell?”

SEN. TOOMEY VISITS ALL 67 PENNA. COUNTIES AGAIN

US Sen. Pat Toomey (R-Pa.), who understands “all politics is local”, has visited all 67 Pennsylvania counties during the 113th Congress which began in January 2013. The Senator accomplished this goal during the previous Congress as well.

“Since joining the Senate, I have made it a priority to visit each county of our great Commonwealth every Congress,” said Toomey. “Pennsylvania is a beautiful state full of history, culture, and most importantly good, hard-working people. After speaking with thousands of people from Pike Co. to Greene Co., and everywhere in between, it’s clear to me Pennsylvanians are worried about our sluggish economy, unemployment, and a federal government that lives beyond its means. They’re concerned about their jobs being threatened by red tape and rising taxes. I am pleased to have heard from so many Pennsylvanians and pledge to continue my efforts to fight for you in Washington.”

He understands working every day as though it were election day, makes it easier to win next time around.

JOIN OUR NEWSPAPER Join over 3.000 visitors who are receiving our newsletter and learn how to optimize your blog for search engines, find free traffic, and monetize your website. We hate spam. Your email address will not be sold or shared with anyone else.