Sonnenberg looking forward to selecting ag commissioner

With the pomp and circumstance of opening day of the 2015 legislature out of the way, lawmakers are getting down to business.

More than 100 bills were introduced in the first two days of the 70th General Assembly, which runs until Wednesday, May 6.

The Jan. 8 opening day saw 18 senators sworn in the body of 35, including Sen. Jerry Sonnenberg, R-Sterling. Eight of the 18 were incumbents who were re-elected; four are new senators who have never served in the legislature before; four more went from House seats to the Senate, including Sonnenberg; and two have served previously in the legislature several years ago.

The 65-member House has 18 new members; 16 have never served before, and two, including Rep. Jon Becker, Fort Morgan, have served previously.

Sen. Jerry Sonnenberg and Rep. Jon Becker, R-Fort Morgan, take a moment to chat after a joint session of the House and Senate on opening day, Jan. 7. (Marianne Goodland / Courtesy photo)

Both Becker and Sonnenberg were joined by their families on opening day; Sonnenberg hosted his wife, Vonnie; sons, Josh and Ryan, his parents and in-laws and granddaughter, Cambrei, whose mother is Sonnenberg's daughter Afton Dains of Henderson. Daughter Ashley Renslow will be at the capitol next Thursday, when she will be one of two interpreters for the deaf who will be signing the Governor's State of the State speech.

Viewing his swearing-in from the floor of the House, Jon Becker's wife Christal and sons Grant and J.T.

One of the first thing on Sonnenberg's agenda for the 2015 session will be who runs the Department of Agriculture. John Salazar, who was commissioner of agriculture during Gov. John Hickenlooper's first term, stepped down on Jan. 6.

Advertisement

Salazar's replacement, once named by the governor, will go through a confirmation hearing in the Senate Agriculture, Natural Resources and Energy Committee. Sonnenberg chairs that committee.

"One of the most important issues we will deal with is who will be the next Commissioner of Agriculture," Sonnenberg told this reporter this week. The department also will need to fill the post of deputy commissioner and financial officer. Sonnenberg said the governor is doing interviews this week to narrow down his pool of finalists.

Family members and senators observe a solemn moment during the opening day ceremonies. Left: Barbara Neville, wife of Sen. Tim Neville, R-Littleton and mother of Rep. Patrick Neville, R-Aurora; Vonnie Sonnenberg, wife of Sen. Jerry Sonnenberg, R-Sterling; and Sen. Neville. Cambrei Dains, Sonnenberg's granddaughter, stands on her grandfather's lap. (Marianne Goodland / Courtesy photo)

"One of the reasons I'm excited to be chair of ag is so I will have some influence, and to get the department of agriculture going again," he said.

In addition to his duties with the ag committee, Sonnenberg has more than a dozen bills to carry; a sunset review of pesticide laws, at least 10 bills on behalf of the Department of Natural Resources, two bills from the Legislative Audit Committee, and three from the Water Resources Review Committee.

That's in addition to the bills introduced in the first two days co-sponsored with Becker.

House Bill 15-1058, sponsored by both legislators, would direct the state treasurer to transfer 70 percent of the general fund surplus (about $1.05 billion in the 2014-15 budget) into K-12 education and 30 percent to higher education. The transfer to K-12 would continue until the "negative factor" no longer applies to K-12 education. The negative factor, a budgetary device employed in the 2010 session, reduced K-12 funding by about $1 billion. The money going to higher education could be used for any purpose, under the bill.

Becker and Sonnenberg also will team up on Senate Bill 15-042, which concerns mandatory reports of animal abuse. This is the second year Sonnenberg has attempted to get this bill through the General Assembly.

If politics makes strange bedfellows, here's one for that list. Sonnenberg is a senate sponsor on HB 1062, which increases penalties for those who engage in animal fighting. The House sponsor is Rep. Steve Lebsock, D-Thornton. Lebsock and Sonnenberg waged battle over Lebsock's efforts to run legislation to ban tail-docking of dairy cows in the 2013 session.

Other bills affecting agriculture include one from the Wildfire Matters Review Committee, led by Rep. Millie Hamner, D-Dillon. HB 1008 would extend property tax classification for agricultural lands destroyed by natural causes. The bill addresses agricultural property destroyed by a natural cause on or after Jan. 1, 2012. The bill states that were it not for the destruction of the land, it would have qualified as agricultural for the following property tax year. Under the bill, the classification for property tax purposes is extended for the year of destruction and the next four years after, unless the land is not rehabilitated by the end of that four years, that the assessor determines the classification is erroneous or that the land use is changed.

Sen. Kerry Donovan, D-Vail, is the sponsor of SB 36, which would create a rural economic emergency assistance grant program. The grant program, to be administered by the Department of Local Affairs, Division of Local Government, would provide emergency-based grant funds to rural communities that have experienced substantial job loss. The bill intends to address plant closures and layoffs, and the increased demand for worker retraining or re-employment.

Two bills, both in the Senate, would attempt to reduce the state's renewable energy standard or related requirements from SB 13-252, the bill that increased the renewable energy standard for rural electric co-ops. SB 44 seeks to reduce the renewable energy standard for investor-owned utilities (like Xcel Energy) from 20 percent to 15 percent for 2015 through 2019 and from 30 percent to 15 percent thereafter. For rural co-ops, the standard would be reduced from 20 percent to 15 percent beginning in 2020. Sen. Ray Scott, R-Grand Junction, is the prime sponsor of SB 44; Sonnenberg is a co-sponsor.

Sb 46, sponsored by Sen. Kevin Grantham, R-Canon City, would allow rural co-ops a little leeway in the way they count the renewable resources they purchase. Under current law, rural co-ops are required to get at least 10 percent of their electricity from renewable sources by 2020; larger co-ops, such as Tri-State Generation and Transmission, have a 20 percent requirement. Under the bill, the utilities could count one kilowatt-hour of electricity obtained through "retail distribution generation" as 3 kilowatt-hours for purposes of meeting the 2020 standard. retail distribution generation is a type of renewable energy source that includes rooftop solar panels.

Grantham's bill does not list a House sponsor; Scott's bill shows one House sponsor, Rep. Dan Thurlow, R-Grand Junction.

Next week, Hickenlooper will take his second oath of office, on Tuesday; his State of the State address is scheduled for Thursday.