Melinda MacInnis is recognized by National Geographic

Melinda MacInnis of Boulder, whose ducmentary "the Price" is set for release in Spring 2015, earlier this year with a rhinoceros at the Denver Zoo. ( Courtesy photo / National Geographic )

National Geographic's 2014 Traveler of the Year To cast your vote for Melinda MacInnis, or someone else, visit travel.nationalgeographic.com/travel/vote-grid/vote-traveler-of-the-year-2014/. The magazine allows individuals to vote once per day, through Oct. 25.

In 2008, Melinda MacInnis was an animal lover teaching high school English in South Central Los Angeles and living in Venice Beach, when she booked a bucket-list trip to South Africa for her 40th birthday.

While on holiday, MacInnis ventured from Johannesburg over to Swaziland, a landlocked monarchy roughly the size of New Jersey, smack in the middle of northeast South Africa.

That excursion six years ago happened to coincide with a disturbing and unregulated spike in poaching of the creature — which, over time, has seen the worldwide rhino population drop from about 500,000 to just shy of 30,000. It was an issue MacInnis knew nothing about before visiting Swaziland, and which has largely defined her life since.

She's now in post-production on "The Price," a feature-length documentary on the plight of the rhinoceros, and what that portends. For her efforts, which include trips to Nepal, Vietnam, China, Mozambique and Kenya, as well as years of filming the likes of Dr. Jane Goodall and Dame Daphne Sheldrick, MacInnis has been named one of ten nominees for National Geographic's Traveler of the Year award.

MacInnis said she's humbled by the recognition, but remains focused on "The Price."

"I don't want to show people the horrible stuff. I don't want to see dead elephants or any of that," said MacInnis, now a Boulder resident. "What you realize is that this rhino story is a story of life on earth in a lot of ways. They've been here during continental shifts, ice ages, millions and millions of years. And now they're being wiped out in a 100-year period by humans?"

Though MacInnis and her film crew, which comprises a slew of Boulder folks and former University of Colorado film students, hope to paint a broader conservationist picture, the demise of the rhino is a rather powerful story in its own right.

"In some ways," MacInnis says, "rhinos were like the cows of the ecosystem. They were like the lawnmowers, keeping grass low so other species could flourish."

Like the North American bison, they were also easy to hunt. For millions of years, though, rhinos didn't have natural predators.

Enter humans.

"When Europeans, colonial-era hunters, showed up with guns, there's stories of them taking out 100 a day, like pests. It was a crazy waste," MacInnis said.

As a result of poaching and black market sales of rhino horn — which, at three times its weight in gold, is highly sought after for supposed therapeutic properties debunked time and again by the fact that the horn is made of keratin and calcium, the same stuff found in fingernails — the creature now lives on the brink of extinction.

Rhino crimes aren't exactly a new development, but they've certainly worsened in recent years. In South Africa, for example, the national parks department reported that 13 rhinos were poached in 2007. The next year, it was up to 68, and, by 2009, more than 200. In 2013, the figure eclipsed 1,000.

Countries like South Africa and Swaziland have been almost powerless in attempting to curtail the destruction. Game scouts and park rangers, MacInnis explained, would for years catch poachers with AK-47s and rhino carcasses, but, with no law on the books, the poacher would pay what amounted to a $10 fine, and be released.

It's a gruesome trend, indeed, but MacInnis hopes to deliver a more hopeful message to viewers — who, by the way, she plans to reach in at least four different languages, for which she already has translators lined up.

"Look at a film like Blackfish," MacInnis said of the blockbuster documentary on killer whale abuse at SeaWorld. "It's an excellent example of connecting emotionally and linking you to an actual cause. That's something that's doable. You can stop supporting SeaWorld."

The rhino issue is different, she said, in that it's "almost larger than us."

"How are we going to stop poaching across Africa? We have to find a way to communicate that saving the rhinos is doable. Rhino horn does not cure cancer. You don't need a rhino bracelet.

"We can shut down the organized crime that's behind it, and the consumers on the other end. It's a test case for solving so many environmental issues."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Alex Burness at 303-473-1389 or burnessa@dailycamera.com, or follow him at twitter.com/alex_burness.