Virgil Green stepped from the shadows Sunday, his first career touchdown catch punctuating a growing presence in the Broncos’ offense. For Green, a 6-foot-5, 255-pound chiseled beast, his road to recognition has been paved in dirt, grass, mud and muscle.

It started in Nevada, where it’s not uncommon for folks to straddle the line between dreams and delusion. Green wanted to play college football. He figured he could be a star receiver for the Wolf Pack, a team that featured quarterback Colin Kaepernick and linebacker Brandon Marshall.

The coaches moved him to tight end.

Broncos Mailbag: Pose a question for Mike Klis

“And I hated it. I hated blocking,” Green said. “But I started to get recognition from not only my teammates and coaches, but the media for springing guys for touchdowns. I realized how valuable my role was. Whatever my job is blocking, I want to do it well and look physical doing it.”

The startling transformation from a 215-pound college freshman into an earth mover for the Broncos’ revived running game draws comparisons to Bruce Banner’s ripped jeans and anger management issues. That’s fine by Green. Long ago, he began calling himself the Hulk, a nod to his last name and adoration for the comic book character who wreaks havoc. Virgil’s younger brother Jeremiah, a former Nevada star who last played in the Canadian Football League, fueled the vision, answering to the nickname Green Goblin.

“He was the villain because he was the linebacker. The Hulk, man, the last four years if it comes on, I watch the entire movie. I love it,” Green said. “We fed off it. We played together at Nevada.”

Broncos fans know Green better now than at any time during his previous three seasons. Offensive coordinator Adam Gase and quarterback Peyton Manning hinted of his value after the early-season loss at Seattle when Green exited with a first-half concussion. His importance became apparent over the season’s final six games during which Green has played roughly 70 percent of the snaps because of Julius Thomas’ lingering ankle sprain.

Denver committed to the run after a humbling loss at St. Louis. The Broncos improved from 89.9 yards rushing per game, ranking 27th overall, to 111.6, which sits 15th in the league.

Adding an extra “tackle” and leaning on Green as a blocker helped breathe life into the ground game. It is a weapon that didn’t exist consistently last season, which creates confidence for their Jan. 11 postseason opener.

“We’ve seen how successful it can be. I am going to really come out and be an animal in the playoffs,” Green said. “I will be firing off the ball to make sure to move my guy and make sure that our running back has a clean read.”

Green’s presence and production is a microcosm of an evolving offense. The Broncos want Thomas as a weapon near the end zone, but he admits he hasn’t been himself. He hopes that with the bye that he can “get over the hump and get back to guy I used to be.” Since that is no longer a certainty, Green’s impact can’t be overstated.

Known as a bruiser, he has shown finesse, providing evidence that he shouldn’t be typecast. Gase said Green deserves credit for taking advantage of additional practice reps, insisting he “trusts” Green in the passing game.

“At Nevada, I didn’t learn much about route running and how to get open against different coverages. It’s just been a learning process, learning how Peyton (Manning) talks, learning how the coaches talk. Julius has done a great job of adjusting well. His mind wasn’t molded like mine was,” Green said. “He had a free mind to work with. Watching him and seeing how he’s getting open has truly helped me to start to understand things better.”

Manning discussed his desire to get Green a touchdown for weeks. He didn’t throw the pass to Green last Sunday, but he called the play.

“We’ve been trying like crazy to get him one,” Manning said of the 1-yard scoring toss from Brock Osweiler. “It was good Virgil got his.”

The reaction of teammates explained Green’s popularity in the locker room. They rushed to greet him, knowing how long he had waited for the opportunity.

Green couldn’t hide his smile. The Raiders probably were better off not making him angry. Opponents don’t seem to like him much when he’s angry.

“When I was at Nevada, I started to bulk up in the weight room. I worked extremely hard to become the best pound-for-pound lifter,” Green said. “But at the end of day, regardless of my weight, it’s about coming off the ball and hitting the guy across from me. That’s what is going on in my head. I don’t care how big the guy is. It means nothing. I have to impose my will.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck