GOP presidential hopeful and renowned pediatric neurosurgeon Dr. Ben Carson is reportedly suffering from an incurable case of foot in mouth disease. It seems every time Carson opens his mouth these days, he pisses some somebody off. Carson has a penchant for saying whatever comes to his brilliant mind uncensored. Evidently, this is a problem for some people. Recently, a Huffington Post contributor (who shall remain clueless) blogged that Carson's medical licence had been revoked by the medical licensure boards in all 50 states because of "his numerous brainless comments." Not to worry, Carson's medical licence and brain are still intact.

As a point of reference, the blogger cited Carson's comments that "the holocaust could have been prevented by armed German citizens, that straight people go into prison and come out gay, and that Obamacare is the worse thing to happen to the country since slavery." When taken out of context and reduced to 30-second soundbites, as most media reportage does these days, it's difficult to know how Carson intended those statements. Who knows? Maybe the 6 million Jewish Holocaust victims, and, less we forget, the 10.7 million African victims of the Trans Atlantic Slave Trade might have forced a different outcome had they been able to meet their captors with armed resistance, which may have been Carson's point.

I won't presume to know what Carson was thinking when he made those controversial comments. But it's campaign season and every politician, including Clinton and Trump, will say whatever they think voters want to hear. Carson is being singled out because he's a deep thinker who says things that perhaps some people don't want to hear, or for that matter, may never have even considered. But that's who Ben Carson is—a pediatric neurosurgeon who first came to prominence by successfully mapping out and performing complex brain surgeries that no other surgeons had done before.

Carson has two choices in this campaign: 1) Play it safe by sticking with the same old warmed over rhetoric coming out of the other candidates mouths, otherwise known as pandering to the crowd; or 2) Risk being honest and forthright about his views regardless of the potential criticism.

Pandering is the act of expressing one's views in accordance with the likes of a group to which one is attempting to appeal. The term is most notably associated with politics. In pandering, the views one is expressing are merely for the purpose of drawing support up to and including votes and do not necessarily reflect one's personal values.

Carson can hardly be accused of being a panderer despite what the media thinks of him, Carson is currently running a close second to GOP front-runner Donald Trump, and poised to overtake him in the polls. So why should he listen to his critics? How many politicians have voters sent to Congress and to the White House who espoused one thing on the campaign trail and did totally opposite once they got in office? One need only look at the most recent elections for examples.

Ultimately, whether his candor wins or doesn't win him the White House, Carson is a voice for the kinds of questions American voters should be asking of the candidates. He also brings a sharper focus on issues that are not being talked about or are largely being ignored. America needs a statesman president—someone of unquestioned character and moral integrity with a vision for uniting the country around the core values and traditional beliefs that have made America a beacon of hope. Carson may not be that man for some, but he's a lot closer than any of his Republican or Democratic rivals.

An example of a politician is a person running for office who flip-flops on issues as the polls change. The politician makes promises but may not deliver on them once elected. A statesman is a person who stands by his ideals and does everything in his power to do what he believes is right for the people of his country.—Johnny Kilhefner

The difference between a politician and a statesman is that a politician thinks about the next election while the statesman thinks about the next generation.—James Freeman Clarke

Because a statesman follows his moral compass instead of opinion polls, his ideas are often initially out of step with the public mood. But instead of tailoring his rhetoric to that mood, he speaks to the very best within his countrymen.—Brett & Kate McKay

To the extent that American voters elect a leader with strong moral convictions and a greater vision for the future of the country and all its people, the stronger our nation will be. That being the case, keep on talking Dr Ben. You never know how far your words may take you.