President Barack Obama lied to the American people about the effects of Obamacare on the price and availability of health care, Sen. Steve Daines tells Newsmax TV. "I would challenge President Obama to jump on Air Force One and come out to Montana and stand up and explain to Montanans why our commissioner – I've got the facts in front of me here – the Montana commissioner of security and insurance published our approved rates for the state of Montana for next year," the "Big Sky Country" Republican told "Newsmax Prime" host J.D. Hayworth.Watch Newsmax TV onandGet Newsmax TV on your cable system — Click Here Now "These are now approved by the commissioner," Daines continued. "The average rate increases across all plans are ranging between 22 and 34 percent. Now I'd like to have him explain how that all works for the average Montanan, because it doesn't.""This is directly affecting the great people of my home state and this is an example yet again of these lies, these promises that were made by President Obama about rates going down, keeping your plans if you like them… it's all turning out not to be true."When asked what can be done in the Senate to put a halt to such rate increases, Daines, a member of the Senate Appropriations Committee, replied:"Well, the discussions we're having right now are looking at a legislative tool called reconciliation. This is [to help] take another shot here at stopping Obamacare. It's something we will look at in the budgeting process in the next few months as a way here to stop Obamacare.""The challenge we face here is… if we don't stop Obamacare, a year from now, our commissioners of security in Montana will be probably be giving us the same news, looking at the rates that will go up.""[Prices] will go up any time the government takes over one sixth of the economy, takes over the health care system. Prices go up and the quality of care goes down. That's what we're seeing currently across this country, certainly in my home state of Montana."Daines also commented on Obama calling out Russian President Vladimir Putin by name in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly Monday, saying "this is another example of President Obama leading from behind. He is late to the party."What we're seeing – the unraveling of the Middle East, seeing the Middle East on fire – is a result of this president's failure to lead. Think about this, if we were to take a poll and ask, 'which countries are now in a better position, a better relationship with the United States than they [were] before this president took office?'""I could think of two. It'd be Iran and Cuba. And that's tragic."