Who is Jonathan Gruber and why is he important to you and your family? If you listen to my show on Talk Radio 1210 or watch Fox News Channel, you know that Gruber is an MIT economics professor and an architect of Obamacare who has been caught on a series of videos saying that to get Obamacare put into law he and others had to lie about big parts of the law.

When you watch the videos, Guber’s message hits you squarely between the eyes. The reason why the lies were necessary is that the American people are stupid and don’t know what’s good for them. This video was of a panel discussion of the annual Health Economic Conference held at the University of Pennsylvania in October of 2013.

Gruber responding to comments about transparency said of Obamacare “The bill was written in a tortured way to make sure CBO did not score the mandate as taxes.” He went on to say “Lack of transparency is a huge political advantage and basically call it the ‘stupidity of the American voter’ or whatever, but basically this was really, really critical to get the thing to pass.”

After this initial video, several more in the same vein have surfaced of Gruber reinforcing the lies behind the bill and the contempt for the intelligence of the American people. Democrats have tried to deny that Gruber was a major player in getting Obamacare passed. Senator Bob Casey on my show on 1210 Radio told me that Gruber was only a policy wonk and didn’t craft the bill.

Advertisement

Other major Democrats have echoed this by saying “Who is this guy Gruber?” The evidence points to the fact that they know exactly who Gruber is. In 2009, Representative Nancy Pelosi pointed to Gruber as a key player. Records indicate he was at the White House in strategy sessions with President Obama over the bill and he was paid hundreds of thousands dollars in consultancy fees by the democrats pushing the bill.

In addition to the lies and arrogance that have been revealed, the Gruber tapes indicate a big divide in the media. Talk radio and Fox News Channel have fully discussed all aspects of this. The mainstream media by and large doesn’t think this is much of a story. That position underlines why Fox News and talk radio are so popular. We offer an alternative to the news that others won’t cover because of their bias.

Obamacare is not settled law and there is a case before the Supreme Court right now that could overturn it. The Gruber tapes probably give Justice Roberts and others on the Court more reasons to consider seeing it as a deception that is unconstitutional.

As far as Gruber, I think he should be called before Congress and questioned on the fraud that was required to get the bill passed. This bill affects every aspect of the lives of all Americans. Gruber has said it was sold as a cost cutter to Americans when it clearly won’t cut costs.

It is a fact that politicians count on the apathy of the public. It’s how they get their pet laws passed, and it’s how they continue to win re-election when they clearly don’t deserve it. Regardless of your political viewpoint, you need to practice engaged citizenship and cry “foul” when our public servants fail to serve its citizens. It’s the public’s version of checks-and-balances.

Talk show host Dom Giordano is heard weekdays 9 AM to 12 noon on WPHT 1210-AM Radio. Contact Dom at www.domgiordano.com.