Female guard at women's prison alleged male guard gave her lap dance among other incidents

The N.J. Supreme Court has overturned the dismissal of a sexual harassment suit brought by a guard at the Edna Mahan Correctional Facility for Women. (Photo: ~File photo) Story Highlights State investigation found allegations unsubstantiated.

Suit was filed before investigation was completed.

The state Supreme Court has reinstated a lawsuit brought by a guard at the Edna Mahan Correctional Facility for Women against her supervisor whom she alleged sexually harassed her by giving her a lap dance among other incidents.

Ilda Aguas, who was hired as a guard on the midnight shift in 2004, filed a suit against the state after a series of incidents involving her supervisor, Darryl McClish, in 2009 and 2010.

Her suit was dismissed in Superior Court, saying that she had not followed the Department of Corrections' policy requiring an employee filed a written complaint and had failed to prove her supervisor had used his authority to control her work environment.

An Appellate Court affirmed that ruling but on Wednesday the Supreme Court ruled in a split decision, saying that the issue whether the Department of Corrections "exercised reasonable care to prevent and correct promptly any sexually harassing behavior" should be decided in a lower court.

The court also ruled that the determination of whether an alleged harasser is a supervisor should be an issue of job function, not job title.

Paul Castronovo, Aguas' attorney, was pleased that the court sided with his client, who still works at the facility.

"It's a win for employees throughout the state," he said about the expanded definition of supervisor.

In the lawsuit, Aguas alleged that McClish, the highest-ranking supervisor on the midnight shift and overseeing 60 employees, began sexually harassing her on several occasions, beginning in October 2009.

One evening, after McClish had allegedly made a suggestive comment to her, Aguas took her handcuffs home with her in violation of policy and McClish called her and demanded she return to the facility.

When she returned with the handcuffs, Aquas alleged that McClish sniffed them and said, "where you been? If you just want to borrow them, let me know," according to court papers.

Then, Aquas contended in her suit, McClish sat on her lap face-to-face and while blowing his whistle, gave her a lap dance and continued, though she told him to stop.

McClish admitted he ordered Aguas to return to the facility with the handcuffs, but denied her other allegations.

Later that month, Aguas alleged, while she and McClish were making their rounds, he began massaging her shoulders, then stuck out his buttocks toward her and said "do me a favor and take my radio off my hip. I worked out and I'm sore," according to court papers. McClish denied those claims.

In a third incident, Aguas contended, that after she complained that McClish had made a comment to her about an alleged relationship with another male guard, he came up from behind her, put her in a hold then bent her over a table and said "what are you going to do?"

Aguas alleged she kicked and head-butted him McClish and the two fell to the floor, where he released her from the hold.

In her lawsuit, Aguas said she reported McClish's behavior to her superiors, including Assistant Administrator Helen Adams who advised Aguas to report the incidents in writing.

But, according to court papers, Aguas rejected that advice because she feared retaliation.

Aguas became distraught after the meeting with Adams and was hospitalized with a migraine, court papers say. While she was on medical leave, she received text messages from a fellow guard that she interpreted as a warning not to file a written complaint.

The Department of Corrections' Equal Employment Division started an investigation into her allegations, but six weeks later found that her claims were unsubstantiated.

Aguas filed her lawsuit two days after the investigation began and before the results were known.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1DiNmA8