President Barack Obama recently announced a TechHire program that will invest in high-tech job skills training for America's labor force. Because tech wages continue to rise faster than other sectors, initiatives like this not only help catapult our tech leadership in the 21st century but also help address income inequality. Similarly, the president's plan to wire 99 percent of our schools with broadband Internet service will help ensure that students – and our future workforce – will have the necessary skills for U.S. pre-eminence in the 21st century.

And as important as these initiatives are, they are only part of the puzzle. If the United States wants to truly be the global tech leader, then every American has to have broadband and other digital tools in their own homes.

This is no longer an option for Americans, especially for communities of color hardest hit by the recent recession. Eighty percent of all U.S. jobs will require digital fluency within the next 10 years, and 80 percent of Fortune 500 companies only accept job applications online. College applications, financial aid, and even registration and classwork itself have all moved online. But today, African-American and Hispanic families lag some 15 points behind whites in broadband adoption.

Many Americans lack the digital literacy necessary to navigate the vast troves and possibilities of the Internet, while roughly half of non-adopters just have not been adequately exposed to its real value and, as such, have not come to truly see the broadband Internet as meaningful or valuable to their lives.

The cost of computers and broadband service can also be an issue – but it's not the only one or even the most important one.

Four years ago, the Federal Communications Commission teamed with the nation's largest broadband provider to initiate the largest experiment ever attempted to close the digital divide. The undertaking, known as Internet Essentials, offers heavily discounted broadband service at $9.95 a month and a fully functioning computer for less than $150 to low-income families – those with a child eligible for the federal school lunch program. They also offer to train those participating in the program with state-of-the-art digital skills. The government's private sector partner is Comcast; other companies like Cox Communications and CenturyLink are following behind with similarly helpful programs.

The program is unique because it not only addresses the major barrier to adoption -- demonstrating relevance of broadband Internet and teaching the skills to use it -- but also because of the additional incentives it offers, such as discounted broadband service and hardware. The program virtually eliminates the barriers most often cited for not having broadband Internet at home.

The success of the program has been beyond anyone's imagination. Internet Essentials has connected 450,000 homes representing 1.8 million low-income Americans to broadband, every one of whom has a story about the doors that have been opened and the new possibilities this change has meant.

The combination of hands-on training and inexpensive broadband service and equipment has made this one of the most successful digital divide initiatives ever tried. Eighty-five percent of program subscribers use the Internet every single day – 98 percent said their children use it for school, 95 percent said it improved children's grades. In real terms, that means hundreds of thousands of students with new learning experiences and new opportunities to find jobs, connect with their families, and apply to college. It's a doorway into the modern connected world that so many take for granted.

A few outlier critics have emerged to claim that the program hasn't gone far enough because it focuses primarily on low-income children; these critics say the program hasn't accomplished enough and should be altered to address other target populations. But these empty naysayers are much like the critics of the president's Affordable Care Act: squeaky wheels looking for attention, offering ephemeral criticisms and, worse, half-baked proposals to divert focus from a program that is working well. And while we continue to work with technology leaders like Comcast and others that have worked so hard to do open up even more doors to digital opportunity, the reality is that no other effort to close the digital divide has come close to yielding these impressive returns.

We need every idea on the table to solve this problem. That means celebrating and scaling up what works and finding new ways to make the Internet more compelling to those who see it as irrelevant today – like new apps for news, education, jobs and civic engagement. But it's going to take a village of these kinds of creative public-private partnerships to salve the divide. The digital divide took years of neglect to open so wide – it'll also take years of commitment and hard work to close.

Hilary O. Shelton is the NAACP's Washington bureau director and senior vice president for advocacy.