Business Honors for June 14, 2015

Business Honors for June 14, 2015

BATON ROUGE AREA

The Louisiana Bar Foundation has named as Fellows Robert W. Barton, an attorney with Taylor, Porter, Brooks & Phillips LLP; Robert T. Bowsher, an attorney with Breazeale, Sachse & Wilson; and Benjamin H. Dampf and Gregory K. Moroux Jr., both attorneys with Kinchen, Walker, Bienvenu, Bargas & Reed LLC. The foundation works for equal justice.

The Baton Rouge Area Chamber has graduated participants in its 2015 Baton Rouge Area Leadership Program class. The program prepares a diverse group of professionals for leadership positions in the community. It focuses during a nine-month program on key issues and areas of concern such as education; diversity; city and state government; health care and social concerns; economic development; the arts and media; and the criminal justice system.

Graduates are David Baxter, Sparkhound; Ryan Chenevert, of Fletcher and Roy LLC; Kahli Cohran, Civil Solutions Consulting Group; Clay Countryman, of Breazeale, Sachse & Wilson; Andree Cullens, of Taylor, Porter, Brooks and Phillips; Allyson d’Aquin, All Star Automotive; Anna Dearmon, of Deveney; Jerry Denicola, Whitney Bank; Eric Dexter, Civil Solutions Consulting Group; Denise Dugas, Seaside Health Care; Stuart Feigley, of Wright Feigley Communications; Wendy Gaudet, Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center; John Gray, The Dunham School; Blaine Grimes, Campus Federal Credit Union; Angelle Hill, Turner Industries Group.

Makesha Judson, March of Dimes; David Kerth, of Jones Walker; Anthony Kimble, Solid Ground Innovations LLC; Norisha Kirts, LSU Foundation; Scott Mabry, Ochsner Health Center; Megan Manchester, ExxonMobil; Mikki Mathews, JP Morgan Chase; John McGee, BASF Corp.; Jessica Monroe, of Johnson & Johnson; David Mullens, Capital One Bank; Melissa Parmelee, American Red Cross; Nial Patel, Cornerstone Governmental Affairs; Kristi Richard, of McGlinchey Stafford LLC; Mendy Richard, Louisiana Department of Public Safety; Rhett Roy, Woman’s Hospital; Bradley Sanchez, The Salad Shop.

Kate Seba, Junior League of Baton Rouge; Mary Ellen Slayter, Reputation Capital Media Services; Kara Still, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Louisiana; Laura Vinsant, Teach for America; Trae Welch, East Baton Rouge city-parish councilman; and from previous classes A. Charles Dabadie and J. Charles Dabadie, both ExxonMobil, Class of 2013; and Liz Smith, Baton Rouge Area Chamber, Class of 2014.

Old Jefferson Community Care Center and Baton Rouge Health Care Centers have received 2015 Bronze – Commitment to Quality Awards through the National Quality Award Program presented by the American Health Care Association and National Center for Assisted Living for their dedication to improving the lives of residents through quality care.

Both are skilled nursing and rehabilitation centers owned and operated by Louisiana nonprofit CommCare.

The program has three levels: Bronze, Silver and Gold. Centers begin the quality improvement process at the Bronze level, where they develop an organizational profile with essential performance elements such as vision and mission statements and an assessment of customers’ expectations.

Bronze applicants also must demonstrate their ability to implement a performance improvement system.

AROUND SOUTH LOUISIANA

Four area biomedical scientists were honored with scholar awards by the Louisiana Clinical and Translational Science Center, a statewide initiative funded by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences in the National Institutes of Health.

The awards recognize early career clinical and translational research scientists for their work, providing them with support and mentoring to further develop their careers.

Honored as Roadmap Scholars and their areas of research are Dr. Sarah Jolley, LSU Health Sciences Center in New Orleans, “Prevalence and Mechanisms of Critical Illness Myopathy in Patients with Chronic Heavy Alcohol Use”; Amanda Staiano, LSU Pennington Biomedical Research Center in Baton Rouge, “Sedentary Behavior, Eating Attitudes, and Weight Gain in Young Adults”; and Dr. Maissaa Janbain, Tulane University School of Medicine in New Orleans, “Adjunctive Antifibrinolytic Therapy with Factor Concentrate Prophylaxis in Patients with Hemophilia A and B.”

Recognized with the Meritorious Post-Doctoral Scholar award is Elizabeth Martin, Tulane University School of Medicine in New Orleans, “Decellularized Breast Cancer Extracellular Matrix in the Induction of Tumor Metastatic Recurrence.”