Buy Photo Well-manicured xeriscaping makes up a large portion of the roadside landscaping along Avenue 52 in La Quinta. (Photo: Jay Calderon/The Desert Sun)Buy Photo

Convert and save

As anyone can plainly see some neighborhoods, some resorts and some HOAs could not be further apart on water management. Perhaps some are using their own wells or perhaps some are using reclaimed water, but the differences are easily noticed.

Some grass is brown, some is gold and some is very lush and green. It is also clear that some like desertscape and others like the “green green grass of home.”

CVWD advised me that desert plants use 20 of the amount of water that grass takes and annuals need 40 percent. Based on those numbers, any homeowner or HOA could take an area that is total grass and convert 45 percent of it to desertscape, retain 55 percent in green grass and still be within the 64 percent mandated allotment.

The conversion cost would be significantly less than total conversion and everybody wins. Yes we can have it both ways! It is called “water management” not “knee jerk” reaction! The bonus would come from everyone’s water cost would be 36 percent less each month and could be used to offset the cost of conversion.

Boyd Williams, Palm Desert

Smarter water use

We converted our lawn to desert landscaping, and received rebate grants from the Coachella Valley Water District and Cathedral City.

As part of the CVWD grant, a technician replaced our traditional irrigation controller with a smart system. It works perfectly. It reduced irrigation run times by 70 percent from a summer baseline. It adjusts the run times daily based on temperatures. When it rains, it shuts off.

There is a mechanism on the rain sensor that lets you adjust the number of days it’s off after a rain. And when the temperature drops to 38 degrees or lower, it shuts off so the lines and plants won’t freeze.

We have cut our water usage to pretty close to exactly what the plants need. Everyone irrigating in the valley should have a smart controller, and CVWD customers can have it installed for free.

Frank Moncrief, Cathedral City

Thanks for the spotlight

I wanted to express my appreciation to Ian James and Steve Elfers for wiritng such interesting and in-depth articles about the world’s depletion of groundwater. Also, thanks to The Desert Sun for publishing their articles.

I read every word.

I would hope that this very serious problem will get more coverage and attention. No water, no food, no life!

Collective solutions are critically needed if we want to save our little blue dot which we call Earth.

Reo Barkle, Yucca Valley

Not loving Dionne’s spin

Dear Mr. Dionne,

Your column was printed in our local paper, The Desert Sun, under the headline “Which party loves the USA?”

After reading it, I would suggest it might more properly have been headlined “DNC should be embarrassed.” Thank you for finally pointing out the obvious: the DNC scheduled a paltry three debates on Saturday nights opposite NFL football games. Why allow Americans to see how thin their candidate slate is?

But my main quarrel with your column is in the absurd premise that one party loves America more than the other. I am a conservative, but do not hold the notion that the Democrats love our country less than I do. It is just that I find their policies and proscriptions to be destructive to our great country. To suggest, as you have done, that Democrats love America the way it is now, and that Republicans love it the way it was THEN is ridiculous. As an example: Most Republicans think the ACA as it exists today is bad for our health care industry and our economy.

When I say I dislike the state of country today, it simply means I’d like to see the problems we face corrected.

Paul Forrest, La Quinta

The Plaza has many fans

The Plaza Racquet Club is a unique facility, one of a limited few available to senior tennis players.

Many of us have traveled to Palm Springs from afar for many years to play in the tournaments sponsored by the Plaza and would like to continue these endeavors in the future.

We sincerely hope that the Plaza will not be just another victim of unneeded commercial development. Please preserve the facility for us who enjoy it.

Robert Foran, M.D., frequent Palm Springs visitor

Club vital to Palm Springs

My wife Claude and I are Canadians and have been coming to Palm Springs off and on since 1980, in recent years for 6 weeks in March and April.

We always rent in Palm Springs, and have no interest in renting anywhere else in the valley.

The principal attractions, apart from the weather, are tennis and hiking. Tennis is always at the Plaza Racquet Club, since the municipal courts are too busy and the hotel is unavailable to us. Plaza is a most attractive alternative. Great courts, very well run and friendly people.

If it is lost to a residential development, we will be looking for another locale to spend our vacation time and dollars. Please do not let this happen. Palm Springs will be the loser.

In our many drives around the city, we see lots of vacant land where the Province Group could build.

Please add our names to the many objectors to this development, and keep us informed.

Earl and Claude Cherniak, Toronto, Canada

Plaza is an asset

I have been a resident of Palm Springs for 38 of the last 40 years that I have lived in the Coachella Valley. During that time I have been a member of the Racquet Club of Palm Springs, the Riviera Racquet Club, and now the Plaza Racquet Club. I can tell you that the Plaza Racquet Club is the most affordable and best run. Kurt and Ana Haggstrom not only line up all of the matches but they have the friendliest of the clubs in the desert.

Our membership is made up of many races, religious sects, gays and lesbians. It is a true “melting pot.” I would like to cover another aspect of the value of the club. With my new and varied friendships, I have attended in the last 2 years over 20 social events planned by the members.

These events were held at places like Melvyn’s, Lulu, Las Casuelas Terrazas, Copley’s, Appetito, the 360 and many more.

My point is that this club also has a monetary value to Palm Springs. It would be a shame to lose this major asset.

Dick Williams, Cathedral City

It’s not about sides

It’s Christmas, and joyful and triumphant songs abound — sadly muted today by strident Islamophobia, mass shootings and police killings.

It’s ironic that while some of our most loudly self-professed Christians are the predominant peddlers of ethnic/religious hate, their own history mirrors the gruesome atrocities of today’s jihadists. Destruction of the treasures of classical Greece and Rome as “idolatry,” centuries of Crusader butchery of Muslims, Inquisitions, pogroms, “witch” burnings, after-church lynchings — all grim reminders that we need to learn that the lives of all are equally precious — our black Americans and Muslims, Israel’s Palestinians, Sunnis and Shiites alike, Hindus and Buddhists as well.

Bob Dylan’s “You don’t count the dead when God’s on your side” nailed it, and that truth should inform our actions — and those of our sorry current crop of chest-pounding politicians.

Ken Scudder, San Francisco/Palm Springs

It might be dangerous

Re: “Desert high schools tackling concussion issue head on,” Dec. 26

Although the article implies “... high school [football] players aren’t in danger of CTE ...” there is a 2013 US Medicine web abstract that seems to state otherwise.

In the web abstract, “New CTE Study Categorizes Stages of Degenerative Brain Disease in Veterans Athletes,” it stated that it found CTE in six high school football players out of 64 athletes’ brains examined. This does not prove that CTE can be caused by high school football, but it does indicate that it is a possibility.

James C. Hamilton, Ann Arbor, Michigan

A lovely sip

Thanks for having an article targeted for the more polished of the valley, “Tea Time,” Dec. 15. Nice to see polished people enjoying life and talking.

Seems like most of the articles have been about people smoking pot, completely different outlook on life, in my opinion.

Sean M. Gerold, Desert Hot Springs

Was it a favor?

A simple definition of “sham”: Words or actions that are not sincere or honest.

In the next edition Merriam-Webster could define the term as “Akin to the Dec. 19, 2015, New Hampshire Democratic National Debate.”

The DNC was criticized for staging this “debate” Saturday night so few people would watch it. Actually, scheduling it for a Saturday night was an act of kindness by Debbie “What’s her name.”

T.J. Sexton, Indian Wells

A different tab

Regarding the $100 million pricetag for CV Link, how about this instead?:

$25 million for cancer research; $25 million for heart research; $25 million for HIV/AIDS research; $25 million for dementia/Alzheimer’s research.

That would be $100 million well spent! How could anyone disagree?

Marvin Gamson, Palm Desert

Losing a ‘friend’

They closed the doors of Coco’s in Smoke Tree Center. How could this happen?

Some accountant, sitting at a desk somewhere, said “nope, these figures don’t add up, close the doors!”

What about the wonderful service people that knew your name and you knew theirs? Where did the best line cooks go? The ones who made eggs exactly like you wanted them? A place where everyone, all ages, went and enjoyed good food at reasonable prices, great pies and friendly service!

A Merry Christmas and Happy New Year to all those people that worked there and made you always want to come back.

Kathryn Bogie, Palm Springs

Holding their own?

Texas flooding: More than likely Texas will request federal disaster aid once again.

Since records began in May 1953 Texas has requested and received federal aid for more than 300 disasters; a hundred more than any other state.

From time to time Texas makes noise that they would be better off if they were to secede from the union. It appears this may be financially beneficial to the 49 states that remain.

Dennis Parlari, Palm Desert

Honoring a mensch

The heinous murder of a man just because he was a Jew diminishes all of us.

Our group in the Coachella Valley wishes to honor the memory of Rabbi Reuven (Eduardo) Birmajer and find ways of assisting his widow and seven children. He was killed Dec. 23 in a stabbing attack outside Jaffa Gate, at the entrance to the Old City of Jerusalem.

The Gerald Ford Desert Chapter of the Mensch International Foundation wishes to recognize him as the real “Mensch” he was. Please contact Steve Geiger at geigersa@gmail.com.

Steve Geiger, Palm Springs

Pick up a new pet

I have been involved in helping abandoned or neglected dogs and cats since Hurricane Katrina.

This is a never-ending battle for these poor animals. Many are being killed in shelters due to their not being adopted.

What can people do? If someone has one dog or cat or no dog or cat how about going and saving one? Pets love you no matter what and they need a companion of their own kind. It has been proven that having a dog is healthy for the owner.

By adding a pet to the household, you are saving a life. The shelters are overloaded and these sad, lonely, lost and abandoned creatures of God are just lost souls and you can make a difference. Why not open up your heart and go to your local shelter and save a dog or cat’s life and give them a second chance at life?

Lisa Robert, Indio

Help the refugees

Re: “Compassion amid crisis: Valley Church offers refuge”

I was heartened to read that Saint Raphael Church, under the leadership of the Rev. David Kruse, plans to assist in hosting Syrian refugee families into our community. My hope is that other churches and local valley governments will assist in the effort.

I strongly believe that our American values demand that we do this. Allowing fear to make us abandon our values as a nation of immigrants is un-American.

M. Kirk Pickerel, Rancho Mirage

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1OAsp5v