Blue Mountain Elementary employee is fundraiser's fourth recipient

In the days following the September flood, Berthoud resident Jill Woo Ching and her family were cleaning out their muddied storage unit near Third Avenue and Main Street in Longmont.

If you go What: Happy Smackah Fun Run When: 8 a.m. May 10 Where: Lake McIntosh, Longmont Cost: Adults, $35; seniors over 55 and students ages 13-17, $25; students ages 6-12, $15; children under 6, $1 More info: http://happysmackah.com/

After days of lifting heavy, mud-filled boxes and furniture Woo Ching, 52, started to feel her age.

"My back was sore and I was tired from all that work but then I felt something pop when I tried to lift a box," Woo Ching said. "I just thought I'd over done it."

Her back was sore but bearable for weeks before Woo Ching decided to see a doctor. The results were worse than she expected.

Several expensive medical tests and doctor visits revealed that the pain in Woo Ching's back was a tumor.

Woo Ching had been in remission for eight years. But now, the rare cancer that she thought she beat was back.

"Earlier that month we were on vacation visiting my son in Maine and I went from a little back pain to having four cancerous tumors," Woo Ching said. "It's like all of the sudden you feel like 'I can't just be walking around with all this cancer,' and everything changes."

Advertisement

Expensive therapies, treatments and equipment have added additional challenges for the family as they fight the rare soft muscle tissue cancer. Woo Ching estimates that the family has spent close to $20,000 out-of-pocket already, and she hasn't received the bill for her latest hospital stay or started her second round of chemotherapy. But colleagues and friends are hoping to help alleviate some of the financial strain at the fourth annual Happy Smackah Fun Run in May.

Berthoud resident Jill Woo Ching gets help walking down the stairs from her son Ben, 20, on Friday. Woo Ching has a rare form of cancer in her lungs and spine. She was a donor at last year's Happy Smackah and is this year's beneficiary. To view a video, visit www.timescall.com. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

The annual fun run raises money for a student or employee of the St. Vrain Valley School District who have been through a tragedy. The inaugural run was launched to support event organizer Karen Cribby's husband, Dan, in 2010.

The fundraiser was labeled Happy Smackah -- a term coined by Dan Cribby -- to support those who are staying positive despite impossible challenges.

Last year, the event raised more than $17,000 for Andy Barela, a former janitor at Niwot High School.

Karen Cribby said several nominations came in supporting Woo Ching as the benefactor of this year's event.

"We think it's a combination of factors, mostly due to how much giving and community involvement she and her family have always been a part of," Cribby said. "People want to give back to her for all she has given. This is the true spirit of the Happy Smackah."

Jackie Bilan, a Longmont High School teacher and close friend of Woo Ching's, provided one of the nominations.

The women have been friends for more than 20 years, and, Bilan said, she can't think of a more deserving family.

"They're the kind of people who give to everyone else, donate to everyone else," Bilan said. "Never have they asked for anything even when times were tough for them."

Bilan has attended most doctors appointments, including several in Houston where Woo Ching was seeing specialists.

Woo Ching has stayed positive — another characteristic that the Happy Smackah recipients share, Bilan said.

Registration is open for this year's event but, Woo Ching said, she can't stop thinking about next year.

"I can't believe I'm the one who needs this," Woo Ching said. "It's so weird but I just keep thinking about how I'll be able to help whoever they choose next year."

"That's exciting for me," she said, "to know that I can help someone else in the way everyone is helping me."

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com