CLEVELAND, Ohio – As Republicans in Congress draw battle lines over Obamacare and a potential shutdown of the federal government, Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald on Thursday attempted to draw Ohio Gov. John Kasich into the debate.

FitzGerald called on Kasich to speak out against a shutdown and to urge his friend and Buckeye State ally, House Speaker John Boehner, to work toward averting one.

"Such a move is likely to have devastating consequences on the economy, and that's the last thing Ohio's middle-class and working families – many of whom are still digging out from the Great Recession – need," said FitzGerald, a Democrat who is angling to unseat Kasich next year. "The fact that we're in this shameful situation in the first place traces back to John Kasich's time in Congress, when he helped to engineer the 1995 federal government shutdown, which he called one of the greatest moments of his career."

FitzGerald's emailed remarks allude to Kasich's 2006 book "Stand for Something." Kasich indeed wrote that the shutdown was "one of the greatest moments of my career." The former chairman of the House Budget Committee said the hard line helped pave the way for a balanced budget deal, which Kasich also cites as a crowning achievement.

Today's shutdown talks have an added layer of nuance for Kasich. Congress must by Sept. 30 pass a bill to keep funding the government. But House Republicans want to strip funding for President Barack Obama's health care program – known widely as Obamacare – from the measure. Such a bill seems likely to pass the GOP-controlled House, but not the Democratic-led Senate. And if the Senate sends back a bill that maintains funding for Obamacare, Boehner and his caucus will face a crossroads.

Obamacare makes possible Medicaid expansion, an initiative Kasich has embraced in Ohio – much to the chagrin of many conservatives and Tea Party activists.

FitzGerald wants Kasich on the record for a reason.

No matter where Kasich comes down, someone is bound to label him a flip-flopper. If the governor publicly opposes a shutdown, he would be deviating from his earlier stance while once again embracing Obamacare. And because of Medicaid expansion, conservatives already are thinking about backing a third-party candidate next year – a dynamic that could harm Kasich and help FitzGerald. If Kasich publicly supports conservatives in their effort to defund the program, it would seemingly contradict his support for Medicaid expansion. And that would give FitzGerald a useful campaign issue.

So when FitzGerald calls on Kasich to call on Boehner to avoid a shutdown, the county executive is calling for something he knows has no chance of happening. Indeed, Kasich spokesman Rob Nichols did not directly respond to questions about a possible shutdown.

"Sounds like to me we have another supporter for the governor's balanced budget amendment plan," Nichols replied Thursday afternoon via email. "The last time the federal budget was in balance, Gov. Kasich was chair of the House Budget Committee. Washington is now broken and the idea that we'll see there the same type of sound budget management we have here in Ohio is a pipe dream. We need in Washington the same balanced budget requirement we have here in Ohio, and the governor has begun that process with the General Assembly and hopes it spreads to other states."

Kasich has been mentioned as a prospective candidate for president in 2016, assuming that he wins a second term.

Nichols, when pressed further about whether Kasich believes Congress should continue funding the government, including Obamacare, replied: "It's flattering that [FitzGerald] thinks Gov. Kasich can solve Washington's budget problems having already solved the state's."