GAIL, Texas — In rural Borden County, 12 people signed up for Obamacare this year.

Livid over the government telling them they must buy something and loath to take anything that looks like a “handout,” the uninsured here are likely to stay that way. As Obamacare’s third open enrollment season began Sunday, this rock-solid conservative community of about 650 people offers a window into the challenges health law advocates face to expand coverage around the country.

Story Continued Below

“Health care is fine, if you can afford it,” said Brenda Copeland, a middle-aged woman who works at the Coyote Country Store and café, along with her two grown daughters, all of whom are uninsured. Copeland has had health insurance only once in her life, and opted to pay Obamacare’s tax penalty earlier this year rather than buy a plan.

“I hope Obamacare goes down the toilet,” she added.

Turning around that kind of entrenched hostility — and convincing people they can afford Obamacare plans — are among the biggest challenges facing the administration as it rolls out the health law’s third enrollment period against the backdrop of a presidential campaign whose winner could determine the law’s fate. Winning new converts like Copeland is key — not just to boost the law’s political standing but to enable its online insurance markets to flourish. But by now most people have heard about the law — even if they have limited or even erroneous understandings about what it might mean for their own pocketbooks. And despite the law’s success in bringing about a historic drop in the uninsured, many don’t like what they’ve heard.

This is Texas, after all, one of the most anti-Obamacare states in the country, and people here have heard plenty from politicians about why they should demand the repeal of President Barack Obama’s health law.

“It doesn’t get a very high grade in my district,” said local Rep. Randy Neugebauer, who is known nationally for yelling “baby killer” as Congress debated the Affordable Care Act five years ago. Neugebauer, who represents 29 predominately rural counties from the New Mexico border to central Texas, added: “I think a lot of people are finding that it’s just not affordable.”

With some of those difficulties in mind, the administration announced modest goals for national signup growth — a target of 10 million people covered through the health law’s exchanges by the end of 2016, or a net increase of roughly 1 million. Its most intense outreach efforts will focus on five metropolitan areas with high concentrations of the uninsured, including Dallas and Houston.

But Dallas and Houston seem worlds away from Borden County, parts of which are so remote they don’t have running water or Internet access. It had one of the lowest Obamacare enrollments in the country this past year, along with Yakutat City and Borough in Alaska, according to administration data. Part of that low enrollment may be because many Borden County residents get health benefits through jobs in the local school system, on oil rigs and on cattle and cotton ranches, so only about one in six was uninsured in 2013. Part of it may be because of its conservative leanings and remoteness.

Outreach workers who are supposed to educate people here and in other parts of west Texas must travel huge distances to find small pockets of the uninsured — people like Copeland and her daughters, Becky Justice and Rika Law, both married women with children. And all of them think the Affordable Care Act is anything but affordable.

Copeland said her income fluctuates but she made about $19,000 last year; she didn’t know that she would have qualified for significant subsidies to lower her monthly insurance premiums, as well as for lowered co-pays and out-of-pocket costs. A plan for the coming year in the mid-priced, most popular tier would cost about $200 a month, after subsidies are figured in.

When she did learn about the subsidies, she softened her stance slightly and said she might look into it. But she said she’s done just fine without health insurance most of her life and is still angry that the federal government can mandate she has to buy it.

“At this point, I don’t mind them penalizing me,” she said.

Law, her daughter, did take a look at the federal enrollment website HealthCare.gov, but said the plans cost too much for her family of four. She too was unaware that she might qualify for tax credits to lower her premiums.

Her family previously had job-based coverage that cost about $1,000 a month — her husband works in the oil fields, but when oil prices dropped, his hours were cut and the Laws decided they didn’t have the money to cover premiums. The plans she looked at on HealthCare.gov cost even more, about $1,350 a month.

“I understand the benefit of having it,” she says of health insurance. “When you’re trying to juggle everyday bills, that’s when it becomes a problem.”

Her sister Becky Justice, who owns this one-room store on the only road through town, said she had health insurance until mid-2014. She doesn’t agree with Obamacare and, unlike her sister, never even window-shopped for plans. If she needs to see a doctor, she says she’ll go to a community health clinic outside the county and figure out how to pay the bill.

Mimi Garcia, the Texas director for Enroll America, an outreach group closely associated with the Obama administration, says people in these rural communities may have heard something about the Affordable Care Act but for whatever reason were not motivated to check out their options.

Low awareness about the benefits remains a challenge nationwide; a recent Robert Wood Johnson Foundation survey found that 59 percent of uninsured people lack knowledge about the tax credits even after two open enrollment periods. Addressing worries about affordability will be a major part of the messaging. That’s why financial assistance will be emphasized in advertising for the 2016 season.

In rural areas especially, Enroll America’s Garcia says local institutions that are trusted in the community are crucial for sharing information and cutting through the noise. But people here in Borden County say that churches, for example, haven’t taken that on. To get people enrolled for 2016, the administration awarded roughly $10 million to “navigator” organizations across Texas. The navigators are the administration’s boots on the ground, and many of them will concentrate on the rural uninsured.

“We’ve known from the beginning that this was going to be a multi-year project,” Garcia said. “In a place like Texas, multi-year really does mean five years or more.”

The state government — which has the greatest ability to coordinate a broad educational effort — isn’t doing anything, Garcia said. Both Republican Gov. Greg Abbott and his predecessor Rick Perry have adamantly opposed the law.

“I haven’t seen any of the state health folks on the ground because of the politics of it, which is sad,” said Rep. Gene Green (D-Texas), a supporter of the health law who represents parts of Houston.

Federal officials say their priority is to reach Americans in all communities and they are advertising in some smaller communities with high uninsured rates, such as Green Bay, Wis., Dayton, Ohio and Waco, Texas.

“We want people to know that wherever they are, we’re here to help,” said CMS spokesman Aaron Albright.

Navigators and other assisters active in west Texas say they use different approaches to educate people, from in-person help, to radio and newspaper ads and spots on local TV shows. But they encounter a deeply embedded ethos of shunning assistance and distrusting the federal government.

“It’s lots and lots of footwork and being at almost every event that you can be at, dropping off brochures at every place that you can think of,” said Roger Cardenas, health services director at the South Plains Community Action Association, which received a $1 million navigator grant. “We’ve even dropped off at laundromats, places that you wouldn’t typically think that you could leave brochures. You never know if one person’s going to see it.”

Other health care entities are trying to put out the word too. The Texas Hospital Association has mounted a social media campaign and has member hospitals distributing enrollment materials. But Borden County is so small it doesn’t have a clinic, let alone a hospital.

Given the relative isolation, no one here knows just how the 12 residents here did enroll in Obamacare plans. It’s not something that comes up in conversation among neighbors at the Coyote’s café, says Becky Justice, adding she “can’t imagine” who any of them are.