Carnival Cruises treats ill staff in house

Written by Nina Lincoff on July 16, 2014

Carnival Cruise Lines’ on-site medical facility for Miami-based employees has seen nearly 300 employees since it opened in June.

For Miami-based Carnival employees, non-emergency medical needs can now be taken care of at the office. Instead of a trip to the doctor, the doctor comes to you.

Over the past couple of years, on-site health care and medical facilities for employees have increased in number, adding another option to the available avenues for health care. 30% of corporations in the US have opened on-site facilities like health clinics in the past four years, with others offering pharmacy services and fitness centers. Corporations may be adding centers to help increase productivity, smooth the process of going to get medical care and overall improve the quality of employee health, reported US-based global professional services firm Towers Watson in its 2012 Onsite Health Center Survey.

Carnival’s new medical facility, which is intended for use by the company’s 2,400 Miami-based employees, is at the company’s Miami headquarters.

“Overall the center has been very well received by Carnival employees in the Doral headquarters building,” said Vance Gulliksen, a Carnival spokesperson.

The 1,100-square-foot Carnival Care Center includes walk-in primary-care medical treatment for non-emergency illnesses and injuries, preventative care, management options for chronic conditions, health coaching and wellness services. For employees needing to cross an annual physical off their to-do list, the care center makes it all the easier.

While Carnival has and stills offers other employee benefits like health, wellness and fitness amenities, the care center takes employee health a step further. “It’s a great addition to our existing employee benefits, which also include an on-site child development center, health and wellness center, Space Coast Credit Union Branch, a basketball court [and] healthy eating seminars,” Mr. Gulliksen said.

To addressing the needs of Carnival employees, the Care Center is currently staffed by a nurse practitioner and a medical assistant. The center is operated by Marathon Health, a Vermont-based provider of on-site workplace health offerings.

“Right now we’re still gauging employee feedback and response, but if the rate of employee usage grows we may consider adding [more staff]. But right now the center is still in the evaluation phase,” Mr. Gulliksen said.

In the past month, the center has undergone its initial rollout, and as response and usage are gauged, changed will be made accordingly.

“Since opening in early June, nearly 300 employees have visited the center with the center expected to see an average of 10-12 employees after the initial rollout,” Mr. Gulliksen said.

The center is open Monday through Friday, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.