I want the people to know, as we say in the military to mean "I've got your back," that "I've got your six."

By Joe Sestak

I loved my 31 years in the Navy, and thought I would never leave the service – until my four-year-old daughter was diagnosed with a form of brain cancer that only eight percent of children survive.

I'd been trusted to lead our young men and women into harm's way in charge of an aircraft carrier battle group, served as former President Bill Clinton's Director for Defense Policy, and became the first Director of the Navy's anti-terrorism unit – but when my daughter was diagnosed with that terrible disease, I left the Navy to help her fight.

Despite being given only months to live, she overcame her cancer because this country provided my family with high-quality healthcare and saved her life.

I ran for Congress as a payback tour to the American people who paid for my Navy health insurance. I was proud to champion and help pass the Affordable Care Act – insuring millions of Americans for the first time.

I represented Pennsylvania's 7th Congressional District during the Great Recession, and kept my office open until 9 p.m. every night.

There, 18,000 of my fellow countrymen and women came in and found help – four times more than the average Congressional office.

We helped families access healthcare and education, helped veterans transition back into civilian life, and saved nearly 1,000 homes from foreclosure at the height of the recession.

I began my campaign for Senate by walking 422 miles across Pennsylvania, and the people I met along the way confirmed my deeply held belief: the biggest deficit in America today is not the budget, but the trust deficit.

People have lost trust in their elected officials, because too many no longer serve the people who elected them.

If our nation is going to overcome the challenges we face, we don't just need politicians. We need public servants accountable to the people above party and type.

I will be that public servant in the Senate, serving the people as I have my entire life.

I will fight for affordable education for all families, for improved infrastructure and an economy that creates small businesses and good-paying jobs, for fair pay and women's rights, and for an improved Affordable Care Act that will continue strengthening our nation's health security.

I want the people to know, as we say in the military to mean "I've got your back," that "I've got your six."

Joe Sestak, of Delaware County, is a Democratic candidate for U.S. Senate in the April 26 primary.