Buy Photo Jim Segrest in front of the porch of Linden Hill, his home at 1607 Frankfort Ave. 2001 file photo. (Photo: The Courier-Journal )Buy Photo

Jim Segrest, a lifelong Louisville resident, community preservationist, amateur historian and a man whose name became synonymous with the Butchertown neighborhood, died Saturday at his Frankfort Avenue home. He was 73.

Segrest grew up on a 500-acre farm in Valley Station and lived in his grandmother’s home in Old Louisville before moving to Butchertown in 1968. He was president of the Butchertown Neighborhood Association in the 1980s and then again from 2001 to 2008. Over the years Segrest bought and renovated 18 Butchertown homes and fought to preserve the rest of the neighborhood.

Segrest was an integral part of making Butchertown what it is today, current neighborhood association president Andy Cornelius said.

“Jim was a man who deeply cared about preservation and the historical significance of not only Butchertown, but Louisville in general,” he said.

Segrest was mentally strong but had been struggling physically following a stroke he suffered last year, Cornelius said.

Segrest lived in a large brick home built around 1796, the oldest in Butchertown, called Linden Hill. He had owned the home for 22 years and helped establish it as a local landmark — the commonwealth installed a state highway historical marker in 2011 to recognize the home’s roots in “Early Butchertown” and former Linden Hill owner Col. Frederick Geiger, a veteran of the Revolutionary War.

If it wasn’t for Segrest supporting him and plugging his family into the community, Cornelius said he and his wife would have never stayed in the neighborhood as long as they did. “He was just an amazing mentor and connector in the city,” he said. “He’s just a wonderful man.”

Fellow Butchertown resident and longtime friend Keith Kemble, said the same. He and his wife found their home when they came to an art fair in the neighborhood, one that probably wouldn’t have taken place if not for Segrest.

“He spearheaded the renaissance of the neighborhood,” Kemble said. “I’d say he was pretty much responsible for breathing new life into one of Louisville’s most historic neighborhoods.”

Kemble has lived in Butchertown for 36 years and he’s been friends with Segrest for 35. Without him, Butchertown would be a much different, less livable place today, Kemble said.

“We’re thankful for Jim and all the good things he did for our neighborhood,” he said.

A visitation for Segrest will be held Wednesday at Calvary Episcopal Church, 821 S. Fourth St., from 4 to 5:45 p.m. His funeral service will be at 6 p.m. at the church.

Reporter Mark Boxley can be reached at (502) 582-4241 or on Twitter at @Boxleyland.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1gAxVEg