Photo

A standoff over expanding Medicaid in Florida escalated on Thursday after Gov. Rick Scott, a Republican, said he planned to sue the Obama administration for using what he called “coercion tactics” to try to pressure the state into adopting the program, a centerpiece of the president’s contentious Affordable Care Act.

In a letter this week, the federal government made clear that unless the Republican-controlled state legislature moved forward with Medicaid expansion, it could lose as much as $2.1 billion in federal dollars to help hospitals care for the uninsured. The federal aid is scheduled to expire June 30.

“It is appalling that President Obama would cut off federal health care dollars to Florida in an effort to force our state further into Obamacare,” Governor Scott said in a statement. The Supreme Court “ruled that the President could not use ‘gun-to-the-head’ approaches in pushing for Medicaid expansion.”

The White House called Governor Scott’s threat of a lawsuit a transparent political gesture that illustrated his indifference to the large number of low-income people eligible for government-financed insurance if the state were to expand its Medicaid program. “It’s difficult to explain why somebody would think that their political situation and their political interest is somehow more important than the livelihood and health of 800,000 people that they were elected to lead,” Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said in a briefing on Thursday.

No longer a purely partisan battle, the notion of expanding Medicaid has divided Republicans in Florida’s Legislature. The more conservative House of Representatives fiercely opposes the move. The Florida Senate, along with most hospitals, supports the idea and has already approved a private-sector version of Medicaid expansion. It wants to try to salvage the $50 billion in federal funds it would receive over the next decade that come with expansion and find a way to help hospitals recoup their costs.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The showdown in Florida is one of many playing out across the country as Republican governors grapple with whether, or how, to expand Medicaid. Ten states with Republican governors have decided to expand the program, like Indiana. But others have run afoul of Legislatures or backed off the plan.

In 2013, Governor Scott astonished Republicans and Democrats when he announced that despite his antipathy toward the Affordable Care Act (he made the issue the focus of his 2010 campaign), it seemed unreasonable to deny the uninsured access to care. But this month, the governor changed his mind again, saying he had little confidence in the federal government’s ability to pay the long-term costs of adding so many Floridians to the health care rolls. His decision further emboldened the House to fight the Senate on any proposal for Medicaid expansion. The impasse over Medicaid this year has all but frozen work on a budget agreement between the House and Senate, which remained about $4 billion apart.

Under Medicaid expansion, the federal government pays for new enrollees — who are allowed to earn up to 138 percent of the poverty level — through 2016, and after that, the federal share never pays less than 90 percent.

Republican leaders in Florida said they expected to run out of time — the legislative session ends May 1 — and will most likely have to work out their budget disagreements during a rare special session.

Senate leaders are playing hardball with Mr. Scott, saying that his priorities — tax cuts and increased education funding — will suffer if the state loses more than $2 billion in federal hospital aid. On Thursday, the Senate president, Andy Gardiner, criticized the governor’s plan to sue and said the federal government’s move on indigent reimbursements for hospitals was not a surprise and was raised several times beginning last year.

“From where I sit, it is difficult to understand how suing C.M.S. on day 45 of a 60-day session regarding an issue the state has been aware of for the last 12 months will yield a timely resolution to the critical health care challenges facing our state,” said Mr. Gardiner, a Republican and an executive at Orlando Health, a nonprofit provider. C.M.S. refers to the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

Americans for Prosperity, a conservative nonprofit group affiliated with the billionaire Koch brothers, has been lobbying intensely against the expansion. The group praised the governor’s announcement.

Aaron K. Albright, the director of media relations for the C.M.S. said the program, called Low Income Pool, to help compensate hospitals for indigent care was long scheduled to end for Florida in June and could not continue in its current form. Federal officials had asked Florida to submit a plan for how to best to deal with uninsured patients but, so far, they have not received one.

Joan Alker, the co-executive director at the Georgetown Center for Families and Children and a health care expert, said to sue the federal government on this issue would be unusual. “There are only a handful of states that even have anything like” Florida’s pool of low-income patients, she said.