Advertisement

Don't like going to the doctor? The doctor can now come to patients, thanks to HealthTap.

HealthTap launched in 2010 as an online question-and-answer service that bridges patients and medical professionals. Responses were made available for free and make up nearly two billion answers from doctors. In an effort to take things to the next level, HealthTap Prime was launched. HealthTap users will still be able to use the app for free, but pay $99 a month ($10 for every additional family member) and Prime will make actual medical consultations possible by phone. Doctors will also be able to make prescriptions remotely, which can be forwarded to the nearest pharmacy to the user.

"Imagine a world where people everywhere have instant ubiquitous access to the best doctors, who genuinely care about them and want them to feel good every day. We can all greatly benefit from having immediate access to trusted doctors, which can have saved time, money, and potentially a life," explains HealthTap CEO and founder, Ron Gutman.

Still, there is doubt that people would be willing to pay that much on top of what they are already shelling out for insurance premiums although telemedicine is a viable market right now. In fact, research firm IHS reports that revenues from companies in the industry will jump from $240 million in 2013 to $1.9 billion in 2018. That spike is partly driven by the Affordable Care Act which supports telemedicine technology in an effort to reduce Medicaid and Medicare costs while at the same time improving patient outcomes.

Telemedicine will not replace in-person care (and it's not seeking to), but it does have the potential to reduce doctor visits that will bring costs of care down for both patient and doctor. In addition, the app doesn't want to stop with simply helping speed up and simplify diagnosis. It wants to address what starts after a patient has been given their prescriptions.

"Today, you go to the doctor, they will diagnose you, give you a prescription and then you're on your own. People don't adhere to the plan they're getting, so we need to be there for them," adds Gutman.

Specifically, HealthTap Prime will be providing ongoing support by offering customized checklists and personalizing reminders and notifications, both aimed at improving compliance rates.

HealthTap is available on iOS and Android devices. It is also the first Android Wear health app.

© 2016 Tech Times, All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.