“The demon is a liar. He will lie to confuse us. But he will also mix lies with the truth to attack us. …”

– Father Merrin, “The Exorcist”

On May 15, the foundering fish-wrap Newsweek magazine ran a story by Kurt Eichenwald entitled “The Plots to Destroy America: Conspiracy Theories are a Clear and Present Danger,” which apparently sought to single-handedly debunk every so-called conspiracy theory ever devised while attempting to reinforce the existence of a vast right-wing conspiracy intended to undo all of the good that’s ever been done in the world.

Leading off with the revolt against an “award-winning plan to provide guidance for private-sector developers” designated a “communist plot” by the woefully unenlightened residents of Baldwin County, Alabama, and former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin’s condemnation of “death panels” under Obamacare, Eichenwald bemoans the supposed proliferation of conspiracy theories, the abject stupidity of their adherents, and furtively touts the kind, wise and benevolent agenda of global elites.

What Eichenwald misses (or simply denies) is the fact that a conspiracy theory isn’t a conspiracy theory if there’s a real conspiracy at work.

The “award-winning plan” to which he refers was indeed a United Nations Agenda 21 design. Like Smart Meters mandated in municipalities and then installed in private homes while local law enforcement stands menacingly by, there are literally hundreds of Agenda 21 “suggestions” in regulatory queues across America, sponsored politically and financially by radical local politicians and ideological millionaires. In my community, we certainly know who they are.

“George W. Bush murdered thousands by orchestrating 9/11. Barack Obama is a Kenyan national and holds the presidency illegally. Education standards developed by state governors are part of an anti-Christian communist plot that will turn children gay. Unemployment rates and the reported numbers for Obamacare sign-ups are lies engineered by the White House.”

– “The Plots to Destroy America: Conspiracy Theories are a Clear and Present Danger,” Newsweek magazine

Newsweek’s intrepid propagandist mixes lies with the truth, in that he similarly mocks both the most preposterous, nearly universally rejected conspiracy theories and those that have already been proven to be factual. While most Americans don’t believe Bush actually orchestrated 9/11, Gov. Palin’s death panels (and a host of other massive government impositions and “poison pills” in Obamacare) already exist in the form of bureaucratic contrivances that will force even well-meaning health-care administrators to act as, well, death panels. The emerging Veterans Administration scandal is a poignant object lesson in just this kind of diabolical “mismanagement.”

According to Eichenwald, “Experts say the number and significance of conspiracy theories are reaching levels unheard-of in recent times, in part because of ubiquitous and faster communications offered by Internet chat rooms, Twitter and other social media.”

Experts? That’s rather vague – and quite easy to throw out there. Might they be the same sort of experts as “ancient astronaut theorists” who don’t believe that prehistoric humans were able to so much as master peeing on a tree without aid from benevolent “ancient aliens”?

Eichenwald has a nasty bee in his bonnet regarding Agenda 21 in particular, the U.N.’s ostensibly “nonbinding statement of intent signed in 1992 by President George H.W. Bush and 177 other world leaders” intended to foster management of urban development and land-use policies in ways that minimize the impact on the environment. In the author’s view, this has been seized upon by “extremist organizations” who claim that it is an attempt by statists to seize private property, herd people into cities, impose redistribution of wealth and crush dissent. “Trees will be given the same rights as humans. Electricity companies will conduct surveillance on customers,” he bleats sarcastically.

As though none of this was actually occurring already.

Back in March, I revealed that a source in the intelligence community had informed me that Malaysian Airlines Flight MH370 was hijacked in a Central Intelligence Agency-sponsored operation reeking of corporate and government intrigue, that the airliner had not crashed and that the manufacturer, Boeing, had likely been involved due to the technical implications of such an undertaking.

I was roundly ridiculed, of course, yet this week Malaysia’s influential former Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad accused the CIA and Boeing of having done just that, describing the very scenario I outlined, and detailing how it might have been accomplished in the same way it was initially explained to me. Mohamad also charged that the missing aircraft’s current whereabouts are known to the alleged conspirators.

This is just one of the recent “conspiracy theories” and “phony scandals” that have either borne out in truth, or appear to contain more than an element of truth.

In the face of overwhelming evidence for such things as the manipulation and suppression of climate data and a global network of intelligence agencies engaging in counterintelligence against citizens on the Internet, one wonders why a news organization – or an individual journalist – would find the wholesale ridicule of conspiracy theories a top priority.

The obvious answer is that the news organization or journalist has an agenda, one of maintaining the status quo of an uninformed populace. A preponderance of indoctrinated Europeans and undereducated American youth may be content to blindly shamble down this road, blaming shadowy capitalist scapegoats and right-wing extremists all the way.

Those who know better, however, still have all too fresh in our memories the fact that what seemed wild conspiracy theories a year ago – even to us – have since been revealed as truth.

Media wishing to interview Erik Rush, please contact media@wnd.com.