Photo illustration by Slate. Photos by Mark Wilson/Getty Images.

Oddly enough, for an institution that operates amid red velvet curtains, austere costumes, and dark lighting, the U.S. Supreme Court is rarely the subject of films, television shows, or plays. This Wikipedia listing of movies about the Supreme Court is staggeringly short, considering that the court has been one of the most powerful elements of our government for more than two centuries.

Dahlia Lithwick Dahlia Lithwick writes about the courts and the law for Slate, and hosts the podcast Amicus.



The court resists being dramatized in film and onstage by design. It is almost completely closed to the public. Its public sessions are deliberately obfuscating and arcane. And unless someone is screaming about nudity or, well, screaming about nudity, it’s rather rare to see the daily work of the court portrayed in American theater. By some kind of tacit agreement, the court remains romantically mystified and the American public remains … just mystified.

Nobody, to my knowledge, wants to watch a film called Anthony Kennedy Agonizes About the Casey Decision.

Advertisement



Last week, as we taped our law podcast, Amicus, on the topic of the court and the cameras, it was striking that the justices who are suddenly receiving the lion’s share of the public attention are not the same justices that court watchers tend to be obsessed with; certainly they are not the members of the court we usually focus upon in the podcast. While Ginsburg, for instance, has become a national celebrity—feted on bags and T-shirts and YouTube videos and now biopics—she is rather rarely the deciding vote in a case. Same goes for Scalia. He is deliciously quotable and often the star of oral argument. But, as has frequently been observed, he is not necessarily the man driving any individual case, or even the man persuading his colleagues with those fiery opinions. The same goes for Thomas. He is fascinating, and his life story is singular. But those of us who watch the court for a living tend to be watching Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Anthony Kennedy as we try to read the course the court is setting on any given day.

So why is it that just as the court is experiencing a cultural and media moment—one that seems unprecedented given the paucity of interest in the past—the justices who are in fact shaping the work of the court have almost completely escaped artistic and dramatic attention?

One explanation is that, at least when it comes to drama, America simply likes characters, stories, and conflict, and that the operatic friendship between Scalia and Ginsburg, or the ripped-from-the-Scandal-headlines of the Thomas confirmation hearings, better lends itself to the types of stories people want to hear and see. Justice John Paul Stevens, at an event this week put on by the Alliance for Justice, observed simply that Ginsburg and Scalia are just interesting people.

Another possibility is that the growing polarization of the court mirrors the polarization of the American people and that, as a consequence, when we pick our heroes at the court, they tend to be the feminist icon, Ginsburg; or the outspoken Latina, Justice Sonia Sotomayor; or the tireless conservative firebrands Scalia and Thomas. They are the ones we want to write movies and operas about precisely because they are the ones that we see as heroes: They inspire and galvanize us precisely because we know how they will vote in most cases. Nobody, to my knowledge, wants to watch a film called Anthony Kennedy Agonizes About the Casey Decision. (Somehow, the most Shakespearean of jurists still defies Shakespeare treatment). But a movie about Ginsburg among a sea of men at Harvard University? Ginsburg concealing her pregnancy to keep her teaching job and writing the briefs in the sex discrimination case Reed v. Reed? This is the stuff of American cultural legend. It may not reflect the role Ginsburg plays on the court today, but it speaks volumes about why so many young American women revere her.

There is another possibility: Scalia has long said that he writes his dissents for the law students and the public, and not his colleagues, whom he more and more often despairs of persuading. Likewise, to the extent that Ginsburg’s dissents have changed in recent years, it’s because she has grown beyond the polite institutional actor at the court and started to write instead to the legions of young women who will read her, quote her, make memes about her, and sport the T-shirts. Ginsburg and Scalia are not merely two of the most ideologically disparate justices. They are also the two who have chosen to engage in a dialogue with the public itself. Their writing is fiery and inspiring. Their project is advocacy. They are writing for the law books and the Tumblrs, but their work doesn’t necessarily reflect the complicated, incremental give and take of some of their colleagues. Anyone who’s been looking closely at the SCOTUSblog statistics so far this term would probably rather watch an opera about Justice Elena Kagan and Chief Justice John Roberts: How are they arriving at agreement and what does it mean for the next generation at the court? This may be the real drama of the Supreme Court’s daily life. But it’s awfully hard to render on film.