Insurance coverage for mental health care has taken strides under President Barack Obama's health care law, but problems still exist. Getty Images/PhotoAlto

Studies have revealed that coverage for treatment of mental illness often does not match that provided for other medical conditions, causing advocates to pressure Capitol Hill to enforce laws and pass new ones to reduce disparities in care.

But advocates this week took a different route: Targeting doctors, teachers, parents and others in the general public who know someone with a mental illness, with the release of a guidebook offering details on mental disorders and how to get help treating them.

“As culture changes, we value things differently,” Barbara Van Dahlen, a licensed clinical psychologist and founder of Give an Hour – an organization that works with veterans who struggle with mental health issues – said during a publicity event for the book Tuesday at the National Press Club in Washington. “That drives policy, money and emphasis.”

“Understanding Mental Disorders: Your Guide to DSM-5” – DSM-5 is the abbreviation for the latest edition of the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders – was released by the association this week, with endorsements from the Anxiety and Depression Association of America, the National Alliance on Mental Illness and Mental Health America.

The federal government in recent years has overhauled insurance coverage for treatment of mental health and substance abuse – jointly referred to as behavioral health. President Barack Obama’s health care law extended the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act, passed in 2008, which requires mental health benefits in some employer-sponsored plans be provided on the same terms as other medical care.

Obamacare also expanded coverage of behavioral health through private health plans sold on state and federal marketplaces, where Americans can buy tax-subsidized plans based on their income. Mental health care is one of 10 benefits required to be provided in all plans sold, just like maternity care and vaccines.

However, a recent analysis by the National Alliance on Mental Illness found that significant barriers to care and to paying for care still exist.

“[The law] won’t be enforced unless people fight for it,” Patrick Kennedy, a former Democratic U.S. congressman from Rhode Island who was the lead sponsor of the parity bill, said at Tuesday's event. “It’s only going to be as effective as we make it … We’re never going to change the system unless there is public demand. We need to increase the total volume of people that are demanding that these services be available.”

The National Alliance on Mental Illness also has found that funding for mental illness at the state level has lagged. And meanwhile, many people still perceive mental health issues as different from other conditions.

Advocates have been working to change the public perception of mental illness from conditions historically surrounded by mystery and fear – often hidden from public view – to illnesses that can be treated in the mainstream of modern medicine.

“If someone has [a mental illness] it’s not because of character weakness, it’s not because they decided to have it, it’s not because their parents did a bad job,” said Dr. Jeff Borenstein, president and CEO of the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation and a member of an advisory panel for the book. “These are conditions of the body – and the brain happens to be the organ we’re talking about.”

The misperceptions and disparity in services related to mental health issues are attributable to stigma and misunderstanding, advocates say, not to a lack of people who suffer from their consequences. A quarter of Americans experience some form of mental disorder or substance abuse problem at some point in their lives, according to the American Psychiatric Association.

“Mental health makes us very uncomfortable,” Van Dahlen said. “It’s a vulnerability."

Van Dahlen noted that her mom was schizophrenic, but that Van Dahlen herself didn’t talk about it until a few years ago.

“I’m a psychologist and I didn’t talk about it openly because the message from the culture to me was, ‘Don’t do that – people are going to judge you,’” she said.

Untreated, mental illness can cause someone to become unemployed or homeless, or to turn to substance abuse. Some turn to suicide, and many are taken to prison instead of receiving care. The economic cost of untreated mental illness is more than $100 billion each year in the U.S., according to the National Alliance on Mental Illness.

More attention is being paid to the criminal justice side of the issue, as state governments are suffering from the cost of caring for mentally ill inmates, who cycle through the system and often do not get the care they need. Diversion programs have emerged in cities like New York and Miami.

But often, mental illness isn’t addressed until a national tragedy arises, such as a school shooting by someone who is mentally ill, even though there is little connection between mental illness and violence.

“A lot of people have historically thought – and unfortunately our public policy has promoted this – that mental illness is just one thing, and that it equates to violence, danger and threat,” said Paul Gionfriddo, president and CEO of Mental Health America.

He called the relationship between mental illness and violence one of the most common cultural myths. In fact, people with mental illness are more likely to be dangerous to themselves than others. In the U.S., suicide is the third-leading cause of death among young people ages 10 to 24. Every day, 22 American veterans kill themselves.

“Often we ignore or dismiss these illnesses in their earliest, most treatable stages, and respond only when they have escalated to critical and potentially life-threatening conditions,” Kennedy wrote in a foreword to the book.

Gionfriddo, whose son began to show signs of schizophrenia at age 5, said families don’t know what to do or where to turn when they face such a situation.