UPDATE, Feb. 20, 6:35 p.m.: Moms 'nurse in' at Play Date Place where apologetic owner Darlene Sattler welcomes customers to breastfeed

SOUTH HADLEY — The recently opened Play Date Place drew less than playful comments on its Facebook page Friday after the announcement of a new policy — reversed a short time later — on breastfeeding at the establishment.

Women opposed to the policy, which initially banned "uncovered breastfeeding" in the establishment's play area, quickly mobilized a "nurse in" at the business scheduled for 2 p.m. Organizer Marissa Potter, a childbirth educator from Shelburne Falls, called the retracted breastfeeding policy an opportunity to to "educate the public and support families who are breastfeeding."

Owner Darlene M. Sattler could not immediately be reached for comment Friday. The business offers a "unique, interactive play and party experience for children ages 6 and under," according to its website.

The post that initially sparked the criticism read:

Play Date Place has instituted a new policy. For the comfort and consideration of all our guests, uncovered breastfeeding will not be allowed in the play area. Please use a cover in the seating area or ask to use one of our party rooms. Thank you.

A second post followed before both were eventually deleted:

Everyone is over reacting. Play Date Place is a nurturing environment but when someone sits in the middle of one of the interactive buildings where other people's children are playing and and drops their shirt, it makes them uncomfortable. We just ask that they be respectful to other people's choices as well. No one has ever been or will be stopped from feeding their child!

I'm very sorry if anyone misunderstood our intent. We received many complaints about women siting in the play area amongst other peoples children and we are just trying to make PDP comfortable for everyone. We apologize if we offended anyone and will not add this as a policy. We just ask that people respect the choices of others as well. We never said that mothers couldn't feed their babies and will always be a nurturing place for all children!

Two more posts on the topic followed:

And:

Play Date Place is a nurturing environment for mothers and their babies but it is also a play space for dad's and grandparents as well. We are trying to make this an enjoyable experience for all involved and want everyone to feel comfortable. Asking that babies be fed discreetly doesn't deserve the comments made. Breastfeeding moms are not the only ones there and I have to try and please everyone. I'm sorry if anyone took offense. The policy will not be put in effect but we ask that people understand our position in trying to make this a comfortable place for everyone.

Public breastfeeding seems to be a topic of perennial debate. There is a Massachusetts Breastfeeding Coalition . Last August, Time Magazine published a story on 16 points of relate debate during World Breast Feeding Week. The article noted: "Almost any discussion of how and when we feed our babies sets off a national debate."

The Massachusetts General Laws include a section on breastfeeding, which reads in part: "A mother may breastfeed her child in any public place or establishment or place which is open to and accepts or solicits the patronage of the general public and where the mother and her child may otherwise lawfully be present."

Under the Affordable Care Act, employers are required, for nursing employees, "to provide a place, other than a bathroom, that is shielded from view and free from intrusion from coworkers and the public, which may be used by an employee to express breast milk."