The resilient University of Denver hockey team has staved off four consecutive season-elimination games, and the Pioneers will go for five straight Saturday against mighty Boston College in Worcester, Mass.

Playoff champions of the inaugural National Collegiate Hockey Conference, the Pioneers earned their automatic bid to the NCAA Tournament and will open the 16-team event against the Northeast Regional top-seeded Eagles (26-7-4). The Pioneers (20-15-6) are the regional’s fourth seed. Nationally, they’re No. 15 overall. BC is No. 2 overall, behind Minnesota.

“Tough matchup. They’re a very explosive offensive team and we’re gong to have to make sure we continue to play with real good puck pressure and manage the ice like we have been in this last stretch,” DU first-year coach Jim Montgomery said of the Eagles. “But we’ll be mentally sound because of what we’ve been through in these last four games. The thought process has never been, ‘This is an elimination game.’ Our thought process is staying in the moment and focusing on what we have to execute to win.”

DU’s game Saturday begins at 2 p.m. MDT and will be televised by ESPNU. The winner plays No. 2 Massachusetts-Lowell (25-10-4) or No. 3 Minnesota State (26-13-1) at 3 p.m. Sunday for the regional title and a ticket to the NCAA Frozen Four in Philadelphia on April 10.

UMass-Lowell captured Hockey East’s tournament title Saturday by beating New Hampshire 4-0 in Boston. MSU won the Western Collegiate Hockey Association with a 4-1 win over Ferris State in Grand Rapids, Mich.

“I do think our region is the toughest region,” Montgomery said. “You have three teams that won their tournaments outright, and BC won the (Hockey East) regular season by a landslide. But we’re happy to be in the tournament and excited about the opportunity that’s in front of us.”

So much for a rebuilding year. The Pioneers, who have only two seniors and got off to a 3-5 start, are peaking at the best time of the season. They’re on their first four-game winning streak, which culminated in the program’s seventh consecutive NCAA Tournament berth and record-extending 13th straight 20-win season.

DU’s season could have ended in Omaha on March 14 in Game 2 of its first-round NCHC playoff series. But the Pioneers rallied to beat Nebraska Omaha 5-1. They went on to win the best-of-three series with a 2-0 victory in Game 3, then rallied from a 3-2 deficit to upset Western Michigan 4-3 in Friday’s NCHC semifinals at the Target Center in Minneapolis.

Saturday’s 4-3 victory over Miami (Ohio) made sixth-seeded DU the inaugural playoff champ- ion of the eight-team NCHC.

The Pioneers are the only program in the country to reach 20 wins in each of the last 13 seasons.