Now that Republicans are in control of Congress and have returned to Washington after the holidays, members are looking for ways to chip away at President Barack Obama's health care reform law – or to find ways to improve it so they can demonstrate that the GOP can lead.

One adjustment comes from the Hire More Heroes Act, which addresses the portion of the Affordable Care Act that requires companies with 50 or more full-time workers to provide health insurance for their workers. Commonly called the "employer mandate," the penalty for not adhering to the law is $2,000 per employee, and takes effect this year. Republicans have argued that this portion of Obamacare causes small businesses to face higher costs and to hold off on hiring.

The Hire More Heroes Act would exempt from the employee count post-9/11 veterans, who already receive health coverage through the defense department or the department of Veterans Affairs and therefore would not require it from their employer.



[MORE: Republicans to Begin Chipping Away at Obamacare]

"It makes a common-sense change to the president's health care law that will encourage small businesses to hire more of our nation's veterans," Illinois Rep. Rodney Davis said in his weekly Republican address Saturday.

Ian de Planque, legislative director for the American Legion, a veteran's group, says the bill is important and called it a "win-win."

"Employers, particularly those who are borderline between small and large company status, get incentive to hire veterans, who bring so many assets to the table as employees," de Planque wrote in an email. "The veterans themselves will not be 'punished' for having their healthcare through VA, because it’s not traditional insurance. Throughout the drafting of the Affordable Care Act, there was a lot of concern that veterans, because many do not carry insurance (when they receive their care through VA) would be penalized by the bill. This kind of legislation ensures they aren’t punished for opting for the health care system they earned through their sacrifice."

The legislation passed the House in March 2014 but got stuck in the Senate. With Republicans now in control of the Senate, Davis, who introduced the bill, believes it has a better chance of passing this year. There appears to be bipartisan support: Last year, Rep. Jerry Nadler, D-N.Y., was the only Democrat in the House to vote against the bill.

The end of 2014 marked a close to the war in Afghanistan and Iraq, with thousands of soldiers expected to return to the U.S. through 2016. "Despite receiving the best training in the world, post-9/11 veterans are consistently faced with higher unemployment rates than that of other veterans," Davis said in his address. "As more and more of these men and women return home, the Hire More Heroes Act will give them a better chance in a still-tough job market."

According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 6.9 percent of female veterans and 6.5 percent of male veterans are unemployed. As of 2013, 9 percent of Americans, or 21.4 million men and women, have served in the military at some point in their lives.

[RELATED: Private Sector Tackles Veteran Unemployment]

Molly Day, spokeswoman for the National Small Business Association, says the organization thinks it's a positive bill, though doubts it will be a huge stimulus for jobs. It could help certain small businesses that hire a lot of veterans, such as defense contractors, she says, or those that already may be considering hiring a veteran.

"Will it have a huge impact on small businesses? Probably not," she says.

The National Small Business Association does not support the repeal of the Affordable Care Act, but does favor laws that would build upon it, such as making the complexity of determining full-time employment or whether a health plan is deemed affordable. "The system the way it was four years ago wasn't working for small businesses," Day says. "Our hope is to look for ways to improve the bill."

The National Small Business Association found in a 2014 report that 91 percent of small businesses have seen increases in their health care costs, and that more than a third have held off on hiring new workers because of the increases.



Though newly appointed Sen. Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., has indicated that his party's goal is eventually to repeal the health law, he and several Republicans have acknowledged that this isn't possible while the current administration is in place, given the president's veto power. The Hire More Heroes Act could be the start of a larger attempt by Republicans to win support and lay the groundwork for a successful 2016 presidential run for the party.

"I support repealing, replacing and frankly, anything else that can be done to ease the negative impact Obamacare is having on the American people and our economy," Davis wrote in an email. Ensuring that veterans are taken care of, he writes, has always been a priority for him, and it includes helping them find employment.