William Sage

March 2, 2015

The Supreme Court has spoken by a 6-3 vote, with Justice Anthony Kennedy writing an opinion for the Court joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Breyer, Ginsburg, Sotomayor, and Kagan. In a strong, clear voice, the Court upheld the enforcement of a major federal statute against a state entity that had failed to embrace federal policy with respect to health care. Although not formally a constitutional decision, the Court’s interpretation of congressional intent played out against the backdrop of an important constitutional question: the permissible and appropriate balance between federal lawmaking and residual state authority. And it was the federal government’s seeming disregard of state sovereignty that led what has become the Court’s conservative rump – here Justice Alito, joined by Justices Scalia and Thomas – to write bluntly in dissent.

The case is North Carolina State Board of Dental Examiners v. Federal Trade Commission, not King v. Burwell, and the major federal statute is the Sherman Antitrust Act, not the Affordable Care Act. Oral argument in North Carolina State Board took place last October (David Hyman and I wrote about it here); the Court’s decision was issued on February 25, 2015.

North Carolina State Board has nothing to do with “Obamacare,” but it may turn out to be the most important health care (and general public law) decision of the year. (Note to Pundits and Hypesters: King v. Burwell will only matter if the Court rules for the plaintiffs, and is unlikely to create enduring law even then. If the government wins, the case will soon be forgotten.) The Supreme Court’s ruling will give professional licensing boards throughout the country significant pause before adopting ad hoc policies that disadvantage competing professionals or non-professionals, and it should lead to a constructive conversation (and perhaps uniform or model legislation) regarding the accountability of self-regulatory bodies to actual state government. Its impact could be comparable to a major revamping of Joint Commission standards for health care facilities – low in visibility but dramatic in operational change.

What The Court Held

The case concerns cease-and-desist letters sent by North Carolina’s dental licensing board to non-dentist teeth whitening businesses, warning them that the unlicensed practice of dentistry is a crime. The state’s Dental Practice Act does not define teeth whitening as the practice of dentistry, nor does the dental board have specific authority to challenge the conduct of non-licensees in a structured, reviewable process. Alleging a violation of U.S. antitrust law, the Federal Trade Commission brought an enforcement action against the North Carolina board, which in turn claimed immunity under the “state action doctrine.”

The Court ruled that the North Carolina board could not invoke state action immunity for its conduct. Taking an approach similar to what was recommended in our earlier post, the Court held that a state professional regulatory board must be subject to active supervision by the state itself if its actions are controlled by active market participants in the occupation the board regulates. The Court was clear that the need for state supervision turns on the practical risk that active market participants will collectively pursue their private interests, and not on the formal designation that the state gives to its instrumentalities.

The most important issue raised by the Court’s decision is how states will actively supervise their professional licensing boards in the future to validate their actions (and, although it was not part of the North Carolina case, to protect individual board members from incurring legal liability). As the earlier post explained, “Congress responded [to the Supreme Court’s 1988 ruling in Patrick v. Burget] by passing the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (HCQIA), which set clear, uniform standards for hospital-based peer review, and immunized providers who complied in good faith with those standards from antitrust liability.” Analogous federal standards for state board conduct are an outside possibility after North Carolina State Board. It is more likely, however, that states will “enact one or more model practice acts that would promote uniformity among boards and assure their accountability to state government.”

Free-market conservatives have long been skeptical of professional monopolies. The Wall Street Journal, for example, supported the FTC’s position. The three most conservative justices on the Supreme Court, however, saw the central issue quite differently. Justice Alito’s very straightforward argument is that an action taken by a state agency is immune from federal antitrust enforcement without any further inquiry into whether the agency actually functions in the public interest. The dissenting justices seemed motivated by a combination of constitutional deference to state sovereignty and their sense of Congress’s original intent when it passed the Sherman Act. As a result, they were particularly disturbed by the Court’s conclusion that a state agency (albeit one composed of active market participants) would be subject to greater constraints than a municipality, which is a non-sovereign entity from a constitutional perspective.

Clearing A Path Toward A More Efficient Health Care System

In 1962, Milton Friedman concluded a scathing critique of medical licensure with the following: “I am myself persuaded that licensure has reduced both the quantity and quality of medical practice; that it has reduced the opportunities available to people who would like to be physicians, forcing them to pursue occupations they regard as less attractive; that it has forced the public to pay more for less satisfactory medical service, and that it has retarded technological development both in medicine itself and in the organization of medical practice.”

Well-intentioned but often insular and unimaginative, many state licensing boards have changed little in the fifty years since Friedman’s polemic. The Court’s decision therefore may help thaw anti-competitive self-regulatory practices that have been largely frozen in time. That the Court’s ruling consists of a clean majority opinion and a clean dissent gives the reasoning in the case a welcome clarity. By contrast, both multiple-opinion (plurality) decisions and unanimous decisions tend to convey hazier messages.

Despite the continuing hype around mandates, taxes, and subsidies, the big issue in health care reform is not redistribution. The big issue is inefficiency, and North Carolina State Board is a potentially significant step along the path that our $3 trillion health care system must travel from guild monopoly to ethical but competitive industry.