Will face Northern Colorado Sting for shot at semis

So far seven is the lucky number.

Through two games for MV USSSA Pride — a local club softball team comprised of mostly Loveland and Mountain View High School players and recent graduates — putting up a seven on the scoreboard has been more than enough for victory.

The Pride opened up the USSSA State Softball Tournament at the Barnes Softball Complex in Loveland with a commanding 7-2 win, and followed up Friday's fine performance with a more dominant 7-0 win over the Colorado-Vigil Cardinals in four innings Saturday afternoon.

"Yesterday we had flawless D, and today our bats were alive, so if we put it all together, we should fare well," Pride coach Rob Stilo said. "I think we can (win the tournament) if we keep the hype to a hush."

That could be easier said than done for Stilo, who's team won the same tournament at the 14 and under and 16 and under age groups. Getting the 18U title is the goal, one the Pride seem to be right on track for.

MV USSSA threatened to strike from the onset Saturday, but a baserunning error between third and home kept the Pride from scoring. No problem, why not let everybody hit in the second?

The Pride hit around in the next frame to the tune of five runs, two unearned thanks to sloppy defense from the Cardinals. The Pride used walks and errors to keep the inning going before getting busted wide open on a RBI triple from recent Mountain View grad Courtney Baeckel, followed two hitters later by a two-run double off the bat of MVHS teammate Taylor Seely.

"I think we hit really well, I think we hit when we needed to," Seely said. "Even with two outs and there's girls on, getting them in, when it's crucial, we got the job done. That's when we hit best, I think."

The Pride added a run in the third inning and the final nail in the fourth with a deep opposite field home run from Danie McFarland in the fourth. The game would be called due to a time limit three batters later.

Stevie Wadsworth, a graduate of Roosevelt in Johnstown, picked up the win for the Pride.

MV USSSA Pride pitcher Stevie Wadsworth throws a pitch in the top of the first inning. The Pride will face rival Northern Colorado Sting in the quarterfinals at 8 a.m. Sunday. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The win sets up an interesting matchup Sunday with another Loveland-based team, the Northern Colorado Sting, which also has a couple Mountain View players on its roster.

Stilo and his team have developed a rivalry over the years, with the Pride and Sting splitting their past two meetings only intensifying matters.

"We've been rivals with them forever; we play them all the time," Seely said. "I think we'll come out on top because we really want this tournament. It will be a tough game, they always play tough against us, but I think we'll hit again."

Northern Colorado Sting 7, Loveland Rage 2

In a battle of two local teams, each side went blow for blow in the early innings, but it was the Northern Colorado Sting which landed the final blow in the fourth frame.

After the two teams traded runs in the first and third innings, Sting pitcher Lara Ammermann helped her own cause by belting a three-run home run to fuel a four-run inning for her side. The win pits Northern Colorado against rival MV USSSA Pride in the quarterfinals Sunday morning at 8 a.m.

"They saw it well. They started slow, but picked it up. That fourth inning was big. The three-run home run from Lara, it was a shot," Sting coach Fred Flores said. "We're looking forward to (Sunday). We always have good games with the Pride. The girls are coming together right now."

Colorado Cardinals-95 8, Loveland Rage 7

The Loveland Rage's run at a championship at the USSSA State Softball Tournament came to a disappointing end Saturday evening after dropping both their games in the double elimination tournament.

Loveland moved on to the second round of the tournament with an impressive 10-0 victory over Lightning Fastpitch on Friday, but the tables were turned when local Northern Colorado Sting stung the Rage 7-2, forcing them to the loser's bracket and added pressure.

The Rage gave a valiant fight with their backs against the wall, yet couldn't quite find what they needed to stay alive and make it to the final day of the three-day event at Barnes Softball Complex in Loveland.

Contact Reporter-Herald Sports Writer Cris Tiller at 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller





Pride 7, Cardinals 0

At Barnes Complex

Colorado-Vigil 000 0 — 0 0 5

MV USSSA 051 1 — 7 6 2

W — Stevie Wadsworth. L — NA.

MV USSSA Pride hitting (ab-r-h-rbi) — Jerhen Montez 3-1-0-0, Courtney Baeckel 3-1-1-1, Kenzie Villareal 2-1-0-0, Taylor Seely 2-0-1-2, Danie McFarland 3-1-1-1, Braydee Bakovich 1-0-0-0, Stevie Wadsworth 3-1-1-0, Skylar Beard 1-2-1-0, Brittany Hart 2-0-1-0. Totals 20-7-6-4. 2B — Seely. 3B — Baeckel. HR — McFarland. SB — Villareal.

MV USSSA Pride pitching (ip-h-r-er-bb-so) — Stevie Wadsworth 4-0-0-0-3-1.





Sting 7, Rage 2

At Barnes Complex

Northern Colorado 101 41 — 7 13 1

Loveland 101 00 — 2 6 3

W — Lara Ammermann. L — Rachel Cadden.

Northern Colorado hitting (ab-r-h-rbi) — Caroline Summers 3-1-0-0, Amanda Etcheverry 3-1-1-0, Brittany Frigetto 3-1-2-1, Brittany Corrales 3-0-2-1, Ali Reed 3-0-0-0, Marina Kelly 2-1-1-0, Cate Ammermann 2-1-1-0, L. Ammerman 2-1-2-3, Mariah Lopez 2-1-0-0, Peyton Tellez 1-0-0-0, Olivia Damage 1-0-0-0, Monica Ramirez 2-1-0-1. Totals 29-7-13-7.

Northern Colorado pitching (ip-h-r-er-bb-so) — Lara Ammerman 5-6-2-1-4-3.