The Fond du Lac County Executive stands up for state Highway 23 expansion, calls for fix to overall road funding issue. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Our tendency with so many of our problems in Wisconsin and this country today is that we set up false choices and then everybody picks a side. A column last weekend by Gannett Wisconsin Media columnist Robert Mentzer headlined, “$200M for highways while local roads languish” certainly did that by misrepresenting the situation and creating an us-versus-them argument that pitted locals against state highways. That is unwarranted in this situation.

Are locals getting enough funding for our roads? No. Is too much falling on the property tax? Yes. However, some readers might come away from the column with the idea that there is enough money in the transportation fund for locals, but it is just being redirected to needless state highway expansion projects. That is not the case. There is not enough money in the fund because our elected state officials in Madison have lacked the political will for the past decade to adjust revenues to even keep up with inflation.

The state highway program had been cut by one-third in this past budget. The recent action taken by the Joint Committee on Finance to release the $350 million in bonding for five state highway projects and scores of state highway rehabilitation projects simply restores that cut. Local funding was held flat in this budget.

I am certainly not shy about advocating for counties to get our fair share of the state gas tax and registration fees, but we have to be adults about this and look at the big picture. By the way, those expansion projects that are being vilified are in fact supported by the local governments in each of their areas. Fond du Lac County is on record strongly supporting the Highway 23 expansion project. The road is unsafe and we have needlessly lost too many of our neighbors and had too many injured on that stretch of dangerous road.

County Executive Nelson over in Outagamie County has been a strong advocate for keeping the Highway 441-10 interchange in Appleton on schedule. Rock County, the city of Beloit and the city of Janesville have all advocated for the expansion of Interstate 39/90 and have made it a priority. Dane County, the city of Madison, the city of Verona and the City of Fitchburg all argued for the Joint Finance Committee to release those bond funds so that the Verona Road Interchange could stay as close to on schedule as possible.

We have a transportation funding crisis in this state. We have real needs at the county, city, town and state level. What we need is a long-term answer — which is what the debate on the Joint Finance Committee centered around — not whether these projects are warranted. Read the quotes from the Senate Republicans who voted “no” and you will clearly see this.

Beyond these five state highway projects lie other significant state projects that are going to be and should be done. Most of our interstate system was built in the '50s and '60s and unfortunately, it is expensive to reconstruct. Pretending we don’t need to address these projects will not help local governments get the funding they needs. What we don’t need is groups like 1000 Friends of Wisconsin, the Sierra Club and other willing accomplices trying to polarize different segments of Wisconsin to further their own agenda, which has nothing to do with funding for local roads.

Allen Buechel is Fond du Lac County Executive.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1NR2LO8