Kawin helped students dedicate Dalton Trumbo Fountain Court

Bruce Kawin, who is retiring after 40 years teaching English and film studies at the University of Colorado, is pictured at the Dalton Trumbo Fountain on the CU campus. Kawin was instrumental in getting the feature named after Trumbo, the blacklisted screenwriter who had attended CU. ( Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer )

In the early 1990s, a group of University of Colorado students wondered why there was nothing on the campus honoring alumnus and blacklisted screenwriter Dalton Trumbo.

The students turned to film historian and English professor Bruce Kawin, who helped guide them through years of administrative procedures and facilitated connections in the film world so they could create a memorial for Trumbo. The screenwriter and nine colleagues were blacklisted for refusing to testify before Congress about Communist ties in 1947.

The Dalton Trumbo Fountain Court, dedicated in 1993, is a lasting reminder of the countless motivated students Kawin has worked with in his 40 years teaching English and film studies on the Boulder campus.

"I feel very, very torn," said Kawin, who is retiring this month. "I'm going to miss my students, and it's a wonderful school."

Kawin, 69, arrived on the campus in 1975, a few years after the formation of CU's film studies program. At 29, he never imagined sticking around for 40 years, but the "supportive" faculty members and hard-working students he worked with made it hard to leave, he said.

"I've always felt that I was in the right place," Kawin said. "This place let me teach no-holds-barred, intense, really demanding courses."

He added that CU's film studies program is unique because it integrates film scholarship with filmmaking.

Advertisement

"We turn out students who are really competent and ambitious and talented and powerful," he said. "This school allows people to work as hard as they possibly want to."

Pablo Kjolseth, who directs CU's International Film Series, remembers Kawin's classes — and their rigor — very well.

Kjolseth credits Kawin's film history class with pushing him toward his current career path.

"I've always loved movies, but it was in his class that I understood why I loved movies," he said. "I felt like it opened my eyes to the grammar of the cinema and the world of cinema."

He went on to work as a teaching assistant and projectionist for Kawin and said the professor's "exacting" nature helped him appreciate all aspects of movies — lighting, sound design, wardrobe and everything in between.

"It was from being in Bruce's class that I turned into one of those people that stays to the very end watching and reading all of the credits," Kjolseth said. "Behind every movie, it's a collective project and everyone brings a lot to the game, and knowing that really expands on one's enjoyment of cinema. You can enjoy just about every movie if you're looking at who's actually doing their job well."

Kawin helped expand CU's film history course to two semesters, a series he co-taught for many years with Jim Palmer, now a retired professor and the former Conference on World Affairs director.

Palmer described Kawin as a "productive scholar" who has written many influential books in film theory and film history, as well as books of poetry.

As a teacher, Kawin taught students to look at film from all angles, Palmer said.

"He had encyclopedic knowledge," Palmer said. "He knows the history of film, he knows the theory of film and he knows about the technology of film, the business of film. So he really brought a wealth of expertise and knowledge about all of the complex aspects of film."

Kawin, who regularly watches at least 10 films a week, said he believes film is the "dominant art of the 20th century," and he used teaching as a way to expose more people to it.

"The great films move us and teach us and lie to us and take us to places we haven't been," he said. "Films have been really important to my life — so has poetry and literature in general — and I like to pass on an appreciation for that."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta