Topics: Billy Gilman, Chely Wright, Country Music, Kacey Musgraves, nashville, Ty Herndon, Entertainment News

In November, breakout star Kacey Musgraves had a big night. She won Song of the Year for “Follow Your Arrow” at the Country Music Association Awards—Nashville’s biggest night. Musgraves recorded and co-wrote the song, which features the gay-friendly lyrics “Kiss lots of boys/or kiss lots of girls/ if that’s something you’re into.” A CMA award is a hearty endorsement from the industry, and the fact that its voters weren’t put off by the lyrics—possibly because they were sung by a straight woman—might have helped ease Ty Herndon’s nerves. Just a couple of weeks later, Herndon became the first mainstream male country star to come out, as he told People magazine, as a “proud gay man.” The 52-year-old artist, who recently walked a red carpet with his partner of five years, inspired country singer and former child star Billy Gilman to post a video announcement of his own coming out the next day. One more and it would have been a trend.

Country music hasn’t had this exciting of a year in LGBT news since 2010, when Chely Wright became the first mainstream Nashville star to come out. Wright’s coming out was a carefully-orchestrated media circus, complete with a tell-all memoir, chronicled extensively in the 2011 documentary “Wish Me Away.” As a trailblazer, Wright weathered criticism, death threats, and a quiet industry freeze-out after her announcement. So far, Herndon and Gilman haven’t faced the same scrutiny.

Nashville veteran and outspoken LGBT ally LeAnn Rimes voiced her support for Herndon in a recent interview with GLAAD All-Access, saying that she hopes his and Gilman’s announcements mean that the industry itself is becoming more progressive. “I hope we’re moving forward and not back,” said Rimes.

She’s not alone. Nashville stars now routinely express their support for the LGBT community in the press, even though how they voice that support can still make headlines. When Carrie Underwood cited Christianity as shaping her progressive views on marriage equality in 2012, some right-wing Christian groups were furious. When you scratch the superstar surface, you’ll find LGBT insiders just like in other entertainment industries, including “Follow Your Arrow” co-writers Brandy Clark (whose own new Los Angeles-made album is gathering acclaim) and Shane McAnally, well-known Nashville songwriters who are both out. In a landscape where even a Red State poster boy like Toby Keith can be blasé about gay marriage (“I never saw the reasoning behind getting in people’s personal lives.”), it’s clear that being an explicitly outspoken proponent of LGBT rights and issues and being a mainstream country star are not mutually exclusive.

Some of that is surely due to how much has changed just in the last four years. 2010 saw the beginnings of the dismantling of marriage discrimination at the federal level when the Defense of Marriage Act was declared unconstitutional. States began passing civil union laws and striking down same-sex marriage bans. Support for same-sex marriage has now surpassed opposition. In a November column for Out & About Nashville, managing digital editor Joseph Brant wrote that for the most part, the people who make up the country music industry aren’t homophobic.

“The country industry is a business, and so it directs its product to a target audience, which for a long time has been assumed to be suburban women between 30-45 years old (and only recently has that assumption been changed to Females 18-24),” Brant wrote. “If those women, in either and both age categories, have been trained to believe their male country stars have to be sex symbols as much as the female country stars have to be non-threatening, then there is conceivably no place for a gay male country performer.”