Illustration of a stethoscope with tubing in shape of heartbeat wave on an electrocardiogram. (Photo: Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — More than 190,000 Hoosiers have selected a 2015 health insurance plan through the federal health exchange, the federal government said Wednesday.

About one-third of the sign-ups have come from the Indianapolis area.

Officials are urging the uninsured not to wait until the Feb. 15 deadline to buy a plan, although they said they're ready for an expected surge of interest.

"We're prepared for it. Our system is stable. We've got call center support," said Kevin Counihan, CEO of HealthCare.gov. "That being said, we think it's in everybody's interest to get in early, shop and compare."

The 193,567 Hoosiers that were automatically re-enrolled or who selected a plan on HealthCare.gov from Nov. 15 through Jan. 30 is an increase from the 132,432 Hoosiers who signed up last year. Neither number, however, reflects how many paid their premiums after selecting a plan.

The nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation has estimated about 680,000 Hoosiers are potentially eligible to buy insurance through the exchange.

A national survey conducted by the foundation last year found that a lack of awareness of new coverage options and of the financial assistance available appear to be major reasons many people remain uninsured. Many of those surveyed who had not bought insurance were eligible for assistance. Some had not sought coverage and some of those who did still found the coverage too expensive.

"The findings show how important it is to come up with more effective strategies, in person, online and elsewhere, for educating people about their eligibility for coverage and financial assistance under the law," Rachel Garfield, a senior researcher for the foundation, said when the survey results were released last week.

Created by the Affordable Care Act, the exchange is a regulated marketplace where people who don't get insurance through an employer or through a government program like Medicare or Medicaid can buy coverage.

Subsidies are available for those earning between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level, or about $11,770 to $47,080 for a single person.

The vast majority of people who have used the exchanges are receiving assistance to help pay their premiums.

But the subsidies are being challenged as illegal in states that — like Indiana — chose not to run their own exchange. The Supreme Court will hear arguments on the challenge March 4 and make a decision this summer about whether the subsidies can continue through the federal exchange.

Federal officials have sidestepped questions about whether they're working on a contingency plan if the subsidies are invalidated.

But Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell did take a dig at congressional Republicans who have voted more than 50 times — including in the House Tuesday — to repeal all or part of the law.

"While we continue to have repeal votes, millions of Americans are counting on the Affordable Care Act," Burwell told reporters. "It's part of the fabric of their lives. It's part of how they have financial security. And it's part of how they have health security."

Hoosiers can also use HealthCare.gov to find out whether they qualify for Medicaid, the joint federal and state health insurance program for the poor.

Gov. Mike Pence recently reached an agreement with Burwell to expand Medicaid to people earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level through a different delivery system, which Pence calls HIP 2.0, that includes monthly contributions from recipients.

"We look forward to finding out what are the kinds of things we can do better in Medicaid," Burwell told lawmakers Wednesday in response to a question from Sen. Dan Coats, R-Ind., about her approval of the plan.

Hoosiers earning between 100 percent and 138 percent of the federal poverty level who had already signed up for an exchange plan before the Medicaid expansion agreement are being told to switch to Medicaid to avoid a tax penalty.

Although that switch needs to be made immediately for those receiving a subsidy on the exchange, individuals who qualify for Medicaid can apply for coverage any time during the year and don't have to meet the Feb. 15 deadline for private insurance.

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com or @mgroppe on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1D06hQ1