Photo: Getty Images With fall open enrollment season underway at most companies, many employers and employees are keenly aware of the likelihood of future increases in health insurance premiums and reductions in benefits. At this point, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act has had a dramatic impact in health care or increased access. But chronic illnesses and other medical conditions continue to drive up health care costs, and PPACA will require even more changes for employer-provided health insurance in future years. Both are expected to trigger more rate hikes, benefit cuts or both. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

1. Don't be penny wise and pound foolish. While the price tag may scare upper management, we found investing in employee health and wellness produced big dividends. An independent research group from Harvard University estimated that McKesson’s return on investment (ROI) for the annual program was approximately 30 percent for each dollar invested.

2. Don't reinvent the wheel. Rather than create all aspects of the program ourselves, we partnered with Vitality and other vendors to provide online education, risk assessments and many other forms of assistance. These partnerships gave us the expertise and resources we needed to have a successful program.

3. One size won't fit all. While an existing program can help, each company needs to tailor its health and wellness program to fit its unique workforce. At McKesson, competition and a sense of community motivate our employees. So we tapped into their competitive spirit by providing incentives, rewards and recognition for higher levels of physical activity.

4. Use a carrot, not a stick. Rewarding sacrifice is generally more productive than punishing bad behavior. At McKesson, we reward employees and their spouses with savings in their health insurance premiums. The more they participate in the health and wellness program, the bigger the savings for them.