Labor pains can be overwhelming, but they didn’t stop Alaha Karimi from applying a full face of makeup before giving birth to her daughter. Karimi, 27, considers makeup to be one of the things she loves most — so she used it to distract herself from the pain of childbirth.

Karimi gave birth to her daughter over a month ago, but she only recently posted the photos to her Instagram. The photos depict her lying in a hospital bed with her eyeshadow palette laid out in front of her, meticulously putting on primer, lipstick, and eyeshadow between contractions. What would normally take about 45 minutes ended up requiring about three hours, but it was her way of staying relaxed during labor.

“I did my makeup in between my contractions,” Karimi told ABC News. “I had to keep pausing whenever I’d get a contraction, and I had to catch my breath. But, honestly, doing something I loved helped the time go by so much faster and made everything so much easier.”

Hello beautiful people, first off, thank you for the love on my latest instagram posts that featured me doing my makeup during labor. As promised, below is a FULL list of makeup details! I have received THOUSANDS of comments and messages as to what primer and setting spray I used and you will find all that down below. Love you guys and thank you for your endless support! _❤️ I now some were laughing because I said I only took "some of my favorite products" and as you can clearly see from the pics and the details below... It's a ton of makeup! Lol however, this statement was based solely on the fact that I had SO much makeup to choose from and I narrowed it down to only my favorite things that I knew would hold up through all the tears and emotions! Product breakdown: @brian_champagne hydraplex serum to prep my face for a smooth finish @benefitcosmetics "porefessional" face primer and "stay don't stray" eyeshadow primer @marcbeauty re(Marc)able foundation @lauramercier translucent setting powder to bake @lagirlcosmetics beautiful bronze and creamy beige proconceal to highlight and contour @anastasiabeverlyhills contour kit to set @motivescosmetics blush from the blush/bronzing duo @thebalm_cosmetics "Mary loumanizer" highlighter paired with @gerardcosmetics "star powder" highlighter in "Audrey" @toofaced "better than sex" WATERPROOF mascara (stayed intact through all the tears!) Huda beauty mink lashes in "Sophia" Morphebrushes 35O eyeshadow palette @sigmabeauty brilliant/spellbinding eyeshadow palette @eyekandycosmetics glitter in "candy coin" dabbed lightly on the lid using their "liquid sugar" @tartecosmetics "waterproof clay pot liner" (also stayed perfectly intact) for the wing as well as the waterline. @anastasiabeverlyhills dipbrow pomade in soft brown (completely smudge proof and water proof) @jeffreestarcosmetics liquid velour lipsticks in "celebrity skin" paired with @doseofcolors liquid lipstick in "sand" Tools are posted in the comments section: beauty blender, royallangnickel, luxie beauty, and Mikasa brushes A photo posted by @makeupbyalaha on Mar 17, 2016 at 7:49am PDT

When the contractions got too strong, hubby was there to save the day!____ #anastasiabeverlyhills #vegas_nay #hudabeauty #cakefaceconfession #mayamiamakeup #wakeupandmakeup #maquiagemx #lillyghalichi #liveglam #ghalichiglam #slave2beauty #makeupfanatic1 #videofashions #laurag_143 #dollhousedubai #universodamaquiagem_oficial #liveglam #makeupslaves #inssta_makeup #benefitcosmetics #melformakeup #morpheme #nyxcosmetics #yesnyx #elciecosmetics #toofaced #tarteist #tartecosmetics A photo posted by @makeupbyalaha on Mar 7, 2016 at 3:33pm PST

We would like to take a second to welcome our precious angel, Sofia Alaya Karimi, into the world. Baby Sofia was born two nights ago, on February 15, 2016 at 6:19pm weighing 8lbs 13oz and a height of 21.5 inches. Mash'allah! Both of us are doing well Alhamdullilah. She has only been a part of our lives for two days and I can't even remember what life was like before her. She has changed our lives in ways we never thought were possible and has given us the most beautiful outlook on life. How could a little human who we have only known for 48 hours, have so much impact on our lives? Both hubby and I are so in love with her that we stare at her for hours as our hearts fill with joy, and our eyes fill with tears trying to understand how we became so lucky to be chosen as her parents. Subhanallah, Mash'allah, Alhamdullilah, times a million for everything God has blessed us with! I know many people are asking for pics, and I'm sorry but her father and I have decided to keep her beautiful face private for some time to keep her all to ourselves a little while longer and keep her away from evil eyes or Nazar (it's a cultural/religious thing and I hope you all understand). Family and friends are more than welcome to reach out and come visit once we are settled in and well-adjusted. Thank you to all those who sent flowers, texts, emails, calls, etc. I haven't been able to get back to everyone individually but I will as soon as I can. Now many of you are probably wondering about this picture, LOL! It was taken the minute she was first handed to me after I delivered her, look at her little head in my palm. Yes, I went full glam lol and I'll post more pics later of me doing my makeup DURING Labor and pausing for the severe contractions lol. And yes, I wore my @hudabeauty @shophudabeauty mink lashes in "SOPHIA" since it was appropriate lol. I had a natural birth alhamdullilah so it was tough, but I'm lucky enough to have been able to experience it firsthand and am so grateful. I prayed for all of the women who are trying to conceive to get to experience this beautiful feeling as well inshallah! Again, thank you all for the sweet messages, wishes, and love! God bless! A photo posted by @makeupbyalaha on Feb 17, 2016 at 7:49pm PST

The makeup helped her get through 10 hours of labor for a natural childbirth — meaning she didn’t take any pain medications. “I went to the hospital at 7:30 a.m., and I was in labor for a total of 10 hours that day,” Karimi told ABC News. “I had an epidural around 8:30 or 9:00 a.m., so when it started to wear off, I needed something to distract myself from the pain.”

Though it may seem frivolous to apply makeup during labor, taking part in a hobby is a good way to distract yourself from all the hours of waiting. Pregnant mothers have been known to take walks, get massages, and dance the tootsie roll (or even "Thriller") to alleviate labor pains and keep things moving.

“Anyone who’s gone through labor knows you can’t do anything for hours except wait,” Karimi told ABC News. “Some people walk around, some people read books, some sit and watch TV. I did my makeup and I shouldn’t be shamed for that.”