Island’s poor economy sending more Puerto Ricans to Conn.

BRIDGEPORT — Inside Panaderia Pan Del Cielo, Puerto Ricans young and old shop for treats not seen since their days back on the island — like quesitos, cheese-filled bread made with honey and sugar.

But lately they have been coming to the East Main Street bakery for other reasons.

“Every day, someone comes looking for a job, saying, “Oh, I know somebody who just came from Puerto Rico,’ ” said co-owner Tania Lamarche. “There’s nothing over there.”

Jeismarie Vargas was one of those people who walked into the shop last December, before the recent rush. She had left her small town of Quebradillas and settled in the Park City two weeks after her husband.

In Puerto Rico, it took Vargas almost a year to find work as a low-wage earner at a Subway sandwich shop. In Bridgeport, 23-year-old Vargas was working in the bakery and making the state’s minimum wage of $9.15 an hour two weeks after her arrival. Vargas now manages the popular East End shop.

Carmen Montalvo, 26, another worker at the bakery, came to Connecticut in January with her two kids.

More Information Population Figures collected by the U.S. Census for 2013 show the number of Hispanic and number of Puerto Rican residents in the state and several cities, and the percent of the population. Location Number Percent Connecticut Hispanics 496,939 13.9 percent Puerto Ricans 267,798 7.5 percent Bridgeport Hispanics 55,758 38.3 percent Puerto Ricans 31,244 21.2 percent Stamford Hispanics 32,850 26.5 percent Puerto Ricans 4,576 3.7 percent

Montalvo and Vargas came to Bridgeport because of family connections, but have the same answer when you ask why they left Puerto Rico.

“Por trabajar,” — to work.

Dogged by a growing fiscal crisis, Puerto Rico is $72 billion dollars in debt and that figure is growing. Inhabitants are leaving the island in numbers not seen in more than 50 years. They are coming to states like Connecticut, which has the highest proportion of Puerto Ricans in the nation.

“In Puerto Rico, you have a poverty rate of 45 percent, an unemployment rate of 8.5 percent,” said Ingrid Alvarez-Dimarzo, state director for the Hispanic Federation. “When people can’t sustain themselves, they are going to migrate where they have connections and families, and that’s Connecticut.”

Boricuas in Bridgeport

Last year, 84,000 people left Puerto Rico for the U.S. mainland, a 38 percent increase from 2010, according to a Pew Research Center analysis of census data. Pew also found that at the same time, fewer Puerto Ricans were moving back to the island.

Puerto Ricans have been coming to Bridgeport since at least 1844, when Joseph de Rivera, a sugar and wine merchant from Puerto Rico, bought a home on the East End, according to an article from the Bridgeport Library.

In the 1920s, Puerto Ricans already working in the U.S. came to the “Nutmeg State” after they found relatives and friends working in easier conditions and for better pay at factories across the state, according to Ruth Glasser, a University of Connecticut history professor. She examined the trend in an article titled “From Rich Port to Bridgeport: Puerto Ricans in Connecticut.”

In the 1950s, more Puerto Ricans arrived after agricultural agreements between the island and mainland brought workers here to help on various farms, including the many growing tobacco. In the 1970s and 80s, after advances in farm technology and frustration over poor conditions experienced by agricultural workers, even more Puerto Ricans wound up in industrial cities like Bridgeport and Hartford.

Even though Puerto Ricans are pouring into Florida, New York still has the largest number, with over one million residents of Puerto Rican heritage. Connecticut has the highest proportion, as Puerto Ricans account for about 7.5 percent of the state’s population. Of the half million Hispanics in Connecticut, half of them are Puerto Rican.

Nowhere is that more evident than on East Main Street. While Ecuadorean restaurants and Peruvian eateries have popped up on the thoroughfare, flags hanging on trees and barbershops, and mainstays like El Coquito Restaurant proclaim Puerto Rican pride.

There were an estimated 31,000 Puerto Ricans in Bridgeport in 2013, according to the American Community Survey, up from the 28,000 the year before. In 2014, that number grew to more than 33,000, as people like Jeismarie Vargas came looking for jobs.

Making up more than a quarter of the population in Bridgeport and growing, the number of Puerto Ricans in the city and state appears unlikely to slow anytime soon as the island continues to face economic woes.

Economic issues

In late June, Puerto Rico’s governor, Alejandro Garcia Padilla, announced in a televised address that the island was unable to repay all of its $72 billion in debt.

Padilla, an ally of Connecticut Gov. Dannel P Malloy, has frequented the state to drum up Latino support during election season. Padilla even paid a visit to one of Lamarche’s bakeries in Hartford.

The reasons for the Puerto Rican debt crisis were examined in a report released last week by the Hispanic Federation, which has a branch in Connecticut. “This is something that has been escalating, and what has happened is that the island has run out of money,” said Ingrid Alvarez-Dimarzo, Connecticut state director for the Hispanic Federation.

Among the factors examined in the report is the Jones Act. The law, which is almost 100 years old, requires all trade goods shipped between the island and the mainland be carried on U.S.-flagged ships. Otherwise high taxes and customs fees apply.

The law has increased costs for items on the island, and chipped away at Puerto Rico’s export and import business, Alvarez-Dimarzo said.

A big chunk of the island’s debt, $25 billion, is related to health care costs. About 60 percent of island residents are enrolled in Medicaid or Medicare. Puerto Rico residents pay the same amount of Medicare payroll taxes as state residents, but Puerto Rico’s Medicare Advantage program is currently funded at 60 percent of the state rate and is facing further cuts.

Medicaid is expected to run out of funds by the end of next year, leaving 900,000 Puerto Ricans without health insurance.

“Puerto Rico is exempt from the Affordable Care Act; health care on the island is extremely expensive,” Alvarez-Dimarzo said. “At times it’s treated like a state and at times not, but these are U.S. citizens we are talking about. It’s urgent.”

When asked what they liked about Bridgeport, Montalvo and Vargas — the two bakery workers who recently arrived in the city — cited affordable health care for their kids.

Solving the problem

After tax breaks that brought mainland companies to the island expired, those companies left. As people fled the island, with its lack of jobs, high health costs and expensive goods, Puerto Rico’s tax base declined.

There are now more Puerto Ricans living on the mainland, a population of more than 5 million, than on the island, a population of 3.5 million.

With a declining tax base bringing in revenue to pay bills, Puerto Rico found only one kind of lender — wealthy hedge funds, according to the Hispanic Federation report. The report said those hedge fund interests were backers of changes in the island’s constitution that mandated the local government to pay debt first, before providing funds to schools, energy and other vital public services. This spurred further emigration.

While U.S. cities like Detroit can declare bankruptcy, U.S. law bars Puerto Rico from doing so.

This summer, U.S. Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn., co-sponsored a bill that would allow the island’s municipalities and public corporations to restructure and pay off debt, the Puerto Rico Chapter 9 Uniformity Act. “I’m perplexed and frustrated, so much time has passed for there to be support on this,” Blumenthal said Friday. “This is not a bailout. There is no federal money being used. This is a reordering of debt.”

Beside people coming to the mainland U.S., there’s another impact. Three out of every four municipal bond funds in the country hold Puerto Rican bonds, according to the Hispanic Federation report. Utilities like the Puerto Rican Power Co. are $8 billion in debt, and almost at the point of default.

“A lot of people in the state hold Puerto Rican bonds and have families there,” said Blumenthal. “If the utilities go bankrupt, the value of the bonds they hold will be greatly reduced in value.”

On Thursday, the Obama administration asked Congress to support Blumenthal’s plan and help restructure the island’s debt. The administration also asked Congress to boost the inadequate Medicaid funding, issues and allow Puerto Rico to have an Earned Income Tax Credit.

Blumenthal compared the island to a badly beated or dying hospital patient. The debt is the bleeding that won’t stop and that has to be addressed first, for to allow the island to live, before other operations and fixes can begin. “I’m proud people are seeing Connecticut as a place of opportunity and family,” he said. “But the goal is creating long-term progress and economic opportunity on Puerto Rico, with jobs for everyone.”

At Thursday’s subcommittee meeting, the chairman, Sen. Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, said more time was needed to look into the island’s finances to come up with a plan.

At the same meeting Padilla said time is running out and the island is at risk of defaulting on its debt by November or December.

“Without hope and willingness of Congress to act, people will have to make decisions for their families,” said Alvarez-Dimarzo, of the Hispanic Federation, whose report urged Congress and the president to act quickly on the island’s problems. “And they will look on the mainland and for their family here.”

As of now, things don’t look good for the “island of enchantment.” According to the Pew Research Center, the island will lose another half million people by 2050, through a decline in births and emigration.