Topics: Editor's Pick, LGBT, Life stories, Theater, Life News

I didn’t see “A Chorus Line” until I was 45.

In 1975, the year Marvin Hamlisch and Edward Kleban’s brilliant spectacle of dance and confession. first appeared on Broadway, I was 9 years old and just becoming aware that I was different from other boys. That year, after I’d expressed an interest in acting, my mother enrolled me in a drama school in Sacramento, incidentally the same school that a young Molly Ringwald attended. But after going to just one class, a well-meaning friend of mine who had heard of my interest from his mother but whose vocabulary was still developing asked me if I intended to become an actress. I quit that very day, instinctively frightened that I had already revealed too much about what I liked and who I was. Acting, I thought I had learned, was for girls and sissies, and I would no longer have anything to do with it.

In the years that followed, the social geography of my conservative, semi-rural California high school confirmed my suspicions. The theatre building was on the far north side of campus, perhaps purposefully isolated from the rest of the school. Every year, when hand-painted posters appeared advertising serious dramas or raucous musicals, a hum of activity surrounded the building. But I scrupulously kept my distance. To be found anywhere near it, I thought, was to be immediately and irredeemably implicated it all its queerness.

In between shows, however, as I went from one class to another, I occasionally observed thin boys with poofy hair and plump, colorfully dressed girls passing in and out of the building’s large metal doors, sometimes singing softly, more often all too wary of the ugly name-calling and contemptuous stares that were their daily crosses to bear. These especially unpopular people seemed to me neither heroic nor pathetic but simply stupid because they willingly, even willfully, brought such hateful attention upon themselves. At my school, they were either ridiculed as “drama fags” or, worse, ignored as irrelevant. The boys, especially, were subject to the loneliest kind of irrelevance. Except as the butt of a football player’s violent joke, it seemed to me, they didn’t exist. Thank God I wasn’t one of them, I told myself.

Things have changed a lot since the 1980s. America has grown more tolerant of gay people, high school musicals have become serious business, and after years of therapy and a lot of soul-searching, I’ve managed to become a reasonably happy adult who both loves the theatre and, miraculously, himself.

To be sure, my knowledge of Broadway is still woefully inadequate for a gay man, owing largely to my misspent youth; some things just can’t be repaired. A decade ago, however, I wrote a play that was produced at the New York Fringe Festival, and a few years ago I even acted in a community theater production of The Tempest, playing an especially effeminate and cowardly Trinculo to rave reviews. On both glorious occasions, a long-dead ember within me flamed anew.

So when a good friend and his partner, both musicians, invited my partner and me to a high school production of “A Chorus Line,” I jumped at the chance. As we crowded into the enormous, expensively appointed theater, I felt a little self-conscious that the four of us – middle-aged men without wives or children – didn’t belong. But as we jostled past proud and eager parents and nearly tripped over their rambunctious younger children, some of whom were clearly aspiring performers themselves, I was also aware that I had, 30 years later, entered the high school theater building—and survived.

When the lights went up, and the dancers began dancing, I found myself utterly astonished by what I saw and heard. These teenagers were not only supremely talented performers but also confident, unembarrassed ones. They perfectly inhabited the gifted, devoted, anxious dancers they were portraying, not merely because they were these things themselves, but because they were that good.

Who were these extraordinary kids? And how did they get this way? Before the show, I’d been told by the conductor that many of them have had years of training and serious professional ambitions; but their self-assurance was something that could only be taught by supportive families, teachers and friends, by a world that welcomed and cherished them. I gazed admiringly into their eyes to discover what they might be feeling as they kicked and turned across the stage. Not all of them were physically beautiful. Some of the boys were short or skinny and some of the girls were chunky or a little plain. But they danced and sang like they were the most attractive and popular kids in school. And the roar of the audience made it clear that they were.

The racy lyrics of “A Chorus Line” never would have passed muster with the teachers and parents at my high school. Bullying, bigotry and callous disregard for the suffering of misfits were widely tolerated, but smoking, foul language, and overt sexuality were not. Indeed, the musical’s mature themes and frank talk of “tits and ass” even made me wonder for a moment just how age-appropriate it was, if these students really understood what they were saying. But the way they said it—with their voices and their bodies—told me that they did understand, that they knew not only what the adult material meant but also what it meant to them.