The Wall Street Journal

Zipcar is adding its voice to the increasingly loud criticisms of advertising agencies when it comes to transparency (or lack thereof) about their digital ad buying practices and pricing.

Two years ago, Zipcar dumped its digital ad agency and elected to shift all of its online ad buying to “programmatic” or data-driven, automated channels, said Chief Marketing Officer Brian Harrington. Part of the rationale for that move–besides a drive towards efficiency–was that Zipcar didn’t totally trust its ad agency.

“A big piece of my frustration in working with a traditional agency is that it felt like a black box,” Mr. Harrington said. “I didn’t like the feeling that agencies play games and direct business to their trading desks. As a CMO, that is extraordinarily frustrating for me.”

Mr. Harrington was referring to the practice that many ad agencies within larger holding companies employ these days. These ad conglomerates typically own digital ad buying specialty divisions–often referred to as trading desks–which focus on programmatic ad buying, but vary in how much they disclose to their clients about how they operate. In some cases, these trading desks simply buy ad space on various digital ad exchanges, often using different sets of data to target ads at specific audiences.

Other agency trading desks actually purchase media inventory upfront at wholesale prices using automated technology and then resell it to individual agency clients, promising highly sophisticated ad targeting using different data sources. In some cases, individual clients do not have any transparency into what prices these trading desks pay upfront for this media inventory.

Zipcar’s comments once again raise questions about the viability of the traditional agency model as firms lose the trust of clients because of their perceived lack of transparency. Executives from agencies like Omnicom and Publicis have already found themselves playing down concerns about widespread kickbacks.

Mr. Harrington, who joined Zipcar as interim CMO in 2012, declined to identify the digital agency that Zipcar had worked with previously. DigitasLBi handed Zipcar’s digital media buying from mid-2012 through part of 2013, according to people familiar with the matter.

“DigitasLBi operates on a fully transparent model for and behalf of all of our clients–past, present and future,” said a Digitas spokeswoman. “Our clients have applauded our transparency, and characterize us as ahead of the industry.”

Besides the trading desk model, Mr. Harrington–a former ad agency executive himself–cited the preponderance of “fraud” and “waste” in listing his gripes with big ad agencies.