It's been almost 20 years since Brad Wolfe of Boulder got into the lawn business. What started as a small side job turned into a career and profitable company for the CU graduate. We caught up with Brad last week as the rain was falling across Boulder County.

1. Tell us a bit about Organo-Lawn's history.

I started Organo-Lawn in 1997 while attending the University of Colorado. My intentions in 1997 were to be able to make enough money to drink a few beers and go skiing during the winter months. When I first started the business I had one aerator, a push spreader and an old cranky pickup truck. When I graduated from CU in 1999, the economy was strong and all my classmates were getting jobs in the tech industry that paid very well. I on the other hand was paying myself about $12,000 a year and working 60-hour weeks.

From about 2002 to present it is incredible how much better chemical-free lawn care has gotten. Organic weed control used to mean pulling weeds by hand. Now, with proper watering techniques and our organic weed controls like Synergy and One Earth Weed Control we can turn a dandelion infested lawn into a very nice lawn in as little as one season.

2. You've just introduced an organic weed control and fertilizer, all organic. How does that work?

We knew that there was a special form of iron that killed weeds. This form of iron is a very strong chelating agent which makes it more available to the plant for uptake. The problem was that there was a very fine line between killing weeds and killing grasses. We spent three years trying many different formulas using additional food grade ingredients called surfactants. In 2014 we finally achieved the perfect formula, which we call One Earth Weed Control and it is an all-natural weed control that will kill most weeds in about 48 hours, and it greens up the grass. The best part is every ingredient in this formula is considered edible.

The best explanation of how the product works is it functions as a catalyst for oxygen reduction, which causes the production of unstable and highly reactive oxygen radicals, such as hydroxyl radicals, which in turn cause cellular damage within the weed, leading to plant death; i.e., the weeds can't handle the nutrient overload because they metabolize them too quickly and it causes them to die.

3. Is it your belief that 100 percent organic products in this market can be as effective as the other off-the-shelf products like Scotts, Sta-Green, Ironite and others?

Organic products are far superior to products like Scotts, Sta-Green, Ironite, etc. Organic fertilizers feed both the soil and the lawn and synthetic fertilizers only feed the plant. Basically, a rich and healthy soil is teaming with beneficial bacteria, protozoa, nematodes and other microbial activity. These beneficial microbes release nutrients that are otherwise unavailable in the plant, they destroy pathogens like lawn funguses, and they keep the soil rich and loamy. When the soil is strong it is called a living soil and there will be millions of beneficial microbes in one handful of dirt. With deep and infrequent watering, organic fertilizers will build a huge population of beneficial microbial activity. On the other hand fast release nitrogen sources like Scotts, etc., will actually kill beneficial microbial activity and creating a dead soil. The organic fertilizers take longer to green up a lawn, but the end result will be a healthy soil which will create a deep dark green only achievable with organics.

4. How difficult is it to compete against those larger, conventional international brands? How do you compete against those big names?

It is very difficult for a small company like Organo-Lawn to compete against large corporations. They have deeper pockets, more resources and more power. They have millions of dollars to spend on marketing and can create very powerful and persuasive commercials. Our biggest problem is educating the public about how to properly water a lawn and why organic products are not only better for the environment, people, pets, etc., but they are better for the lawn. We feel very lucky that our customers have helped us grow organically by telling their neighbors about our services.

5. Have you seen consistent growth with your company since starting out almost 20 years ago?

Fortunately, we have grown every year we have been in business. We have grown about 25 percent per year over the past four years because of two reasons. First, organic weed controls are now more effective and the results can be seen much faster than in the past. Secondly, homeowners are educating themselves about the dangers of chemicals. It used to be that a 100 percent weed free lawn meant you were doing things right. Now a 100 percent weed free lawn means you have exposed yourself and your family to too many dangerous chemicals.

You can learn more about us at our website, www.organolawn.com.