NASHVILLE, Tenn. — A solid road game begins with excellent goaltending and includes timely scoring and winning special teams. The Avalanche combined those things with resiliency Saturday night in a 3-2 triumph against the Nashville Predators.

Rookie forward Andreas Martinsen used a midair backhand shot to break a third-period tie as Colorado held on behind goalie Semyon Varlamov (34 saves) at Bridgestone Arena.

Martinsen, one of two Norwegian-born players in the NHL, called his second career big-league goal “ugly,” but there was definitely some skill involved.

“I saw it midair and thought, ‘Might as well give it a try.’ I hit it, and it went in,” Martinsen said. “It’s a good feeling when you score goals like that.”

Defensemen Francois Beauchemin (power play) and Nick Holden had Colorado’s first two goals.

The Avs — now 5-2 against Central Division foes — were 5-of-5 on the penalty kill and scored on one of their five power plays. It was a great start to a three-game, all-Central Division road trip that continues Sunday at St. Louis for a late-afternoon clash against the Blues. The trip concludes Tuesday at Chicago against the defending Stanley Cup champion Blackhawks.

“Varly was outstanding and the guys in the PK did a (good) job tonight,” said Avs winger Matt Duchene, who had a game-high seven shots and provided the screen on Beauchemin’s goal that made it 1-0. “Special teams have lost us some games this year, but tonight they won us this game.”

The Predators, who were 9-1-1 in their previous 11 home games against the Avalanche, tied it 2-2 in the first minute of the third period. But the Preds never led and were continually frustrated by Varlamov.

“He was really good,” Avs coach Patrick Roy said of Varlamov. “He made some really key saves, especially in the PK. But I’d like to say our guys played well in front of him. Our D’s were sharp. Our breakout was good.”

Beauchemin opened the scoring 8:37 into the game. On the power play, the defenseman’s slap shot from the left point beat goalie Pekka Rinne inside the near post.

Colorado (13-16-1) doubled the lead at 14:38, when Holden capped a terrific tic-tac-toe play with forwards John Mitchell and Alex Tanguay. Holden buried Tanguay’s no-look back pass from the back door.

The Avs’ near-flawless first period was partly ruined when Nashville got a fortunate bounce off the skate of Miikka Salomaki, who was providing traffic in front of Varlamov. The goal came just 7.7 seconds before the end of the period.

Colorado committed four of the six penalties in the second period, but the consecutive infractions by Duchene (boarding), Jarome Iginla (hooking) and Cody McLeod (high-sticking) weren’t costly.

“Our PK was really good. Guys blocked shots and were very disciplined in our structure,” Roy said.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or Twitter: @MikeChambers

COLORADO AT ST. LOUIS 4 p.m. Sunday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Paul Stastny:

The former Avalanche forward is back in the Blues’ lineup and centering their top line with wingers Magnus Paajarvi and Vladimir Tarasenko. Stastny, who played his first eight NHL seasons in Colorado, missed nearly five weeks with a broken right foot.