Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, James Carroll, Religion, Life News

Jesus died around the year 33. Thirty years later, the Romans began killing Jews in a more systematic way. Between 67 and 136, over the course of a three-phase war, the Romans destroyed the Temple in Jerusalem and killed thousands, perhaps even millions, of Jews, in communities across the Mediterranean.

It was during this period that the Gospels were written, offering the first accounts we have of Jesus’ life. Somehow, we tend to forget this, but Christianity was born as a Jewish sect, during a time of terrible violence. We read about Jesus’ life through a prism of strife. “The Christian movement,” James Carroll told me, “is stamped with a case of communal PTSD.”

Carroll is a journalist, columnist, novelist and scholar. A devout Catholic, he used to be a priest. In his new book, “Christ Actually,” Carroll chronicles how the Roman war pushed early Christians to define themselves in opposition to Judaism, and to divorce Jesus from his Jewish roots.

That antagonism would lead to other wars against the Jews centuries later, one of which would outstrip even Rome’s. For Carroll, the Holocaust is a defining moment for Christians, one that requires a new look at the religion’s history.

Carroll isn’t interested in pinning down the exact historical details of Jesus’ life, though. Instead, in “Christ Actually,” he seeks an interpretation of Jesus that isn’t quite so warped by hostility and war. The interpretation that emerges is of a resolutely nonviolent, wholly Jewish figure—a figure, in short, who offers little traction for anti-Semitism and holy war.

Reached by phone, Carroll spoke with Salon about religious violence, Pope Francis and why Christians should bring their Jewish friends to church.

Originally, Christianity was a Jewish sect. Eventually, it became something religiously distinct—and, often, hostile to Judaism. Where exactly does that divergence begin?

It is not a specific historical point. Into the third century, there are some people who are observing Shabbat on Friday evenings and also going to the eucharistic table on Sunday. There are some Jewish people who are observing kosher but also remembering Jesus as Messiah. The final and complete break is with the conversion of Constantine [in the fourth century], which is the conversion of the Roman Empire to the Church—when the Empire begins to enforce the boundary with violence.

That’s part two of the break. Part one of the break, I’m arguing, is the Roman war against the Jews. Let’s say there were five separate parties of Judaism in the 60s of the first century. Sadducees, Pharisees, the priesthood, the Essenes, the Jordan Valley—multiple ways of being Jewish. All of them were destroyed in the Roman war except two: the party associated with the rabbis, who left Jerusalem and refused to be part of the war against Rome. And the other party, the Jesus people, who also split from Jerusalem and set up in Galilee. It’s because they refused to be part of the violent resistance against Rome that they survived at all. Two new religions come out of the destruction of the Temple [during the Roman war].

And begin to diverge.

And then they begin to argue with each other over who can claim the legacy of Israel. Who is the true Israel? And the argument, as you know, becomes ferocious, which is what informs the conflict in the Gospel between Jesus and the, quote, Jews, unquote. The Gospels are written over three decades. You can track the increased levels of hostility between those two groups of Jews by the number of times the polemical phrase “the Jews” shows up in the text. In Mark, the oldest Gospel, it shows up a few times. By the time you get to John, written 30 years later, it shows up dozens of times. In the Acts of the Apostles, all of it is laid at the feet of the Jews—quote-unquote “the Jews.”

Jews become a symbol to push back against.

Absolutely, yes. That’s why, decades later, when the Jewish Christians are gone, the gentiles read these texts, and it’s easy for them to imagine that Jesus isn’t a Jew, which is the beginning of the problem.

Christians go to church week in and week out and hear gospel passages read, and they don’t even understand that they’re getting a kind of anti-Jewish propaganda. Take, for example, the parable of the Good Samaritan. Sweet story, right? No, actually. The parable of the Good Samaritan could also be called the parable of the Bad Jews, because it’s a non-Jewish guy who’s coming along who rescues the poor schmuck who’s laying on the side of the road, having been beaten by thieves. Before he gets there, it’s the priest, the scribe—the Jews—who won’t rescue the guy.

The Good Samaritan assumes the Bad Jew; it’s a bipolar structure of the imagination. Good Christians, bad Jews. New Testament, Old Testament. Grace, law. Generosity, greed. Mercy, revenge. The God of love versus the God of judgment, the merciless God from whom Jesus’ God rescues us. You see what we’ve got here? It’s a bipolar, anti-Semitic structure of the imagination. If I get one thing out of the publication of the book, it’s that a few more people understand that’s how deep into us this problem goes. That’s what I’m after here.

You write in the book that you hear sermons every week in church that promote this kind of polarized thinking.

I heard one last week. The scripture put before Christians and Catholics was about Jesus’ attack on the Temple. That’s a classic case of this problem. Jesus is understood as going into the Temple and defending what he calls “my father’s house” against the avaricious Jews. He upends the tables of the money-changers as if the money-changers are medieval Jewish lenders. That’s the way the story is heard.

It’s an outrage to imagine that Jesus was in any way opposed to the normal business of the temple. If there was money-changing going on at the Temple, it was because people, Jews from all over the Mediterranean world, were showing up there regularly, and they all had different currencies. In order to have the currency required to buy the sacrificial offering, they had to have a way to change their money. It was a service, in other words. There’s no way Jesus would have regarded that as offensive. So if Jesus committed some disturbance at the Temple—and scholars seem to agree that he did—it has to be understood in defense of the Temple, not in opposition to it.

That’s a subtlety that Christian preachers don’t have. They don’t get it.

I imagine that the people with you in church on Sunday are perfectly kind to their Jewish neighbors. When you’re sitting in church and hearing a sermon like this, is it almost as if there are two distinct ideas of Jewishness?

Here’s what I recommend for every Christian: bring your Jewish friend to church with you, and let your Jewish friend listen to the text, and then ask your Jewish friend how they felt. Jewish folks listening to these very common texts—the Good Samaritan parable, the attack on the Temple, any number of them—or the way that polemical phrase, “the Jews, the Jews, the Jews” keeps showing up …

Think of all of this as a bug in the software of Christianity; how do we de-bug it? Number one, we have to understand how the texts came to be written this way. Number two, we have to hear the anti-Jewish texts as if we’re Jews; we have to learn how to do that. Number three, we have to measure everything we say and believe about Jesus against the fact that he was authentically, fully an Orthodox Jew until the day he died.

I have a theology professor friend at Boston College, where you have to have very high SATs to get in. He would ask, at the beginning of the year, a set of questions to get a sense of where people were coming from. One of them, typically, was “What religion was Jesus?” And the answer, overwhelmingly, comes back, “Christian.” Just a basic question.

Another version of the question was, “What religion were the Romans?” and one student raised his hand and said, “The Romans killed Jesus, right?” The professor thought, “Well, that’s progress. At least he knows the Romans killed Jesus,” and he said yes, the Romans killed Jesus. And the kid replied, “Well, then they were Jews.”

Ouch.

I’m lifting up the level of education we’re confronted with.

That seems like a daunting task. Just the other day, a Catholic in a large Mexican city shied away from me and said, “Oh, you killed Jesus!” when he learned that I was Jewish. That experience is not unusual. Where will this kind of education have to come from?

In Latin America, that myth still holds to a larger extent than in English-speaking countries.

A tremendous religious educational revolution did take place in the Catholic Church over the last generation, even to get rid of the Christ-killer myth. I’m a baby boomer, but people younger than me in the Catholic tradition have never heard this Christ-killer business. There was a tremendous religious education revolution after the second Vatican Council in the early ’60s. It’s possible. It just hasn’t gone far enough.