Buy Photo Gordon Bonnyman, staff Attorney and co-founder of the Tennessee Justice Center, left, moderator David Plazas of The Tennessean, center, and Justin Owen, President and CEO of the Beacon Center of Tennessee discuss Insure Tennessee on Monday at the Wildhorse Saloon. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Representatives of two vocal organizations that fall on opposite sides of the Insure Tennessee debate hashed out the pros and cons of the proposal Monday before Nashville leaders.

Gordon Bonnyman, staff attorney and co-founder of the Tennessee Justice Center, advocated for the passage of Insure Tennessee while Justin Owen, president and chief executive officer of the Beacon Center of Tennessee, stood firmly against it during the panel discussion hosted by the Rotary Club of Nashville.

David Plazas, the opinion engagement editor for the The Tennessean, moderated the conversation at the Wildhorse Saloon during the rotary's weekly meeting. At the start of the debate, Plazas made clear to the crowd that he would only be asking questions and keeping time, and would not be sharing The Tennessean's views of the resolution.

Insure Tennessee, unveiled by Gov. Bill Haslam in December 2014, is a two-tiered program designed to provide insurance to uninsured people who fall in the gap between qualifying to buy insurance on the federally run exchange and qualifying for traditional Medicaid.

The state projected that 280,000 low-income people would enroll in the program, which would be funded by Medicaid dollars that Tennessean taxpayers have already paid into. The federal government would pay 100 percent of Insure Tennessee at first, and gradually that commitment would drop to 90 percent. Tennessee hospitals had agreed to tax themselves to make up the remainder. It was defeated twice in committees in the state Senate.

Owen argued that in practice there is no real difference between Insure Tennessee and a traditional Medicaid expansion. While the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Affordable Care Act in a 2012 decision, it struck down the provision in the act requiring states to expand Medicaid.

"Will there be more people on Medicaid if we pass Insure Tennessee? Yes," Owen said.

Story continues below photo

Buy Photo Gordon Bonnyman speaks about Insure Tennessee on Monday at the Wildhorse Saloon in Nashville. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)

Bonnyman countered that Insure Tennessee is quite different from a traditional expansion, citing the proposal's incorporation of private incentives for healthy behaviors and accountability mechanisms.

"I think it's strange to say this is a Medicaid expansion. The governor rejected that two years ago. He didn't spend 18 months to come up with Medicaid expansion," Bonnyman said. "Frankly, I would have preferred a Medicaid expansion."

Owen hammered the point that Insure Tennessee would just provide insurance and doesn't address the state's access to health care issues. He pitched expanded access to innovation, such as patients in rural communities teleconferencing with doctors, and allowing patients to contract directly with their physicians on a monthly basis.

"I'm not saying we shouldn't try to focus on insurance, but let's focus on actual issues that will address the health care crisis, not simply focus blindly just on health insurance," Owen said.

Story continues below photo

Buy Photo Justin Owen gives his views of Insure Tennessee on Monday at the Wildhorse Saloon in Nashville. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)

Bonnyman said it defies common sense to say that people think they're better off without health coverage, and he challenged representatives of the Beacon Center and state lawmakers to try living without it. He said the proposals Owen pitched during the debate do not address what Insure Tennessee would.

"I agree. It's not a silver bullet. This is not going to bring in immediate health care improvements to the entire population, but Gov. Haslam is a pragmatic leader who understands the importance of using these dollars that are available here," Bonnyman said.

While both men stood firmly on different sides of the issue, they found some common ground when asked why politicians, who receive lifetime health insurance from the state, are opposed to low-income taxpayers having insurance.

"State lawmakers' lifetime insurance does cost the state budget. I have difficulty understanding why state lawmakers begrudge their own constituents coverage that's paid for by the federal government and hospitals," Bonnyman said.

The Beacon Center opposes the lifetime benefits for state lawmakers and would support repealing them, Owen said.

"It's really a red herring," Owen said. "It sounds great to really beat these guys up because they get government health insurance. They get government health insurance because they are the employees of the state when they are serving as legislators."

Reach Holly Meyer at 615-259-8241 and on Twitter @HollyAMeyer.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RSZv4r