MADISON (WKOW)-- A proposal included in the state budget means childless adults could be forced to shift from Wisconsin's Medicaid program, BadgerCare Plus, to the online, health insurance marketplace to find coverage on their own.

The plan has some with chronic or serious illnesses concerned, like John Zimmerman who has cancer.

“I had surgery to remove cancer from my eye, it was in my abdomen and my right lung,” Zimmerman said.

Zimmerman is now in remission but still requires regular scans and care. He's insured through BadgerCare Plus

“Without it I wouldn't be able to, I wouldn't even be here,” Zimmerman said.

But the plan in the proposed State Budget would limit childless adults, like Zimmerman, to four years on the Medicaid program. Republicans say the plan makes fiscal sense and still provides care.

During a joint finance committee session, Representative John Nygren said, "What we chose to do is rather than put more people on a system that reimburses at pennies on the dollar, is we chose to send people to the exchange."

Nygren added subsidies would help assist in purchasing those insurance plans.

"It's not about taking away healthcare for anyone," he said. "It's about building a system that's sustainable."

Zimmerman says without BadgerCare, he'd struggle to make ends meet. His cancer, coupled with diabetes, only allows him to work part time.

“I think its tough for any cancer patient really to balance their work and their treatment and how sick people can become,” said Allison Miller, a spokeswoman for the American Cancer Society.

Miller says that's partly why the American Cancer Society has concerns about the plan. She says cancer isn't a quick, catch-and-cure disease. There are often long term side effects and reoccurrence.

Zimmerman says his cancer creates enough unknowns and he doesn't want to have to wonder if he'll be able to afford an insurance plan.

“It scares me,” he said. “I don't know what's gonna happen.”

The Joint Finance Committee approved the budget proposal this week. It would allow the State Department of Health Services to decide if there would be any exceptions to the four-year rule. The federal government does have to issue a waiver in order for wisconsin to implement this plan.