Photo

WASHINGTON — The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office said Friday that repealing the Affordable Care Act would significantly increase federal budget deficits and the number of people who are uninsured.

But, it said, repealing the law would also raise economic output because it would create incentives for some people to work more.

The estimates came in the first major study issued by the new director of the budget office, Keith Hall. It was also the first report to use new methods of fiscal analysis, according to instructions from the Republican majority in both houses of Congress.

Repealing the law would increase federal budget deficits by $137 billion in the decade from 2016 to 2025, Mr. Hall said in the report. In addition, he said, the number of uninsured people, estimated at 35 million under current law, would increase by 24 million if the law was repealed.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Hall itemized the likely changes: Fourteen million fewer people would be enrolled in Medicaid, and 18 million fewer people would have private insurance purchased on the open market or on public exchanges established under the health law. But eight million more would have coverage through employers.

The report came as consumers, lawmakers and politicians wait anxiously for a Supreme Court ruling on health insurance subsidies paid under the health care law to millions of people in more than 30 states.

President Obama has repeatedly threatened to veto legislation repealing the health care law, his biggest legislative accomplishment as president, but Republicans keep trying and stepped up their efforts this year after taking control of both houses of Congress.

Proposals to repeal the law are included in legislation being prepared by Republicans to respond to the Supreme Court decision, which is expected within days.

The report by the budget office is sure to be cited by members of both parties as they continue fighting over health care through the 2016 elections. Democrats, defending the law they passed five years ago, can use the report to argue that repealing the law would be a bad move because it would increase the deficit. Republicans can use it to argue that the law itself is bad.

Senator Michael B. Enzi, Republican of Wyoming and the chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, said the report showed that “repealing the president’s health care law will increase economic growth.” But Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House minority leader, said it showed that “repeal will explode the deficit.”

The budget office said that repealing the law — with its insurance subsidies and expanded eligibility for Medicaid — would increase federal budget deficits by $353 billion in the coming decade, largely because the government would forgo big savings in Medicare and would lose revenue from new taxes and fees. But after taking account of the positive economic effects of a repeal, it said, the increase in the deficit would be $137 billion.

The law tends to “reduce the supply of labor by reducing some people’s incentives to work,” the report said. Repealing it would reverse those incentives and could increase the output of goods and services, the gross domestic product, by seven-tenths of 1 percent, the study said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The insurance subsidies, along with expanded eligibility for Medicaid, “generally make it easier for some people to work less or to stop working without losing health insurance coverage,” the report said.

Mr. Hall said that repealing the law would also have these effects over the next 10 years:

■ The federal government would lose $43 billion in penalty payments from people who go without insurance. The law requires most Americans to have coverage.

■ The government would lose $167 billion in penalty payments from large employers, who are supposed to offer insurance to full-time employees.

■ It would lose $87 billion from eliminating a new excise tax on certain employment-based health plans with relatively high premiums. Under current law, revenue from this “Cadillac tax” will grow rapidly as more health plans are affected each year, starting in 2018.

■ It would lose $346 billion in new taxes paid by high-income people, $142 billion in fees paid by insurance companies and $54 billion in fees paid by manufacturers of prescription drugs and devices, provisions of the health care law meant to help pay for it.

■ It would save $822 billion because it would no longer subsidize some private insurance bought through the exchanges.

■ It would save $824 billion in Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program.

But, the budget office said, repealing the health law would accelerate Medicare spending, which has been growing at an exceptionally slow rate.

The law throttled back the growth of Medicare payments to hospitals, nursing homes, health maintenance organizations and other providers. Repealing it would undo those savings, and as a result, Medicare spending would rise by roughly $800 billion over 10 years, the report said.

The report analyzes the economic effects of the health care law and the ways in which those effects may, in turn, influence federal spending and revenues — a technique known as dynamic scoring. Democrats fear that Republicans will use that approach to help justify tax cuts. But at least in the report on Friday, Mr. Hall was cautious in using the new technique and carefully documented the economic assumptions that led to his conclusions.