This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... with a pediatric neurosurgeon rewrite Obamacare are welcome to Opinion Journal were fortunate to date have not just any pediatric neurosurgeon but the doctor Ben Carson the former director at the Johns Hopkins running ... I was that the surgery said Dr thanks for joining us now is inflation ... we have our Kevin interesting moment for conservatives now with the chance finally to start ... tearing away some of the infrastructure of Obamacare on the Congress of focusing on ... redefining the workweeks if you were businesses get hit ... I also big Supreme Court case that threatens the subsidies ... aam on the Leica ... mainly the people who created Obamacare you've actually practiced medicine in a very high level as you look at ... this ... this law the structure that is created ... what's on your to do list is Republicans ... seek to reform ... well we knew that some basic questions ... his health care right ... the answer to that age read the Constitution is now ... however ... should we ... provide healthcare as a compassionate society ... for people an answer to that is yes because we are compassionate people ... of Obamacare doesn't do that ... Obamacare is really a method ... whereby the people ... who had the chemical power ... in this system as it was structured ... has shifted to greet them in power ... to the government ... and to this is exactly what the founders of this nation fee is this kind of thing ... I think we need to get rid of ... the so-called Affordable Care Act but I don't think we should abandon the goal of providing good health care ... and my recommendation to Congress ... would be let's really come up with the alternative ... before we get rid of that ... threat will and this question may be coming very soon with this Halbig case I think there is likely to be the pressure now from both sides of the aisle with this case goes against the administration ... to rewrite this thing yet ... as they start getting into the details what would you recommend ... while I would recommend ... first up setting new goals ... the goal is to have the health care in the hands of the patients ... and in the hands of the health care providers ... that is the only way that we can ever bring it back into the free market free market is what controls price ... and will control squall ... so as long as without government control of that we will never have cost control and when the ramp only to OKC and talk to pass about health savings accounts basically putting the consumer in charge for it um it sounds like a of employer provided health care generally which shows the artifact of the tax code is also not something you are particularly enamored with them to know that the nice thing about the house they use it to the system is that ... you don't seem to couples with you all the time it's portable ... so as not necessarily tied to job even though while you working ... you know your employer can supply of money for your house things to come to a variety of ways to fund the Helsing to come ... even the most indigent people society which can fund their health seems account ... to Medicaid fake those same dollars to but deny them up and put them into an account over which they have control what differences that make up a makes a big difference ... the Botany costs sixteen dollars K this coming sixty six thousand this current which one you going to if you're into it and if you attend statement that a no brainer ... those are the kinds of things that begin to make it work ... if people flexibility so they can shift many an HSA between their family members ... covers and your smile that says there are few things that won't cover ... you have to have catastrophic insurance but sensors almost nothing in pinging on the costs of that goes way down the kicker If you can buy across state lines ... is a perfectly good system ... and we can tweak it a little bit ... and I am ... I to actually no reason that we can Institute some time ... sounds like a plan by stock of ... the