If you're a physician, please tell us your opinion on the Affordable Care Act. Email cross@plaind.com.

A new survey of physicians shows growing support for Obamacare, with a majority of respondents nationwide saying there is "more good than bad" in the controversial law.

The survey by the American Association for Physician Leadership and the Navigant Center for Health Care Research and Policy Analysis showed significant backing for the law's effort to implement a "value-based" payment system that seeks to eliminate costly and unnecessary treatments for patients.

Fifty-five percent of respondents said they agreed or strongly agreed that Obamacare, formally known as the Affordable Care Act, has "more good than bad" in it. Sixty-nine percent agreed or strongly agreed that physicians should be held accountable for health care costs in addition to quality of care.

In an interview Monday, MetroHealth System chief executive Dr. Akram Boutros said the Affordable Care Act has set forth "the right destination" for the health care industry in the United States.

"Without the Affordable Care Act and the ideas of accountable care and value-based reimbursement, we would not have made the strides as a health care industry that we've made in the past three years," Boutros said.

He added that most critics of the act have concerns about the bureaucracy surrounding the law and how some of its rules are applied.

"But I have complete confidence in the health care system," Boutros said. "We'll figure this out and people will be receiving much better care because of the Affordable Care Act for years to come."

Approved in 2010, the Affordable Care Act has expanded health insurance coverage to more than 17 million Americans since its implementation, but it has also suffered high-profile slip ups, such as as repeated breakdowns in the online system designed to help people sign up.

The survey by the American Association for Physician Leadership, conducted in the spring of 2015, was completed by 2,398 members of the association. The organization represents more than 11,000 doctors and medical executives.

Its findings offer support for the law as it continues to draw attacks from Republicans in congress following a second Supreme Court decision upholding its key provisions. The law remains a hot topic on the presidential campaign trail, and will likely generate considerable discussion in the first Republican presidential debate in Cleveland on Thursday.

Dr. Michael Anderson, chief medical officer for University Hospitals, said he's planning on attending the debate and expects to hear a lively back and forth. But he said most physicians have moved beyond the political controversy surrounding the law and are focused on implementing it effectively.

"There are still a lot of emotions on both sides, but if you look at some of the foundational elements of rewarding quality of care, I think most physicians realize there is some real bounty there," Anderson said.

In terms of rooting out unnecessary costs and procedures, Anderson said, "The Affordable Care Act is a start, but I think physicians and delivery systems really own the next chapter. We need to make sure patients are getting good care across the continuum, but we need to be continually looking at costs."

The physicians' survey found that most doctors agree that the accountable care organizations supported by Obamacare will become standard practice in coming years. Accountable care organizations provide financial incentives for doctors to better coordinate care of patients and cut costs.

Among the survey's other key findings:

-- 57 percent of respondents agreed or strongly agreed that accountable care organizations will be a permanent model delivering health care in the years ahead.

-- 63 percent of respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed that "the elimination of fee-for-service incentives in favor of value-based payments will hurt the quality of care provided patients.

-- 58 percent of respondents agreed or strongly agreed that transparency about physicians' business dealings is a positive trend for the profession.