The post office in Fairburn, South Dakota, a rural town with a population of less than 100 people. Kayla Gahagan for Al Jazeera America

The strategy – called “post plan” – is expected to save the service half a billion dollars annually once it is completely implemented this January. Announced in May 2012, the plan realigned retail window hours based on customer use. Since it started, more than 9,000 post offices have seen retail operating hours reduced to two, four, or six hours per day.

Post Service spokesman Peter Nowacki said the plan is aimed at balancing customer needs and declining volumes and revenues.

“We have to align service hours offered to better match actual customer demand and reduce costs,” he said.

The shift to electronic forms of communication has had a profound impact on the entire Postal Service, not just rural post offices, Nowacki said.

Since 2006, overall mail volumes have declined by more than 25 percent, with single-piece First-Class Mail, like birthday cards and bills, down about 60 percent from its peak. Fewer people buying fewer stamps means visits to post offices declined as well.

But customers, particularly elderly people who still conduct business by paper mail, have been impacted by the cuts.

Larry Livingston, who lives across the street from the Fairburn Post Office in western South Dakota, is one of them.

“Nowadays everything’s on computer,” he said. “I’m just not what you call computer literate.” All of his correspondences and bills are sent by traditional mail service.

He said that while reducing window hours makes sense, he worries about what the future will bring; it would be a hardship for people living in rural communities to have to travel to larger towns or cities every time they want to mail something or pick up their mail, he said.

The post office, particularly in rural communities, is more than a store, Jamison said.

“Post Masters were an asset to the community,” he said, a connection that has been lost because dedicated, full-time, experienced postal workers are increasingly being replaced with inexperienced people who have taken the part-time job on the side, resulting in a loss of quality service.

Critics of the post plan say the reduction of hours at offices in rural communities has degraded service and derailed retirement plans of postmasters.

Some also believe the plan is a ruse intended to make post offices less essential to rural communities so there will be less opposition when they are closed.

“There’s nothing positive about it at all,” said Jamison. “It’s a scheme. They’re undermining the connection of the community with the post office so people don’t care. It’s worse and worse service.”

DeElda Williams’s plan was to work hard and retire at 62. Instead, she retired a year ago at 60, cutting into her pension and retirements funds.

“In September, they were going to cut my hours to four a day and my pay would have been cut in half,” said Williams, who had worked at the Fairburn Post Office for 26 years.

Williams said eventually poor service will force customers in rural communities to head to bigger cities – giving the Postal Service a reason to close smaller offices.

“It’s a way of closing little post offices and making everybody look good; they’ll come out smelling like a rose,” Williams said. “Nobody wants to work for four hours.”

But Nowacki said the Postal Service is still effectively reaching its mission each year, “to provide secure, reliable and affordable delivery to every address in America.”

He said in developing their cost-cutting plan, the Postal Service held thousands of public meetings and conducted surveys, and the response was clear.

“Customers and communities around the country [asked] that their post offices remain open,” he said.

Nowacki added that the Post Office still recruits quality employees.



“The Postal Service prides itself on outstanding customer service and the organization’s part-time employees have always been a valued and vital component of the postal workforce,” he said. “We are fully confident in the ability of all of our employees to provide quality service to our customers.”