Sioux Falls, SD

This story was corrected to reflect that the man was hurt by an electrical shock, not electrocuted. A misspelling was also corrected.

KELOLAND News has learned a man was hurt from an electrical shock at the Sioux Empire Fair Sunday night.

It happened after the fair had closed and employees were taking down the rides around 8:00. A 50-year-old Texas man received an electrical shock, according to the Minnehaha County Sheriff's office.

He was an employee of Reed Expo and was rushed to Sanford Hospital. He is listed in stable condition. The cause of the shock is being investigated.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:

This story was corrected to reflect that the man was hurt by an electrical shock, not electrocuted. A misspelling was also corrected.

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.