Tax preparers and some other advocates have complained for a while that the health law’s insurance sign-up period is timed wrong. Now they have a paper in the journal Health Affairs to back them up.

Asking lower-income people to contemplate buying coverage around the holiday season is a bad idea, because their decision-making capacity is stretched too thin, say two health policy professors.

Crafters of the Affordable Care Act originally envisaged the open enrollment period as a fall activity that would coincide with the sign-up periods for Medicare and also the time when many Americans who get coverage through their jobs have to renew their elections.

In 2014, the official open enrollment period for the exchanges, also known as “Marketplaces”, kicked off Oct. 1 and ended March 31, with technological problems slowing the start and a bulk of the sign-ups rushing in toward the end. For 2015, the enrollment window is shorter, and much more wintery — Nov. 15, 2014 to Feb. 15, 2015.

That doesn’t necessarily make sense for people who don’t have coverage, write Katherine Swartz, a professor at the Harvard School of Public Health, and John Graves, an assistant professor at Vanderbilt University’s School of Medicine.

“Recent research by experimental psychologists and behavioral economists strongly suggests that when people’s decision-making capacity (bandwidth) is stretched thin, either they cannot make decisions or they make poor choices,” they say.

“Using data from nearly a decade of US-based Internet search queries to measure population behavior, we found considerable seasonality in measures of financial stress and in when people seek out information on health insurance plans. A more opportune time for scheduling open enrollment for the ACA Marketplaces may be between February 15 and April 15.”

As the Journal reported earlier this year, tax preparers have taken a big role in signing up people for coverage. They have long said the holidays are a bad time to ask people to commit to other bills, and have also pushed to extend the sign-up period to include March or April, when many people file their tax returns, because returns are the way people either declare they have coverage or pay a penalty if they do not.

Several firms have said they are worried that people who didn’t get coverage this year will learn for the first time when they come in next March that they have to pay a penalty for 2014 — and that it’s too late to get coverage for 2015.

Jackson Hewitt Inc. officials have also said they believe some low-income people might be more likely to buy coverage if they’ve just received a refund, which the professors agree with. Other tax preparers have been more skeptical of this idea, saying people tend to have decided what to do with their refund before they even get it.