The Idaho House Health and Welfare Committee approved a plan this week to provide Medicaid coverage for up to 12 months to working adults who no longer qualify for the program.

The proposal, which still needs a Senate hearing and approval to take effect, will add more than $9.7 million to Medicaid’s ever-growing budget.

The arrangement is dubbed Transitional Medicaid and allows workers who earn too much to qualify for Idaho’s Medicaid program to continue receiving health services under the plan for up to a year.

To be disqualified, a worker from a four-person home would have to earn more than $439 a month. Children in that situation would continue receiving coverage under the Children’s Health Insurance Program.

State lawmakers took up the issue because the federal government reauthorized transitional Medicaid payments late last year. Congress had repealed the temporary coverage as part of the 2010 health care overhaul, which required states to expand Medicaid to the working poor, thus making the transitional payments unnecessary.

But the U.S. Supreme Court struck down mandatory Medicaid expansion through Obamacare in a June 2012 ruling. Since then, states have had the option to accept program expansion. Idaho and several other states have hesitated, judging it too risky to assume new spending obligations in the absence of assured support in the future from the federal government.

The Idaho Department of Health and Welfare sees Transitional Medicaid as a boon for workers who might need a little help as their household budgets grow.

“This program is designed to promote participants finding work without the fear of losing Medicaid coverage immediately after finding employment,” department staffer Julie Hammon told the House Health and Welfare Committee.

She projected at least 2,700 Idahoans will receive transitional Medicaid payments each year. With the proposed expansion, the department expects the payments to cost $9.7 million annually. The state general fund will pay $2.83 million of that tab, and the federal government will pay the rest.

The committee approved the proposal on a nearly unanimous tally. Only Rep. Brandon Hixon, R-Nampa, dissented. He told IdahoReporter.com after the meeting he didn’t agree with the program paying benefits to workers who earn higher levels of income.

Committee Vice Chair Kelley Packer, R-McCammon, praised the plan as an exit from poverty.

“To have any way of being able to improve your circumstances without being penalized is a positive step forward,” Packer said.

The panel — and the state as a whole — might not have had much say in the decision to reauthorize the entitlement payments. The federal government requires states that haven’t expanded Medicaid to offer the coverage. A DHW spokesman couldn’t tell IdahoReporter.com what penalties the federal government might impose if the state didn’t approve the plan.

The state’s portion of the Medicaid budget could grow by more than $12 million in 2017, a 2.4 percent increase above this year. If lawmakers approve Republican Gov. Butch Otter’s budget, Idaho would pay more than $514 million out of the general fund for Medicaid.

The program’s total Idaho cost, including state, dedicated and federal funds, would reach more than $2.21 billion in 2017 if legislators accept the Otter budget. That would represent a 5.3 percent spending hike for the program above the 2016 appropriation.