For American fans of ski racing this is a momentous day, because an American who took up the sport on a 300-foot hill in a suburb of Minneapolis as a little girl is now the winningest woman in the history of a sport traditionally dominated by Europeans who hail from the Alps where the sport was invented.

PHOTOS: Lindsey Vonn breaks World Cup wins record

Lindsey Vonn got win No. 63 Monday in a super-G at Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, in front of her parents and boyfriend Tiger Woods, who surprised her with his presence.

“I had no idea he was here,” Vonn told reporters in the finish area. “He told everyone to keep it a secret and I’m surprised. Normally no one can keep a secret in my family, but it was an amazing surprise. I’m so happy that he’s here. He just showed up. He has a tournament soon, so he’s got a lot of work (to do), and I’m surprised that he was able to come all the way over here for a few hours to watch me ski.”

That was the surprise of the day, because there was little suspense left in Vonn’s chase of the record held for 35 years by Austria’s Annemarie Moser-Proell. After Vonn’s record-tying win in downhill on Sunday, it seemed inevitable she would break the record before coming to home to compete in the world alpine championships at Beaver Creek in two weeks.

“I felt no pressure,” Vonn said. “In the start I felt really loose, I felt a lot better than I did (Sunday). (Sunday) I still was feeling pressure. For me it’s just important to focus on the skiing. Everyone was talking about the record for so long that it definitely puts pressure on you. (Monday) I had no pressure, I was just skiing and doing the best I could. I felt like it was a training run, just pushing myself as hard as I could.”

Vonn left her native Minnesota when she was 12 to join Ski & Snowboard Club Vail, which offered her a big mountain where she could become a downhiller. Now she has 32 World Cup wins in downhill and 21 in super-G.

Vonn’s time of one minute, 27.03 seconds was 0.85 of a second ahead of runnerup Anna Fenninger of Austria. It was Vonn’s first win in super-G since December 2012, two months before she blew out her right knee racing super-G at the world championships in Schladming, Austria.

WATCH: John Meyer explains the significance of Lindsey Vonn’s all-time World Cup wins record

“I was definitely pushing the limits the whole way down,” Vonn said. “Sometimes I was a little bit out of control but I maintained the speed, especially on the bottom part of the course. I’m so happy to finish the weekend with win No. 63. It’s a really, really special day.”

Woods remained incognito as long as he could, wearing a mask to avoid attention from crowds.

“I was so surprised that he’s here,” Vonn said. “He has a tournament in like a week, so I didn’t expect him to be here at all. It’s really cool. The last time he was over in Europe for my race was Val d’Isere (France, in 2013) and I was hurt. This is a totally different scenario and a much better memory that we can have forever.”

The magnitude of Vonn’s achievement goes beyond her personal list of achievements, which include four World Cup overall titles, Olympic medals in downhill (gold) and super-G (bronze) and five world championships medals. It means American children can dream about being the best in a sport long dominated by racers from Austria, Switzerland, Italy and France.

“Hopefully this will bring more attention to the sport,” Vonn said. “I think it will be really good going into the world championships. Hopefully there will be some more TV interest, and more interest in general from the American public, especially in a non-Olympic year, but I always just try to promote the sport. I think it’s an amazing sport.”

Universal Sports Network will show Monday’s race at 8 a.m. Denver time.

John Meyer: 303-954-1616, jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer