SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Republican presidential candidate Florida Senator Marco Rubio said of the omnibus bill “I know enough to say we’re going to oppose it, and I know enough to say that we should use every procedural aspect that we have to slow it down and perhaps force some changes” on Thursday’s “Happening Now” on the Fox News Channel.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Rubio said, “you can slow it down. Ultimately, if they want to pass it, they’re going to ram it down everyone’s throat, and it’s unfortunate. This is over a trillion dollars in spending. It was put together at the last second, as it always happens. They know this has to be done. They wait until December to do it. there’s one provision in the whole thing that’s really important, which is it once takes away the bailout fund for Obamacare, something I was able to achieve in the one last year, and then a bunch of really bad stuff, and you just mentioned one [the bill’s provisions for refugees]. This is why people are so frustrated with Washington. we know that this is a problem, we know that ISIS is trying to use the refugee program to infiltrate killers into the united states and nothing’s going to happen about it. They’re going to approve basically the same program we have today. And people scratch their head and say, how can it be? How can Washington be so out of touch and so disconnected?”

He added, “We can most certainly slow this process down and force them to go back and make changes to it. There’s no doubt that we can and we should and we will. And I think there’s an effort underway now, among many conservatives in the Senate, and in the House to make that happen. … Look, this is a massive piece of legislation, over a trillion dollars of spending, It was just announced, and this — and everyone now has to, in 48 hours, make a decision about what to do about it. I know enough to say we’re going to oppose it, and I know enough to say that we should use every procedural aspect that we have to slow it down and perhaps force some changes on these things that we’ve been discussing.”

Rubio concluded, “if we can add some days to it, the way Senator Sessions is talking about, and maybe some others, that process of slowing it down allows more Americans to wake up to the reality of what’s in the bill, and perhaps as a result demand that their elected representatives do something to make those changes on things like the Syrian refugees, which we’re talking about now.”

Follow Ian Hanchett on Twitter @IanHanchett