Woman led to career in science and technology

Amanda Huppert-Sazama is an application engineer at GEA Process Engineering Inc. in Hudson working in the field of dairy processing. She also raises cattle. (Submitted photo)

This special event is something designed to expose Hudson students, especially young girls (K-12) to future opportunities in STEM+ careers in science, technology, engineering, math and the applied arts.

The event will be held Feb. 12, from 5-8 p.m. at Hudson Middle School. Students will have the opportunity to explore STEM+ careers by meeting and talking with female professionals and others in a variety of fields. Businesses will have booths to showcase what they do and the careers that make up their business. There will also be several local representatives from Minnesota and Wisconsin universities and colleges to talk about their programs.

Amanda Huppert-Sazama will be at the event. She is an application engineer at GEA Process Engineering Inc. in Hudson. She has Bachelor of Science in Food Science and Technology and a Master of Science in Agricultural Education, both from the UW-River Falls.

Huppert-Sazama grew up on a dairy farm near River Falls and she says her upbringing influenced her career choices. “As a child my backyard was my laboratory as I was always fascinated by how plants grew, how to raise happy and healthy animals and the mechanics of the equipment on the farm.”

Through programs like 4-H and FFA, she continued to explore careers in the agricultural sciences as well as develop leadership through coursework and competitions. Her experiences in these organizations lead to awareness of opportunities in the agricultural industry and to a career in food science.

Huppert-Sazama said food science encompasses several disciplines including life/agricultural sciences, chemistry, physics, microbiology, mathematics/statistics and engineering and there are a variety of career paths out there.

Her own career has involved research and development for an ingredient manufacturer and for a large food company prior. At GEA she works on dairy processing projects.

Huppert-Sazama has some advice for young women interest in careers like hers. She remembers job shadowing a veterinarian when she was in the eighth grade. “I would recommend exploring career options in areas of interest at an early age, which may also assist in deciding what courses to take in high school.

She also believes a mentor is a good idea. “Meeting in person or via Skype with a professional in your area of interest on occasion can prove to be very helpful. Mentors can offer guidance on courses to enroll in and schools to apply too. Even adults meet with mentors and it is beneficial to draw from other’s career experiences.”

And she recommends being active in the community by participating in youth organizations or volunteer activities. “You never know who you may meet and the valuable resources that exist in your community! This is a good step toward developing networking skills.”

She also has some advice for parents looking to guide their daughters. It starts with engaging in a child’s interests and hobbies. “My mother spent countless hours with me at the library helping me research my interests from dinosaurs to dairy cows. She was also very supportive of my science experiments and projects and also accepting of the messes that came along with scientific inquiry.”

The event is open to interested students from surrounding schools as well as Hudson.

For more information about Women in STEM+ contact Melisa Hansen, School to Career Coordinator for the Hudson School District at (715) 377-3712, hansenma@hudson.k12.wi.us or Jodie Bray, Technology and Engineering Instructor, Hudson Middle School at (517) 449-8732, brayjf@hudson.k12.wi.us.

Get hands on at "Women in STEM+" set for 5-8 p.m. Feb. 12, at Hudson Middle School

Here are some of the activities planned for students:

—swab and test their own mouth bacteria

—create an object on a 3D printer

—create their own pot on the potter’s wheel

—use an injection molder

—create an app for their phone or iPad

—learn how roads and bridges are built

—learn the science behind every day products they use