The reformers say they want to move the GOP beyond its Reagan-era script. 'Reform conservatives' take on GOP

With the Republican Party’s establishment and tea party wings busy attacking each other, and no standard-bearer emerging for the White House, a group of intellectuals calling themselves “reform conservatives” are maneuvering to seize the party’s 2016 policy agenda.

In the process, they’ve set off a lively, intensifying debate in recent weeks over whether today’s GOP can be reformed at all.

Story Continued Below

The policy wonks — led by thinkers including Peter Wehner, Yuval Levin, and Ramesh Ponnuru — are circulating their economics-focused ideas with the express goal of influencing 2016 presidential contenders, and some of those potential candidates have been cautiously receptive. Rep. Paul Ryan, for instance, tweeted that their proposals are “good food for thought;” Sen. Marco Rubio’s spokeswoman said he believes the ideas “can ensure that the next generation of Americans have more opportunities for success”; and Indiana Gov. Mike Pence told POLITICO that he has “great appreciation for the efforts of reform minded conservatives.”

( Also on POLITICO: John McCain against the media)

The reformers say they want to move the GOP beyond its Reagan-era script of cutting taxes and shrinking government and toward a focus on what a more limited government can and should do, especially for the middle class. For the most part, they’ve shopped their ideas around informally, through private conversations and journal articles. But recently they took a more organized approach, releasing a 121-page policy manifesto called “Room to Grow.”

That move dramatically raised their profiles — and drew out the skeptics.

Conservative columnist Michael Gerson has praised the group, arguing it has “ more potential influence” than the tea party. But liberal critics, such as columnists E.J. Dionne and Jonathan Chait, have questioned how effective the reformists can be at a time when the Republican Party has expunged many of its moderates and the base is animated by the notion that government is always a problem. Some observers, meanwhile, compare them to the New Democrats of the 1990s, a parallel the intellectuals resist.

( Also on POLITICO: Dems prep Mississippi war plan)

The reform conservatives argue there’s no need to lure the GOP to the middle and no desire to further splinter it. (They’re not even sure who came up with their group’s label, though Gerson has used the phrase, or a version of it, for at least two years.) If anything, they say, their ideas would “reform” broken institutions by pushing them to the right.

“It is a conservative movement, and it’s important to understand that,” said Wehner, a former policy adviser to ex-President George W. Bush. “It’s not a fight. It’s not Goldwater vs. Rockefeller.”

The e-book manifesto, released in May at an event sponsored by the YG Network and the American Enterprise Institute, lays out proposals from around a dozen authors on 10 wide-ranging issues, including replacing Obamacare, helping the long-term unemployed, and rewriting War on Poverty programs.

( Also on POLITICO: Cruz invokes Reagan to Texas GOP)

It avoids divisive cultural issues such as abortion and same-sex marriage, steering a careful path around anything that could offend social conservatives. But it does include this implied challenge to the tea party: “Rather than talk about conservatism exclusively as a set of rules about what government should not be doing, we need to help Americans see the conservative vision of American life as a way to unleash the nation’s potential.”

Some critical details are still being worked out, like how to pay for some of the ideas. A chapter on tax reform, for example, talks up Utah Sen. Mike Lee’s proposal to give families an extra $2,500 tax credit per child and advertises it as a way to help parents struggling with the cost of raising kids. But an analysis by the Tax Policy Center found that Lee’s idea would add $2.4 trillion to the deficit over 10 years.

The reform conservatives note that the ideas are mere blueprints for now. The main point, they say, is to show how conservative proposals can be turned into policies to help the middle class, not just recycled into the usual talking points about cutting taxes and slashing spending.

“Middle class families aren’t worried about their tax burden,” said Reihan Salam, a policy adviser at the YG Network and contributing editor at National Review. “They’re worried about how much it costs to own and operate a car. They’re worried about finding decent post-secondary [education] options.”

Levin, who edits the conservative journal National Affairs, put it more bluntly: “The left always thinks it’s 1965. The right always thinks it’s 1981. The country knows it’s 2014.”