Soon, getting a prescription for birth control will be as hassle-free as asking a pharmacist.



When a new state law approved in 2013 is implemented later this year, pharmacists will be able to write scrips for hormonal contraceptives – no doctor required. Circumventing the physician will save women time and eliminate the co-pay tied to first visiting a doctor’s office.



“The traditional method just doesn’t hold up very well. It requires women to take time off work or school in order to make an appointment that might not be easy to get,” said Don Downing, a University of Washington School of Pharmacy professor who has researched and advocated for better access to birth control for nearly two decades.



“Many women don’t necessarily have a primary care provider. … It will be great news for a lot of people who are sexually active, but who don’t know where to turn,” Downing added.



The new law may make women’s lives easier, but it’s also seen as a major step toward expanding the role of pharmacists amid a nationwide shortage of doctors. Fueled by an aging population and a growing number of people newly covered by insurance under the Affordable Care Act, the shortage could reach 90,400 physicians by 2025, according to the Association of American Medical Colleges.



“Pharmacists are the experts on medications. This should be a really good thing for everybody,” said Joyia Emard, a spokeswoman with the California Board of Pharmacy.



California’s new law also allows pharmacists to prescribe prescription-strength inhalers, gums and lozenges for nicotine addiction, as well as medication for travel abroad, including vaccinations and antibiotics. Along with hormonal contraceptives, these three categories of drugs are considered preventive services for major public health issues.



The law also creates an additional class of pharmacists, called advanced practice pharmacists, who, after earning special certification, will be able to initiate, adjust, or discontinue all types of drugs after referral from a physician.



Hormonal contraceptives are birth control pills, the skin patch and vaginal ring. Under the new law, women will still have to obtain a prescription from a doctor for an intrauterine device.



The new law, SB 493, is expected to go into effect as early as Oct. 1, said Emard, spokeswoman with the pharmacy board, which has spent the past year crafting protocols that spell out how pharmacists will prescribe contraceptives. The board recently finalized the protocols, but they still have to be reviewed by multiple state agencies for legal and budgetary approval.



On the first visit women will be required to fill out a form with their medical history and, for pills that pose a risk of hypertension, they will need to take a blood pressure test.



Some physicians have questioned whether fewer women will get screenings for cancer and sexually transmitted diseases if they no longer have to visit a doctor to get birth control.



But Dr. Rachel Perry, a gynecologist and assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at UC Irvine, isn’t concerned that one will impact the other.



“Screenings for cancer and STDs aren’t medically required,” she said. “While these are necessary and important, I don’t think they should be tied to birth control.”



Her position is supported by the American Congress of Obstetricians and gynecologists, which has argued that oral contraceptives should be available over-the-counter, meaning without a prescription, so they are even easier to obtain.



The group cites a 2004 nationwide phone survey of 811 women that found 47 percent of uninsured women and 40 percent of low-income women who were not using the pill, patch or ring would start using them if they were available from pharmacies without a prescription. Making pills, patch and ring available over the counter would be politically charged, but it also might create a price barrier, because they would no longer be covered by insurance, Downing, of the University of Washington, said.



In authoring California’s new legislation, Ed Hernandez, a state senator from West Covina, argued that pharmacists are “over-trained and under-utilized.”



Mahtab Jafari, who directs UC Irvine’s undergraduate program in pharmaceutical sciences, agrees.



“The public doesn’t really know about the education that pharmacists get,” she said. “What the public sees is a pharmacist behind the counter, counting pills and giving them medications, but pharmacists are very educated.”



Pharmacy schools are adapting their curriculum to conform with SB 493. Jafari said she expects the changes will place an emphasis on teamwork, so pharmacists are prepared to communicate and share patients’ drug information with doctors.



Pharmacists who have already graduated from school will need to take at least one hour of continuing education to be able to prescribe contraceptives. Some might already have started that training or will soon.



Jon Roth, CEO of the California Pharmacists Association, which co-sponsored SB 493, said independent and chain pharmacies will take advantage of the new law as soon as they can.



“I think they see this as an opportunity to expand patient services and they’ll see consumer demand for it very quickly,” he said.



Downing is a bit more doubtful.



“We have found that there were a tremendous number of women who, when asked if they thought if it was safe to go to pharmacist to get pills, patches and ring, said, ‘Well isn’t there a blood test or some other exam that is necessary?’”



“There may be a very slow uptake until women disassociate cancer (and STD) screenings from birth control,” he said.



Contact the writer: jchandler@ocregister.com and @jennakchandler on Twitter