'It appears that it’s just blow after blow after blow coming from the EPA,' Rahall says. Coal fires up W.Va. House race

This story is part of an ongoing POLITICO series on how national policy issues are affecting the 2014 midterm elections.

HUNTINGTON, W.Va. — Deep in coal country, the candidates waging one of the nation’s most closely watched House races are competing to show who is the most outraged by President Barack Obama’s environmental policies.

Story Continued Below

Democratic Rep. Nick Rahall has denounced Obama’s Environmental Protection Agency as “ callous,” attacked its biggest greenhouse gas rule as “ disastrous” and filed legislation to block the heart of the president’s climate agenda. Republican challenger Evan Jenkins agrees that the EPA’s policies are “devastating” to West Virginians — but says the 19-term incumbent championed Obama’s election in 2008 and appears helpless to stop the White House now.

The state, where an imprisoned felon ran a close second to Obama in the 2012 primary, was always going to provide challenging turf for Democrats this November, but EPA raised the stakes this month by proposing a greenhouse gas rule that could sharply reduce the nation’s reliance on coal. The rule has offered Republicans a wedge issue in House and Senate races across the country, including in the Kentucky contest, where Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell is facing Democratic challenger Alison Lundergan Grimes.

(See more from POLITICO's All Policy is Local series)

Perhaps more than any other candidate on the ballot, Rahall faces a test: Can red-state Democrats separate themselves from a president so deeply unpopular back home?

He and his opponent are fighting it out with nearly identical rhetoric.

Jenkins, a state senator, promises that “I will never give up on coal,” while Rahall pledges that “we won’t turn our back on it for a nanosecond.” Both candidates tie the erosion of coal industry jobs to the district’s ever-present poverty and growing drug use. Both put out fliers that talk about “putting West Virginia first.” Both also deride the fire hose of cash flooding into the race from out-of-state spending groups — although Jenkins describes the groups as “anti-coal radical environmental interests,” while Rahall calls them Jenkins’ “puppet-masters, the Koch brothers.”

Jenkins faces the easier task: playing the anti-Obama in one of the most anti-Obama states in the country. Rahall’s job is trickier as he tries to channel his constituents’ despair at what Obama’s administration is doing in his state.

(Also on POLITICO: EPA administrator denies war on coal)

“We’ve been down before,” Rahall said in an interview at the opening of a campaign office in Huntington, a city of colleges, a large port and technology companies in the state’s southwest corner. “We’ve come back. But when we’ve been down before, we have felt that the government’s been on our side.” Now, though, “it appears that it’s just blow after blow after blow coming from the EPA.”

Republicans accuse Rahall of trying to have it both ways, noting that just last summer, he hobnobbed at a ceremony renaming EPA’s headquarters and praised Administrator Gina McCarthy for showing “a genuine willingness to listen” — yet, by all appearances, couldn’t get the agency to back off its coal regulations. The conservative, Koch-supported American Energy Alliance also has run ads accusing Rahall of supporting a carbon tax, which he denies.

Jenkins said in an interview that he reminds people “at every opportunity, this is the guy who was the chief campaigner for Obama in West Virginia.” Rahall was a Democratic superdelegate who endorsed Obama in the 2008 primary.

( Also on POLITICO: SCOTUS nibbles at EPA's powers)

“It is West Virginians and people of the 3rd Congressional District in particular that are bearing the brunt of this agenda,” Jenkins said. “And that’s what’s so devastating.”

Rahall is leading for now in the fundraising race and in some recent polls. But his share of the vote has slipped in the past few elections from 69 percent in 2006 to 54 percent two years ago. Republicans sense a big opportunity in a district where Mitt Romney won 65 percent of the vote in 2012.

Still, “Nick Joe” — as many people here call Rahall — has some ammunition of his own. He reminds voters of the earmarks he brought to the district in years past, plus his close ties to the late Democratic Sen. Robert Byrd, a still-beloved figure here.

He acknowledges that the campaign is going to be “very tough” and that the spending to date is probably just the beginning. Democratic and Republican party committees and PACs have announced plans to spend a total of $3.6 million on the race, in addition to money from groups that don’t have to disclose their outlays.

( Also on POLITICO: GOP plays Steyer card vs. Dems)

“I feel confident, but not overconfident,” Rahall said. “I work every election hard. I don’t take any votes for granted. And I believe in the way my former mentor Robert Byrd used to say — ‘There are two ways to run: Unopposed or scared.’”

‘Hopeless’ in coal country

Similarities between Rahall and Jenkins go well beyond their expressed dislike for EPA and fealty to coal.

The candidates align on supporting gun rights, opposing gay marriage and opposing amnesty for undocumented immigrants. They both talk about diversifying West Virginia’s economy, promoting oil and gas, timber, agriculture and the state’s No. 2 industry, tourism. They even both take credit for the state’s Hatfield-McCoy trail system, popular with riders of off-road vehicles — Jenkins says he sponsored the original state legislation that led to the trail’s creation, while Rahall says he got the project its “seed money.”

What space exists between them on campaign issues mainly seems to involve Obamacare and boosting the minimum wage. Rahall voted for Obamacare and has said that “I sleep easy at night, knowing I cast the right vote.”

But nothing strikes as close to voters’ hearts here as coal.

“They feel hopeless,” said Christina Underwood, the wife of a pastor and coal miner who sat down with Jenkins and several coal-industry employees at the Nicholas County GOP headquarters in Summersville, in the district’s eastern side. The workers included Roger Thomas, a coal mine electrician who recently returned to work in the area after being away from his wife and seven children for eight months.

“It isn’t just a job that’s being lost,” said Underwood, whose husband was laid off three times in the past six years. “It isn’t just coal that’s being a war waged against. It’s Roger. It’s his wife, Eva, and his kids. It’s me, my husband, our kids. I can’t save for them for college. The savings that we had, we had to take out to get us through when we were laid off.”

The uncertainty eats away at people, Thomas said. “It’s honestly hard to keep your mind on your job if you don’t know if you’re going to have a job. … You just kind of come out, hope they tell you to bring your bucket back tomorrow.”

Summersville holds the same natural beauty and charm evident across the state — winding roads dotted with sturdy wooden homes, churches, an old bank and broad, open sky that meets the state’s mountainous terrain. But it’s also home to the problems plaguing all of southern West Virginia: prescription drug abuse and rising heroin addictions, unemployment and a palpable panic for many coal-dependent families.

“Right now, we’re living on false hope,” said Mike Grose, owner of Superior and Elite Coal Services, which trains and contracts out miners to coal companies. “That’s what’s wrong with the industry now — there is no light at the end of the tunnel.

“Where’s our bailout?” Grose asked.

Anger in coal country is the key to Jenkins’ campaign.

Jenkins represents Cabell County in the state Senate and lives here, the state’s second-largest city. But that area is a stronghold for Rahall, while the district’s coal-heavy reaches are where the incumbent lost support in the May 13 primary, when he took 66 percent of the vote.

That’s why Jenkins was spending a Friday afternoon in June tooling around Summersville with two campaign aides and Nicholas County GOP Chairwoman Benjean Rapp.

Jenkins mingled with seniors at Shoney’s, toured Grose’s training shop and met with miners at the local GOP office before scooting off to speak with the county’s main pediatrician, who some locals worry may close up shop, given Medicaid reimbursement troubles.

The decline of the coal industry is central to the state’s other major issues, Jenkins and his supporters say.

“I think that if you had a well-paid, trained workforce that can take care of themselves, you’re going to have less issues with thievery, drugs, the Medicaid problem that we have, the being on welfare,” Rapp said.

Jenkins said that’s the “core frustration” for him. A good job is “not going to get everybody off drugs, but there’s a lot of people who have lost hope,” he said. “And tragically, where they turn to a lot of times is the pain pills, or now heroin.”