SCOTIA >> U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, the Republican presidential candidate, received a hero’s welcome at a Christian school here Thursday, pledging to uphold God and fundamental rights while dismissing rival Donald Trump as unelectable and Democratic hopefuls Hillary Clinton and Sen. Bernie Sanders as “wild-eyed socialists.”

About 1,000 people packed the gym at Mekeel Christian Academy for the second visit this week to the Albany area by a presidential candidate. Hillary Clinton spoke at Cohoes High School on Monday, and Trump, Sanders and Republican Gov. John Kasich of Ohio are headed to the area next week, supporters say.

The April 19 New York primary could be key to deciding both parties’ nominees, a sharp change from the past when the state’s late voting was usually not a deciding factor. Cruz was in New York City Wednesday and was scheduled to return there following his Scotia speech to attend events in Brooklyn.

With students seated on a makeshift stage behind him, Cruz said the 2016 election will focus on “jobs, freedom and security” as he described an apocalyptic political landscape of national debt, eroding basic constitutional freedoms, and what he called the weak leadership of President Obama.

Advertisement

He also offered hope and encouragement, “because people are waking up and help is on the way” to change the status quo of drift and economic stagnation.

“The media tries to tell us this is the new normal, this is as good as it gets,” Cruz said. “Let me tell you, that is an absolute lie.”

He joked that the word politics derived from the word “ticks,” comparing Washington, D.C., to “blood-sucking parasites.” He said “federal regulators have descended like locusts on small businesses.”

He vowed “to repeal every word of Obamacare” and “pass a simple flat tax where every American can fill out our taxes on a postcard.” When that happens, “we should abolish the IRS.”

The border will be secured and amnesty, sanctuary cities and welfare benefits for illegal aliens will cease, he said.

With such changes, “it will be morning in America,” he said, alluding to President Ronald Reagan’s 1984 re-election campaign theme.

He cited Reagan for cutting taxes, rebuilding the military and defeating the Soviet Union in the Cold War. “I intend to do the exact same thing with radical Islamic terrorism. ... We believe in peace through strength, but if and when military force is necessary, we should use overwhelming force, kill the enemy and then get the heck out.”

He reserved his harshest rhetoric for describing the threat posted by the U.S. Supreme Court if liberal justices become the majority. He said “we are one liberal justice away” from the Supreme Court “stripping religious liberty from millions of Americans ... effectively erasing the Second Amendment from the Bill of Rights” and subjugating national sovereignty to the United Nations and the World Court.

“Don’t pick Andrew Cuomo!” a voice in the crowd yelled, prompting applause and Cruz to say, “All right, you convinced me.” Cuomo, the New York governor, is a Democrat who supports Clinton.

Cruz said his chief GOP rival, Trump, “has been supporting liberal Democratic politicians for 40 years” and dismissed his claims to being a deal maker. He said Clinton will win if Trump is the nominee.

“I will not compromise away your religious liberty and I will not compromise away your Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms,” he said.

Nominating Trump will guarantee a Clinton win and that “is catastrophic. We lose the Supreme Court for a generation, we lose the Bill of Rights, our kids are buried in trillions more in debt, and we remain trapped in the same economic stagnation we’ve seen in the past seven years.”

“Our friends in the media tell us that Donald Trump is unstoppable in New York state,” Cruz said. “Oddly enough, our friends in the media are comfortable with a New York liberal who has supported Andrew Cuomo, Hillary Clinton and Chuck Schumer for decades.”

He closed by predicting “the most long lasting legacy of Barack Obama is going to be a new generation of leaders of the Republican Party who stand and fight for liberty, who stand and fight for the Constitution and who stand and fight for the Judeo-Christian values that built this great nation.”