With six people carrying a wooden coffin, dozens of supporters began their walk Monday morning in front of a closed hospital to show support for rural health care.

With signs in hand, people from all over the country came to North Carolina to participate in the trek.

"It's heart warming to see all these people coming from other states who have similar concerns," says Belhaven resident Marjie Stark.

Belhaven Mayor Adam O'Neal, civil rights activist Bob Zellner and others are making a second walk to Washington, D.C.

"The Walk" was orchestrated to bring attention to the growing rural healthcare problem. They consider Belhaven to be ground zero for this crisis affecting 62 million Americans.

"Keep the hospitals open for our veterans, for our brownie scouts, our boy scouts, our grandparents, for our parents," says O'Neal. "We need to keep these hospitals open."

O'Neal and others have been trying to get Vidant Pungo Hospital reopened. The Belhaven hospital closed last summer.

Last July, Zellner, O'Neal and other leaders walked 273 miles over a two-week span to D.C. They say they were pushed to do so after the death of 48-year-old Portia Gibbs. They believe her life could have been saved if the hospital and its emergency room were still open.

This year, "The Walk," as it's called, is growing. Representatives from a number of states, along with Belhaven residents and others, say they're walking to protest the potential closing of 283 rural hospitals.

Previous Story

Belhaven Mayor Adam O'Neal and Civil Rights activist Bob Zellner appeared on MSNBC's Melissa Harris-Perry show Saturday to promote Monday's walk to Washington D.C.

For the second time O'Neal is walking to Washington, D.C. to protest the closing of Vidant Pungo Hospital.

"The Walk" was orchestrated to bring attention to the growing rural healthcare problem. They consider Belhaven to be Ground Zero for this crisis affecting 62 million Americans.

Last July, Zellner, O'Neal and other leaders walked 273 miles over a two-week span to D.C. They say they were pushed to do so after the death of 48-year-old Portia Gibbs. They believe her life could have been saved if the hospital and its emergency room were still open.

This year, "The Walk," as it's called, is growing. Representatives from a number of states, along with Belhaven residents and others, say they're walking to protest the potential closing of 283 rural hospitals.

The Walk begins with about 20 walkers from 11 states at 8:30 a.m. at Public Docks, Wynne's Gut in Belhaven. Before they take off, Rev. Dr. William Barber, Dr. Charles Boyette, Mayor O'Neal, and Zellner will speak.

You can learn more about it in the related links section.