The international community must punish Russia before we see more violent spillover

Ukrainian employees search for bodies amongst the wreckage at the crash site of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 in the Donetsk region Sunday. (Photo: Bulent Kilic, AFP/Getty Images)

The July 17 downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17 and death of all 298 passengers on board is a heartbreaking catastrophe. It is also an international incident and a wake-up call for those who might wish to sit on the sidelines while this violent war continues to escalate. This tragedy requires a swift, measured response from the United States and the international community to pressure Russian President Vladimir Putin to put an end to this fight.

If the needless deaths were not enough of a provocation, the response over the weekend has only escalated the situation. Russian media's attempts to twist the facts caused a veteran Russia TV reporter to resign in protest. And Ukrainian rebels continue to contaminate the crash site, removing evidence and resisting international efforts to launch a proper investigation and care for the bodies.

President Obama has placed the blame squarely on Putin, noting that this sort of weapons system requires "sophisticated equipment and sophisticated training — and that is coming from Russia."

Unfortunately, U.S. efforts to date to pressure the Russian president to end his support to the rebels and use his influence to stop the fighting in Ukraine have been met with more hand-wringing than action by American allies, who have been reluctant to follow through on previous rounds of economic sanctions targeting Russian oligarchs. More confounding still, France is on track to sell two amphibious warships to Russia.

As a result of this lack of unified resolve, Putin has acted with impunity. After annexing Crimea, Russia launched a creeping invasion of eastern Ukraine that has fueled an escalating civil war with a steady stream of lethal military aid to pro-Russian rebels. Shooting down this civilian airliner is a tragic consequence of this reckless behavior.

Clearly, the global community cannot isolate itself from further spillover from this violent conflict. The international community must support U.S. efforts to pressure Putin and support Ukraine's defense. And the U.S. can do more in leading the way.

In the short term, America should use its resources to reveal the truth about what caused this tragedy and who is to blame. By being "first with the truth," we can pierce through the swirl of rumors and propaganda that Putin will have every reason to encourage.

Next, harsher financial sanctions must be levied against Russia.

There are signs that the current sanctions, targeted against prominent Russian businesses and individuals, are beginning to exert serious pressure on the Russian government. The latest round, announced by President Obama the day before the Malaysian jet was shot down, will squeeze Russian banking, energy, and arms markets.

Yet the strongest measures have so far been held in reserve as Europeans have been unwilling to risk the strain on their own economies. In order for economic pressure to be effective, these nations can no longer opt out. France must end its warship deal with Putin and the EU nations must sign on to sector-wide sanctions.

America and its NATO allies should also increase military assistance to Ukrainian forces. In addition to the important non-lethal aid already being provided, including food, body armor, medical supplies, and the like, Ukraine needs military advice, weapons, ammunition, and training to counter this offensive.

Finally, this appalling tragedy demonstrates the global ripple effect of Putin's aggression in Ukraine. Australia, faced with the deaths of 28 of its own citizens, is considering blocking Russian participation in the G20 summit, scheduled for this November in Queensland.

This is an appropriate response. Russia should not continue to reap the benefits of the international system while actively and skillfully attempting to undermine it at the same time. Nations around the world should make this clear by shutting Russia out.

The tragic death of nearly 300 innocent civilians from around the world has shined a bright light on the violence in Ukraine and Putin's role in fueling it. But people do not act just because they see the light; they act when they feel the heat. It is time for the global community to turn up the heat on Putin because as Samantha Power, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said on Friday, "Russia can end this war. Russia must end this war."

Janine Davidson is senior fellow for defense policy at the Council on Foreign Relations.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1jPaOhl