An army veteran, a longtime mayor and a teacher are among the five candidates seeking to represent the 48th Assembly District in California’s primary election next month.

Running to succeed Assemblyman Roger Hernandez are four Democrats — Bassett Unified School District Board member Armando Barajas, Baldwin Park Mayor Manuel Lozano, Baldwin Park Unified School District Board member Blanca Rubio and Upper San Gabriel Valley Municipal Water District Board member Bryan Urias — and Republican Cory Ellenson, a self-employed tax attorney and Glendora Unified School District board member.

The 48th District, which has a population of about 460,000, includes Azusa, Baldwin Park, Bradbury, City of Industry, Covina, El Monte, Glendora, Irwindale, Monrovia, West Covina and the unincorporated communities of Bassett, Charter Oak, East Arcadia, Ramona, Royal Oaks and Valinda.

With Hernandez termed out, the June 7 primary will be the first election in the district without an incumbent since the state adopted the Top Two Candidates Open Primary Act, in which the top two vote-getters, regardless of party, advance to the general election in November.

And in a majority-Democrat district, Rubio, 46, saw this year’s election as her best shot at getting elected.

“I would not get another opportunity for a number of years,” said Rubio, a fourth-grade teacher in the Fontana Unified School District.

Rubio, who was first elected to the Baldwin Park school board in 2003, said her top goals if elected would be to invest more funding into green infrastructure projects and vocational training programs for high school students.

“We’ are all in agreement that kids need higher education, but a four-year university is not necessarily for everybody,” Rubio said, adding that she would like to see more accountability in how school districts use their state funds to ensure those dollars are being used equitably across districts.

Ellenson, who is serving his first four-year term on the Glendora school board, said in an email that he too would work to increase funds for career technical education programs. He also wants to reform regulations that hinder business growth and focus on workforce development.

“These are straightforward solutions to obvious problems,” Ellenson said in the email, emphasizing a nonpartisan approach to local issues. “I’m just doing what makes sense, and I don’t care what side of the aisle that comes from.”

Advertisement

Urias, a former staffer for U.S. Rep. Judy Chu and then-Congresswoman Hilda Solis, said he wants to work on making higher education affordable and ensure that the San Gabriel Valley continues to get its fair share of resources for transportation and water infrastructure.

“It’s gotten better but I think it could get a lot better,” said Urias, who currently lives in Duarte. “We don’t get nearly as close to 100 percent we pay in taxes back to the San Gabriel Valley.”

Lozano, the only candidate who has run for state office before, said he decided to run as an alternative to Urias and Rubio, who have raised more than $400,000 and $245,000, respectively, according to campaign finance records. Urias has been endorsed by several top Democrats in Congress as well as many state legislators. Rubio has also received endorsements from state officials and the legislature’s Latino and Democratic women’s caucuses.

“They are simply going to be status quo,” said Lozano, Baldwin Park’s mayor since 1999. “I’m seeking the endorsement of the residents of the 48th district versus Sacramento.”

He and Barajas, a newcomer to politics, have not raised any money leading up to the primary election. Lozano said he was relying on social media this time around, while Barajas has opted to spend a few thousand dollars of his own money on his campaign.

“If I don’t make it past the primary I don’t want to be wasting people’s money,” said Barajas, a 30-year-old U.S. Army veteran from La Puente. “For me, it’s an investment.”

Barajas, who was only elected to the Bassett Unified school board in November, described himself as an outsider whose main priorities are the economy, education and veterans.

He wants to bring more services to veterans in the San Gabriel Valley and invest more in early childhood education.

“I’m very optimistic,” Barajas said. “I don’t believe that money makes the world go round.”