It was William F. Buckley who, in a fit of exasperation, wrote that he wished he could stand "athwart" history's march of modernity crying "stop!" Something similar is going on today in the Republican Party and its fascination with Donald Whatsisname.



This is not to equate the Donald, a cynical, serial liar with no credible beliefs or convictions, with Bill Buckley, a man of real principle and honest (if sometimes misguided) convictions, the Moses of modern Republican conservatism.

The link between Buckley's time and this one is the mortal fear of change in the GOP of both eras – with one important difference.

The response of Bill Buckley's Republican Party was intellectual and idea-driven. He fostered debate on conservative and liberal differences, Republican and Democratic policy options, wherever he could. The Republican Party of today, at least as evidenced by its "front-runner" and his fans, deals instead in insult and invective.



Mexican immigrants are "criminals and rapists," according to the Donald, Muslims must be barred from immigration until ... who knows when. But he's not alone.

Ted Cruz, who strikes me as more dangerous than Whatzisname because he might actually have a real electoral chance (he seems a likely winner in Iowa) wants to admit only Christians. In other words, he'd impose a religious test that the Founders specifically prohibited in this country.

Where'd all this American fear and hostility come from? Why has it only surfaced now? And what, curiously enough, does it share with radical Islamist fundamentalism?

Well, it may have emerged with singular intensity just at this moment but it's been brewing for some time. And that shouldn't be surprising. We're experiencing a time of almost unprecedented change in degree and speed, and most of us – those who'll admit it – are a little unsettled by it all.

The degree to which we're unsettled seems to vary demographically and generationally, by where we live and how old we are. No group is more rattled by it all than white men – particularly older white men. Anyone who has listened to the conversations at the local country club has experienced it up close and personal.



And, from what the polls and press reports have indicated, this phenomenon is most pronounced among older, white rural Americans, especially in the heart of the Old South.

We're talking here about the rank and file, the grass roots, of the Republican Party – those to whom Whatizname is flat out pandering and his Republican opponents are too fearful of offending to challenge the "front-runner" face-to-face.

The fact that so many in the GOP field are so easily cowed by the polls is eloquent testimony to the sad fact that this is the weakest assemblage of Republican presidential aspirants to come along in some time. They act, as one Republican reportedly described them, "like they're all wearing suicide vests."

That's obviously no good for the GOP. But it's only slightly less obvious that it's no good for the development of a responsible Democratic alternative either. Extremism in either party tends often to promote a different brand of extremism in the other. It hasn't yet in the Democratic Party but ... who knows?

The most curious aspect of the GOP's dread of modernity – some of us call that change – is how it mirrors the dread of the modern world underlying the convulsion taking place is Islam.

The jihadists of ISIS crave, they tell us anyway, a return to the pieties and certainties of seventh century Islam, when women knew their place and non-believers could justifiably be subjugated or slaughtered, maybe both. American conservatives, at least those parading past the presidential reviewing stand, likewise yearn for yesteryear, for the Golden Days of the Reagan era.

They're both wearing rose-colored glasses. The seventh century for Islam gave way to the great Shi'a-Sunni split over who'd succeed the Prophet. And the Reagan era produced an immigration amnesty and a doubling of the federal debt, not to mention the Iran-Contra scandal.

But who's keeping score ... right?

The other common thread found in Islamist radicalism and ultra-right Republican conservatism is futility. ISIS cannot win an all-out war with the West; such a fight would produce a harvest or destruction for its followers. Likewise, GOP conservatives cannot roll back the calendar to a time before President ObamaCare and his Affordable Care Act.

Much of what we see today as discomforting change is not going away with time. It's part of the future; it's here to stay. Best to keep cool, as they say, and carry on.

More John Farmer columns

John Farmer may be reached at jfarmer@starledger.com. Find NJ.com Opinion on Facebook.