A cyclist rides on the new path next to the Longmont-bound lanes of the Diagonal Highway on Sunday. In the background is the new underpass. ( Johnnie St. Vrain / Longmont Times-Call )

Dear Johnnie: We have been watching the construction of the bicycle underpass at the Diagonal and Airport Road for many months now. However, we have yet to figure out what the traffic pattern will be. Can you find someone who can explain how that underpass is going to help bicyclists? I don't understand how a bicyclist going south will use it or one going north. Either way it seems to me that they will still have to stop and somehow manage to cross Airport Road or the Diagonal. Can you help? -- A Confused Motorist

Dear Confused Motorist: First of all, I apologize that it took me so long to get to your question.

As it turns out, "north" and "south" are key to the answer. This underpass completes the passage from the north side of the Diagonal Highway to the south side of the highway.

Yes, cyclists and pedestrians still have to cross the Boulder-bound lanes of the Diagonal, but at that intersection, they have a traffic light. So, a cyclist can safely proceed across the highway at that point.

That's just what I saw happen when I drove out on Sunday afternoon to take a look for myself. The cyclist then proceeded south on the new bicycle/pedestrian path and under the Longmont-bound lanes of the highway.

The underpass provides access to the LoBo regional trail and to Ogallala Road, both of which are on the south side of the highway, and it allows Longmont-bound cyclists who want to head north on Airport Road to avoid taking a left from Diagonal. I can imagine that at rush hour it can be terrifying to go from the right shoulder of the Diagonal across two lanes of 65 mph traffic to get onto northbound Airport Road.

Also, the underpass provides access to an RTD bus stop on the south side of the highway.

If you think about it, the option to building an underpass would be a traffic light at that intersection. Doing it this way keeps cyclists and pedestrians safe while causing the least disruption to traffic.

The underpass is supposed to have low-impact, low-energy lighting that remains dim until a pedestrian or cyclist approaches. I was there during a sunny afternoon, so I could not check that out for myself.

The project also was scheduled to include the installation a new 8-foot concrete sidewalk and bicycle path along the east side of Airport Road between the highway and the Longmont's city limits to the north, where it will tie into the city's sidewalk and streets system. That, I saw.

Johnnie: Our family was wondering if you have heard any news on when Button Rock reservoir is going to open up again for hiking and fishing. We sure miss the wonderful hiking trails and wildlife that are so close to us from Longmont. — Missing Button Rock Badly

Dear Missing Button Rock: Button Rock Preserve (and Ralph Price Reservoir) will be closed until "spring/summer 2015," according to the city's flood recovery update website.

"The preserve is completely closed to public access while essential work is underway to restore water supply infrastructure in the area. Replacement and repair of hiking trails and recreational facilities (2 outhouse facilities, signage, parking area, fishing pier, gates) will follow critical water supply infrastructure repairs, likely in spring/summer 2015," according to the site.

I asked city project manager Josh Sherman about the possibility of opening in the spring

"It means closer to May than March," he said. "Mid to late spring."

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com.