School notes

Adventures in Learning preschoolers practice flossing "teeth" with the help of Marek's mom.

Sunnyside Elementary School staff dressed in character to match some of the books they read as I Love to Read Month concluded.

There is no school Monday March 9.

Ramp Up

This week in Ramp Up to Readiness, students will learn about the following:

Grade 8 – Factors to Consider When Selecting Post-Secondary Training

Grade 9 – Evaluating the SMARTness of Goals

Grade 10 – Gaining a Better Understanding of the SAT

Grade 11 – Using “College Majors”

Grade 12 – Not So Great Study Groups

Sunnyside School

Kindergarten registration

The kindergarten registration process has moved to Sunnyside Elementary. The office is open Monday through Friday from 7 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. to register. Bring a photo copy of your child’s government-sponsored birth certificate, your child’s preschool screening date and an up-to-date copy of immunizations (5-year-old shots required before school). Note: If your child has not been preschool screened, an appointment can be made by contacting Colvill Family Center at 651-385-8000.

Walking Wednesday

Congratulations to our winner, Clare Guse from Mrs. Dressen’s kindergarten class.

Character Dress-up Day

During I Love to Read Month, teachers dressed as a character in a book. They then went around to classrooms to read.

Kindergarten

Monday March 2 was Dr. Seuss’ birthday. We read the book “The Cat in the Hat,” made Thing 1 and Thing 2 people, hats and snacks. We also made a portrait of ourselves as the Cat in the Hat.

Conferences

Parent/teacher conferences are 11:20 a.m. to 7 p.m. March 9.

Jump Rope for Heart

On Friday March 13, 24 Burnside students will be here at 9 a.m. to perform their jump rope skills that they have been working on since early January. This will be the official start to Jump Rope for Heart for our Sunnyside students.

Kids Junction

We are making a chart using a lion or lamb to take a poll predicting March’s weather and how it is coming in and going out. Go Green is the theme to kick off spring. Crafts will be made using items of green including paint, yarn, pipe cleaners, pompoms, and beads.

Twin Bluff Middle School

Conferences

Conferences are March 9 from 3:30-7:30 p.m.

PAC

Parent Advisory Council will meet at 6:30 p.m. March 10. All parents are welcome.

Pennies for patients

Donations continue to be collected for the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society. Pennies for Patients boxes can be brought in through Wednesday. Competition between grade levels is on. “When you spare change … you can change the world.”

Burnside School

Burnside Today

Burnside Today announcers will be Logan Losey and Daminica Young with Matthew Bolland operating the camera.

Conferences

Parent/teacher conferences will start at 11:15 a.m. Monday March 9.

Grade 4 fundraiser

Grade 4 Pizza Pete fundraiser orders are due Tuesday March 10.

Picture day

Spring picture day will be Wednesday March 11.

Maple tapping

Grade 2 will be tapping maple trees on Friday March 13. Over a couple of weeks, the Red Wing Environmental Learning Center will lead the students through a complete maple tapping experience.

Jump Rope for Heart

The opening Jump Rope for Heart asssembly will be 1:30 p.m. March 13.

Media Center

The schoolwide read is “The One and Only Ivan,” a Newberry Award book. Grades 3 and 4 are learning about the award and other books that have achieved this honor.

Mitchell Seeley and Avvagael Plank have read six Maude Hart Lovelace books.

Elementary PAC

Elementary Parent Advisory Council will meet at Burnside at 11:30 a.m. Friday March 13. All parents are welcome.

Grade 3 book clubs

Mr. Lahammer’s third-grade books clubs met again last week. The Girls Dessert Before Lunch Bunch met with Mrs. Beckner and the Boys Dessert Before Lunch Book Bunch met with Mr. Lahammer. They shared who their favorite book character is and why. They told what they would do with that character if they could spend a weekend with them. They had cookies from Hanisch Bakery and then dined together.

Kids Junction

The Kids Junction participants will create little leprechauns to hang around our room to go along with a St. Patrick’s Day theme for our non-school day on March 9.

St. John’s

Basketball night

Basketball awards night was Friday March 6. This concludes the season.

Spirit Week

Spirit Week poster winners are Malakai Bartholomew, Elijah Sievers, Lilly Lopez, Elijah Klatt, Isabella Goeman, Tori Pritchard, Kailyn Peterson and Reece Price.

Little Blessings

Preschoolers are talking about things that are shamrock-shaped and green. The children are doing a variety of hands-on activities with letters and numbers.

Kindergarten

Kindergartners love a challenge. They continue to read harder books and they get so excited about reading. In math, students are taking sets of coins and exchanging them for another set of coins worth the same amount.

Grades 1 and 2

First-graders had a math test to finish up a unit on geometric shapes and concepts. Second-graders are measuring things.

Grades 3, 4 and 5

In Mr. Justin Hansen’s classroom students are working with subject/object pronouns. They continue to work on reading with expression. Fifth-graders took a unit test on verbs. They have started reading the book “Genius Files: Mission Unstoppable.”

Grades 6, 7 and 8

Principal Benjamin Bain has reviewed unit 6 in his Everyday Math 6 classes. Transition Math multiplied positive and negative numbers. Algebra students solved equation of the form ax(squared)=b. Sixth-, seventh- and eighth-graders have started a new reading unit called “Fire and Ice.”

Adventures in Learning Preschool

3-4-year-olds

The students were introduced to Danny Diamond and made diamonds with their hands. After hearing a country version and a rock version of “Little Bo Beep,” the students graphed to see which version was preferred. The rock version had more votes. The students made puppets to act out the rhyme.

Morning 4-5-year-olds

The students made a chart showing what they knew about “Goldilocks and the Three Bears.” After hearing several versions of the stories, they charted the similarities and the differences. Game day was a hit for the students. Marek’s mom, Calli, came in to share more information about dental health.

Afternoon 4-5-year-olds

Along with charting the similarities and differences, the students also made puppets and used items around the room to make a “stage” where they acted out the story. They learned about actors and audiences roles in a play and how to have proper etiquette. Game Day and library time also made for a busy week.

Colvill Family Center

Colvill Kids 3’s

Ms. Debbie’s classes will be exploring the sense of hearing this week. They will be learning about the letter Dd.

Mixed Ages

Ms. Debbie’s class will be reading and learning about the sense of hearing. They will focus on the letter Dd.

Colvill Kids 4’s

Ms. Lila’s classes will be learning about frogs. They will read “A Lost Button” from the book “Frog and Toad Are Friends” by Arnold Lobel. During the week, students will sort buttons and put together the frog’s life cycle. The letter of the week is Ss (Sammy Seal.)

Fall preschool

We are now accepting registrations for 2015-16 Colvill Kids preschool. We have many options available for ages 3 to 5. For more information, call Colvill at 651-385-8000.

Kids Junction

New for the 2015-16 school year, Kids Junction and Colvill are excited to offer preschool child care. For more information, contact Colvill Family Center at 651-385-8000.

Childhood screening

Upcoming early childhood screening is March 19 and April 9. Screening is required by the state of Minnesota before a child enters kindergarten and is free to families. Screening is recommended for all children over age 3. Call Colvill at 651-385-8000 to schedule an appointment.