One of the annoying things about covering politics is that few people admit partisan motives for issues.

Right to Work was all about choice for (lazy) workers, not about breaking unions, the backbone of the Democratic Party. Killing Obamacare is about destroying socialism (even though it's a free-market system), not detonating the signature achievement of our Democratic president.

You get the idea.

Now in Michigan, we have a proposal on the table that is purely partisan: Changing how we divide our electoral votes to help Republicans.

Right now, Michigan, like 48 other states, operates under a winner-take-all system. That's been very bad for Republicans since 1988, the last year they captured any of the Mitten State's sweet, sweet electoral votes.

Things were so bad in 2012 that President Obama whipped Mitt Romney by 450,000 votes here, or almost 10 points.

So when you can't win, you change the rules.

The original plan would have mainly divided Michigan's electoral votes by congressional district. As Republicans have a 9-5 advantage, that incredibly would have given Romney more votes in '12.

Now there's an inscrutable plan where nine votes go to the winner, but the rest are determined by a confusing equation out of Algebra II (too bad GOP Gov. Rick Snyder just signed legislation dumping that requirement from high school).

Basically, the runner-up (i.e. the loser) will probably end up with some electoral votes. It's like a participation trophy in preschool T-ball, only Michigan is trying to build up the self-esteem of Republican wannabe leaders of the free world.

It's not a coincidence that the lawmaker who's been on this quest for years, Rep. Pete Lund (R-Shelby Twp.), has been interested in being Michigan GOP chair, where he can focus purely on chocolatey politics, without the annoying policy candy shell.

There's no policy fig leaf for this Electoral College rigging, but I feel sorry for reporters who have to dutifully type: "Republicans say it's about making Michigan more relevant in the presidential process."

Because if they don't, Republicans, who are being completely disingenuous about their motives, will accuse journalists of being biased. The chuzpah, it burns.

Before this latest iteration, I wrote about the parade of presidential hopefuls -- Chris Christie, Jeb Bush, Hillary Clinton, etc. -- in Michigan for the election. I mused that they would still campaign here in 2016, as they'd be fighting over congressional district votes.

But this new plan gives little incentive to pay Michigan any mind. If candidates will get some electoral votes just for appearing on the ballot, they'll be even more likely to bypass us for big prizes in Florida and Ohio.

We'll be less relevant than before. And there's an economic impact no one's talking about.

Broadcast and cable TV stations' bread and butter in even years is political advertising, and presidential ads net far more money than those for state House. Newspapers and radio stations also will take a hit.

And fewer campaign events mean less money for hotels, bars and restaurants.

Yes, the GOP Electoral College rigging bill is a job-killer. Is it worse than Obamacare? We'll see.

Of course, very smart people have been pooh-poohing the idea that this will happen, usually citing a Dave Weigel Bloomberg View piece.

Sure, there's already been a committee hearing, but they're convinced Snyder will save us.

The guv has expressed skepticism, sure -- but he's never promised to veto, just like he never did on RTW.

Snyder desperately wants tax hikes to fix the roads (something unpopular with Republicans), and signing the electoral vote scheme could be part of the deal. He's just been re-elected and doesn't have anything to lose.

Can't wait for the throaty lecture about how this is all about good government.

Susan J. Demas is Publisher and Editor of Inside Michigan Politics, a nationally acclaimed, biweekly political newsletter. She can be reached at susan@sjdemas.com. Follow her on Twitter here.