[WATCH] Students know more about the Justin Bieber than Obama’s State of the Union address

Who would win in a fight, Justin Bieber or President Barack Obama? Well in the fight for the attention of college students, the Biebs takes the cake.

The 19-year-old pop star has been making headlines after his recent arrest in Miami Beach for drag racing, driving under the influence, resisting arrest and driving without a valid license. Only five days after Bieber’s arrest, the President gave his State of the Union address.

So Media Research Center’s Dan Joseph set out to find out which news story students at George Mason University, located minutes outside of Washington, D.C., knew more about — and the results weren’t pretty.

“Did you hear about what happened to Justin Bieber recently?” Joseph asked several students.

“He was arrested for drag racing and driving under the influence,” said one girl.

“Yeah, everyone knows what happened to Justin Bieber,” said another. She even knew his bail was only $2,500.

Unfortunately, students weren’t so sure how to answer Joseph’s second question.

“There was a big political event last night,” he said. “Do you know what it was?”

“Last night?” one student responded.

“Yeah, Obama was talking…” another responded, but that was as far as she could get.

“Honestly, I watched it about a year ago and I was bored so that’s why I didn’t watch it this time,” one bold student said. At least he was honest.

Fortunately, some knew that the State of the Union was the big political event that happened the night before, even if they had no idea what was actually said. One girl openly admitted to watching Pretty Little Liars instead.

“He [Obama] could probably be on that show, although he’s not that pretty,” Joseph joked.

Last year, MRCTV tested students knowledge on abortion when Joseph asked students to sign a petition legalizing abortion after the fourth trimester, or after the baby has already been born. Later in the year, Joseph returned to George Mason and quizzed students on the Gettysburg Address, finding that at one of the top schools in the country, many could not place the words “four score and seven years ago” with both Abraham Lincoln and the correct speech.

Watch the entire MRCTV video here to see all of the responses to the Biebs and Obama questions.