Jonathan Wesener was only 16 when he took his life. School, community leaders should work to end bullying and battle teen suicide.

Jonathan Wesener, 16, took his own life on May 28. (Photo: Contributed)

I attended the memorial service on Saturday for Jonathan Wesener, the Edgar High School student who took his life after being bullied.

I saw firsthand the heartache, grief and suffering of the family. Anyone who attended this service would have witnessed the sheer agony that Jonathan's death brought on to this family. Jonathan's parents had dreams for their son, as we all do, that have been destroyed.

In the days before the cellphone, you had to be careful who you bullied, as you might swallow your teeth. Today bullies hide behind their cellphones.

Jonathan's life mattered — maybe not to others, but his life was his family's legacy. Gone now are the days when Mom could say, "Johnny, how was your day?" or "Hurry, you will be late for school." Dad can no longer ask, "Johnny, do you want to go fishing?" or "Let's mow the yard."

He was only 16 when his life ended. What is left is an urn that sits on the Weseners' mantle to remind them every day of what could have been but will never be.

Jonathan wasn't bullied at home or at work. His bullying took place in school and on social media. Did we as a community and our school do everything thing we could to prevent this tragedy, or is our image more important?

It's time for parents and students to speak up, as the the loss of life due to bullying never should have to happen.

When I left the memorial, I felt devastated and angry that Jonathan was a victim of bullying and now his life was gone. So senseless! I question why the family did not receive more support from our school. Even at the memorial, administration, coaches of Jonathan's and school board members did not attend to offer the family their condolences. Was it because what you don't see and feel is easier to ignore?

Think of what Jonathan was thinking and feeling. The mental torture and stress he felt when he arrived at school. Everyday occurrences that brought him to his breaking point, to the point that he felt taking his life was his way out. Jonathan clearly didn't have the feeling the school was his back-up.

It takes a village to raise a child. Parents do not have the privilege of being with their children at school during school hours or at after-school activities, so we depend on school staff to keep our students safe.

As I was talking with Jonathan's family, I wondered what their perception was of our school. Did they feel Jonathan was perceived as a valued student or just a number in the enrollment?

Our school should be in the forefront addressing this bullying issue. Bullying is still active and growing every day. The methods the school is using to prevent bullying clearly aren't working.

I know our schools can't do it all. Do they need professional help from a person who has extensive training regarding bullying?

The students know what is going on. Are they going to tell? No, perhaps because they perceive that they themselves could become targets. When parents contact the school, does the school blame the bullied student and claim that he or she is to blame for being a troublemaker?

The two biggest lies told about bullying are, "We don't have bullying at our school" and "Bullying won't be tolerated."

We have at-risk students who need to know help is on the way. They have to know they will be believed and assured the bullying will stop.

Let's give the Wesener family our support by showing them their son's death was not in vain. Let's adopt a zero-tolerance attitude for bullying that has severe consequences as this affects all. Our goal is to get bullying out of our schools now.

To me, to prevent a loss of life is more important than any criticism I will receive for my opinions.

Jonathan, you are now safe in God's hands and encircled with protection and love of your family. We also have given Jonathan a place in our hearts. R.I.P. Jonathan.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1JK5t6N