WHY IS Obamacare being held hostage to its website? It is, after all, rather risky to have staked the success of an overhaul of America's entire health-insurance system on the performance of one gigantic, complex information-technology project. When I compare the structure of Obamacare to that of its closest foreign analogue, the Dutch system, a few possible answers leap to mind. Broadly put: it's possible to make it simpler and more transparent for consumers to purchase health insurance by regulating the insurance marketplace aggressively so that the products are more uniform. But Obamacare doesn't go as far in that direction as the Dutch system does. Instead, it leaves a lot of diversity in the marketplace, while counting on its website to supply the needed transparency to the consumer. That means a website that has to import a huge amount of disparate data from different sources, process it securely, and make it comprehensible to the user and authoritative for the insurance company and government providers; and as we've seen, the result has been a disaster.

The Dutch system, like Obamacare, is an all-private health-insurance system with an individual mandate. It was instituted in 2006, replacing a rather kludgey previous system under which most of the population was covered by a government-run basic plan, while the rest bought private insurance. In other words, unlike America, the Netherlands moved from a quasi-socialist universal system to a regulated private-sector universal system. The ideas of Alain Enthoven, a heath economist at Stanford, were an important source for the Dutch reform, as they were for the Heritage Foundation and other early American advocates of a private individual-mandate system.

One way in which the Dutch system is simpler than Obamacare is in the kinds of plans on offer. Under Obamacare, insurers offer four varieties of basic insurance packages, bronze, silver, gold, and platinum, with different deductibles and different levels of coverage. In the Dutch system, there is only one type of package for basic insurance. The level of coverage is roughly comparable to Obamacare's silver plans, though the deductible, currently set at €350, is much lower. Individuals who want supplementary insurance can buy it, but that lies outside the state system's parameters and is up to individuals and their insurers to negotiate.

Having four types of basic packages rather than one does not add a lot of complexity, but another difference does. As with Obamacare, the Dutch system has "guaranteed issue": insurers must accept any applicant for any policy, regardless of how old or sick that applicant is, what gender they are, where they live, etc. And, obviously, they're not allowed to charge too much more for an old person than for a young person, since this would enable them to effectively discriminate in their customer pool to keep out more costly seniors. Under Obamacare, however, insurers can charge the oldest customers up to three times as much as young ones. In the Dutch system, they have to charge them exactly the same price. This means that Obamacare's website needs to input and verify your age information before it can decide how much to charge you. The Dutch system doesn't care how old you are, so that element of complexity drops out; in fact, competition between insurers keeps prices so close that essentially everyone in the Netherlands pays about the same amount for insurance, about €1,230 in 2013. To make the premium more affordable for the poor and working-class, if your income is below €26,000, you can get a sliding tax refund that goes up to a maximum of €432.

But how, you may ask, can insurers survive in the Dutch system if they can't charge old, sick people more than young, healthy people? Won't they go bankrupt if, by random chance, they end up with too many sick customers? This is where risk pools come in. Insurers who end up with more sick people are compensated by the government out of a common risk pool. The funds for the risk pool come out of a dedicated payroll tax paid by each individual's employer amounting to 6.5% of salary; the self-employed and retired pay about 4.4%, depending on income. For most insurers, compensation through the risk pool provides most of their revenue; customer premiums account for only a minority of the country's health-care spending.

This arrangement is another reason why the Dutch system is simpler than Obamacare: it doesn't need to do as much work to provide individual subsidies. In Obamacare, to make sure that people with lower incomes can afford to buy the insurance they are offered, the system has to analyse their income and provide appropriate tax credits. This, again, requires Healthcare.gov to securely process an immense amount of information from creaky public and private databases. In the Dutch system, most of the "subsidy" is provided by simply routing most of an individual's insurance payment through a payroll tax. Instead of charging people for insurance and refunding them a subsidy based on income, you charge them an income-based tax and use it to pay their health insurer. Since it's a flat tax, and applies only to salary, it's not as progressive as many liberals might like, but it takes a lot of complexity and stress out of the insurance system. And, as mentioned above, there is also a more progressive income-based tax credit to offset the premium.

The Dutch system has a lot of drawbacks. Probably the biggest one is that financing most of the insurance system through the risk pools reduces the incentive for insurers to compete by holding down costs. After all, if their customers do incur higher health-care costs, the insurers will simply be compensated out of the risk pool. That means insurers have less incentive to exert pressure on hospitals and doctors not to order unnecessary tests and procedures. This may be one of the reasons why, contrary to reformers' hopes, Dutch health-care costs have continued to grow rapidly since the all-private insurance system was introduced in 2006. In fact, Dutch health-care spending is now the highest in the euro zone. But the relative simplicity of the Dutch system means they don't have to depend on an all-embracing government-run website to help consumers make sense of the insurance plans on offer.

In fact, Dutch consumers don't buy insurance through a government-run website. Because the plans themselves are fairly transparent, and most of their funding runs through the tax system (reducing the importance of subsidies), customers can compare plans reasonably easily through normal private-sector portal websites. In other words, there are tradeoffs in everything. In this case, a somewhat more aggressive way of regulating and restructuring the guts of the private insurance industry can lead to less dependence on a massive centralised government website down the road.