Topics: Families, Father's Day, LGBTQ parents, lgbtq rights, Parenting, trans justice, trans parenting, Trans rights, transgender people, Life News, News, Politics News

When I transitioned more than two years ago, we thought we had worked out most of the details. Out to everyone important? Check. Finances? Check. Job situation? Check. ID changes? Check. New wardrobe for work? Check.

One of the hardest issues had been what the children should call me after transition. My partner and I agonized over it for months. Continuing to use “Dad” seemed both odd and dangerous. We live in small town Ohio, and had no idea how to assess the dangers of being outed in public. The last thing we wanted was for something bad to happen to me or my family as a result of the kids using the word “Dad.”

Mom seemed out of the question as well. For me, laying claim to that title felt even more awkward than Dad. In the end, we settled on the same solution as transgender author and parent Jennifer Boylan: a portmanteau of Mom and Daddy that results in “Maddy.”

Still, every year since has made Father’s Day a source of discomfort. I continue to exist in a gray space where our language and culture just can’t wrap itself around the whole notion of being transgender.

On the surface, it seems simple to accept that a transgender person can be a fine parent. Sociologists, the court system and even the American public are all coming to accept that gay parents are no big deal; they can raise children just as well as opposite sex couples. The argument that you need role models of both sexes as parents is falling by the wayside.

And yet, transgender parenting is somehow viewed as different. Even lesbian and gay activists have criticized transgender people for transitioning because of the implied harm it supposedly causes their children. This objection seems nonsensical on the surface. We all agree that same-sex parents are just fine. However, their point is it is one thing to always have parents who are same sex, it’s quite another for children to have to adapt to the change of a parent in transition.

For children raised from birth in same-sex households, it is assumed there is no sense of loss over a parent’s gender role. If you grew up always having two moms or two dads, that is your own normal. There’s no sense that your family has gained or lost something. It just is. But for a transgender parent who transitions, there is a new normal that has to be embraced.

My partner, Janis, has been supportive throughout the process, though we continue to face challenges. About a year ago around Father’s Day we were driving back from the grocery store with the children, when the topic of how gender affects our expected responsibilities as parents came up. I asked hypothetically who would walk our daughter down the aisle if she marries. As soon as I uttered the question I knew something had shifted. She stiffened, looked away, and her tone was ice.