Brian Williams, the former golden boy anchor of “NBC Nightly News,” has been suspended without pay for six months while rumors of permanent replacements swirl through the media jungle.

A memo, purported to be from Deborah Turness to NBC News staff, published on the Drudge Report announced the suspension just before 5 p.m. Eastern Tuesday.

“We have decided today to suspend Brian Williams as Managing Editor and Anchor of NBC Nightly News for six months,” the memo says. “The suspension will be without pay and is effective immediately. We let Brian know of our decision earlier today. Lester Holt will continue to substitute Anchor the NBC Nightly News.”

It continued: “While on Nightly News on Friday, January 30, 2015, Brian misrepresented events which occurred while he was covering the Iraq War in 2003. It then became clear that on other occasions Brian had done the same while telling that story in other venues. This was wrong and completely inappropriate for someone in Brian’s position. In addition, we have concerns about comments that occurred outside NBC News while Brian was talking about his experiences in the field. As Managing Editor and Anchor of Nightly News, Brian has a responsibility to be truthful and to uphold the high standards of the news division at all times.”

The memo said it was a “hard decision” made by a triumvirate of NBC News executives.

“We felt it would have been wrong to disregard the good work Brian has done and the special relationship he has forged with our viewers over 22 years,” it said. “Millions of Americans have turned to him every day, and he has been an important and well-respected part of our organization. … Certainly there will be those who disagree. But we believe this suspension is the appropriate and proportionate action. ”

The memo went on to say: “This has been a difficult time. But NBC News is bigger than this moment. You work so hard and dedicate yourselves each and every day to the important work of bringing trusted, credible news to our audience. Because of you, your loyalty, your dedication, NBC News is an organization we can – and should – all be proud of. We will get through this together.”

NBC Chief Executive Officer Steve Burke added: “This has been a painful period for all concerned and we appreciate your patience while we gathered the available facts. By his actions, Brian has jeopardized the trust millions of Americans place in NBC News. His actions are inexcusable and this suspension is severe and appropriate. Brian’s life’s work is delivering the news. I know Brian loves his country, NBC News and his colleagues. He deserves a second chance and we are rooting for him. Brian has shared his deep remorse with me and he is committed to winning back everyone’s trust.”

What do YOU think? Who should be the next anchor of “NBC Nightly News”? Sound off in today’s WND poll!

Meanwhile, “Today” co-host Savannah Guthrie has emerged as the top choice to replace Brian Williams behind the anchor desk at “NBC Nightly News,” according to the Drudge Report.

Executives have reportedly narrowed in on Guthrie in recent days, as the beleaguered Williams continues to fight for survival at the network.

Williams had previously stepped aside as anchor of his nightly broadcast for “several days” as a result of the controversy generated by his comments about his reporting during the Iraq war and Hurricane Katrina.

More details about the newsman’s dramatic misremembering of the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 have emerged, with the manager of the hotel he stayed at directly contradicting his narrative of seeing dead bodies float in the street, being attacked by gangs in his hotel, and contracting dysentery.

“Maybe he misremembered,” Myra DeGersdorff told the Washington Post of Williams’ claims. “I’m not going to judge him, because it was such an unpleasant week and there were times to be concerned. … And when there is that kind of concern, you can misremember.”

As the general manager of the Ritz-Carlton at the edge of the French Quarter in New Orleans, DeGersdorff was in charge of more than 1,200 people.

In 2006, the company’s corporate office gave her the Ritz-Carlton President’s Award in recognition of her preparation and leadership in the storm’s aftermath.

DeGersdoff says that while it’s possible Williams saw a body, he probably didn’t see one in the French Quarter, which only got “a few inches of flooding.”

A few looters attempted to break into the building, but were chased off by security guards, and three individuals told reporters that gangs never infiltrated the Ritz-Carlton, despite Williams’ claims, reported the Post.

“None of the guests were in danger of being harmed,” she said. “And none were.”