CHAPEL HILL, N.C., Feb. 6, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- The Affordable Care Act has been the catalyst for dramatic change in the US healthcare marketplace. The overall influence of payers is rising and the types of payers influencing healthcare access are diversifying. In this environment, payer coverage, support or opposition are tantamount to success or failure for a new biopharmaceutical product.

According to recent research from benchmarking firm, Best Practices, LLC, up to 86% of benchmarked companies use payer landscape research tactics to better understand payer decision making. Any company hoping to compete and win in this "brave new world" must understand the "payer ecosystem" and learn to navigate through it.

The related report, "Increasing Market Access through Innovative Payer Market Research: Assessing New Tools & Technologies to Gain Insight into Payer Decision Making," identifies which market research approaches are most effective and innovative for understanding payer needs and decision-making.

Key study topics included:

Prioritizing Players in the Complex Payer Landscape: Which Payers Most Impact Your Business

Optimizing Your Payer Research Structure to Capture Managed Markets Insights

Market Research Resources for Conducting Impactful Payer Research

Engaging Payers & Harvesting Insights across the Product Lifecycle

Payer Landscape Research Activities & Timing

Payer Contracting Research Activities & Timing

Formulary Research Activities & Timing to Gauge Payer Perspectives

Effective Tools & Technologies to Capture Payer Insights

Future Trends & Lessons Learned in Conducting Payer Research for Greater Market Access

Thirty-eight payer research leaders participated in this study. More than half of the participants represent pharma or biotech companies. In addition, five selected participants were interviewed to add qualitative depth to the study.

To access the full report, or to download a complimentary summary containing insights found in this report, click on the following link:http://www3.best-in-class.com/re2285.htm

For more information on other recent primary research studies, contact us at 919.403.0251. For related research, visit our Best Practices, LLC website at http://www.best-in-class.com/.

ABOUT BEST PRACTICES, LLC

Best Practices, LLC is a leading benchmarking, consulting and advisory services firm serving biopharmaceutical and medical device companies worldwide. Best Practices, LLC's clients include all the top 10 and 48 of the top 50 global healthcare companies. The firm conducts primary research and consulting using its comprehensive proprietary benchmarking tools and analysis. The operational insights, findings and analysis form the basis for our Benchmarking Reports, databases and advisory services to support executives in commercial and R&D operations. Best Practices, LLC believes in the profound principle that organizations can chart a course to superior economic performance by studying the best business practices, operating tactics and winning strategies of world-class companies.

SOURCE Best Practices, LLC