LITTLE ROCK — Gov. Asa Hutchinson is expected to call state legislators to the Capitol this week for a special session with two items on the agenda — though some lawmakers say a third is possible.

Hutchinson has said the session will start Wednesday and, if he has his way, will be limited to his proposal to continue and revamp the state’s version of Medicaid expansion and his proposal to let a private company or companies manage parts of the traditional Medicaid program.

Arkansas Works

Arkansas’ Medicaid expansion program, known as the private option, was created in 2013 and has used federal Medicaid money to subsidize private health insurance for more than a quarter of a million Arkansans earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level. Created as an alternative to the expansion of Medicaid rolls that was envisioned in the Affordable Care Act, the program has divided Republican legislators.

Hutchinson is proposing to rename the program Arkansas Works and add elements including referral to worker training for unemployed, able-bodied recipients with no requirement to participate in the training; premiums of up to 2 percent of their income for people earning at least 100 percent of the federal poverty level; and an end to 90-day retroactive eligibility. The changes will need federal as well as legislative approval.

Though not a supporter of the Affordable Care Act, the Republican governor has said that ending Medicaid expansion in Arkansas would create “turmoil” in the health-care marketplace, leave a $100 million hole in the state budget and create a fairness issue because federal subsidies for health insurance would remain available to people earning 100 percent of the federal poverty level but would cease to be available to people earning below that level.

“I understand that we in Arkansas and across this nation are all frustrated by what we see happening in Washington — federal intrusion on state prerogatives in terms of health care. But we should not punish Arkansans simply because we are frustrated with Washington,” Hutchinson said in February.

Arkansas Works will require a simple majority vote in each chamber for approval in the special session. Legislative leaders say they expect it to pass. But in the 2016 fiscal session, which is set to begin April 13, the plan will have a higher hurdle to clear: Appropriating funding for it will require a three-fourths majority vote in each chamber.

Managed care

The second item on the governor’s agenda for this week’s special session is a proposal to create a managed-care system within Medicaid for dental care and services to people with developmental disabilities and behavioral health issues.

To date, the federal government has paid 100 percent of the cost of Arkansas’ Medicaid expansion, but starting in 2017 the state will be responsible for a share of the cost that will start at 5 percent and increase gradually to 10 percent by 2020. Consultants hired by the state have said Arkansas could save $1.4 billion over the next five years with managed care, more than enough to cover the cost of Arkansas’ share of Medicaid expansion.

Hutchinson has said that if the managed-care plan is approved, it will create a fund that will be used to cut the waiting list for home- and community-based services for developmentally disabled people in half within three years. Nearly 3,000 people are on the list.

The managed-care plan also can be approved with simple majority votes in each chamber.

DiamondCare

A group of legislators has been developing an alternative plan, called DiamondCare, that would expand and enhance Arkansas’ patient-centered medical home model, in which a patient’s treatment is coordinated by a team led by a primary care physician. Consultants have said that approach could save $1.1 billion over five years, also more than enough to cover the state’s costs related to Medicaid expansion.

Rep. Justin Boyd, R-Fort Smith, a pharmacist, said the patient-centered medical home model has succeeded in reducing health-care costs in Arkansas, while managed care has not always delivered on its promise in other states.

“What DiamondCare does is it uses providers, it continues on that currently working model and pushes it further into more populations in order to coordinate care and manage fraud, waste and abuse and save money,” he said. “Quite frankly, I’m just a lot more comfortable continuing on something that has already had proven success than bringing in something from somewhere else that doesn’t always work, or doesn’t always work as well as it’s promised.”

The governor sets the agenda for a special session, but after the Legislature has taken action on all of the items on the governor’s agenda it can, with a two-thirds vote in each chamber, choose to extend the session for up to 15 days and take up other items.

Boyd said he did not know if the backers of DiamondCare had enough support as of Friday to have it considered during the special session, but he said, “we’re gaining momentum.”

He also said he is still hopeful that Hutchinson will agree to let the proposal be heard or agree to a compromise so lawmakers can avoid “going to that extreme.”

The leaders of the House and Senate say their plan is for the special session to conclude on Friday, five days before the fiscal session begins. House Speaker Jeremy Gillam, R-Judsonia, said that if lawmakers were to vote to consider DiamondCare, the debate could not extend beyond April 13.

Even if issues remained unresolved, ‘we’d have to adjourn, because we’d have to be in the (fiscal) session at 12 Wednesday,” he said.

Hutchinson also has said he plans to call a special session on highway funding shortly after the fiscal session. He has said that if lawmakers want to bring up items not on his agenda, they should do so in that session, not the Medicaid session.