The City Council's new industrial and manufacturing policy is music to the ears of New York's nascent food and beverage producers, artists and allied workers, including makers of all kinds. Using zoning and land-use tools to encourage "creative-sector industries [in] creative-economy … and industrial-employment districts" would be a great improvement over traditional mixed-use industrial, residential and commercial zones.

Traditional mixed use inevitably defaults to residential and commercial uses, which are much more profitable. The council will need a great deal of energy, and the support of a city administration that has yet to unveil its industrial policy, to achieve this transformative vision.

In the 1990s, my company, Brooklyn Brewery, played a small role in the rezoning of Williamsburg and Greenpoint. We hosted public hearings that drew small businesses to participate in the process. (Free beer was a powerful incentive.)

Unfortunately, the resulting mixed-use Industrial Business Zone that encompassed the brewery allowed hotels and other commercial enterprises that drove out many of the industrial businesses, some of which cashed in by selling to commercial developers. I recall saying that "mixed use" was a grim fairy tale for manufacturers who did not own property.

The council's idyllic vision will be tested in the impending rezoning of Brooklyn's Gowanus neighborhood. Its noxious canal is to be cleaned up through a federal process, opening the way for development. Gowanus is a mixed-use area being squeezed by über-gentrified Park Slope and Carroll Gardens. A new Whole Foods Market is already drawing thousands.

Councilman Brad Lander hosted a community-planning process called Bridging Gowanus to develop consensus around a rezoning that balances new residential development with the area's mix of small businesses, artists' studios and cultural organizations. At a November public meeting, Bridging Gowanus proposed a "mandatory mixed-use zone" to ensure that a substantial part of the rezoning is dedicated to "light industry, arts and cultural uses." This is totally in line with the City Council's vision.

The Williamsburg/Greenpoint rezoning was tumultuous. But opinion leaders eventually recognized that without such a process, the industrial zone was going to be the default home of garbage-transfer stations and power plants.

Gowanus faces a similar dilemma. The state Department of Corrections plans to open a mega-parole center in the middle of Gowanus, a stone's throw from Whole Foods. The public had no input into this decision. The building will consolidate three downtown Brooklyn facilities and serve 6,000 parolees. Borough President Eric Adams, a former police officer, and some parolee advocates say the center is in the wrong place at the wrong time for Gowanus and for the recently incarcerated. A new community coalition, Gowanus United, is suing.

The Gowanus rezoning is too late to stop the parole center. But it may determine whether "mixed use" is another unhappy fairy tale for small business or a dream come true.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments