Time will tell if Shen returns next season

The winner of a dramatic final at 5A No. 1 singles, Fairview freshman Amber Shen is the 2015 BoCoPreps.com girls tennis Player of the Year. ( Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer )

Amber Shen has moved on.

"It's just part of being a tennis player," she said.

The Fairview freshman is less than a month removed from one of the best No. 1 singles championship matches in recent memory, and she already has her mind set on her future.

"It was a great win and all," said Shen, who rallied in a drama-filled title match over Cherry Creek's Kalyssa Hall at Gates Tennis Center. "But to keep going as a tennis player, I kind of have to forget about it and keep trying to get better."

Shen was as good as it gets on that late May Wednesday afternoon, beating Hall 3-6, 7-6 (7-3), 7-6 (8-6) to earn the title. The 2015 BoCoPreps.com girls tennis Player of the Year also made it a clean sweep for Fairview tennis at the state's top level, No. 1 singles. Ignatius Castelino won the No. 1 singles title during the boys season last fall in very much the same thrilling fashion.

Shen's dramatic final featured six overruled calls by the chair umpire — who later said he should have stopped the match and immediately awarded it to Shen — against Hall, including late in the third set that made it 5-5.

"I feel like this match was the one match that I was most mentally strong even through the situation," said Shen after the win.

The match, which lasted nearly three hours, had everyone involved with the tournament watching from all possible angles, including Shen's Fairview teammates.

And it was something that one half of the Knights' No. 2 doubles runner-up team, Ellie Savage, told Fairview coach Susan Stensrud after the match that exemplified what the prep version of the game is all about.

"I wanted her to win more than I wanted to win, because if she wins, it feels like we all win," said a paraphrasing Stensrud. "She was an inspiration and a role model even as a freshman.

"The kids were really proud to have her as our No. 1 singles player. She really set the tone for our entire team and encouraged us to play our best."

There has been a trend in recent years amongst the top players in the state of Colorado to be one-and-done and move their games to tennis academies in warmer climates in Texas, California and Florida. Shen will be back at Fairview next season, but hasn't come to a conclusion yet on whether or not she will play.

"I'm not quite sure yet. There is a lot of time that goes into it and I did miss a lot of school," she said. "I'll see how it goes."

Stensrud, for one is hopeful.

"It isn't really something I have discussed with her parents, but I think that she had a great year and I think that her intention is to play next year," Stensrud said. "We are hoping with the addition of new players next year that we have a good shot at winning state and I think that she would want to be part of that.

"Plus it would be Cherry Creek's 20th year in a row, so we would like to go ahead and interrupt that."

Follow Jon on Twitter: twitter.com/JonEYunt