Your office desk is more likely to be dirtier than your office toilet seat due to not washing your hands, eating at your desk, and overall poor hygiene.

Your office desk is more likely to be dirtier than your office toilet seat due to not washing your hands, eating at your desk, and overall poor hygiene. The Cleaning Services Group

Inside the three little walls of an office cubicle many of us can be found quietly typing on our keyboards, staring at our computer screens for eight hours a day. Between the keys, the mouse, and the phone, there are millions of bacteria lurking — more than the average toilet seat. These private surfaces harbor viruses that cause colds and the flu with thousands of germs per square inch.

In an effort to dish out the filthy facts about office space and hygiene, The Cleaning Services Group, a national cleaning specialist in the UK, has created an infographic, “How Clean Is Your Work Space?” The infographic exposes the culprits responsible for harboring thousands of germs that leave behind a minefield of viruses at the office. Contrary to popular belief, 80 percent of infections are transmitted via contaminated surfaces, such as an office desk — not coughing and sneezing.

In comparison to office toilets, which contains 49 microbes, or “germs” per square inch, office telephones harbor over 25,000 germs per square inch, while keyboards and computer mice contain between 1,000 to 3,000 germs. Not washing your hands, eating at your desk, and not sanitizing your desk all contribute to the high volume of germs found at an office desk.

Wiping down and practicing good hygiene is vital to prevent the spread of infection. Germs like the common cold can last on computer keyboards and mice for up to 72 hours. More dangerous germs such as Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) can last anywhere between six weeks to seven months.

Reduce infection risks dramatically and clean up your desk with more filthy facts about your office desk in the infographic below: