Charlie Eagle Plume liked to tell stories to tourists.

In one of his tales, he claimed to have arrived in Estes Park by horseback, from a Blackfoot Indian reservation in Montana. Whether Eagle Plume made the ride is unknown, but he managed to retain a certain amount of mystique.

For many decades, Eagle Plume was a familiar figure in the Estes Park/Allenspark area. He collected and sold Indian artifacts, championed the rights of Native Americans and became a legend in his own time.

According to well-documented genealogical research, Eagle Plume wasn't from Montana at all. Instead, he was born in Leadville with the name Charles F. Burkhardt. His father, Fred Burkhardt, was German and worked as a butcher.

Eagle Plume acknowledged he was half-German but claimed Native American heritage through his mother, Ella May McGahren. Census records, however, reveal that Ella May's father was Irish and her mother was born and raised in Illinois by parents from Ohio.

No one knows just when Eagle Plume arrived in Estes Park, but shortly afterward, he frequented a curio shop between Estes Park and Allenspark called the Perkins Trading Post.

At first, the shop mostly sold antiques, but with Eagle Plume's help, the owner shifted the focus to the arts and crafts of the American Indian.

In addition to minding the store, Eagle Plume, in full Indian headdress and attire -- including a wig -- quickly became a public speaker specializing in Indian art and culture. In 1931, while attending the University of Colorado, he made Chautauqua Auditorium one of the stops on his speaking circuit.

There, he appeared on the Chautauqua stage with "Chief Ponopeech," the Indian name conferred years earlier by members of the Ute tribe on then-Secretary of the Chamber of the Boulder Commerce, Eben G. Fine.

When the owner of the Perkins Trading Post died, she left her shop to Eagle Plume. He spent time there during the summers but did some traveling, as well. In 1935 and 1940 (and, presumably, the years in-between) census records reveal Eagle Plume was living in a boarding house in Chicago and worked as an "interpretive dancer." He never married and had no children.

During World War II, he served in the Army and was stationed in the Pacific.

Eagle Plume established the Charles Eagle Plume Memorial Scholarship Fund to pay for the college education of Native American students. He also developed a nonprofit foundation for his art collection, stipulating that if it ever was sold, the proceeds would go toward the students' educations.

Eagle Plume kept his ties to the store, where he was known for giving turkey feathers painted to look like eagle feathers to children 8 and younger. Those older than 8 received arrowheads.

Charlie Eagle Plume died in Estes Park in 1992 and is buried in the Fort Logan National Cemetery in Denver. Like his predecessor, he left his business to his employees. The store is still open and is still called Eagle Plume's.

Even though the legendary former owner no longer is there, visitors say his spirit lives on.

Silvia Pettem and Carol Taylor write about history for the Daily Camera. Email , Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net, Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.