Justin Lucio, also known as Eli, sits on the steps of The Inn Between on Thursday in Longmont. Lucio graduated high school early and has secured a place in the Job Corps program in North Dakota. He would like to return to Colorado for his high school graduation, but he doesn't have money for a plane ticket. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

If you go What: Chili Chili Bang Bang chili cook-off When: Noon to 5 p.m. Feb. 20 Where: Grossen Bart Brewery, 1025 Delaware Ave., Longmont Cost: $20 to enter. Donations welcome More info: Go to theinnbetween.org for details.

The last time we caught up with Justin Lucio, also known as Eli, he had recently moved in to a room at The Inn Between after moving out of his grandma's house and into a teen facility run by Attention Homes, via the streets.

Lucio had made the decision to leave when his grandma had contracted breast cancer and he didn't want to be an extra financial burden for her. It was a staggeringly selfless act for a 17-year-old and, as it turns out, things have worked out quite nicely thanks to the help of The Inn Between.

Lucio graduated high school half a year early this year and has secured a place in the Job Corps program in North Dakota.

"He was going to graduate in May but had enough credits to graduate in December," said Inn Between bilingual case manager Guillermo Carrera. "The school's encouraging him to go to this job program which takes him out to North Dakota. It's a five-days-a-week, full-time work experience program."

Advertisement

Job Corps will pay for Lucio's living expenses, and he gets a small allowance and real-life job experience. It can last for six to 18 months, depending on the courses he takes.

Lucio said he has always been good with his hands and he hopes to train and work in automotive mechanics. He believes that none of this would have been possible without the help of the people at Inn Between.

"When I needed to talk to someone, I met with Guillermo pretty often," he said. "He helped me with insurance, food stamps and everything. I wouldn't have been able to do that on my own."

Lucio will be living in a dorm during the program, and he hopes to move back to Colorado when he's finished, to work in a shop. He wants to return for a trip this year to attend his high school graduation, but he doesn't have the money to do so.

"That's important to a young person," said David Bitler, The Inn Between's executive director. "It's an accomplishment. He was homeless and he probably wouldn't have graduated. Now he has, he's excelled, and he has a chance with Job Corps. We're hoping for some gifts to help fly him back for graduation. That plane ticket's going to be about $550."

To raise money for Lucio, as well as the other clients of the Inn Between and HOPE for Longmont, a chili cook-off is taking place at Grossen Bart Brewery on Feb. 20.

"We want to invite people to come out, because if we don't have those events, we can't help Justin," Bitler said. "If we can get some donations to help Justin, he can come back, walk with his classmates and feel good about himself, and then head back to North Dakota, finish his Job Corps and move on to whatever's next in his life."

Brett Callwood: 303-684-5274, callwoodb@timescall.com or twitter.com/city_slang