STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- Republican District Attorney Daniel Donovan and Democratic Councilman Vincent Gentile, running in the May 5 special election for Congress, were both asked by the Advance how they as congressmen would tackle various issues that are important to Staten Islanders.

Here is a look back at how the two candidates responded.

TRANSPORTATION

Both Gentile and Donovan said they would ask to be on the House Transportation Committee.

Both candidates said they would seek federal money to study a West Shore light rail. Denver, Seattle, Portland and Buffalo have light rails partially funded by taxpayer money -- "Why not Staten Island?" Gentile asked

Donovan said if he's elected, being a member of the majority would make him the go-to person for securing funding for other city-based districts, as all the Congress members in the city are Democrats. "Being in the majority in the House at the same time the Republicans are in the majority in the Senate is a unique position for somebody in the district," he said.

Check out the complete comments here.

IMMIGRATION

The candidates differ on what to do about undocumented immigrants in the country.

Gentile supports allowing all undocumented immigrants stay. "... So at the risk of tearing families apart, I think we have to find a way for people to pay the penalty for what they did, but at the same time work toward a legal status," Gentile said.

Donovan said he's not in a rush to give citizen status to those who have broken the law. "That's a very difficult task to do," he said. "So I don't know how we would go about doing that, so that should be explored. I just think we should reward the people, follow through with the promise we made to the people who are following our process before we reward people who broke the law."

Click here for a look at the full story.

ANTI-TERROR TACTICS

Donovan believes that if Congress agrees that military action should be taken, then they must fund it fully. "To send them into war without the proper equipment and proper funding, it's more than a disservice to these men and women," he said. "...we have to take care of them when they come back."

Gentile thinks it is wise for the United States to assist in fighting terrorist organizations by providing military aid to other countries' troops fighting. He is against putting U.S. troops on the ground overseas. "Congress should work with the president, urge the president to use whatever resources we have to help groups in the Middle East that are willing to fight ISIS on the ground and to fight any other terrorist group," he said.

Read the full story here.



AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

Donovan believes the Affordable Care Act can work if portions of it are changed. "There's parts that work and parts that don't. Let's figure our what's working, keep those and tweak or ban the things that aren't working and replace them with things that do," he said.

Both candidates agree that covering people with pre-existing conditions is important.

Gentile sees the Affordable Care Act as an overall success, insuring more than 16 million people. "All those good things are in this act and the bad things that have been predicted have not materialized," he said.

Click here for the full story.



SANDY RECOVERY

Both candidates say that various levels of government need to get their act together in regard to Sandy recovery.

The federal government is currently looking into alleged fraud within the National Flood Insurance Program, run by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. "I think we need to... make FEMA accountable for what they're doing in the oversight of these insurance companies and find out why it is that we're now discovering that there's been fraud committed and FEMA has not acted on it," Gentile said.

Donovan criticized officials for failing to get money to the people who need it. "You have to assess what are people's needs? And how can we help you and streamline things?" he said.

See the full story here.