Rams face Utah State in conference opener

Colorado State coach Mike Bobo, left, and quarterback Nick Stevens chat on the sidelines during Saturday's 33-31 win over UTSA. The Rams head into Mountain West play this week at 2-2, hitting the road to face Utah State. ( Don Reichert/CSU Athletics )

SAN ANTONIO — Now for the main event.

Colorado State's football team has had it's share of ups and down in the non-conference portion of the schedule, coming out the back end dead even at 2-2.

After two straight overtime losses, the Rams were finally able to pull out a victory at the end of a close game, running off the final 5:28 on the clock in Saturday's 33-31 victory over a UTSA team that remains winless on the year.

The season hasn't been easy for the Rams, and there isn't any slack in the near future.

Ready or not, Mountain West play is upon them.

"I think we've been tested. I think we know how to fight in a close game," CSU coach Mike Bobo said after the win. "But you know, we've got to go back to work and get ready for Utah State who's a very tough opponent. I heard that's a tough place to play."

He also knows they have a tough defense, and the Aggies (1-2) will have had an extra week to prepare, having a bye this past week to not only lick the wounds of two defeats to Utah and Washington, but also losing quarterback Chuckie Keeton for at least a month with yet another knee injury.

More importantly, Bobo knows his Rams have plenty to clean up as his team runs head first into what is arguably the toughest run of the season, with Boise State and Air Force at home after traveling to Logan, Utah.

From the CSU perspective, at least it heads in with a bit of momentum after getting over the hump by winning a game that went down to the wire instead of the alternative.

"That was big. I say just going into conference with a win on our shoulders, goes in with confidence," receiver Rashard Higgins said. "That's a big confidence builder."

Then Higgins, who had his 14th career 100-yard receiving game, added he has to block better. Others have to block better. The defense has to tackle better.

There isn't a lot one can pin down about this team at this moment. The defense, which had been playing well, gave up 279 yards rushing to UTSA. Wyatt Bryan is making just over 50 percent of his kicks, and while punter Hayden Hunt is having a great season, the unit allowed a punt to be blocked by UTSA.

Offensively, the running game has clicked, be it with Dalyn Dawkins (who missed the UTSA game) or Jasen Oden Jr. carrying the load. Quarterback Nick Stevens had his moments either way, not just during the season, but within games.

After a sluggish start against the Roadrunners, he finished with decent numbers, hitting on 15 of 28 passes for 255 yards and three touchdowns. A definite sign of improvement was he didn't add to his interception total after throwing two the week prior.

"Nick was going to the right guys. That one long drive, couple of long drives we had, we did it a lot through the air," Bobo said. "We were turning their field linebacker free and he was standing there throwing and making clutch throws and guys responded, making big plays.

"There's a couple of things we gotta learn from. Like I told him after the game, he tries to be a little bit too perfect and he expects that same look. You've got to trust what you see and cut it loose, but that's part of the growing pains of being a young quarterback."

Growing has been the theme of the first month of the season for Colorado State, not just with Stevens, but adapting to a new staff and new systems. The Rams may not be as polished as they'd like to be right now, especially going against an Aggies' defense that limited them to 16 points last year, shutting them out the year prior.

Either way, the schedule is set and it's time to face the new tests ahead.

"Without a doubt. I think we've been through a lot of trials and tribulations, so I think we won some and we got close, too," safety Trent Matthews said. "I think we know how good we are and how good we've got to be and now we know how to finish."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/mbrohard