Four health care experts at a forum Monday night sponsored by the Live Free or Die Alliance and New Hampshire Public Radio sought to help navigate the tangled thicket of the Affordable Care Act.

Among the highlights from Lisa Guertin, president of Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield in New Hampshire; Lisa Kaplan-Howe, policy director for New Hampshire Voices for Health, Steve Gerlach, a tax attorney at Bernstein Shur; and Rachel Verville, a vice president at Elliot Hospital:

Guertin: If Granite Staters have an insurance policy they like, they can, by state law, renew it before it expires. They have until Nov. 30. “The way to hang on to your plan is already there,” she said;

Kaplan-Howe: It would have been better if New Hampshire had decided to run its own exchange, but it would not have guaranteed a problem free roll-out. “Some state-based marketplaces are doing remarkably well and some have the same problems the rest of us are having,” she said;

Gerlach: Some businesses may decide to forgo mandated health insurance coverage for employees and pay the fine. He said in some cases the penalty is less than the cost of the insurance;

Verville: Competition is not necessarily better when it comes to health care. “Unlimited choice just adds to a patient’s confusion,” she said.

Laura Knoy, host of NHPR's The Exchange, moderated the forum before an audience of about 40 at the radio station’s offices and studio in Concord. Former TV newswoman Tiffany Eddy of the LFDA took questions from the audience and from Facebook, email and Twitter.

The forum -- well worth the hour of your time to listen in -- was live-streamed by both the LFDA and NHPR. It can be accessed here. It will be broadcast on NHPR on Friday, Nov. 29, during the Exchange time slots at 9 a.m. and 8 p.m.

Kaplan-Howe, as policy director for the non-profit consumer advocacy organization, was most supportive of the ACA - also known as Obamacare.

She noted that the health care system in the country was broken and that Obamacare is a step in the direction of fixing it. She said the cost of care under the ACA can’t be measured just by the premium but by the value of the care that coverage offers.

Kaplan-Howe said the law was written with the assumption that states would expand eligibility for Medicaid coverage for people who fall into what she called “the coverage chasm.” But the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that states have the option of expanding Medicaid, thus the current debate in the New Hampshire Legislature about Medicaid expansion; a special session on the matter ends Nov. 21.

If the legislature fails to expand Medicaid, an estimated 49,000 poor Granite Staters will fall into that chasm and, according to Kaplan-Howe, will have to rely on expensive, uncompensated emergency room care that the rest of us pay for.

Guertin explained that Anthem is the only carrier participating in the New Hampshire exchange because it was the only company to choose to.

“We decided it was important to do,” she said.

Anthem has been criticized for reducing the number of hospitals in its network as a way of controlling costs. For some, it’s meant they have to change doctors. She said the decision about what hospitals to include wasn’t made in a vacuum but with feedback from Anthem subscribers.

“We didn’t make an arbitrary decision about how far is too far to drive,” she said.

Gerlach represents clients in matters pertaining to the Affordable Care Act, and he was asked about how businesses feel about the law.

He answered there is no one size fits all answer -- some employers embrace health coverage as a way to help maintain morale and keep employees healthy and more productive. Other companies will reduce hours or hold back hiring employees to stay under the hours and headcount caps that trigger mandatory coverage under the law.

Verville said Elliot Hospital, based in Manchester, has an advocacy program to help patients navigate the new health care law by giving them information on their options. “It’s a lot to digest,” she said.

Paul Briand is an editor for the Live Free or Die Alliance, a non-profit, non-partisan organization that encourages the discussion and analysis of New Hampshire politics and policies.