Though he comes from a family of pediatricians, Dr. David Dosa, a health researcher and Assistant Professor of Medicine at Brown University Medical School, chose geriatrics. He realized early on that there was a coming healthcare crisis for the elderly demographic. As the US population ages, there will be an unprecedented demand for end-of-life care and services for the elderly from a system that’s largely unprepared to meet it. David DosaIt’s his ability to maintain simultaneously a general and a focused perspective regarding the issues of geriatrics and the practice of medicine overall that makes Dosa an interesting physician to profile. More importantly, he brings the clarity of an accomplished, best-selling writer to emphasize the human element that drives everything we face in healthcare. Very much alive to the general trends that make the aging population such a challenge to our collective mandate to promote good health, he still knows the importance of providing a level of care tailored to each patient. Dosa cites this belief as the biggest takeaway from his book, Making Rounds with Oscar: The Extraordinary Gift of an Ordinary Cat. The staff at the nursing home in Providence, Rhode Island, where Dosa served as a consulting physician considered Oscar a typical unfriendly, self-possessed cat until they noticed that he had the peculiar habit of cuddling up next to those patients whose deaths were imminent. Although there may have been a physiological reason for Oscar’s behavior—one theory is the cat could scent the biochemicals released by disintegrating ketone cells in the terminally ill—the sheer human effect was most prominent, giving comfort to the dying as well as family caregivers and staff. As he studied Oscar during his time at the facility, Dosa took this idea to heart—and realized that sometimes the best thing a physician can do for his patient is just to be there and listen. Dosa articulated this view in a July 2007 article published in The New England Journal of Medicine, and subsequently in his book, which was on The New York Times bestseller list for eight weeks and subsequently published in 20 languages worldwide. A deep appreciation for the patient as a human being governs how Dosa practices. When asked about his work with vet- erans and with the elderly, he explained that it was the wealth of individual experiences that his patients share with him that makes his work meaningful. “I’m a storyteller, and I like to listen to stories; I love hearing from people. As I said in my book, I like the life well-lived and I like the stories that people have to say.” For Dosa, doctors are not merely scientists. A med student who has memorized a textbook but can’t talk to her patients simply cannot do her job fully. Doing the difficult thing and taking the time to learn about your patient is just as much a part of the task of administering care, Dosa stresses. Fostering communication is more than just an enjoyable aspect of his work, however. He believes that spending time reaching out to others to talk and to listen will be the saving grace of geriatrics as a clinically relevant profession in medicine. Specific elements of the health delivery and financing system that make it unable to properly handle geriatric patients are simply an indication of larger social issues and deficiencies. Dosa believes that the healthcare system is in the process of reorienting itself towards a greater focus on holistic care and patient well being across the board, not just in geriatrics. The 2010 Affordable Care Act (ACA) reform necessitates new healthcare models because science has been demonstrating that the way we currently provide care—the failure to rely on biomarkers to render treatments more precisely, an overreliance on standardized institutional procedures, and silo thinking among physicians, administrators, and other service providers—is not good enough.

Currently, one of the biggest problems Dosa sees in geriatrics is that doctors are paid to perform a specific service, regardless of quality or whether it is even necessary for the patient’s health. Cardiologists order EKGs, radiologists perform scans, and physical therapists conduct physical therapy all because the care delivery system promotes this kind of specialization and pays doctors to provide acute care within their field of expertise—even when it might be better not to. Patients in end-of-life care situations are disproportionately affected by the current system. “When you ask older folks what it is that they want in terms of their healthcare, they want quality of life,” Dosa says. “They want to be surrounded by family. They want to die at home, surrounded by family. They obviously want to live a long life and a happy life, but they don’t necessarily want to sacrifice quality for quantity. “Unfortunately, our healthcare system rewards doing rather than not doing. The system rewards treating rather than not treating, and it doesn’t reward communication. People don’t get paid to communicate, to sit down and ask, ‘What is it that you truly want?’ I think that’s the central dysfunction with our healthcare system today.” For Dosa, listening is where the care begins, especially with elderly patients where studies suggest that fewer procedures and tests make for a better quality of life. But taking the time to find out who patients are as individuals is no easy task, in large part because individuals are so, well, individual. It takes time and energy to nuance how one provides care around the different traits and problems of the patient. It’s much easier to treat the symptom without addressing the larger pattern of disorder, and even easier to forget whether this treatment is in line with who the patient is and what they want. Dosa is adamant that this mindset needs to change. “Older people have multiple medical problems and they have multiple chronic comorbidities, and that requires a different approach. It requires that doctors and healthcare systems speak to each other so that people don’t do things to a patient that are counterproductive just to conform to a guideline.” Dosa offered the idea of having a “captain of the ship” for patients suffering multiple comorbidities as a solution to this issue. Such a person could manage the nitty-gritty task of making sure the patient’s goals are being met but also making sure that the patient’s multiple physicians are in communication with one another, too. No longer working in the nursing home facility with his feline companion, Oscar, Dosa sees his role evolving as a teacher of geriatrics for med students and other doctors. When asked what we can do about the relatively few geriatricians compared with the large population of geriatric patients, he responded that the solution is not to do the simple thing by growing the field of geriatric practitioners because, to a certain extent, it’s too late for that. “It’s more about teaching the cardiologists and the ophthalmologists and the primary care doctors to pay more attention in treating their aged patients and to be geriatric savvy,” says Dosa. “I view my role, now, as more in a teaching capacity to make sure that the next round of urologists understands what those urological drugs do to patients who perhaps have cognitive impairment, that they are able to manage patients with chronic multiple comorbidities when they do surgery, and that they understand what it is to treat a patient with delirium or dementia.” Dosa believes that for doctors to have a more comprehensive understanding of their patients requires that they have a more comprehensive understanding—or at least a greater appreciation—for the other branches of medicine. And when doctors are armed with this knowledge, they can focus on their patient’s health holistically, giving them the outcomes they both require and deserve, Dosa says. These new expectations are not limited to geriatrics, however. Rather, Dosa believes that changing expectations among the population as well as a shifting regulatory environment will drive change. The federal Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is working on healthcare quality measures on which to base reimbursement. This effort is being imitated everywhere in healthcare as a part of a general effort to reduce bloat in an unwieldy system burdened by the recent influx of millions of newly insured patients. The ACA is incentivizing the launch of new accountable care organizations to develop more integrated systems of care. Dosa affirms that though the newly insured may have trouble finding enough doctors at first, this shift away from fee-for-service will be a boon to the country at large.