Buy Photo Santacon participant "Peter Clause" seen at Johnny Mac's House of Sprits. Saturday, December 13, 2014. Noah K. Murray-Special for the Asbury Park Press ASB 1214 Santacon (Photo: Noah K. Murray-Special for the Asbury Park Press)Buy Photo

They came on bicycles, stilts, in chimneys, and yes, even by sleigh.

They brought food and toys. Some brought the missus. Others brought teams of miniature helpers with pointy ears. At least one had a designated driver named Rudolph.

All brought holiday cheer as they descended upon Asbury Park for the city's third annual Santacon.

Main Street was flooded Saturday with people named Santa Claus, Kris Kringle and Nick — or at least that's what they said their names were.

Their red and white, furry suits kept them warm, and at least one Mr. Claus wore a blue and white suit to signify Hanukkah.

And while the jolly fellows imbibed in spirits inside Johnny Mac House of Spirits on Main Street, many of them accompanied by a Mrs. Claus, the bins outside the pub were filling up with canned goods and other non-perishable food for the Food Bank of Monmouth and Ocean Counties, and toys for the children of Asbury Park.

Johnny Mac was the first top on the Santacon pub crawl, fashioned after the one also held Saturday in New York City, but not as massive and crazy, and with a charitable purpose to collect food and toys for the needy and spread holiday cheer.

"We enjoy the company, get out the holiday spirit, get some food for the food bank and have a good time with fellow Santas and elves," said Kris Kringle of the North Pole, who also goes by the alias Mark Vetrini, 46, of Old Bridge.

Rich Hample, 35, of Bradley Beach, donned a Santa suit and rode to Asbury Park on bicycle. He said he left his sleigh at home.

"It's easier to come here than go all the way into the city (New York),'' said Hample, who said he has participated in Asbury Park's Santacon since its inception in 2012. "We go around and patronize the bars and spread Christmas cheer.''

At least one of the participants had lots of experience. Danny Reilly, 53, of Manasquan said he has played Santa Claus at Christmas parties for the Belmar-based Friendly Sons of the Shillelagh for more than 10 years. Each year, the Friendly Sons fill a 45-foot trailer with toys to distribute to needy children he said. The Santacon event in Asbury Park seemed like a natural thing to do.

"It seems like a good thing to do in New York," Reilly said, outside of Johnny Mac. "Why not do it locally? We have about 50 Santas. They have about 5,000."

Other stops on the pub crawl included The Bank, The Stony Pony, Bond Street Pub and Wonderbar, and organizers said the number of participating Santas was likely to grow to several hundred before the event concluded.

And not everyone was dressed as Santa. Paul Taylor, 43, of Belmar was wearing a bright green suit speckled with candy canes. He schmoozed his way through Johnny Mac handing out — you guessed it — candy canes.

"It's fun," Taylor said. "We donate to charity. We meet new people. It's a great experience. Everyone should do it at least once."

A furry, antlered creature who identified himself as Rudolph said Saturday's event was the second time he has participated in Asbury Park's Santacon. Last year, he and his fiancée happened upon it by chance, he said.

One skeptical pub patron, however, questioned his identity because his nose wasn't a glowing red.

"It's broken," Rudolph said of his red nose. "One of the other reindeer got to me and knocked it out commission."

The doubting patron demanded to know who was responsible for the dastardly deed. Rudolph gave it up immediately.

"Prancer," he stated. "He's pretty wild. We'll settle it later with reindeer games."

Rudolph, also known as Justin Kowal, 33, of York, Pa., was with a group of people all dressed as reindeer characters. He said last year, he and his fianceé, Ashley Decker, were planning to go on a pub crawl in New York City around Christmastime, but the weather was bad, so they stayed in Asbury Park and by chance got caught up in the local Santacon.

"We figured this year we'd dress up as a theme," Kowal said. "We brought food and toys."

And, where would Santa be without his elves to help with sorting the toys? Probably out in the cold, sorting toys, instead of inside the bar sipping beer.

About 20 of Asbury Park's Jersey Shore Roller Girls took on that task for Santa, manning the donation tables outside Johnny Mac and helping to escort the Santas from bar to bar.

The event raised about 1,000 pounds of food in its first two years, according to organizer Swayze Claus.

"We hope to get more than last year," said Chris Genthe of the Jersey Shore Roller Girls.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1DtlGL5