When I was a young boy coming up in the 70s I had to go to church. I really didn’t listen to much the preacher had to say but he did say one thing that stuck with me for 40 years. He said, “In several decades you will see a shift. What is right in America will become wrong; what is wrong in America will become right.” That’s exactly what you’re seeing. It’s a paradigm shift in core conservative American values and you can thank the liberal movement for that and it’s disgusting.

From what I read in the newspaper why is the Pottstown School Board even considering the reorganization of the school administration according to the suggestions of the outgoing or retiring superintendent? Shouldn’t that be handled by the new superintendent and the school board? Should the Philadelphia Eagles have asked Chip Kelly to reorganize their management team when they were firing him? Thank God, no.

I’d like to make a comment about an inequity that I’ve seen. I read in The Mercury where they’re giving illegal immigrants free medical care which is picked up by the local government and the federal government. That’s interesting because when I was laid off, I worked for 36 years paying taxes, and Obamacare is quoting me $650 a month just for my medical care. I don’t get any free medical care. Why do they deserve it and they’re not even citizens? What an equity.

Make America great again. Take our country back. These are code words to let’s go back to the way it was in the 50s where people were denied civil rights and voting rights. This is a great country and no one has taken it away from us, at least not yet.

Advertisement

Hawaiian Punch Party

Remember, never laugh at your wife’s choices because you’re one of them.

Werewolf

I will gladly accept your old PCs, laptops, Apple products, printers, keyboards, cables, even flat panel monitors, no large monitors. I’ll be happy to recycle these parts properly and you may call Jim at 484-941-2937. I will take these recycled items most days of the week

I know this is crazy and it’s just a wild idea because all politicians are crooks but what if... Trump for president, Hillary vice president and Bill as the secretary of state. Now that’s probably the best you can do.

Just Saying

Get ready for Donald Trump’s mouth to start again. All this vulgar stuff, he said he’s going to stop and be professional. He won’t be professional, not even when he’s president.

I was just wondering if the humane society that took care of that horse that was unfortunately shot by paintballs if they could take a picture because that horse is beautiful, it looks like a masterpiece, and I thought it would be so nice if they could sell pictures of the horse on prints, caps, T-shirts to honor the horse for surviving. I think that would be a great way for the humane society to raise money for their cause and for that horse surviving such a hard thing.

Come on Bernie, it’s time to tell your supporters that you are really a Hillary backer. She calls the shots and is waiting for you to kiss and make up and that will happen.

To the person in Stowe who is coming down Roberts Drive onto Grosstown Road gunning your engine, please know we are going to get your license plate and report you to the police. There is no reason to drive the car as you are doing and to gun your engine. This is not the Indy 500. Please stop this. It makes no sense at all.

All media outlets should suspend their normal programming and broadcast the Bunny Hop for 24 hours nonstop. This will give the nation a chance to unify and heal around this ancient ritual dance. Put your left foot forward, put your right foot out, do the bunny hop, hop, hop.

Catbird

I reside in Pottstown and I was reading about the parade. The borough manager I feel is very wrong. I think he’s going to be taking it out on these children who look forward to the parade. I think that’s sad.

I’d like to thank Todd’s Tree Service for cutting the trees down at 342 S. Evans St. Did a wonderful job. These trees were way much interfering with the traffic trying to park next to there and get out of your car. Very nice job Todd’s Tree Service. Thank you.

A Homeowner

I must say it’s extremely funny to see Hillary feeling the burn of the entitlement mentality.

About that public restroom, I’m a long distance truck driver and I can tell whenever I have to use the restroom if a woman used the toilet before me, they pee all over the seat.

18-Wheeler Man

Sound Off is a forum to spur dialogue from residents of the communities we serve on topics of interest in those communities. Fair game are comments that raise issues of note or amplify ongoing debates.

We will not publish comments that are potentially libelous, slanderous, mean-spirited, vulgar or inappropriate. Publications of Sound Off comments are at the sole discretion of the publisher.