A-list guests attending a ritzy Republican shindig Thursday in Midtown ignored hundreds of protestors demonstrating outside — and at least one presidential candidate inside.

Chaos erupted early as guests, including Donald Trump, John Kasich and Ted Cruz, funneled past shouting demonstrators to get into the Midtown Grand Hyatt on E. 42nd St. for the state party’s annual dinner gala. Inside a packed ballroom, however, the well-heeled attendees ignored the pandemonium on the street as they spooned up steak and fish — while totally ignoring Cruz, video shows.

KING: THE NEW YORK POST'S SAD TRUMP EDORSEMENT DEFIES LOGIC

“If I’m elected President, we will repeal every word of Obamacare," said the Texas senator, who famously denigrated "New York values," as guests walked freely around the ballroom, chatted with friends and and took selfies during the candidate's widely ignored speech.

'We will pass a simple flat tax," added Cruz, who said that he would also “rip to shreds” the Obama administration’s nuclear deal with Iran. "Monday is Tax Day. Many people in this room will write very very large checks. If I’m elected, we will write our taxes on a postcard and we’ll abolish the IRS."

Anti-Trump protesters fill the streets outside the Grand Hyatt hotel Thursday evening. (Andrew Savulich/New York Daily News)

DAILY NEWS EDITORIAL BOARD SAYS VOTE JOHN KASICH

Guests were a little more attentive when Trump stepped to the podium.

“It’s great to be back. What a crowd,” Trump said, giving a thumbs-up as he took the stage for what turned into a long, rambling speech about the city.

Praising the response after 9/11, Trump said, “Every small act of kindness” was an example of New Yorkers’ grit.

The scene as Cruz speaks at NYC GOP Gala pic.twitter.com/Pwx8I0Ci25 — Vaughn Hillyard (@VaughnHillyard) April 15, 2016

He then pivoted to the state’s April 19 primary.

“I just want to tell you that I’m so proud to be with you tonight. I’m so proud to be discussing New York values. . . . We’re going to have an amazing election coming up,” he said, dismissing the “paid protesters” at the hotel door.

TRUMP CAMPAIGN MANAGER CLEARED OF BATTERY CHARGES AGAINST BREITBART REPORTER

Kasich, who followed Trump, also evoked a New York theme.

A Donald Trump supporter clashes with protesters outside the Midtown hotel on Thursday. (MIKE SEGAR/REUTERS)

“I think I’ve eaten my way across the state. . . . I hope the New Yorkers will forgive me for taking a fork and touching a pizza with it,” he joked.

“The reason why I come here is, frankly, you’re so alive when you’re in New York, you don’t want to sleep when you’re in New York,” Kasich enthused, as he went on to tout his positive attitude for the next 10 minutes.

As the candidates tried to woo votes among the GOP faithful, mayhem ruled outside as demonstrators clashed with police.

More than 500 protesters swarmed the streets — and several were thrown into police wagons and hauled away.

Police helicopters buzzed overhead as people organized into a loose march and began to walk toward Times Square.

“We’re here to shut him down,” shouted Lyn Nealy, a retired public school teacher from New Jersey.

“We want to show Trump he can’t spread his hateful racist message,” she added.

KKK LEADER BEATS TRUMP AS LEAST LIKED PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE

Protesters chant anti-Trump slogans on E. 42nd St. (Andrew Savulich/New York Daily News)

Mike Bento, 31, a Manhattan barista, said all the Republican candidates are bad choices.

“(They) all . . . have espoused hate — hate against black people, hate against women and hate against immigrants,” he said.

Earlier, a group of 10 protesters — who had booked rooms in advance — filed through the lobby chanting and shouting anti-Trump slogans. The boisterous group was arrested.

A second group of five protesters managed to hang a long banner from a 10th-floor window that said “GOP + Trump = Party of Hate.”

Cops bust demonstrators outside the Grand Hyatt Hotel. (PETER FOLEY/EPA)

Natalia, 33, from Queens, said the group that hung the banner was Make the Road Action. They were not arrested.

“Trump is promoting hate,” said Natalia, who didn’t give her last name. “We’re just not going to stand by. New Yorkers have to act up against bigotry.”

The NYPD said 12 men and 19 women were taken into custody. Most would likely be issued a desk appearance ticket and released, cops said.