The clown bus traveling to and from Ames had to stop several times to be disinfected. It seems a very virulent virus has infected the bus that is being used for a comedy act known as “The Republican Presidential Candidates Over-The-Top Clown Tour.” The virus is known simply as the Donald. The Donald has in recent weeks really bit the clown known as JEB! in the butt several times wreaking havoc on JEB!’s ability to think and speak. The Donald bug has also bitten clowns Marco and Randy. It has also caused havoc with the drivers and organizers of the tour to the point that about all anyone can talk about is the Donald.

There is concern that if the Donald is allowed to live until August 6th, it may get out of its container and infect the general public.

Please exercise caution if you see this virus.

Hey time to see if you were paying attention

1) The New Horizon probe flew by Pluto this week giving earthlings a sense of pride. When was New Horizon launched?

2) What Iowa congressman is pushing a House resolution that states may “refuse to recognize or license same sex marriages?”

3) July 19th & 20th, 1848 a very important meeting was held at Seneca Falls, NY to discuss what issue?

4) In a speech Monday candidate Hillary Clinton said she would work to change the tax code to encourage what method of rewarding employees easier?

5) Former Rep. Michael Griffin (R-NY) was sentenced Friday to 8 months in prison for what offense?

6) For the first time, coal was not the major source of electricity in the US. What replaced coal as the major source of electricity?

7) Three officials of what association were removed for their part in helping with interrogations using torture?

8) Well, Republicans sort of got their wish. Where was President Obama Thursday?

9) Huffington Post decided that whose presidential campaign fit better in their entertainment section instead of their political section?

10) AFSCME and 20 legislators filed suit against Gov. Branstad over what issue?

11) RAGBRAI kicked off in Sioux City this morning. Can you remember the two DM Register columnists that started this annual event as a kind of challenge between themselves?

12) After being called a dwarf, did this put on a little girth. What is 50 miles larger than previously believed?

13) NOAA reported last week that a what is expected to continue throughout next winter and early sprain in North America?

14) The Iran deal was announced late last week. Up to now which Republicans have endorsed it?

15) What family is out of work after cable channel TLC cancelled their show last week?

16) July 15th came and went in Texas without incident despite fear that what was going to happen?

17) Iowa’s DOT is reminding motorists to check for what before they leave their cars during this hot summer?

18) While Greece’s financial difficulties grab headlines, what major governmental bankruptcy is looming in the US?

19) German Chancellor Angela Merkl got really bad press last week when she responded negatively on national TV to a young girl’s plea to do what?

20) At 94 years old Oscar Groening has been sentenced to 4 years in prison for his role as an accountant at what prison in WWII?

BTW normal disinfectants only make the Donald virus begin to shout how great it is.

Answers:

1) January 15, 2006

2) Steve ‘cantaloupe calves’ King

3) women’s rights

4) profit sharing plans

5) Tax fraud. The threat to kill a reporter wasn’t tried.

6) Natural gas

7) American Psychiatric Association

8) El Reno prison in Oklahoma. Just visiting, though.

9) Donald Trump

10) closing of mental health institutes in Clarinda and Mount Pleasant

11) Donald Kaul and John Karras

12) Pluto

13) an El Nino – winter may be warmer.

14) None that I have heard of.

15) the Duggars

16) military Operation Jade Helm would be a cover for a takeover of Texas by the Obama administration. (quit laughing)

17) Check to make sure you didn’t leave your baby in the hot car.

18) Puerto Rico

19) The girl was a Palestinian refugee and she wanted to stay in Germany to attend college.

20) Auschwitz.