HOBOKEN — The days of oil and natural gas gushers may be drawing to a close. But new techniques that tap into new reserves of energy are delivering economic benefits that outweigh the risks, an audience at the Stevens Institute of Technology was told.

John Deutch, an energy expert and former undersecretary in the Department of Energy, took on the controversial practice of fracking, the process of gathering hard-to-reach gas and oil reserves, as part of the college’s lecture series.

On one hand, the technique, officially called hydraulic fracturing, has allowed energy companies in the United States to tap vast new reserves of oil and natural gas. On the downside, the technique has been condemned for the dangers it poses to the environment.

Fracking is a mining technique that reaches oil and gas deposits trapped within shale rock by injecting a mixture of water and chemical additives at high pressure to break apart rocks and extract the supplies hundreds of feet below the earth.

Although the technique is used to get at reserves below the water table, the process requires energy companies to drill through the aquifers and there are concerns that the chemicals used may leak and contaminate drinking supplies during the drilling process.

Deutch has argued that the risk of drinking water contamination is “extremely minimal,” but quality of life and environmental concerns where fracking occurs have sparked lawsuits, bans and protests.

Some of the key issues that need to be addressed are how to reuse, treat or dispose of contaminated materials used in the process and developing standards to ensure that dangerous methane gas doesn’t leak from the pipes drilled deep underground, he said.

However, Deutch argued that fracking is an economically viable energy strategy to tap into previously inaccessible and unconventional oil and gas resources.

“Unconventional oil and gas represent a staggering change to the nation’s energy outlook,” Deutch said. “The question is: Will the public see this type of exploration go forward?”