MIAMI — There was an awful moment, followed by an anxious 18 months, in which Jorge De La Rosa wondered if he would ever realize his potential as a big-league starting pitcher for the Rockies.

It was on May 24, 2011 on the mound at Coors Field, facing the Arizona Diamondbacks, when De La Rosa’s left elbow quit working. He underwent Tommy John surgery a few days later and hoped for the best.

“I was scared in the beginning, and then I had a setback and I had a lot of things in my mind. But thank God I’m here and I came back better than before,” the soft-spoken left-hander said Sunday afternoon after rewriting the Rockies record book.

WATCH: Jorge De La Rosa becomes Rockies all-time leader in wins, beats Marlins and more

By authoring a 4-1 victory over Miami at Marlins Park, De La Rosa, 34, notched his 73rd win in a Rockies uniform, passing Aaron Cook for the most wins in franchise history. De La Rosa improved his career record to 88-70. He’s 73-49 pitching for Colorado.

“I’m really excited to win all of those games for this team,” he said. “I hope there are more.”

More urgently, De La Rosa’s seven strong innings gave the Rockies the boost they were seeking to snap a frustrating four-game losing streak.

“That was just what we needed,” manager Walt Weiss said. “Jorge’s throwing the ball really well. He’s on a good run right now.”

De La Rosa was slowed by a left groin strain and a nasty cut on his left middle finger earlier this spring, but he’s healthy now and it shows. With his changeup baffling hitters and his cut fastball keeping them off-balance, De La Rosa has pitched like an ace in his last five starts, going 4-0 with a 2.56 ERA during that span, with opposing batters hitting just .173 against him. The Rockies are 5-0 in those starts.

“I think I have found my rhythm, and I’m throwing more strikes,” he said. “I walked four guys today, but still, I think (fastball command) has been my biggest key. That’s why I’ve been pitching like this.”

Colorado’s offense, lifeless during the four-game swoon, provided an energy shot in the first inning off Miami right-hander Dan Haren. Charlie Blackmon led off the game with a homer into the right-field corner and Nolan Arenado followed up with a two-run homer to give the Rockies a 3-0 lead.

“As it turned out, Haren settled in really well, so those runs really made a difference in the game,” Blackmon said. “We kind of got to (Haren) early before he got a good feel for everything and it helped us win the game.”

Blackmon’s homer, his eighth, curled just inside the right-field foul pole and he wasn’t sure he’d hit it out.

“This is a tough park to hit in, being that it’s so big and the ball never seems to come down — but it doesn’t go very far, either,” he said. “So I was making sure I was running pretty hard, just in case.”

Blackmon’s home run was the eighth leadoff homer of his career, tying Eric Young (Colorado’s current first base coach) for the most in franchise history. It was Blackmon’s fourth homer to lead off a game, moving him ahead of teammate Carlos Gonzalez for the club record.

Arenado’s homer was his 16th and he’s knocked in 49 runs, easily leading the team in both categories.

De La Rosa cruised threw six scoreless innings, allowing just two singles, until things got a bit messy in the seventh. A leadoff walk to Jeff Baker, a pinch-hit RBI single by Ichiro Suzuki, followed by another single by Dee Gordon, fueled the Marlins’ mini-rally. But De La Rosa coaxed Donovan Solano to hit an inning-ending groundball to second.

“Jorge threw really well all day and really competed,” Blackmon said. “That’s what Jorge does, he competes really well.”

The Rockies’ bats were dormant from the second through the sixth innings, but DJ LeMahieu’s RBI groundout scored Nick Hundley in the seventh.

Closer John Axford struck out three Marlins in the ninth to get his 12th save and lower his ERA to 0.47.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp

Jorge’s history

Rockies left-hander Jorge De La Rosa became the franchise’s all-time leader in wins Sunday. A look at where he stands on the Rockies’ pitching charts:

Victories

1. Jorge De La Rosa 73

2. Aaron Cook 72

3. Jeff Francis 64

4. Jason Jennings 58

5. Ubaldo Jimenez 56

Starts

1. Aaron Cook 206

2. Jeff Francis 185

3. Jorge De La Rosa 159

4. Jason Jennings 156

5. Ubaldo Jimenez 137

Strikeouts

1. Jorge De La Rosa 792

2. Ubaldo Jimenez 773

3. Pedro Astacio 749

4. Jeff Francis 742

5. Jason Jennings 622