The New York State residents who live farthest from New York City and its suburbs and purchased health insurance from the individual exchange are likely to see some of the biggest premium increases, because they have the fewest options for shopping around.

ACA Enrollment by County NYS

The map above breaks down how each of the 16 insurance plans on New York's exchange performed in all 62 counties across the state through the end of the open enrollment period last April. If you scroll over the map, you will see the number of customers each provider signed up.

What you can see from this chart is that roughly two-thirds of the 370,000 people who enrolled in a qualified health plan came from New York City, Long Island and Westchester, meaning insurance companies that could not compete in those counties were left with few customers across the rest of the state.

That highlights a problem tens of thousands of New Yorkers are facing heading into the second year of enrollment.

While state officials like to highlight the fact that 16 insurers offered dozens of plans on the exchange, this map illustrates that options begin to narrow outside of the New York City Metro area, possibly contributing to lower enrollment totals in upstate counties.

Several counties north of Albany and west of Rochester offered only three or four insurance options on the individual market: Today's Options of New York; MVP Health Plan, Fidelis Care and Excellus.

Capital's Nidhi Prakash reported last month that American Progressive Life & Health Insurance Company of New York, also known as Today’s Options of New York, pulled out of the exchange. It operated in 37 counties across New York State, but only 384 people signed up for its plans. In many counties, it enrolled fewer than a dozen people.

That leaves three insurers, all of which have asked the state permission to raise rates by a significant amount.

MVP is looking for a 19-percent increase, Excellus is pushing for almost a 20-percent increase and Fidelis is looking for a 7-percent increase. Capital District Health Plan, which is a fourth option found in several counties, is looking to raise their rates by 8.5 percent.

The bar chart below shows the proposed rate increases for the different plans—platinum, gold, silver, and copper along with the market share.

While those are only proposed rate increases, and Democrat senators have asked state superintendent of financial services Ben Lawsky to hold the line on rates, the message is clear: if you live in the more rural areas of the state, your premiums are almost certainly headed higher.

This is consistent with trends seen across the nation, according to a report from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

The research found that rural county residents could choose from about 14 plans through four insurers compared to 17 plans and five insurers in more urban counties.