Guest Speaker: Fight for your patients

Graduates stand to be recognized after receiving their pins during the NJC Associate Degree Nursing Pinning Ceremony, Thursday. This year 20 nurses graduated from the program. (Callie Jones/Journal-Advocate)

— The healthcare field is sure to be going in a good direction with the 20 new nurses that have just entered the field. Northeastern Junior College celebrated the achievements of these new nurses Thursday evening, at the Associate Degree Nursing Pinning Ceremony.

Following an invocation by Aaron Edinger, nursing director Julie Brower welcomed the graduates and their families and friends to the ceremony.

“This evening is a celebration for the entire community to recognize what these 20 students have accomplished,” she said. “These graduates have completed every course with at least a 77 percent test score average, they have written multiple papers and completed. The graduates have traveled to multiple clinical sites. They also learned to adjust to multiple instructor’s expectations and different styles of teaching.”

Guest speaker Marci Dowis, a registered nurse who works at Sterling Regional MedCenter, gives graduates some advice at the NJC Associate Degree Nursing Pinning Ceremony, Thursday. (Callie Jones/Journal-Advocate)

Following Brower’s speech, guest speaker Marci Dowis, an NJC graduate and emergency room nurse at Sterling Regional MedCenter, gave the new nurses a few words of advice, leaving the graduates with 12 words that will help them start their next step.

Her first pieces of advice were to smile when taking care of patients, “it makes a worth of difference in getting through your shift,” and to travel, to “be a part of something bigger than yourself.” She told the graduates to travel to places where they can use their nursing skills to impact people.

“Pray, pray for wisdom, pray for patience, pray for help, pray for understanding, pray often, thrive on prayer in your career,” Dowis said.

Advertisement

Another piece of advice she had was to cry, both during the good times and the bad times, “if you don’t let yourselves cry everything bottles up it turns up to bitterness and cynicism and that’s not a healthy way to be a nurse.”

She also told the graduates to grow, “continually seek opportunities to develop and fine tune your nursing skills. Never be satisfied with the status quo.”

Class presidents Erin Witte and Kimberly Gray congratulate their fellow graduates at the NJC Associate Degree Nursing Pinning Ceremony. (Callie Jones/Journal-Advocate)

Additionally, she encouraged them to laugh, teach and continue to share their life lessons with others, accept and embrace change, save lives, read and fight.

“Fight and be an advocate for your patients,” Dowis told the graduates. “Your patient is counting on you to look out for their best interest and to be a loud voice when they cannot.”

Lastly, she encouraged the graduates to love their job, their patients and the fact that they are a nurse. She told them that she could already see the love in them.

“You guys show love, you really do and I’m really encouraged,” Dowis said. “Everybody in the audience, you should be very excited and encouraged to know that healthcare is going in a good direction with nurses like this.”

Steve Smith, of the Sterling Rotary Club, waits to present Kristy Kuntz and Sherilyn Knight with the Highest Academic Achievement Award, while nursing instructor Valerie Edinger says a few words about them. (Callie Jones/Journal-Advocate)

After her speech, class presidents Erin Witte and Kimberly Gray spoke to their fellow graduates.

“We are here tonight to celebrate a journey, a journey that has brought us all together as family,” Witte said.

“After everything we have been through, we can definitely say, we will be successful,” Gray added.

They gave their families and friends at the ceremony a little lesson on how to live with a registered nurse, talking about the terms they might use around the house.

“We can confidently tell you, that these nurses here today, deserve the success that they have achieved,” Gray said. “They will commit in every way to the care of those they see everyday, with patients, kindness and caring, the heartbeat of healthcare.”

Darrell Smith, president of the Sterling Lions Club, waits to present Erin Witte with the Best Beside Nurse Award, while nursing instructor Valerie Edinger talks about Witte. (Callie Jones/Journal-Advocate)

They told the graduates that they have become stronger, smarter nurses together and even though they’re all taking different paths in life, they will always carry the memories they made at NJC.

In addition to the speeches, several awards were also handed out.

The Highest Academic Average Award, sponsored by the Sterling Rotary Club, went to Kristy Kuntz and Sherilyn Knight, and the Best Bedside Nurse Award, sponsored by the Lions Club, was presented to Erin Witte.

Also, the following students received scholarship recognition Kimberly Gray, Kristy Kuntz, Amy Pallesen, Shawn Unrein and Erin Witte.

Following the awards presentations, it was time for the presentation of the pins.

The 2013 graduates are: Virginia Allen (Sterling), Aaron Clark (Sidney, Neb.), Elly Cochran (Merino), Loraine Esquibel (Denver), (Amanda Fiegel (Sterling), Heather Gaines (Akron), Kimberly Gray (Sterling), Shelby Harris (Sterling), Amy Kabore (Woodlands, Texas), Sherilyn Knight (Holyoke), Kristy Kuntz (Sterling), Tiffany Maelzer (Amherst), Traci Nolan (Sterling), Amy Pallesen (Riverton, Wyo.), Heidi Romero (Fort Morgan), Meghan Sandridge (Sterling), Jessica Sullivan (Sterling), Shawn Unrein (Sterling), Abbey Whomble (Wray) and Erin Witte (Wray).

Class officers are Erin Witte and Kimberly Gray, co-presidents; Amy Pallesen, vice president; Amanda Fiegel, secretary; Elly Cochran, treasurer; and Jessica Sullivan, CAB representative.

Callie Jones: (970) 526-9286; cjones@journal-advocate.com. Follow cjones_JA on Twitter.