When the working poor and indigent in Texas can’t pay their medical bills, who covers the costs of their care?

Local hospitals are eating millions in costs associated with low-income Texans who can not pay their medical bills, and the CEOs of hospitals such as Seton Medical Center Harker Heights and Metroplex in Killeen say the costs are astronomical.

But in the end, it isn’t just hospitals who pay for unpaid medical bills. Taxpayers across Texas do, too.

Matt Maxfield, CEO of Seton in Harker Heights, said his hospital writes off anywhere from $2 million to $2.5 million per month in “what we call bad debt and charity, (and) those are different numbers,” he said. “Bad debt are those patients that come that we expect they had the means to pay their bills, but didn’t. Then charity are those who go through the process of providing the information to prove that they truly meet our charity guidelines.”

Both the bad debt and charity care are commonly referred to as uncompensated care, and Maxfield said Texas’ refusal to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as “Obamacare,” is causing the heavy burden on hospitals and taxpayers.

“Which is one of the reasons in our state, the expansion of Medicaid is so critical to ever getting reductions to hospitals for the amount of indigent care and bad debt we’re providing,” Maxfield said.

Medicaid expansion

According to the Affordable Care Act, the federal government would pay 100 percent of the cost of each state’s Medicaid expansion, tapering down to 90 percent after 10 years.

The expansion would raise the income eligibility requirement to anyone below 133 percent of the federal poverty level. This includes expanding health coverage to individuals making less than $15,000 per year or a family of four making less than $30,000, providing about 1 million Texans with health care they otherwise would not have.

Metroplex, too, is writing off millions in uncompensated care for patients who are unable, or unwilling, to pay their medical bills.

“Uncompensated care is an issue for all hospitals,” said Vickie Hill, Metroplex’s director of patient financial services. “This year, Metroplex wrote off more than $7 million in unpaid debt in addition to the $23 million that met charity care qualifications. There has been an increase in numbers due to changes in eligibility requirements and health plans with higher deductibles and co-insurance.”

Officials with Scott & White Healthcare said they wrote off some $34 million in indigent uncompensated care. Those who did not pay their medical bills cost Scott & White some $103 million in bad debt.

Cost-shift

Part of the reason deductibles and co-insurance is higher in Texas is the fact that hospitals who write off millions in unpaid debt “cost-shift” that debt on to those Texans who have insurance, making everyone’s premiums and co-pays higher.

“Not just in Texas, but the industry; what hospitals have done for years is, in order to offset this, we do what’s called cost-shifting,” Maxfield said. “We charge those who have insurance more to make up for the fact that we’re not collecting from this very large percentage of patients. Here in Central Texas, particularly the Killeen, Harker Heights, Copperas Cove market, we have a large number of young adults that often go uninsured, that fall into those gaps. ‘Hey I’m healthy. I don’t need coverage.’ So, they just choose not to. We see a lot of that.”

Texas has the highest number of uninsured adults and children.

Driving up premiums

Soon after promises from Gov. Rick Perry and Gov.-elect Greg Abbott that Texas would opt out of expanding coverage to over 1 million adults and children who fell into the coverage gap in Texas, the Texas Hospital Association lobbied legislators hard with a series of TV and radio ads after the Supreme Court decided states could opt out of the Medicaid expansion. But if the 2014 mid-term elections were any indication — more than 9 million registered Texans did not vote — their lobbying efforts fell on deaf ears.

“Uncompensated care does affect the price of premiums because the health care cost of the uninsured is covered by free care provided by the hospitals and by driving up average insurance premiums by $1,800 annually,” said Carlyle Walton, CEO and president of Metroplex Health System in an email.

If not expanding Medicaid in Texas is the answer to lowering uncompensated care costs, Maxfield said Texas’ new governor needs to come up with an alternative solution.

“I think that if that’s not the answer … if the Republicans believe that the answer is not expanding Medicaid, I would go back and say what is?” Maxfield said. “What is the plan? Because right now, there is no other way to get this done. There’s not another product, not another program that gets this done.”