STAFF WRITER

andrea agardy

Traditionally, judicial retention elections in Tennessee do not generate a lot of headlines. This year, however, three of the state’s Supreme Court Justices are hitting the campaign trail in an effort to counteract a movement to get them bounced from the bench – the first serious challenge to sitting justices in nearly two decades.

Justice Cornelia A. “Connie” Clark, flanked by retired judges and prominent attorneys from across the state, visited the Coffee County Justice Center in Manchester on Monday afternoon, where they encouraged the roughly 50 people in the audience to vote to retain the justices and to urge their friends and neighbors to do the same.

In addition to Clark, Chief Justice Gary Wade and Justice Sharon Lee will also be on the ballot next month. All three were appointed to the Supreme Court by former governor Phil Bredesen, a Democrat.

A commercial, paid for by Tennessee Forum, began running last weekend that refers to the Supreme Court as “the most liberal place in Tennessee,” and asserts that “liberal Democrats control our court and threaten your freedom.” The ad goes on to state the justices are “liberal on crime” and “advanced Obamacare.”

“Clearly, we have touched a nerve,” said Susan Kaestner, president of Tennessee Forum, in a press release. “Our ad is thoroughly documented and based in fact, We stand behind our ad and more importantly we stand behind the right of the people of Tennessee to speak the truth about these liberal judges… Every day Tennesseans are held accountable for their actions at school, work and in their daily life. The Supreme Court should be held just as accountable.”

Although the Supreme Court has not heard a case involving the Affordable Care Act, the justices are charged with the responsibility of selecting the state’s attorney general. The state’s current attorney general, Robert Cooper, drew ire from some conservatives when he did not join more than two dozen other states to challenge the law.

“The Supreme Court had an opportunity to pick an attorney general that shared Tennessee values. The instead picked the Tennessee Democrat Party’s lawyer, who then refused to oppose Obamacare,” Kaestner said. “That is a fact. No matter how the judges and their Obama operative try and spin it, that is the truth.”

The ad has been denounced by many in the legal community from both sides of the aisle. The Tennessee Bar Association recently polled its membership, with 93 percent of the responding attorneys indicating the justices should be retained.

Unlike the United States Supreme Court, justices on the Tennessee Supreme Court do not receive lifetime appointments.

Prospective Tennessee Supreme Court justices are subject to a lengthy screening process by the 15-member Judicial Selection Committee, which narrows the field of applicants down to three top candidates. That list of three names is then forwarded to the governor, who makes an appointment from that list.

Once on the bench, justices serve eight-year terms. They are subject to a thorough review by the Judicial Performance Evaluation Commission, which must recommend them for retention before their names appear on the ballot. All three justices up for retention this year have successfully cleared the commission’s review process. Copies of the justices’ review reports can be found online at tncourts.gov.

All appellate court judges throughout the state are subject to retention elections. They do not run under any party affiliation and there are no challengers running against them. Voters will find the names of the appellate court judges up for a retention vote at the end of the lengthy ballot next and will be asked to choose to either retain or replace each individual judge.

“I am here today to tell you that I believe I have passed all the tests the legislature has set in order to be considered, and I believe I’ve passed them overwhelmingly,” Clark said.

During their appearance in Manchester on Monday, Clark and her supporters said what is really on the line in August’s election is not only the fate of the three Supreme Court justices on the ballot, but the integrity of the state’s judicial system as a whole.

Clark said her role as a Supreme Court justice is simply to uphold the laws enacted by the legislature.

“It is the legislature, not judges, who make the law,” Clark said. “We simply take the laws that our legislature has made and it’s our job to uphold them. And it’s our job to uphold them in the same way and apply them equally to every body that comes before us.

“No matter who you are, when you show up, the judge you see and hear will treat you fairly,” she continued. “You shouldn’t have to worry if you’re in the same civic club as that judge or not. You shouldn’t have to worry if you’re in the same political party as that judge or not. You shouldn’t have to worry if you go to the same church or religious institution as that judge or not. You should be able to rely on the fact that no matter what that judge does in their personal lives … the judge is going to put aside all that and is simply going to listen to the facts and the law. For your Tennessee Supreme court that’s most important of all because the cases that we hear are the cases that develop and advance the law. They are the cases where usually we are the last people that get to speak on an issue.”

Jim Henry, an attorney will the Tullahoma firm of Henry, McCord, Bean, Miler, Gabriel & LeBar, said voters are being presented with a choice this August that could affect the judicial system for years to come.

“I think that the situation, as I see it, is that we are at a crossroads in Tennessee in terms of the appellate court and political activity,” Henry said. “We need to make a choice in this election as to which direction we’re going to go. We have the ability to work towards an independent and impartial judiciary or we can adopt one that is real partisan.”

Henry recommended voters weigh the decision before them from two different perspectives: Evaluating the records and reputations of the three justices on the ballot this year while considering the political motivations of those trying to remove them.

“We are in a situation where there are political influences. To my knowledge, they are not all from Tennessee, but they are trying to inject a lot of political activity into our appellate court retention election ballots. And, respectfully, that’s not a place you want politics to be,” Henry said. “Our entire judicial system is based on the fact that all the lawyers and all of the litigants buy in to the idea that this is a fair and impartial system of justice… If we get into a situation where this is politicized, and you don’t have the D or the R after your name, or you know the other side has made bigger donations, no one will ever be satisfied with an adverse ruling… There will never be a time when that’s justified.”

Don Ray, a retired attorney from Tullahoma, said he is concerned about the amount of money being spent on the effort to oust the justices, adding that anyone who passes up the opportunity to participate in the retention election “plays into the hands of those who oppose and do not want to retain these judges for their own reasons.”

“I’m here to speak on behalf of the system we have,” Ray said, “and the fact that we cannot allow our system to be controlled by… people of the world who have a vested financial interests.”

Ray said the movement to oust the judges did not seem to be getting any traction until recently, a development which he does not see as a coincidence.

“Now I see the game plan,” he said. “Put the rush on in the last two weeks of the election so first off, no one can answer you back. They [the judges] can’t answer back anyway, really. Then all of a sudden, the minds of the voters are set on the last ad they saw.”

Former Nashville mayor Bill Purcell, who is also an attorney who went to law school with Clark, echoed his colleague’s sentiments.

“I think this is the most important election that I can remember. This particular election will decide for eight years and arguably for the rest of our lives what kind of court system we will have,” Purcell said. “People are sitting at a distance from this state we know some of them are in Washington, we don’t know where the others are, and they are manipulating the flow of money and information in to Tennessee for one purpose and one purpose only – to change our Supreme Court. Not their Supreme Court, but our Supreme Court.

“They never tried this before because no one believed it was possible, no one thought it could happen. We were in control of our courts, we knew what kind of courts we had and that’s the way it would stay. For the first time in our history people outside of our state are trying to change that…,” he added. “If we were, for whatever reason, to allow folks from outside of our state to try to change that we would be sorry, I think not just for eight years but for the rest of our lives.”

Andrea Agardy can be reached by email at tnrept03@lcs.net.