Q: My husband is upset because I warned my parents that his teenage sister had a history of theft — I think she’s a kleptomaniac — before she came to their house for our baby shower. I believe my parents had a right to know who was coming into their home.

My husband says she has not had issues for a while and that I have prejudiced them against her forever. Was I wrong on this?

A: You both have valid perspectives, so the true wrong here is the lack of communication before your decision was made.

From your description here, your sister-in-law’s past history could be anything from youthful mistakes to chronic criminal activity or even a mental health problem, with each scenario requiring a different level of discretion. A conversation between you two would have served these nuances well, and perhaps your husband could have offered an alternative to full disclosure: like a buddy that kept a close eye on her.

You and your husband have the right to have big decisions involving a relative’s well-being talked about respectfully and thoroughly — especially important once you have that baby.

Q: A friend of mine is so unbelievably needy that I just can’t take it anymore.

Stuff, errands, favors, time — I used to offer things just to be nice, and not only would she take me up on them each and every time, but she would ask for something further or exploit my generosity.

I feel like I am always meeting her needs and she is never bothering to ask about mine.

A: Repeat after me: I shall not offer any favor that I would grumble about fulfilling. And: “just to be nice” means just that, and requires actually wanting to be nice (or at least faking it convincingly).

In addition, you’ve got to learn to say no. It’s a difficult skill, but flexing that muscle is a favor not just to yourself, but also to the friend that otherwise you will swiftly begin to resent.

“I’m sorry I can’t do that for you this week.” “I wish I could help, but I have to say no.” Then a breath. Don’t justify or embellish: Simply borrow from Nancy Reagan and Just Say No.

Hopefully, this will allow you to enjoy her company again. If not, it’s time to re-evaluate if she’s capable of being the friend you need.

Andrea Bonior, a clinical psychologist, writes a weekly mental health advice column for The Washington Post’s Express and is author of “The Friendship Fix.” For more information, visit www.drandreabonior.com. You can also follow her on Twitter: @drandreabonior.