ROCK HILL, S.C. — Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders is blaming Democrats' tough losses in Tuesday's election on abysmal voter turnout rates.

The socialist presidential hopeful, who's running for the Democratic nomination, delivered remarks at a gathering for the South Carolina Democratic Women's Council Saturday morning as part of his effort bolster his support among female voters in the earliest Southern voting state. Sanders was joined by his wife, Jane.

"Tuesday was a devastating election for Democrats in Kentucky [and] in Virginia," Sanders told a crowd of about 100 women.

The independent senator from Vermont said Republican Matt Bevin's win in the Kentucky gubernatorial election "will give huge impacts on hundreds of thousands of people." He fears Bevin will toss the state's health-insurance exchange under Obamacare when he moves into the governor's mansion.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

"Many people have given up on the political process and that is how Republicans win elections," Sanders said.

"Did you know what the voter turnout was in Virginia? Twenty-six percent," he noted as several audience members booed. "In Kentucky [it was] 30 percent."

"We don't win elections when people don't turn out," Sanders added.

The second-place Democratic candidate also touched on the 2014 midterm elections when a Republican wave swept over Washington and GOP governors won in several blues states like Maryland, Massachusetts and Illinois.

"They did so well because 63 percent [of Americans] didn't vote," Sanders said matter-of-factly. "Eighty percent of young people didn't vote. A vast majority of workers didn't vote."

Also from the Washington Examiner Donald Trump outsources campaign operations to RNC Some Republicans fear the RNC will be too consumed with Trump to focus on House, Senate and governors races.