In recent weeks, a spate of media attention has once again alerted Americans to our epidemic of narcotic drug abuse – and its destructive and fatal consequences. My recent piece in this publication spoke to the political promise for a response in this country because an epidemic is indifferent to whether a person is Republican, Democrat or independent. We are all besieged by this problem; an epidemic makes no distinctions between white, black, Hispanic or Asian, rich or poor, urban or rural, or young or old.

For the doers among us, we need to decide and act on what can be done to contain this epidemic. Unnecessary deaths can be averted, and we can do far better to protect against the personal, community and economic devastation that addiction wreaks on a society. At the risk of missing a few things, I offer below 10 actions individuals, families and communities (including our policymakers and insurers) can do. These are not meant to be taken in rank order; rather, the more taken, the greater our chances of success.

[READ: America Is Neglecting Its Addiction Problem]

1. Reduce overdose deaths by providing easy access to naloxone. Naloxone, now available as a nasal spray, immediately blocks the deadly respiratory suppression caused by heroin, methadone and narcotic pain pills (like OxyContin, Percodan and Vicodin), and it should be made easily available to first responders, families and those dependent on narcotics and their friends. In 2014, overdose deaths from prescription pain pills reached nearly 19,000, a more than threefold increase from 2001. Over 47,000 people total overdosed that same year.

2. Identify and crack down on prescribers who are providing large quantities of narcotics in so-called pill mills. Use state prescription databases to identify these prescirbers, and distinguish them from doctors legitimately practicing with populations of pain and cancer patients.

3. Employ TV, radio and social media to educate families about drug-abuse prevention. This has been repeatedly shown to reduce the non-medical use of narcotic pain pills.

4. Establish and implement medical guidelines for the treatment of chronic pain. This can be done through quality improvement techniques and performance improvement strategies.

[READ: The Food and Drug Administration Needs to Change After 110 Years]

5. Make problem drug and alcohol use screening a standard of care. Screening for this abuse should be a universal practice, used with adult patients seen in primary care settings to identify and intervene early before addiction sets in and overtakes an individual. Screening, brief intervention and referral for treatment, or SBIRT, is a proven intervention that is generally covered by insurers, including Medicaid and Medicare. This intervention has also been adapted for teenage detection and intervention of drug and alcohol problems.

6. Increase the availability, affordability and access to drug treatment programs. An estimated 80 to 90 percent of individuals who could benefit from treatment are not getting it. Celebrities who can pay vast sums for private treatment programs should not be the only ones able to enter them. The Affordable Care Act requires as an essential service element coverage and parity for mental health and substance use disorders, meaning that insurance benefits for addiction must be equivalent to any other covered general medical condition. The opportunity for proper reimbursement for substance disorder treatment has never been better.

7. Educate doctors, patients and families about what good addiction treatment must include. Medical providers, not just addiction specialists, need to appreciate the underlying neuroscience of addiction and fashion their treatment accordingly. Patients and families need to be far more informed consumers in order to advocate for effective treatments.

[READ: Obama Is Right, Fighting Drug Addiction Is a Bipartisan Issue]

8. Expose treatment centers not providing comprehensive treatment for substance abuse as falling below standards of quality of care. 12-Step recovery programs (like Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous) are important as a part of a comprehensive treatment program, but have low rates of effectiveness alone. Treatment options must include motivational enhancement, cognitive-behavioral treatments, relapse prevention, family education and support, wellness efforts and medication to help prevent relapse and maintain sobriety.

9. Promote and pay for the use of medication-assisted treatment. This means that recovery efforts can include medication. The use of medication should not be exhorted as a violation of sobriety. A number of medications now exist for drug and alcohol addiction (tobacco too) that improve rates of abstinence – or reduce use, called harm reduction. These include buprenorphine (Suboxone), methadone, naltrexone (including the 28-day injectable Vivitrol) and naloxone. Let's give people in recovery as good a chance as possible not be drawn into puritanical and outdated notions of recovery.

10. Keep hope alive. People with substance use disorders can recover. That takes good treatment, hard work, ongoing support and keeping hope alive. People with addictions do get on the path to recovery – but it is hard to predict when that will happen. For some it is early, even after one or two rehabilitation programs. For others it may take five, 10 or 20 rehab programs, and the pain and suffering of too many relapses. Persons affected, their families and clinical providers need to sustain hope that recovery can happen during what can be a protracted and very dark time. The darkest moments, the most deadly, are when hope evaporates, which is when exile from family, friends and communities and suicide are more likely.

[READ: Phillip Seymour Hoffman and the Real Face of Drug Addiction]