The Rockies’ franchise-altering trade of Troy Tulowitzki teetered them toward waiting. The Rockies sacrificed an all-star shortstop meant to lead them to the post- season in favor of setting up what they hope is a better future.

In the wake of Tulowitzki’s trade to the Toronto Blue Jays, in return for three pitching prospects, and the call-up of touted rookie pitcher Jon Gray, the Rockies have eyes on youngsters setting up to crack the major leagues.

And it won’t be Colorado’s first turn at making its fans wait for a contender. In 2005, after trading right fielder Larry Walker to the St. Louis Cardinals, the Rockies stocked their roster with a team of 20-somethings. They started a marketing campaign titled “Generation R,” playing up the shift toward youth.

Call this “Generation R.2” if you want. But the Rockies don’t call it a rebuild.

“It’s not a word we use around here,” general manager Jeff Bridich said. “To ‘rebuild’ says that we’re going to sell whatever assets we have at the major-league level just to say we’re rebuilding or getting rid of guys just for the sake of change.”

RELATED: Stephen Strasburg dominant for Nationals in return from DL, beats Rockies

Whether it’s rebuilding, rebranding, restocking or reviving, the Rockies are really invested in their prospect pipeline.

Here are the names — just like Tulowitzki, Garrett Atkins, Jeff Francis, Brad Hawpe and Clint Barmes in 2005 — who are nearing the major leagues and, the Rockies hope, ready to help turn around a team headed toward its fifth consecutive last or second-to-last place finish in the NL West.

SS TREVOR STORY, 22

Story’s story is an exercise in tempering expectations. Within a week in mid-July, Story had six multihit games, including a two-homer, four-RBI night and two three-hit games. But he has cooled off since and entered Saturday hitting .259 in the Pacific Coast League.

The Rockies were willing to take on Jose Reyes’ $24 million-per-year contract in the Tulo- witzki trade because they needed a shortstop. Story isn’t ready.

But his call-up, perhaps in September when big-league rosters expand, might plop him at any one of three infield positions. Story advanced through the Rockies’ system as a shortstop, but he could be better suited as a second baseman.

“Nobody has a crystal ball here to know what the opportunity on the major-league level will eventually be,” Bridich said. “You don’t truly know until you see a guy do it at this level.”

OF DAVID DAHL, 21

Dahl’s visit to a hospital emergency room in May — after he collided with a teammate in the outfield while chasing a flyball — led to his spleen being removed. But it didn’t set his progress back.

Dahl returned to Double-A New Britain about six weeks later. He needs to catch up with playing time. And he’s striking out too much — once every four at-bats this season.

But “he has a chance to be a five-tool player,” said Rockies farm director Zach Wilson. “So all those tools are still developing.”

The 10th overall pick in the 2010 draft coming out of high school, the Alabama native fast-tracked to Double-A. He is the youngest player on the Rock Cats’ roster.

“He’s very young for that league,” Wilson said. “And there’s still a lot he needs to do to prepare himself.”

LHP KYLE FREELAND, 22

The race is on between Jeff Hoffman, the right-hander the Rockies received in the Tulo- witzki trade, and Freeland, a former standout at Thomas Jefferson High School in Denver.

Both are 22. Both are coming off arm injuries. Hoffman had Tommy John surgery and Freeland had bone chips removed from his elbow. But Freeland, the No. 8 overall pick in the 2014 draft, has pitched with more maturity than his age.

“The things that make Kyle Kyle is he’s polished in a lot of ways,” Wilson said. “As an amateur, he had very good command of his fastball. And it’s only gotten better. But he needs innings.”

C TOM MURPHY, 24

Jim Tracy, who managed the Rockies to their most recent postseason appearance, in 2009, recently coached Team USA at the Pan American Games in Toronto. His catcher was 24-year-old Murphy — the Rockies’ top backstop prospect.

“He’s a very good defensive catcher,” Tracy told The Denver Post last week. “He’ll play in the major leagues.”

Murphy’s ascension was slowed some by a shoulder injury last year, but he was promoted to Triple-A on July 23 and is hitting .261 with regular playing time.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke