2 photo s Slideshow

Pres. Barack Obama called Friday for federal support for two years of free community college education, so long as the students are making progress and attending school at least half time.

The White House estimates that the program would cost $60 billion over 10 years, with substantially more added by the states.

“What I’d like to do is to see the first two years of community college free for everybody who’s willing to work for it,” Obama said in a video posted by the White House this week. “It’s something we can accomplish, and it’s something that will train our workforce so that we can compete with anybody in the world.”

While the proposal resonated with many, there were skeptics. Politico cited Bryce McKibben, a former Association of Community College Trustees policy analyst and now a policy adviser to Democrats on the Senate education committee, who has observed that, Politico paraphrased, "the program could end up doing more for less needy students than those who need it the most, because low-income applicants may already be covered by Pell grants and other federal aid."

“With no details or information on the cost, this seems more like a talking point than a plan,” Cory Fritz, a spokesman for House Speaker John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, told the New York Times.

Other critics also note that a program focused on tuition overlooks the costs of room and board, which in a community college setting may actually be more than tuition.

"There’s also the issue of capacity," ABC News notes. "The nation currently only has 1,100 community colleges. Some states that have individually dabbled in subsidized or free community college programs have seen their systems overwhelmed."

The proposal is an echo of a new policy set to begin in Tennessee next fall. That program, called the Tennesse Promise, offers "last dollar" tuition to students attending community colleges or technical schools in the state. Last dollar means that the tuition support kicks in after other forms of financial aid, including Pell grants but not including loans, are capped out.

The Tennesse program goes a step further, adding guidance from a mentor, a feature that many critics of higher education see as vital to get at-risk students on a successful path.

"In addition, Tennessee Promise participants must complete eight hours of community service per term enrolled, as well as maintain satisfactory academic progress (2.0 GPA) at their institution," the state's website notes.

Email: eschulzke@desnews.com