Buy Photo Charlotte’s Web is a brand of hemp oil that has gained national attention for its purported ability to dampen seizures in children with epilepsy. (Photo: Brian Powers/The Register)Buy Photo

If ever there was any doubt as to the absurd nature of Iowa’s new law on cannabis oil, that doubt can now be put to rest.

So far, the state’s new cannabis-oil authorization program has spent more than $100,000 to create and issue registration cards, indicating the bearer is authorized to possess the oil, to about 50 people. That translates to an average of $2,000 per card.

This expense, and the amount of bureaucratic red-tape in acquiring a card, would be excusable if the cards had any real value.

Unfortunately, these cards are an outgrowth of a new state law that only in theory allows people with severe epilepsy to legally use doctor-approved cannabis oil. Practically speaking, this new law conflicts with a longstanding state law that makes it illegal to manufacture or distribute cannabis oil in Iowa, and with a largely unenforced federal law that bars its transport across state lines.

So what is a patient to do?

Those in border areas simply travel to other states, despite laws that require purchasers to show evidence of in-state residency.

Then there’s Jennifer McFadden of Dubuque, who obtained a cannabis-oil card to facilitate the treatment of her 12-year-old epileptic son, Liam.

McFadden has found a Colorado company that’s willing to send her the oil, but the federally regulated care facility where Liam lives can’t allow the oil inside. As a result, McFadden takes Liam to the facility’s parking lot twice each day, rain or shine, administers the cannabis oil, and then brings him back into the facility.

This is the direct result of the Iowa Legislature’s nonsensical approach to cannabis oil.

Sadly, things aren’t expected to change anytime soon. In fact, Republican Rep. Clel Baudler says the new law isn’t likely to be tinkered with next year since it represents something of a compromise between opponents of any form of legalized cannabis and those who favor a much less regulated approach.

“So I think we’ll stay right where we’re at,” he says.

That stance might make sense if the new law didn’t represent the worst of all possible worlds: It has created a program that is both ineffective and costly.

Usually, when the Iowa Legislature fouls its nest, it does so by passing a bill that either creates bad public policy or needlessly increases state spending. In this instance, our industrious lawmakers somehow managed to do both.

When Gov. Terry Branstad signed the legislation, he said it signified the work of “people talking to their legislators and to their governor about important issues to them, to their families and to their children.”

But the bill also illustrates the unwillingness of lawmakers and the governor to listen to those people when they’re talking. Advocates had repeatedly warned state officials the bill they were contemplating would do very little for Iowa families, since they would still face all of the medical, legal, financial and practical hurdles of obtaining and administering the drug.

If our elected leaders are sincere in their desire to help Iowa families, they need to pass a law that allows for the distribution — not just the possession — of cannabis oil for medical purposes. Other states, including Illinois, have taken this common-sense path. Iowa needs to do so, as well.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1SyH1dN