Waiting on House Dems

With help from Elena Chiriboga

SOMETHING WILL HAPPEN SOMETIME: As it stands, it appears that three of the four conferences on Capitol Hill are basically on board with the permanent extenders deal. Ironically, it’s the group with the least overt power — House Democrats — who are the big hold-up, with Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi still holding out to index the Child Tax Credit to inflation. The backup, if the big deal falls short, is a two-year extension of the expired tax breaks, putting us right back in this position in holiday season 2017.

Story Continued Below

House Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady said Wednesday that Republicans believed there was still good reason to keep negotiating with Democrats, but showed no give on indexing. “My view is the index is extraneous,” Brady told reporters. “Glad to have that debate in the future.”

But Republicans also acknowledge that there’s a good chance that any permanent deal trading business incentives for the GOP for the Earned Income Tax Credit and child credit plus-ups for Democrats collapses if Pelosi doesn’t get on board. Rep. Pat Tiberi, a senior GOP member of Ways and Means, said “a couple dozen” House Democrats could back a permanent extenders deal even without leadership support. But he added: “I think you have to have leadership’s buy-in. And quite frankly, it complicates things with the White House, too, if you don’t have Pelosi on board.”

As for the Senate: Take it from Democrat Ben Cardin, who told The Hill "if it was up to the Senate, we would be ready to sign the deal now."

WHO’S DRIVING THE CADILLAC? Let’s be clear — it'd be hard to find Republicans who like the Affordable Care Act’s tax on costly insurance plans. But that doesn’t mean they all want to delay the tax in an extenders deal. Some, like Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn, basically want to inflict more pain on Democrats and their labor allies before they agree to delay the tax. “That's a major Democrat ask, so there needs to be something proportionate in terms of achievement on our side,” Cornyn said.

But Brady noted the GOP was “convinced all 23 taxes in Obamacare are pretty bad taxes,” adding that “every effort we get to kick some of these taxes out of the way, even for a short time, we think is pretty helpful.” More from our Brian Faler here: http://politico.pro/1RFul2h

ALRIGHT, IT’S THURSDAY, and another threat of weekend votes on Capitol Hill has miraculously evaporated. In the interim, we hope the rest of you aren’t having dreams (nightmares?) about extenders negotiations. You know where to find us with your tips, scoops and constructive criticism. Email: bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com, bfaler@politico.com and kodonnell@politico.com. Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

OTHER FUN FACTS TO KNOW AND TELL ON EXTENDERS: POLITICO's John Bresnahan, Jake Sherman and Lauren French take the broader view on what’s become broader negotiations over the year-end omnibus and extenders — surely someone has copyrighted “taxibus” somewhere — and find House Speaker Paul Ryan and Pelosi at a crossroads. Story here: http://politico.pro/1Qx8wRv

Democrats are expected to grudgingly accept the end of the oil export ban. The Pro Energy team’s Elana Schor notes that Democratic Sen. Tom Carper is floating the idea of a refinery tax credit as part of that trade for his party. http://politico.pro/1NHihMr

And Cogan Schneier notes for the Pro Agriculture team that farming interests are a bit nervous about extenders as well, especially provisions dealing with expensing. http://politico.pro/1IVOpGv

HILLARY ON INVERSIONS: The Democratic front-runner says that she absolutely believes the Treasury Department has the authority to attack earnings stripping as it seeks to combat corporate inversions, a step the Obama administration has yet to feel comfortable taking. (Recall that Treasury Secretary Jack Lew was both a deputy to Hillary Clinton at the State Department and a member of Bill Clinton’s administration as well.)

More from our Katy O’Donnell on Clinton’s plan, which also includes an “exit tax” on companies that plan to invert: “She would funnel an anticipated $60 billion in new revenue from the earnings stripping measure into incentives for manufacturing, research and small businesses, according to a Clinton aide.” Full story: http://politico.pro/1RanjU2

Executive action as the last resort: The WSJ notes that Clinton has also vowed to act on her own on both immigration and guns. But her spokesman, Brian Fallon, said that “her first preference will always be to seek to work with Congress. But where progress has stalled and there is clear legal authority for the president to act, she will not hesitate to do so.” http://on.wsj.com/1luWkpv

** A message from Grant Thornton LLP: The tax code puts U.S. companies at a disadvantage. Congress can’t address the problem if it excludes pass-throughs from an innovation box or tax reform. Congress should lower the effective business tax rates equitably for all U.S. businesses. http://gt-us.co/1LhfUyM **

THAT’S A WIN: Sen. Ron Wyden, the top Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee, got on the bad side of some people for his handling of the 2014 year-end tax negotiations. But Wyden, the original co-author of a measure that bars states from implementing new taxes on Internet access, helped get the Permanent Internet Tax Freedom Act tucked into a bicameral customs compromise (H.R. 644). “In my view, when you have something that works, that has stood the test of time, you ought to make it permanent,” Wyden said.

Win-win actually: That’s because Wyden, from the sales tax-free state of Oregon, has bitterly opposed efforts from retail advocates and a bipartisan group of lawmakers to pair the Internet access measure with a more controversial measure to give states more latitude to collect sales taxes from online retailers without a brick-and-mortar location in that state.

The Retail Industry Leaders Association, a key advocate for the online sales tax measure, somewhat sarcastically called the permanent authorization of ITFA “a remarkable departure from the regular order commitments House and Senate leaders have made and that many members have so exalted.” The group added that allowing ITFA to move without a sales tax bill “robs Main Street retailers, the backbone of local economies, of the logical companion to bipartisan legislation to level the sales tax playing field.”

Just an FYI: Not everyone’s happy about that customs bill. Rep. Sander Levin, the top Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee, is urging Democrats to vote against the measure, in part because a currency manipulation provision was dropped. More on how the provision was left out, from our friends at Pro Trade: http://politico.pro/1TCsKbZ And Levin’s opposition, from The Hill: http://bit.ly/1M42PEk

SEEKING A PUERTO RICO FIX: Three senior Senate Republicans — Chuck Grassley, Orrin Hatch and Lisa Murkowski — rolled out a bill to establish a new authority overseeing Puerto Rico’s finances, just about three weeks before the island faces another key debt payment. The GOP proposal didn’t give Puerto Rican authorities the Chapter 9 bankruptcy protection they requested, but does include a cut in the payroll tax meant to give the economy a spark. More from Colin Wilhelm on the Financial Services team here: http://politico.pro/1mbCmA5. A House bill also released Wednesday would give Puerto Rico bankruptcy protection.

Side note: Republicans are generally big fans of tax cuts, but not necessarily payroll tax cuts. Ryan once called the payroll tax cut here in 2011 and 2012 “sugar high economics.”

Hitching a ride? Over at The Hill, Peter Schroeder — previously forced to co-byline entirely too many stories with your Morning Tax author — reports that Puerto Rican officials hope a rescue plan will be included in the omnibus. But that may be a long shot. Democratic Rep. Luis Gutierrez vowed to vote against any spending deal that didn’t have assistance for Puerto Rico and asked others to join him. Hard to imagine a groundswell, though. http://bit.ly/1NcKqJG

TAX FOUNDATION VS. TAX POLICY CENTER: The more free-market Tax Foundation examines why its projection for Jeb Bush’s tax plan found it to be so much less expensive than the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center — $3.66 trillion vs. $6.8 trillion — and finds three reasons. First, the Tax Foundation didn’t model some provisions because of uncertainty about the details. Second, the Tax Foundation assumes Bush’s plan would go into effect in 2015, and the Tax Policy Center goes with 2017. And finally, the Tax Foundation says that the Tax Policy Center assumes more transitional costs in the early years of Jeb’s plan. Full blog post here: http://bit.ly/1Z08rZK

YAHOO’S ABOUT-FACE: Internet titan Yahoo had planned to spin off its stake in the Chinese e-commerce titan Alibaba. But then the IRS got in the way, and now Yahoo’s going to spin off what the AP called basically “everything associated with the Yahoo brand name” to “become little more than a holding company” for Alibaba. The tax implications: The original decision to spin off Alibaba “was designed to sidestep more than $10 billion in taxes Yahoo might otherwise owe. But the IRS jeopardized that plan by refusing to guarantee a tax exemption.” AP story: http://apne.ws/1RFBWht.

CNBC also explains why reversing course might result in a better tax bill for Yahoo: http://cnb.cx/1TBNDE8.

INTERNATIONAL NEWS —

BATTLE OVER OFFSHORE TAX BREAKS, CONTINUED: The FACT Coalition said Wednesday that almost 90,000 letters went to Congress asking lawmakers not to extend two tax extenders popular with multinational corporations — the CFC look-through and the Active Financing Exception. http://bit.ly/1ORQ0Uh

No thank you to patent box: The libertarian Mercatus Center says in a new study that an innovation box on profits from intellectual property “is a poor substitute for much needed holistic corporate income tax reform.” http://bit.ly/1Z0dxVL

STATE UPDATE —

REPUBLICANS PRESS OREGON DOJ TO INVESTIGATE ENERGY TAX CREDITS: Republican lawmakers are asking Oregon Attorney General Ellen Rosenblum to look into the controversial sale of state energy tax credits, The Oregonian reports. “In a letter sent Monday, the legislators summarized a variety of allegations that surfaced in conversations with whistleblowers at the Energy and Revenue departments. Based on those discussions, the lawmakers expressed concern that the state may have lost substantial tax revenues and that state employees may have used their positions for personal gain.”

Nearly $1 billion in tax credits to businesses, nonprofits and public organizations has been circulated by the Energy Department since 2007 to fund “efficiency, conservation and renewable energy projects.” Most of those credits, though, end up being sold again to investors at a lower cost, “either because the original recipient has no tax state liability or prefers cash.” http://bit.ly/1mb9U17

ALASKA GOVERNOR CALLS FOR — GULP — AN INCOME TAX: Gov. Bill Walker, faced with plummeting oil revenues, is proposing Alaska’s first personal income tax in 35 years, as well as an increase in alcohol and cigarette taxes, The Associated Press reports. Alaska is expecting revenue from oil and gas production taxes to bring in $172 million in fiscal year 2016, a massive decline from two years ago, when production taxes totaled $2.6 billion. http://abcn.ws/1mbAxTE

Production taxes for fiscal year 2015 added up to about $390 million, the state Revenue department said in a report. The AP: “Alaska relies heavily on oil revenues to fund state government and is currently grappling with an estimated $3.5 billion budget deficit amid chronically low prices. In recent years, petroleum revenue provided about 90 percent of the money available for spending. Last year, that dropped to 75 percent, and it's not projected to provide more than 72 percent during the rest of the decade, the report said.” http://abcn.ws/1Qe4Q8E.

QUICK LINK

— How a garden variety tax dispute (at least for a galaxy far, far away) kick-started the Star Wars sagas. http://bit.ly/1TgmE0K

DID YOU KNOW? About 40 percent of the almost 75 million Americans who play fantasy football have a league on Yahoo. http://bit.ly/1Lx3NOp

** A message from Grant Thornton LLP: When Congress fails to act, businesses suffer. More than 50 popular tax provisions expired at the end of 2014, including the R&D credit. Congress’s indecision on these provisions is impeding business planning and stifling growth. According to a Grant Thornton survey of top financial executives, more than half of companies that use the provisions do all their planning under the assumption that the extension will not occur. That’s a huge blow to the effectiveness of the provisions and a barrier to growth. The R&D credit is a major driver of entrepreneurial activity and high-paying jobs. Congress needs to act soon to reinstate these provisions and to make the R&D credit permanent. Find out what else Congress could do to strengthen the R&D credit and view survey findings at http://gt-us.co/1iOXJW5

© 2015 Grant Thornton LLP | All rights reserved | U.S. member firm of Grant Thornton International Ltd **