Randy Hillard was supposed to be dead by now.

In 2010, the Michigan State University psychiatry professor was diagnosed with stage four stomach cancer and given less than a year to live. He started wondering how he could die in the most comfortable way possible given the circumstances, even briefly researching an assisted suicide organization in Switzerland.

But Hillard, now 63 years old, lucked out. Around the same time he received his diagnosis, a breast cancer drug called Herceptin was approved to treat some forms of stomach cancer. For more than four years, a Herceptin infusion taken once every three weeks has kept Hillard alive — at a cost of $1 million, he estimates, with about $100,000 coming from his own pocket.

"I can barely afford that, and I'm a doctor," he said.

So the vote that Hillard cast on a Food and Drug Administration panel earlier this month had some extra significance. Meeting at the FDA's Silver Spring campus, the panel recommended the approval of the first in a new class of drugs called "biosimilars" — a type of generic drug that's never before been available in the United States and would potentially save him and patients like him thousands of dollars.

The specific drug in question was a copycat version of the blockbuster drug Neupogen, which is primarily used to help chemotherapy patients fight off infection. Like Hillard's Herceptin, Neupogen belongs to a class of drugs known as biologics — complex and costly treatments made from living organisms that help patients battle some of the most severe diseases. Biosimilars undergo an identical manufacturing process, and drug companies and regulators say they can provide patients the same help.

The FDA's almost-certain approval of the Neupogen copycat will open the door to a new range of biosimilar drugs that will offer lower-cost competition. These drugs are arriving as the United States faces the dual challenge of expanding patient access to treatments while constraining how much the country spends on health care.

While traditional generic drugs have long been commonplace in America, the health-care industry and regulators are still battling over the guidelines for biosimilars. The decisions they make will ultimately affect how broadly these drugs — on the market for the past decade in Europe and elsewhere — will be available in the United States and just how much of the billions of dollars in expected savings will eventually materialize.

All that's standing in the way are concerns about introducing patients and doctors to these new drugs, drug company efforts to protect their bottom lines, and an anxious health-care industry looking to keep spending from spiraling out of control.

"Really, truly, we are betting our lives on these new biosimilars," Hillard said.

Americans have had broad access to generic versions of traditional drugs for more than 30 years now, thanks to the 1984 Hatch-Waxman Act. That landmark law established a scheme for regulating the generic drug market, which has now grown to about 85 percent of all prescriptions dispensed in the United States. Generics, on average, are discounted about 75 percent from the price of the brand-name drug.

Biologics, however, are much different, more complicated and more expensive to produce than traditional drugs, and they have a pricetag to match. For example, the arthritis treatment Remicade, which recorded $8.4 billion in sales in 2013, can cost up to $2,500 per injection. The cancer treatment Lucentis, one of the world's best-selling drugs, costs about $2,000 a dose.

The Hatch-Waxman law only applies to what's known as small-molecule drugs, which are chemically synthesized products. When those drugs come off patent, drugmakers are able to offer their own generic versions in accordance with the FDA review process outlined by the 1984 law.

However, no similar process for biologic imitators to compete with brand-name drugmakers existed until 2010, when a new regulatory pathway was authorized under the Affordable Care Act. For a drug to be deemed biosimilar, that law requires that the copycat drug is "highly similar" to the original, or "reference" drug, and doesn't have "clinically meaningful" differences to it.

"The FDA has to make a determination that it will behave the same way, it will have the same clinical profile," said Leah Christl, FDA associate director for therapeutic biologics,

It's a tougher standard than the one for traditional generics, making it harder to enter this new biosimilar market. Biosimilar products on average will take eight to 10 years to develop and cost the manufacturer between $100 million and $200 million, according to the Federal Trade Commission. By comparison, traditional generic drugs cost just between $1 million and $5 million to develop over three to five years.

An overseas market for biosimilars has existed for almost a decade in the European Union and other countries, including Canada, India and Japan. Though it's hard to predict what biosimilars will cost in the United States, they tend to cost about 20 percent to 30 percent less than the branded biologic in these countries. That's far less than the discounts for traditional generic drugs, but it still could mean tens of thousands of dollars in savings for the most expensive biologics.

The United States spent a combined $271.1 billion on prescriptions drugs in 2013, which comes to almost $1 for every $10 the country spends on health care. Biologics accounted for about 28 percent of drug spending that year, up from 21 percent five years earlier, according to the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics.

Notably, spending on prescription drugs had slowed in recent years, largely thanks to a number of traditional brand-name drugs coming off patent and getting cheaper generic competition. But more new drugs were launched in 2013 than any of the previous 10 years, and health-care payers are bracing for higher spending on drugs. They spent the better part of 2014 condemning drug companies for the prices of these new medications.

Nowhere has this tension been more apparent than in the very public dispute over three new hepatitis C treatments released over the past year. The drugs all represent a significant improvement over previously available therapies, but they carry sticker prices of no less than $84,000 for a disease that can now be cured for the vast majority of patients within 12 weeks.