Caitlyn Jenner despite being a hardcore conservative admitted on Sunday's episode of her reality reality series that Hillary Clinton is ‘very sweet’ and ‘nice’ in person.

While watching a Democratic debate on I Am Cait, the 66-year-old reality star called Bernie Sanders ‘an idiot’ – but when she met Hillary she appeared quite enamored.

‘You know Hillary Clinton…she’s very sweet, very nice’, Cait said after their impromptu meeting.

See more on Caitlin Jenner as she praises Hillary Clinton on I Am Cait calling her sweet

Impromptu meeting: Caitlyn Jenner on Sunday's episode of I Am Cait met presidential candidate Hillary Clinton and later complimented her for being 'very sweet'

Her friends giggled about how ‘starstruck’ the staunch Republican appeared.

Cait then shook hands with the presidential candidate, who praised her for helping trans people and raising awareness.

‘And who comes by two minutes later but Bill [Clinton],’ said the former Olympian who met the political couple in the rural state of Iowa.

On the road: Caitlyn Jenner and her posse have been on a road-trip this season to raise awareness of transgender issues

‘He volunteered for a picture…overall I thought it was great,’ she cooed.

Cait earlier had scowled and sneered throughout the whole democratic debate, disparaging the candidates and their policies.

‘Just like Obama, he doesn’t really appreciate this country,’ she said of Sanders.

Safe word: Kate Bornstein decided to use a safe word to keep Cait from ranting at the debate

When asked what she thought about Sanders’ comment that climate change was the ‘biggest threat to national security’ she gawped: ‘He’s an idiot’.

She later complained about Obamacare.

‘I’m in the top one percent, I don’t even have Obamacare and I had to put $450,000 in there, the health care is going to be worse…so I think we need a better tax structure,’ she moaned.

Republican side: Cait booed when Hillary was introduced at the debate

Chance meeting: Hilary surprised Caitlyn and her friends and met up with them after the debate

Group shot: The Democratic candidate took a picture with Caitlyn, Candis Cayne and their friends

Another surprise: Former US President Bill Clinton also met Caitlyn and stopped for a brief chat

Showing support: Bill also volunteered to take a picture with Cait and her pals

Her trans friends were nearly all Democratic voters, who disagree with her wholeheartedly.

On the way to Des Moines they had decided on a ‘safety word’ to prevent Caitlin from going on a Republican rant.

‘I don’t know how to protect her from that,’ fretted her friend Kate Bornstein, who made the safety word ‘God Bless America’.

Safety word: The group decided to use 'God Bless America' as their safety word

The show had opened with Cait wondering if they should all wear the same colour ‘for solidarity’ on their political journey.

They began at Chicago House, a charity that helps homeless trans people.

Outside the convention center a group of people were protesting Cait, saying that she did not represent their community.

Group protest: A group of protesters targeted Cait saying she did not represent their community

‘You don’t care about the real trans women of America, you don’t represent us, you have no idea what it’s really like,’ screamed a women wearing a mask in the throng, as others waved banners.

‘I’m only representing myself,’ said Cait.

One of Cait’s posse decided that it was ‘good for her’ to hear people’s objections to her immensely ‘privileged’ transition.

Good for her: Jenny Boylan believed that it would be good for Cait to hear people's objections to her 'privileged' transition

‘She needs to pay attention,’ Jenny Boylan said sternly.

To lift their spirits the ladies went lingerie shopping in Dubuque, Iowa.

‘I think there’s some wild things going on in Dubuque,’ said Cait before they hit the casino to meet the locals.

Drake University, where the Democratic debate was being held, was also where Bruce Jenner ran his first decathlon.

Track star: Caitlyn returned to Drake University where she ran her first decathlon as Bruce Jenner

‘I’m proud of that part of my life,’ she recalled.

The last stop was Cait’s alma mater Graceland University where she became extremely nervous and tearful.

‘I never wore heels at Graceland,’ she sighed.

Alma mater: Graceland University named it campus sports complex after Bruce Jenner

Wearing all white Cait hit the stage with her friends to answer questions from the youngsters.

Her friend Chandi Moore discussed the relationship between religion and gender identity.

‘God knew who I was before I did,’ she explained, while Kate Bornstein explained how her Scientologist daughter had ostracised her for being trans.

Good answer: Chandi Moore answered a question about religion and gender identity

Cait cried when describing her ‘struggle’ and her newfound joie de vivre

‘I can’t wait for the day to get started, I’ve got things to do, I love myself,’ she sobbed.

I Am Cait continues next week on the E! network.