Hillary Clinton takes a question during a campaign event on Sunday in Derry, N.H. (Steven Senne/Associated Press)

There is no doubt that President Obama’s unilateral anti-gun actions will thrill his and Hillary Clinton’s liberal base. The Post reports:

The Obama administration on Monday unveiled a series of new executive actions aimed at reducing gun violence and making some political headway on one of the most frustrating policy areas of President Obama’s tenure. The package, which Obama plans to announce Tuesday, includes 10 separate provisions, White House officials said. One key provision would require more gun sellers — especially those who do business on the Internet and at gun shows — to be licensed and would force them to conduct background checks on potential buyers. Obama would devote $500 million more in federal funds to treating mental illness — a move that could require congressional approval — and require that firearms lost in transit between a manufacturer and a seller be reported to federal authorities.

Whatever one believes about the merits of his actions, they are no different legally speaking from his unilateral action on immigration, which has been blocked so far by the courts as an impermissible executive overreach. As with immigration, it is no excuse to say that Congress won’t act on gun control. For starters, Congress did act, and said no. For another, there is no constitutional clause in Article II specifying that the president can do what he wants if he cannot get Congress’s attention.

Obama’s moves will almost surely help Clinton in the primary against Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), whom she has already attacked for his pro-Second Amendment stances. But the moves will also mobilize the National Rifle Association and potentially aggravate the swing voters in the November election in states such as Virginia, Colorado and those in the upper Midwest. It was Bill Clinton, you recall, who attributed Al Gore’s 2000 loss (including loss of Gore’s home state) in part to the gun issue. And if Republicans are worried that downscale white voters won’t turn out in 2016 without Donald Trump, this surely gives other candidates a tool to mobilize such voters.

Guns aren’t Hillary Clinton’s only policy headache. The stock market’s rocky start to 2016 is indicative of international instability and fears of another recession. The Wall Street Journal reports:

U.S. stocks slipped Tuesday as investors remained cautious on the heels of a sharp selloff. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gave up earlier gains, falling 56 points, or 0.3%, to 17093. The S&P 500 and the Nasdaq Composite dropped 0.1%. “I don’t think people are convinced that the U.S. markets will see all-time highs in 2016,” said Keith Bliss, senior vice president at brokerage Cuttone & Co. The S&P 500 is off about 6% from the all-time high it hit last May. Energy shares were among the weaker performers Tuesday, as oil futures slipped. . . . Stocks in Asia closed lower despite moves by Chinese authorities to stem investor jitters. The Stoxx Europe 600 recovered from earlier losses to trade up 0.4% recently, led higher by a bounce in mining shares. The shaky start to 2016 points to what analysts and investors say will be a volatile year in global markets. “Clearly the fear over China hasn’t abated,” said Ben Kumar, investment manager at Seven Investment Management, which has over $9 billion in assets under management and administration.

The good news is, thanks to the president’s threat to crimp gun sales, “Shares of gun makers rose, however. Smith & Wesson Holding Corp. rose 12% to $25.97 after raising its revenue and profit guidance late Monday. Rival gun maker Sturm, Ruger & Co. added 7.3% to $65.88.”

There will be no blaming George W. Bush after eight years of a Democratic White House if the economy — not exactly operating at top speed — suffers yet another setback in 2016. No, as she hugs the president, Clinton embraces his economic policies and their results.

And then there is Obamacare. It remains unpopular, and will, if premiums continue to rise, provide fodder for the GOP nominee in November. The Congressional Budget Office has found that repealing Obamacare is a big money-saver (“Legislation to gut most of Obamacare’s mandates and taxes, known as Restoring Americans’ Healthcare Freedom Reconciliation Act, would reduce the deficit by $516 billion over 10 years”). Republicans will have to come up with a politically viable alternative that costs less, but House Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) vows to do just that. In his speech last month at the Library of Congress, Ryan said:

We say lower costs for everybody by giving them that choice. Instead of forcing you to buy insurance, we should force insurance companies to compete for your business. Let people find a plan that works for them. And yes, help people pay for health insurance. I’ve long believed we should offer an individual tax credit to help people pay for premiums—giving more to the old and sick. There are a lot of other ideas out there, but what all conservatives can agree on is this: We think government should encourage personal responsibility, not replace it. We think prices are going up because people have too few choices, not because they have too many. And we think this problem is so urgent that, next year, we are going to unveil a plan to replace every word of Obamacare.

In essence, he is teeing up the issue for the eventual GOP nominee to use against Clinton, painting her as defender of the broken status quo.

It therefore is not just the disastrous state of U.S. foreign policy that will plague Clinton — although that is nothing to sniff at. On guns, the economy and health care, Obama is bequeathing to her a bundle of problematic issues. It will be up to the GOP to capitalize, but the Republican nominee will not be able to say Obama failed to give him a leg up.