Q. My U.S. citizen wife won’t file for my green card — and she also won’t grant me a divorce. Can I get my green card through my daughter? My wife of 20 years and I are separated.

I came to the United States on a visitor’s visa in 1988 and never left. My two beautiful daughters, born in the United States, are now ages 19 and 21.

N.F., by email

A. Since you came here on a visitor’s visa and you have a U.S. citizen daughter age 21, getting a green card should be easy.

The parents of U.S. citizens age 21 or older qualify for permanent residence in the category called “immediate relatives of U.S. citizens.” People in that category can apply for permanent residence without regard to the immigration quota limiting the number of people from each country that get a visa each year. That means that you can apply immediately for permanent residence.

Moreover, immediate relatives of U.S. citizens who entered on visitor’s visas can interview for permanent residence in the United States even if they overstayed. You can get the forms and filing instructions online or by calling U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services at (800) 870-3676.

U.S. CITIZEN'S RELATIVE CAN IMMIGRATE WITH KIDS, MAY WAIT YEARS

Q. I’m looking for help for an undocumented immigrant on dialysis. Can you help? I am a social worker at a dialysis clinic. My patient came here from Honduras with his mother and brother. None has lawful status. My patient has no insurance and we are looking for a way to get reimbursed for the cost of his treatment.

Name withheld, Austin, Tex.

A. Because Congress excluded undocumented immigrants from getting insurance under the Affordable Care Act, these individuals have limited health care options. Immigrants’ options also depend on which state they live in. Undocumented immigrants qualify for emergency Medicaid, but not every state or county considers regularly scheduled dialysis to be an “emergency.”

My reading of Texas rules is that emergency Medicaid for regularly scheduled dialysis is available only in some counties. Your client may have to move to a different county to get reimbursed health care. In New York, where I live, regularly scheduled dialysis is available for undocumented immigrants throughout the state. New York, however, has particularly generous rules for providing health care to undocumented immigrants.

Allan Wernick is an attorney and director of the City University of New York's Citizenship Now! project. Send questions and comments to Allan Wernick, New York Daily News, 4 New York Plaza, New York, NY 10004 or email. Follow him on Twitter @awernick.