Michelle Obama joined a campaign rally for a pro-abortion Democratic gubernatorial candidate in the state of Maine.

She did not use the word abortion but said this, “And if we don’t show up at the polls this November, if we don’t elect leaders like Mike who will put people first instead of just fighting for special interests, then we know exactly what will happen. We will see more folks interfering in women’s private decisions about our health care. We’ll see more opposition to raising the minimum wage and ensuring access to health care for hard-working folks.”

Just before saying this, “And here is what I want you to remember: Those kids, our kids, are counting on us to stand up for them this November. And there are so many of these kids all over the country who I meet every day who are counting on us. Kids like a young man named Lawrence Lawson who I met earlier this year.“

Apparently to Michelle Obama, supporting pro-abortion candidates such as her husband and Mike Michaud is somehow supporting kids.

She was joined by Planned Parenthood president, Cecile Richards to support Democratic candidate for governor Mike Michaud at the University of Maine on Friday night.

In her speech, the First Lady gave a shout out to the abortion giant prez,” And I also want to give a big hello to Cecile Richards who has been such a strong, passionate advocate for women and families across this country — and I’m thrilled — it was a pleasure, I know for all of you, to hear from her today,” said Michelle Obama.

Cecile Richards’speech was typical political jargon where she begins by giving a salute back to Michelle Obama, Planned Parenthood Action, and then says this, “I am so honored to be here today on behalf of the three million patients who count on Planned Parenthood each year for health care….for cancer screenings, for birth control, for breast cancer exams, and yes for safe and legal abortion.”

Richards then bemoaned the recent decision by the Fifth Circuit Court to allow strict pro-life regulations to go forward closing several abortion clinics in Texas, “We have seen the dangerous results of politicians putting their own personal agenda ahead of the rights of women to access health care that they need. And, what we’ve seen in Texas is that dozens of women’s health centers [ abortion clinics] have closed…and that’s simply because the legislature and our Governor put their own political ambitions ahead of women’s ability to make their own private medical health care decisions…”

How exactly is killing an unborn child now considered health care?

Mike Michaud clearly supports abortion on demand and writes this on his campaign website:

Women’s Health Issues:

Not only must we work to increase access to affordable health care for women and families, but we must also ensure that in doing so, women have access to a full range of reproductive health care options and family planning services. This includes access to contraception, maternity and newborn care, and safe abortion services. That is why I have supported public funding for family planning services and fought to ensure that emergency contraception is readily available to women on military bases. Like this pro-life news article? Please support LifeNews during our Fall 2014 fundraising campaign with a donation! As governor, I will veto any bill that attempts to weaken Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Act or infringes on a woman’s right to choose. I will also oppose any attempt to restrict access the full range of healthcare services–including abortion–provided under the Affordable Care Act I supported in Congress. Decisions about whether to choose adoption, end a pregnancy, or raise a child must be left to a woman, her family and her faith, with the counsel of her health care provider. Like many Americans, my views on abortion have evolved over the years. Thanks to the countless women who have shared their stories and concerns with me while I’ve been in office, it’s become clear to me that a woman’s decision to end her pregnancy is a decision that only she can make. I’m proud to say I now have a 100 percent rating from NARAL – the nation’s leading organization for women’s reproductive rights – as well as a 92 percent lifetime rating with Planned Parenthood. Women don’t turn to politicians for advice about birth control, mammograms, cancer screenings or treatments. So, politicians should not be involved in a woman’s personal medical decisions about her pregnancy.

LifeNews Note: Carole Novielli is the author of the blog Saynsumthn, where this article originally appeared.