By Tim Nesbitt

The seniors are coming. Our boomers are aging. Should we be worried?

Oregon is experiencing a growth spurt in our elderly population. We have more than our share of boomers, now aging in place. Plus, we're seeing an influx of retirees. We are fast becoming a disproportionately older state in a nation that has proportionately more old people than at any time in its history.

The prospect of this so-called "silver tsunami" has long raised concerns about swamping senior safety nets and inundating government budgets. In the Reset Report that I edited for former Gov. Ted Kulongoski in 2010, we warned of a doubling of the need for senior services by 2030 that will "greatly increase demands on Medicaid and Medicare, severely test the capacity of our medical care systems and exceed Oregon's capacity to pay for the care it currently purchases." That's still the case.

But there's a better scenario to consider, as envisioned by Multnomah County's Task Force on Vital Aging in 2008. Before the Great Recession hit, the task force foresaw not a silver tsunami but a silver reservoir – a source of more volunteerism, a font of career experience to be shared with a younger generation and a channel to more flexible work practices in an economy that was projected to run short of experienced workers. And now that we are regaining our prerecession footing, this brighter shade of silver is coming back into focus.

This was the theme of an event hosted by AARP Oregon in Portland last Tuesday. John Tapogna, president of the consulting firm ECONorthwest, discerned an often-overlooked bounty in the Social Security checks and Medicare benefits that incoming seniors are bringing to Oregon, especially on the south coast and in the rural counties of southern Oregon. AARP's Jody Holtzman, who tracks the spending power of the over-50 generation at the national level, described a fulsome stream of benefits that are flowing from the "longevity economy." Other speakers confirmed my own experience: Aging boomers are less likely to go leisurely into retirement and more likely, by choice or necessity, to stay connected to the workforce.

All of this will be good for Oregon in the short term. But Holtzman's documentation of the longevity economy includes a lot of paychecks from 50-something workers at the peak of their earnings potential, who will eventually transition to lower incomes in retirement. And, I share the concerns of state Treasurer Ted Wheeler, who reminded the AARP audience that younger boomers and Gen-Xers who are less likely to have the resources they will need to sustain them in their elder years. The longevity economy may not be as long-lived as its participants.

So we may be entering a kind of demographic honeymoon period in Oregon, during which a growing cohort of relatively healthy and wealthy seniors brings new vigor to our economy and civic life (through what vital aging advocate Jay Bloom calls "returnment") and, for another decade or so, requires little in the way of assistance from family members and government programs. But we have to prepare for the darker shades of silver ahead. The Affordable Care Act has brought more young Americans into our health care system, but it hasn't done much to change the trajectory to more intensive and expensive care for an aging population. States like Oregon, with older populations and a culture of innovation, will have to lead the way in promoting both public and private initiatives to change how we manage medical and custodial care for our seniors.

Intel's Eric Dishman highlighted the promise of personal care technologies to enable seniors not just to age in place, but to decline in place, in their own homes. And Holtzman described the benefits of programs that bring doctors, nurses and social workers to seniors where they live. Oregon is making significant contributions in these areas as well. We have trained a new cadre of homecare workers to help staff the transition from nursing homes to in-home care. Innovations like the Physician Orders for Life Sustaining Treatment pioneered by OHSU and the work of Portland State's Institute on Aging are reshaping the future of elder care. If there is a silver lining in our demography, it's that we still have the time, the resources and the creativity to complete this transformation before my generation creates yet another fiscal crisis for the next.

Tim Nesbitt writes on public affairs, has served as an adviser to Governors Ted Kulongoski and John Kitzhaber, and is past president of the Oregon AFL-CIO. He writes biweekly for oregonlive.com and The Oregonian. He can be reached at nesbitt.columns@gmail.com.