People Moves: Allegiance, Carlyle, CVC

Allegiance names John Sloan new CEO; Carlyle hires operating executive; CVC adds head of TMT

Lorenzo Borgogni has joined Akerman LLP as a partner. Borgogni, previously with Proskauer Rose, concentrates on M&A with a particular focus on Italian buyers.

Gerald Brown Jr. has been promoted to partner at Fried Frank Harris Shriver & Jacobson LLP. Brown, based in New York, focuses on private equity fund formations.

Chris Colpitts has joined CVC Capital Partners as head of telecommunications, media and technology (TMT). Colpitts, based in San Francisco, was previously the global co-head of TMT investment banking at Deutsche Bank and was also a managing director at Lehman Brothers.

Tom Flanagan has joined Natixis as a managing director. Flanagan, previously with Jefferies, will be responsible for sourcing and executing leveraged finance and acquisition mandates from private equity clients.

Andrea Gede-Lange was promoted to partner at Fried Frank. She concentrates on private equity and mergers and acquisitions.

Tim Hassenger will soon be leading the efforts of SierraConstellation Partners LLC’s new Dallas office. Hassenger has turnaround experience in the aerospace, apparel, construction and health care sectors and can also help companies resolve regulatory and legal issues.

Christian Iwasko has joined Sidley Austin as a partner. Iwasko, most recently with Kirkland & Ellis, concentrates on private equity including leveraged buyouts, fund formations along with debt and equity restructurings.

Michael Jenny is now with Livingstone as a managing director. Jenny, most recently with Houlihan Lokey Inc. (NYSE: HLI), focuses on M&A in the metals and manufacturing sectors, including steel and aluminum production and alloys.

Adam Kaminsky has been promoted to partner at Fried Frank. He advises clients on executive compensation and employee benefits related to M&A, Initial Public Offerings and spin-offs.

Randi Lally has been promoted to partner at Fried Frank. Lally, based in New York, focuses on private equity and M&A.

Chris Maduri will be heading Eaton Partners’ new Chicago office. Maduri, who has been with the placement agent firm since 2011, concentrates on private equity and real estate asset fund distribution. Stifel Financial Corporation (NYSE: SF) completed its acquisition of Norwalk, Connecticut-based Eaton in 2016.

Chad McCormick was hired by Kirkland & Ellis as a partner. McCormick, most recently with Baker Botts LLP, advises clients on tax matters in M&A and financing.

Drew McManigle will soon be leading the efforts of SierraConstellation Partners’ new Houston office. McManigle has operational, turnaround and restructuring experience in the oil and gas and energy sectors.

Peter Siroka has been promoted to partner at Fried Frank. Siroka represents debtors and creditors’ committees in chapter 11 cases and out of court restructurings.

Ish Spencer has been promoted to managing director at US Capital Partners Inc. Spencer will work with the firm’s deal teams and has a particular expertise in the healthcare, medical device and biotechnology sectors.

John Sloan (pictured) has been named CEO at investment bank Allegiance Capital Corp. He replaces David Mahmood, who will stay on as chairman. Sloan has been with Allegiance since 2007 and is credited for expanding the firm’s energy business. He is also credited for integrating Allegiance’s business development and investment banking groups.

Joel Thickins has been hired as the country head of Australia at TPG. Thickins, most recently with Australian private equity firm Champ, will replace Ben Gray, who will remain with TPG until the end of 2016. At Champ, Thickins was in charge of the firm’s deal activity in the agriculture, industrial and consumer sectors.

David Zwiener was hired by the Carlyle Group LP (Nasdaq: CG) as an operating executive in its financial services group. Zwiener, a former interim CEO at reinsurer PartnerRe Ltd. will advise the firm on due diligence and potential sector investments.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: