Conservative pundit and national commentator Frank Luntz is kicking off a national tour about small business in the Orlando area Thursday.

His main goal is to gather intelligence on how Americans view small business, government, and the way they mix. In an exclusive interview, he explained why he picked the City Beautiful for his first stop.

"There's so many people who weren't born in Orlando that live there now. It has a national feel to it, and I can tap into a broad spectrum of people," Luntz said. "Orlando's economy has seen success and challenges, and people are focused on Orlando, not just in the state but across the country."

Luntz is actually part of a tour called "The Bring Small Businesses Back Tour" organized by a conservative advocacy group, Job Creators Network. JCN was established by Home Depot founder Bernie Marcus and is partly known for opposing the National Labor Relations Board on regulations regarding franchises.

The town-hall meeting is free and begins at 6 p.m. at the Hilton Orlando in Altamonte Springs. Nationally syndicated talk show host Mike Gallagher also will be there.

According to the JCN group, the town hall Thursday will help to explain "why government policies often hurt small business owners and more importantly, how America's entrepreneurs can talk to the public, their legislators, and their employees, to push for a pro-growth, pro-jobs, and pro-opportunity future."

Although associated with the GOP, a flyer for the event takes aim at this year's election cycle in general: "So far this election has been dominated by shouting, scandal, and sound bites—come join your fellow business people to discuss real problems and real solutions—without the politics and theater."

"Small business owners are not as vocal as union members, or teachers," Luntz said. "But small business owners should be the focus. That's where dreams come true. I think that can be that America in 2016, that your innovation, hard work and commitment can make you successful."

But Luntz said business people and the general public needs to understand "taxes, regulations and a lot of factors that Washington imposes on people."

He said the Affordable Care Act, or health-care reform, is just "one of the regulations small biz owners are facing. It's definitely one of the top issues."

He said Bernie Sanders' popularity with young Democrats is bizarre to him.

"I'm less focused on the specific policy and much more focused on why so many young people believe socialism is a better system than capitalism," Luntz said. "I want people to walk away understanding the mindset of the country, and the language of America."

Orlando low cost?

Don't tell anyone who's hunting for an apartment, but a major accounting firm just ranked Orlando second in the nation for being low-cost.

For whom, you may ask? It's for businesses seeking cheap labor.

Accounting and advisory firm KPMG said Orlando was the second most cost-friendly city to do business among the 31 largest U.S. metro areas — those above 2 million population.

Orlando was followed by Tampa, Cleveland, San Antonio and Atlanta.

The firm said its study is a valuable benchmark for business executives, economic developers and policymakers considering sites for their business operations.

The study measured 26 key cost components in each market — including costs associated with taxes, labor, facilities, transportation and utilities — as they apply to seven different business-to-business service sector operations and 12 different manufacturing sector operations. Scores were awarded, and the lowest score was ranked No. 1.

Orlando, at 94.4, had the second-lowest labor costs, coupled with low salaries, statutory plans and benefits. According to KPMG, low office-lease costs were also an advantage, helping boost Orlando into second place overall.

Cincinnati ranked first, for leasing costs, low property taxes and second-lowest salary costs. Ohio tax credits for to video-game production also helped.

pbrinkmann@orlandosentinel.com or 407-420-5660