A third hospital in New York's North Country has established closer ties with the University of Vermont Health Network.

Alice Hyde Medical Center announced yesterday that it is “formalizing” its partnership with UVM.

The moves came as growing numbers of regional hospitals say they need big partners to survive a changing healthcare system.

Partnership comes after years of affiliation

With all the change and evolution that's happening in healthcare these days...it is going to be critically important for hospitals to have scale.

Doug DiVello, CEO of Alice Hyde , said this announcement really amounts to a deepening of a long-running affiliation between his hospital and the big medical center in Burlington. "Alice Hyde is going to continue to function as an independent hospital," he said. "The UVM parent board will provide oversight and support to Alice Hyde."

DiVello said partnering with UVM’s Health Network will mean more services will be available to patients in a more fluid way. He also said hitching Alice Hyde’s wagon to a bigger team is an important strategy as big policy changes like the Affordable Care Act take root. "With all the change and evolution that's happening in healthcare these days, particularly in the way that hospitals are going to be paid for the care they provide, and moving toward an outcomes-based reimbursement model, it's going to be criticall important for hospitals to have scale," DiVello said.

Part of a growing trend

Hospitals in Elizabethtown and Plattsburgh have already joined UVM’s network. In 2013, Champlain Valley Physicians Hospital CEO Stephens Mundy in Plattsburgh said, establishing a broader base of affiliation is crucial for hospitals. "The ones that scare me are the organizations that are in the very rural areas that are totally unaffiliated or loosely affiliated and are struggling. That keeps me up all the time," Mundy said.

Healthcare impact that affects big employers

These changes matter to healthcare, but also to local jobs. Hospitals are often the biggest private sector employers in their communities. Alice Hyde employs roughly 600 people in Malone. Doug DiVello said this partnership with UVM won’t cost jobs — he said he hopes it will actually mean his hospital will grow. "My objective is to see that job security actually improves as the success of Alice Hyde Medical Center benefits from this formal affiliation," he said.