There's something mesmerizing about a billionaire leading in the GOP presidential race whining in public about not being treated fairly.

"It's unfair. It's unfair," says Donald Trump. "Our Republican system is absolutely rigged. It's a phony deal. They wanted to keep people out. This is a dirty trick."

Oh, the pathos.

The real estate mogul is upset that Ted Cruz is outwitting him when it comes to counting actual delegates in a few states such as Colorado even though he, Trump, has "millions and millions more votes than anybody else."

A Trump presidency would be exhausting. It's always, always, always all about Trump. If he's not the center of attention, the corpse at the funeral, he's not happy. And he lets everyone know it.

This is what's unfair, Mr. Trump:

A single mom gets her son a job at her workplace. They compare paychecks. He gets a dollar an hour more than she does. Women who work full time get only 78 cents for every dollar that men earn. That is $10,600 less every year on average. Trump's response: "I love the women."

Here's what unfair, Mr. Trump:

Worried about displaced workers, President Barack Obama proposed the American Jobs Act, a $447 billion package of economic actions, including construction jobs to improve crumbling infrastructure and cuts in payroll taxes. Your Republican Party, Mr. Trump, of which you so desperately want to be the standard-bearer, killed it.

The president then proposed help for working parents through higher tax credits for child care. Republicans killed it. As economist and Wall Street executive Steven Rattner points out, the Republicans then systematically killed plans for expansion of the earned income tax credit, new rules to let retirement plans be portable, tax credits for manufacturing communities and community college investments.

In other words, every proposal the administration came up with to help the struggling middle class was shot down, with venom, by Republicans.

Trump promises to be the "best jobs creator that God ever made." He does not say how he would do this. Providing pie-in-the-sky promises to frustrated Americans who just want to have good jobs and take care of their families — that's unfair.

Some states have expanded Medicaid payments to take care of the poor and working poor who need operations and medicine and treatment for illness. But 19 states have refused federal money to help impoverished residents. To be denied proper health because of the state you live in — that's unfair.

It's totally unfair that we have to waste our time listening to Trump spout nonsense and complaining about how unfairly he is being treated by people he despises and who, increasingly, don't care much for him.

Ann McFeatters is a columnist for Tribune News Service. She may be reached at amcfeatters@nationalpress.com.