Sentiment from Teller County residents was mixed when asked if they would vote to increase sales taxes to help support the Ute Pass Regional Health Service District, one of two ambulance services in the county.

Supporters acknowledge that emergency health and transport services are an essential part of any locale, especially Teller County, which sits more than 15 miles from Colorado Springs and a plethora of first responders. Those who oppose measure 4A, which will be on the Nov. 3 ballot, worry about yet another tax and the possibility that the money might be irresponsibly spent.

More than two dozen people weighed in on the Woodland Park Community Facebook page when asked recently how they would vote on an issue that could bring more than $1.4 million to the district in 2016.

Ute Pass Regional Health Service District Chief Tim Dienst responded to concerns at a Woodland Park City Council meeting Oct. 1 and again Thursday in an interview with The Gazette. Dienst noted that the additional 1 percent hike to sales taxes in the district would sunset at the end of 2025 and district officials hope the financial woes will be gone by then. He reminded voters that his agency will need to fulfill its promises in case the district needs to ask the electorate for an extension.

"We are a community resource, number one," Dienst said. "We have to have (the community's) trust and confidence in us, especially when we're giving them care."

The district argues that the passage of the Affordable Care Act in March 2010 will mean ever-growing costs to simply maintain status quo.

In the Teller County election booklet the district says, "Provisions of the ACA are going to require that the district modify the services it provides and improve quality on the same or reduced revenues. The district must prepare for, and pay for, new services and payment structures."

Dienst said the new requirements and additional services the district offers under Obamacare prompted his agency to change its name from the Ute Pass Regional Ambulance District to its current moniker.

According to the chief, costs have risen each of the last five years. In 2011, district spending was $2,013,297. Dienst and his team estimate that by the end of the 2015 fiscal year, district spending will be more than $2.2 million.

At the Oct. 1 Woodland Park council meeting, Dienst outlined large losses because of mandatory government write-offs associated with Medicare and Medicaid patients as another reason the tax is needed. For example, in 2014 the district billed Medicaid almost $600,000 for services. But after the write-offs, only $42,770 of that was paid to the district.

Dienst lobbied for support of 4A, saying that his district chose a sales tax rather than a property tax because the Ute Pass ambulance district serves many non-residents. Those visitors, who potentially use the ambulance service, spend money on food, gas and other amenities, he said. Their patronage will contribute to the local sales tax and inevitably support the district.

He said the agency is constantly looking for grants to help cover costs to keep equipment and services up to industry standards.

"The competition for grants just keeps growing," Dienst said.

The district covers all of Teller County except for Cripple Creek and Victor, which are served by Southwest Teller County Emergency Medical Services. The Ute Pass district has six ambulances and 17 employees, Dienst said. It operates three shifts at stations in Florissant and Woodland Park and staffs two ambulances around the clock and a third part-time.

Dienst said the district hopes that added revenue from the sales tax hike will lead to more employees to staff more ambulances and possibly the addition of another station in Divide.

While it's not written into the wording of the ballot issue, Dienst said if 4A passes, out-of-pocket costs for ambulance services will be waived for district residents. Woodland Park City Councilman Bob Carlsen questioned Dienst at the Oct. 1 meeting and was one of the Facebook commenters who weighed in on the issue. Carlsen worries that without the district's promise to waive resident costs written into the ballot question, the door is open for the district to renege on promises.

Dienst said that won't happen.

"If we don't keep our promises, if we provide bad service, then they won't forget that," he said.