The "Metamorphosis" outfit for women consists of a shirt that changes colors and transforms when they've had too much to drink, aiming to boost the drinker's awareness of their inebriation.

The "Metamorphosis" outfit for women consists of a shirt that changes colors and transforms when they've had too much to drink, aiming to boost the drinker's awareness of their inebriation. Younghui Kim / Vimeo

If you've ever felt like you needed a wristband or an app to tell you to stop drinking, you might be curious to learn about these South Koreans who have designed alcohol-monitoring clothes.

An artist collective in South Korea has designed a shirt for women and a jacket for men that can monitor your blood alcohol levels, “metamorphosing” accordingly when the alcohol in your veins has reached its boundaries.The new smart clothes design, labeled Metamorphosis, was presented at a hackathon in Seoul. Along with the focus on its function and practicality, the product is also artistic and graceful. The film below depicts a rather beautiful transformation as the clothes glow and mold into a new shape.

It’s obviously meant to boost the drinker’s awareness of their drunkenness level, and hopefully prevent them from drinking a little too much. It can also help a drinker’s friends notice when they’ve gone a little too far. That is, when your clothes start moving, maybe it's time to put the drink down.

On the Metamorphosis website, artist Younghui Kim and her collaborators describe their two prototypes. “[A] female dress is about expressing different levels of alcohol consumption with a kinetic and colourful lights with glamour and the male jacket where its collars slide out to cover up the drinker’s face when it senses too much of alcohol in his breath,” they write. “Korean drinking culture has a different social aspect than western social drinking.”

They continue:

The female kinetic wearable, ‘취중진담 Metamorphosis’ expresses how alcohol brings up one’s self-esteem and courage to reveal ones mind by raising the shoulder with lights changing into different colours smoothly. The shoulder opens up as the alcohol level goes up as if the wearer is revealing ones mind and ready to talk frankly. There could be a misinterpret for different manner but, as an expressive art form, this wearable displays the wearer’s alcohol consumption visually and it expresses cultural context of social drinking in Korea.

Whether anyone will actually be using this art-piece-turned-drinking-police is yet to be seen. To view the design in action, watch the video below: