CMS on May 26 gave the Medicaid managed care industry a jolt when it released a long-awaited set of proposed regulations for health plans operating in the program. The depth and breadth of the new rules will be examined for weeks to come, but the initial impression from a major Medicaid carrier, Wall Street analysts and market consultants is that the guidelines will be positive for business even if new medical loss ratio (MLR) minimums and other operational requirements make it through the wash.

Since the draft came out, most of the buzz has concerned the CMS plan to require a minimum 85% MLR for Medicaid insurers. But the insurer arguments against the provision are more nuanced than simple objections to the standard, particularly since Medicaid plans already typically have higher MLRs than in the commercial market.

J. Mario Molina, M.D., president and CEO of Molina Healthcare, Inc., tells HPW, “I don’t think it comes as a surprise that there are MLR requirements in the language, because we know there is an MLR requirement in Medicare and in the marketplace. The second thing is, we reported out last quarter that we were running about an 89% MLR. So, if it were 85% it would actually be beneficial to us,” he says. Moreover, “it’s not a hard and fast rule; it is a guideline, something more for states to shoot for when setting rates. And last thing, we have always been very transparent. We list MLR by states, [but] most health plans don’t do that. For some health plans that might be a change. For us, I don’t think it’s a huge change.”

In its latest guidance issued on May 6, WellCare Health Plans, Inc. said MLRs in Medicaid should run from 89.5% to 90.5% in 2015. And Centene Corp., another Medicaid managed care specialist, has stuck to guidance for this year that estimates its overall MLR will range from 89.2% to 89.6%.

In the proposed rule, CMS said managed care plans operating in the Medicaid program must adhere to the MLR standard of 85% starting in 2017. But in a difference with how MLR regulations operate for plans under the Affordable Care Act, Medicaid plans would not have to repay states if they cannot meet the minimum MLR. States would, however, use the information to set future payment rates so that carriers can meet the standard.

Reporting Burden Is Bigger Issue

Caroline Pearson, senior vice president, Avalere Health LLC, a Washington, D.C.-based consultant, agrees that “the majority of those operating in the Medicaid space are operating with very high MLRs today. It is not about being able to meet the MLR, but the additional costs of reporting,” she says.

A major Medicaid insurer lobbyist, Jeff Myers, president and CEO of Medicaid Health Plans of America, tells HPW that while the proposed rule overall is a good step forward and codifies a lot of sub-guidance already in existence, the major area of concern is MLRs because of some major philosophical issues. “We still believe a nationwide MLR is not productive for the program, and it may harm state efforts to expand care coordination,” he says.

It appears CMS used the Medicare Advantage (MA) and commercial MLRs as a benchmark in setting the MLR minimum at 85%. “While that may work in MA and commercial, it probably does not work in the Medicaid space. Each state is run differently and having a minimum but not a maximum MLR could actually create instability. Having minimums is kind of like having a solution searching for a problem,” Myers adds.

The core sticking point is what CMS wants built into the numerator for determining the MLR formula. Each state may identify different factors they want in the formula, like care coordination and provisions for services and support. “Some may say these are medical expenses and some may say admin,” he says. To force each state to have the same MLR requirement will stifle innovation, Myers adds.

But the view from Wall Street is more sanguine. “Feared across the commercial and Medicare Advantage (MA) markets when debated and established over the prior five years, an 85% minimum MLR is being proposed for Medicaid MCOs. In our view, this is reasonable and will eventually prove manageable by the industry — just as it was for commercial MCOs — and will level the playing field to a certain degree from plan-to-plan,” Thomas Carroll, securities analyst for Stifel, said in a May 26 research note. “The goal seems to be to mimic the existing minimum MLR rule as closely as possible but allow for Medicaid-specific nuances. In terms of defining the pool that will be tested, the state has discretion in defining but may not create a system that cost shifts to the federal government (e.g., expansion paid at 100% currently).”

Molina says the way CMS crafted the proposed rule, in regard to allowing states to keep plenty of control over their specific programs, should be commended. “I think the federal government was very careful not to intrude too much on the state’s domain,” he says. Overall, Molina believes the CMS effort was solid in that it modernizes rules left untouched for 12 years.

“I was very pleased with a lot of the comments around quality and transparency, things we have talked about for a long time that we need to have more of in Medicaid managed care. So coming up with uniform standards to measure health quality I think will be helpful for plans, and I think especially helpful for the beneficiary so that they can make some sense of all this,” he explains. “We publish our HEDIS results, which is the measure of health plan quality, but I think for the average person that is hard to understand. So I think coming up with a simpler way to compare quality will be a good thing. Transparency about the rates will also be a good thing.”

Read the CMS proposed rule at http://tinyurl.com/nbe9udq.

© 2015 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Get more timely news and business strategies on Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D and Managed Medicaid in AIS’s Medicare Advantage News. Sign up for an $87 two-month trial subscription today!