Former Gov. Jeb Bush (R-Fla.) has the worst favorability rating of any of the prospective Republican presidential candidates, and a majority of voters nationwide say they won’t consider voting for him, according to a new poll.

ADVERTISEMENT

The George Washington University poll released on Monday found that 35 percent of voters say they have a favorable of view of Bush, against 48 percent who view him negatively.

Only 36 percent of voters said they would consider voting for Bush, while 60 percent said they would not consider voting for him.

The rest of the GOP field has better favorability ratings but remains largely unknown.

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker (R) is viewed favorably by 22 percent of voters, against 19 percent who say they view him negatively. However, 47 percent said they don’t know enough about the Wisconsin Republican, compared to only 6 percent who said the same about Bush.

Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) is the only other GOP candidate with a positive favorability rating, with 31 percent saying they view him positively, against 30 percent who have a negative view of him. Twenty-six percent of voters said they don’t know enough about Rubio to have an opinion.

Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee (R) breaks even on favorability with a 34 percent-34 percent split, while Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) is 4 percentage points underwater at 33 percent positive and 37 percent negative. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) comes in at 25 percent positive and 33 percent negative.

But it’s not just Bush who faces deep skepticism from the electorate at large — 55 percent of voters said they wouldn’t consider voting for Paul, Huckabee or Cruz, while 50 percent said the same about Rubio and Walker.

Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton (D) is viewed positively by 48 percent of voters, while 49 percent say they have a negative view of her. Forty-seven percent of voters said they would consider voting for Clinton, against 51 percent who said they would not.

“These GW Battleground Poll results show that the American electorate's deep, broad and chronic pessimism about jobs and economic security translates into across-the-board hostility toward the 2016 presidential candidates,” Michael Cornfield, the research director for the school's Global Center for Political Engagement said in a statement.

“In each and every case, more respondents said they would not consider voting for them than would,” he added. “Campaigners face stiff suspicions and a preference for political effectiveness over ideological affinity.”

The poll of 1,000 registered voters, conducted May 3-6, has a margin of error of 3.1 percentage points.