Supreme Court biases & precedents

The Supreme Court resumed its work this month with the support of only 48 percent of Americans — a three-decade low. The court often has been a lightning rod of controversy in its 226 years. But never before have so many darts been lobbed at the institution from so many points on the political spectrum.

Mike Huckabee, the GOP presidential candidate, calls the June decision giving gays and lesbians a right to marry an exercise in “judicial tyranny.” Sen. Ted Cruz (Texas), another Republican presidential hopeful, says that Chief Justice John Roberts, whose nomination he supported a decade ago, “put on an Obama jersey” when he wrote the 6-3 decision saving ObamaCare from a potentially fatal challenge.

Liberals applaud some of the court's most recent rulings, but many on the left were infuriated by a 2013 Voting Rights Act decision and by Citizens United v. FEC, a campaign-finance ruling from 2010.

No one can deny that Supreme Court justices are powerful. Once seated, they answer to no one. They set their own agenda, taking only cases that at least four justices deem worthy of their attention. The justices often vote in predictable ways, making it impossible to argue that world views play no role in their deliberations. But a closer look suggests that deep skepticism about the legitimacy of the court might be overblown.

Year in, year out, the justices issue more unanimous opinions than 5-4 decisions. Their last term was one of the most bitterly divisive in recent memory but they still ended up 9-0 in 41 percent of argued cases, compared with 29 percent for 5-4 splits. The previous year, the justices handed down 9-0 decisions a whopping 66 percent of the time and 5-4 decisions in only 14 percent of cases.

And when the justices disagree, they rarely split neatly along ideological lines. In fact, of the 66 cases decided in the term that ended in June, only five resulted in a razor's-edge split along the left-right fault line. In the previous term, there were four. In sharply contested cases, both liberal and conservative justices break the mold more often than casual observers may realize.

Many rulings suggest that neither ideology nor partisanship plays a decisive role in the justices' rulings. Yet moral and political judgment often is inescapable when the Supreme Court must decide what counts as “liberty,” “equal protection of the laws” or “cruel and unusual punishment.” These and many other provisions in the Constitution are hardly self-explanatory. And it is no surprise that nine intelligent lawyers will come to different conclusions, informed by clashing moral principles and judicial philosophies, when interpreting them.

Another big year is underway at the Supreme Court. The justices soon will take up cases involving juvenile criminal justice, voting, public unions, affirmative action and — likely — religious liberty and abortion. Come June, if observers' early predictions pan out, it might be the liberals' turn to lament many of the outcomes of these cases. No matter which way these rulings go, however, they won't be evidence of a court gone rogue against the American people.

Steven V. Mazie is Supreme Court correspondent for The Economist magazine.