Add a group of celebrity moms to the list of Obamacare boosters.

The White House continued its push Friday for Americans to enroll in new health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, with a video featuring the mothers of famous celebrities like Jonah Hill, Alicia Keys, Adam Levine and Jennifer Lopez.

“Jonah was a prankster,” Sharon Feldstein, Hill’s mother, says in the video released Friday encouraging Obamacare enrollment, which is branded as part of a campaign called #YourMomCares. “Jonah flooded the elementary school. Jonah would lie on top of my dashboard, and literally not get off.”

“Trust me, us moms put up with a lot,” Feldstein says. “But one thing we should never have to put up with is our kid not having health care.”

The messaging comes ahead of a critical March 31 open enrollment deadline, and at a time when the Obama administration is increasingly turning to comedy to drive Americans to sign up for new health insurance. The White House credited President Barack Obama’s appearance on the Funny or Die series Between two Ferns this week with driving significant traffic to the Healthcare.gov federal insurance exchange website.

The latest campaign, which includes a message from First Lady Michelle Obama, is targeting the so-called “young invincibles” — younger and healthier Americans whose relatively low health care costs are needed to make insurance affordable for the larger population of uninsured Americans.

“Seriously, do you want your mothers to have a nervous breakdown?” Feldstein says in the new video. “You need health insurance, it’s imperative that you have health insurance. Taking care of yourself so you mothers can sleep and have a nice life after all they’ve done for you is not too much to ask in my opinion.”

Michelle Obama closes the new video by imploring: “We nag you because we love you.”

The new ad campaign was produced with Droga5, the award-winning advertising agency and creators of The Great Schlep, the famous 2008 ad campaign in which comedian Sarah Silverman implored young Jews to go to Florida and convince their grandparents to vote for Obama.

See the video below:

-with reporting from Mark Halperin