It's finally Election Day on The Good Wife. And things are looking good for Alicia Florrick -- until her husband decides to get involved. Can she win despite the governor's interference?

But Alicia's run for State's Attorney isn't the only big game out there. Diane's trying to secure Florrick, Agos & Lockhart's future, and she's got some prime targets in her sights. Let's just say Kalinda's not the only one at the firm who's handy with a gun.



Time to Vote!





In "Red Meat," Alicia and Peter have one last campaign appearance together on the schedule, then Peter will stump for her the rest of the day. Unfortunately, he's still fuming at what he views as her "cheap shot" at him during the Black Business Leaders Luncheon . She just wants to get through the event. A chill is in the air, to say the least.





At least Diane's off where it's supposed to be chilly, in the snowy mountains of Montana. She and Kurt are at a fancy hunting lodge with some of America's richest people. Not exactly liberal-Democrat Diane's kind of crowd. She becomes considerably more excited about the guest list when she spots Gil Berridge, a tech billionaire who might be looking for new legal representation. Could she snag him as a client? She sweet-talks Kurt into arranging for her and Gil to be put together in a hunting blind. He does -- but then she learns "the wives" are expected to have a spa day.





Back at Alicia's apartment, she and Jon discuss last-minute strategy. (We still don't know if those two got hot and heavy.) As he's leaving, Finn Polmar shows up with a good-luck gift (a copy of Halo), and Lemond Bishop calls to wish her well. She's happy about the first-person shooter game, not so happy to hear from the city's biggest drug dealer. Alicia doesn't know that Kalinda's standing in Bishop's living room.





Bishop makes it clear he will expect Kalinda's boss's help if she's elected -- and he also expects Kalinda to be his go-between.





With Friends Like Peter, Who Needs Enemies?





At Peter's press appearance, he announces that he's sure his wife will win. Despite what you might think, this isn't what Alicia's campaign staff wants to hear. With the polls barely open, such a ringing endorsement might suppress turnout. "He just screwed you," Jon complains to his client. "You're five points up, but only if people come out to vote." Things don't look so good anymore.





Alicia has to stop the bleeding, so she shows up unexpectedly at Peter's next appearance. He boasts about praising her, but she's not buying it. A light dawns: he doesn't want his wife to win.





"You want to be the only winner in the family," she says. Peter angrily denies it, but again, she's not buying it. Alicia tells Eli to cancel Peter's other campaign appearances. She doesn't want his "help" anymore.





Back at the lodge, a bored Diane lounges in spa robe and slippers, listening to the billionaires' Stepford Wives talk trash about Obamacare. Just as she's about to blow a gasket, Cary and David call from the office to say that it's true -- Gil Berridge fired his last law firm because they weren't a good fit for a tech company. Most important, it was his wife's suggestion. "Get the wife, and you get the husband," David tells her.





And guess who's not 10 feet away? Diane strikes up a conversation with Georgette Berridge, who's surprised to learn that Diane's a lawyer because she doesn't seem Jewish. "Gil hates all the Jews around," she says. Not that Gil is anti-Semitic or anything. Diane's face freezes into a stiff grin.





A Hunting We Will Go





Kalinda's driving Bishop's son Dylan to school when she notices she's being followed. Bishop takes care of it. At the boy's school, however, the head of the parents committee asks K if everything's okay -- she saw men being dragged from a car. (So much for subtlety.) Kalinda drives off.





Jon and Josh argue about whether Peter should actively walk back his comments or stay out of the spotlight. But the damage is spreading -- voters aren't showing up at the polls. Bodywoman Marissa tries to raise Alicia's spirits with a round of Halo. Alicia's surprised to find her online team includes Finn.





Jon and Josh want Peter to record a last-minute robocall about the privatization of parking meters. Alicia doubts Peter will do it. And she's right -- he won't. Eli wants him to reconsider, but Peter thinks it's a bad idea. Still, Eli thinks the governor should help her. But how?





Diane and Georgette keep talking girl talk when Kurt calls her. Could she come out into the field and bring him one of his rifles? How much does she love her husband at this minute?





Diane troops out into the snow in chic designer camo to join the men. She invokes Georgette's name to Berridge, mentioning that her firm might be a good choice. Suddenly, Berridge decides he'd be better off in another blind.





What did I do? Diane wonders. The hunting party's host, R.D. (Oliver Platt) says, its probably the fact that Georgette's not the guy's wife -- she's his call girl. So ... a little awkward.





Take Your Best Shot





R.D. tries to make Diane feel better about the little mix-up. Despite their (extreme) political differences, they hit it off and have a raucous debate about abortion rights. He even gets her to shoot a deer -- much to her surprise.





At Dylan's school, Kalinda comes to pick him up, only to overhear the headmaster telling Bishop that they're dismissing the boy. They're worried that Dylan's presence endangers the other students.





At the apartment, Jon tells Alicia that early exit polls aren't going her way. Time to work on her concession speech to Prady. Still playing Halo, Alicia tells Finn she's okay with losing. Most first-time candidates don't succeed, after all. Finn's still holding out hope. "You ran a great race," he tells her.





"No," she replies. "The right man's winning." We also learn she wrote a concession speech months ago. "Losing is actually a relief."





At the lodge, Diane stares at the venison on her dinner plate. R.D. congratulates her for her fine shooting. Suddenly, she's not hungry. Kurt reminds her she eats meat every day -- and that she never has to hunt again. "You don't understand," she says. "I liked it."





Her phone rings. It's Cary and David with some news. Gil Berridge is definitely in play, but she says that's not on the table anymore. But more news: the fourth richest man in America is there as well -- the reclusive Reese Diffle. That's her new friend, R.D.!





Bishop tells Kalnda this is the third school Dylan's had to leave. He's worried for his son's future. But worse, the car following Kalinda that morning wasn't after Dylan -- they were following her. Those men work for Geneva Pine in the State's Attorney's Office.





The Winner is Revealed





The returns are coming in, and it's still neck and neck. During Alicia and Finn's Halo bout, she asks him to have dinner tomorrow night. (Yay!) He turns her down -- he's just started seeing someone. (Boo!) Suddenly, Jon asks her to come see something now.





We find out what Peter's been up to. He's giving a last-minute speech in the city center, right in the heart of Prady's strongest precincts. Traffic's a mess, and the news anchors are recommending that people stay away.





At the lodge, R.D. sits down next to Diane, noticing that she hasn't touched her food. He asks her why she hasn't pitched him yet. Even though they spent two hours arguing, he enjoyed it. She says her firm won't argue any anti-choice cases -- or pro-life cases. He tells her to call him on Friday. Suddenly, she's got a big appetite.





Back at Alicia's apartment, her team awaits the results. The predicted winner: Alicia!





As the news anchors speculate about Prady's political future, we see him waiting in his car. The door opens -- and Alicia gets in. What's up?





"Come work with me," she says. "Be my deputy. My corrective. We'd be great together."





He turns her down because he doesn't believe in her approach -- she's too pessimistic for him. He says he has to go now -- he has a concession speech to give.





Back at Bishop's house, he tells Kalinda he's decided to get out of the drug business. He needs K to go to Alicia and tell her to get Geneva Pine to drop her investigation. He doesn't want to end up in prison. "I need to know I'll stay free."





At the campaign party, Jon and Marissa discuss their futures. He has other offers, but he's getting to like Chicago. Marissa hopes to stay on with Alicia. (Yes, please -- we love you, Sarah Steele!)





But just as Alicia's about to approach Jon, Peter shows up. He and his wife share a big hug as her campaign manager watches forlornly. He's decided to move on after all.





Summary Judgment





So -- bet you didn't see that coming, right?





After all the shake-ups in Alicia's professional life, The Good Wife has gone and done it again. This puts Alicia on the other side of the table from her colleagues, which promises us some high drama. (I guess they'll have to change the monogramming on the towels in the executive washroom, too.)





Who imagined that the main partners in the law firm would be Diane and Cary? After all, she fired him in the past. And who imagined that Diane would enjoy hunting -- literal hunting, not just the stalking-new-clients kind.





My only complaint about this episode was Kalinda being kept out of the main action. I want less of Kalinda looking dour in Bishop's kitchen and more of Kalinda taking on the bad guys with a baseball bat. Now that Alicia's the new State's Attorney, and Archie Panjabi is down to her last few episodes, let's hope things heat up for her again.





But that aside, let's all congratulate Alicia Florrick, the new State's Attorney. We knew you could do it!









The Good Wife airs Sundays at 9pm on CBS.