The Hardy Loyd Gym on the Columbia Central campus has been the site of numerous dynamic basketball games, but less than a handful matched the finish of Friday’s District 8-AAA season championship game.

Central’s Kendall Gill’s amazing 35-foot shot at buzzer “brought the house” down, forcing overtime during which the Lions put Franklin County away 66-58 and ensuring the home team the No. 1 seed for the district tournament.

The 3-pointer by Gill was his second in the game’s final eight seconds and came after Franklin County’s Dru Morris made the second of a two-shot foul to give the Rebels a 3-point lead.

“My teammates set three screens for me. Brandon (Levier) hit me with a good pass,” said Gill. “Yes. I have ‘dreamed’ of making a big shot like that.”

Gill had one lay-up (two points) until he connected for a 3-pointer with 1:49 remaining, moving the Lions within four (45-41).

“Kendall was struggling most of the game. He was getting frustrated. He’s our best shooter and that we were counting on him,” said Columbia Central head coach Hal Murrell.

For that final 2.6 seconds, Murrell also had long range shooter Tyler Andrews on the opposite side of the court.

“The screens freed Kendall, but they (Franklin County) forced Kendall out of the corner and out to the wing,” said Murrell.

The Lions were able to get the ball to Gill uncontested, saving some time by rolling the ball into Levier who quickly passed the ball to Gill to complete one of numerous late game comebacks by the team.

“We have been through this a lot. We just stick together, and play team ball,” said Levier, who had a steal after a defensive rebound by a Rebel, and hit an off-balance shot to the left of the foul lane to close the gap to 52-47 with seconds left. Levier also had a dandy pass to low post player Ashanta Brown with 50.6 seconds left to 47-45.

Murrell started an all-senior line-up which included two normal starters and a pair who have started a few games.

“Our seniors all stepped up big tonight,” said Murrell following his team’s first district seasonal title since 2010. “We have some time to rest up for the district since we have a bye and don’t play until Saturday. But the district tournament will be a ‘war.’ Every one of the teams we played except Tullahoma played us to five point games, and we have gone into overtime in three of the last four.”

Though the late game offensive surge took the spotlight, the persistent defensive effort on Franklin County’s Tyler Schaub was very significant. Senior Kevonta Cathey and freshman Tre Parker alternated most of the game with help from teammates like Brown, but down the stretch Levier took the primary role.

“Brandon has improved on his footwork and using his chest, not his hands, to keep position since his freshman year,” said Murrell. “He made some big plays for us.”

Schaub did finish with a game-high 20 points, but did not have a field goal in five attempts during the final 9:45 of play.

“We did a great job on him, but he still had 20,” said Murrell. “That tells you how good he is.”

Brown and Gill led the Lions (17-9, 11-1) with 15 and 14 points respectively. Cathey, Brown and Levier had five rebounds each. Levier added four assists.

Montrease Van Zant and Matt Schmitz added 14 and 11 points respectively for the Rebels (18-10, 8-3). Schaub was tops in rebounds with six and Van Zant contributed three assists.

Spring Hill 54, Cascade 52, OT: The Raiders outlasted the host Champs when the game extended into overtime.

Chance Perry’s 17 points paced the Raiders, who carried a 34-31 lead into the fourth period of the game which saw both team’s with 41 points when the horn sounded after four quarters.

Tucker Rippy and Keidron McCallister tallied 14 and 12 points respectively for the Raiders (7-15, 3-7).

Hayden Edmondson hit six treys and led Cascade (18-5, 6-4) with 18 points. Will Holt added 17 points.

Centennial 46, Summit 45: The Cougars held the host Spartans to five points in the fourth period to overcome a 40-37 deficit in the District 11-AAA game.

Tyrel Dodson led Centennial (8-17, 3-9) with 19 points.

John Carter and Grant Robison scored 13 and 11 points respectively for Summit (8-15, 2-10).

Hampshire 67, Riverside Christian 49: Fabian Bojorquez reached the 1,000-point by scoring 29 points to lead the win for the Hawks (11-13).

Bojorquez had 13 two-point baskets and three foul shots on his big night.

Seth Grimmitt and Marshall Wray provided 12 and 11 points respectively. Hayden Lightfoot, who scored his 1,000th point earlier this month, nailed two 3-point goals and netted eight points.

Josh Hill (24 points) and Eli Wright (20) combined for the bulk of the points for the Knights (0-12).