Opioid abuse in tech crosshairs

With help from Darius Tahir (@DariusTahir) and Arthur Allen (@ArthurAllen202)

SENATE TO GIVE BOOST TO DRUG MONITORING: In the Senate today, debate continues on a bill to fight opioid abuse that includes new funding for state-led prescription drug monitoring programs. The state databases track prescribing of controlled substances and can discover if patients are doctor shopping. But as our Darius Tahir reported late last year, the technology is clunky, and doctors usually can’t see whether patients are getting opioid scripts in other states. The Senate bill, the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act (S. 524), would provide up to $5 million in grants to states to develop and improve the databases. The bill is expected to pass overwhelmingly despite Democrats’ late push to add $600 million in emergency funding. We’ll follow this bill, which has a vote scheduled Wednesday afternoon.

Story Continued Below

-Also on the addiction beat: the Substance Abuse & Mental Health Services Administration announced it will award $30,000 in prizes for developers who create a mobile app that supports patients recovering from opioid dependence. “The app may be used as part of a patient's comprehensive treatment plan, which includes counseling and participation in social support programs,” SAMHSA said. “The goal of this challenge is to assist people in recovery in accessing resources, educational materials, information, and social supports through technology.” More information: http://bit.ly/1p0RocR

EPIC FOUNDER SAYS INTEROP IS EASY TO MEASURE: Interoperability can easily be measured, and measuring it might help solve the vexing problem of getting health records out of their digital silos, Epic Systems founder and CEO Judy Faulkner told POLITICO in a sit-down at HIMSS. “You could define it with a few people in a few hours,” she said. Although she believes such a metric could be developed, her company doesn’t support the idea of an EHR star-ratings system, which currently is making its way through the Senate. Epic users have sent 265 million C-CDAs, or patient summary documents. That’s roughly 22 million per month, with about 20 percent going to non-Epic users. The number of shipments has doubled in the past year. Your scribe and colleague Darius have the full story here: http://politico.pro/1LYQu5T

--Some Pro subscribers were quick to point out that simply measuring the number of C-CDAs shipped from point A to point B doesn’t tell the whole story of interoperability. Faulkner’s suggested metric doesn’t track the usefulness of the information being shipped, which is why former Health IT Standards Committee chair John Halamka has suggests a more qualitative measure.

eHealth tweet of the day: @jeffyuan19: Peyton Manning retires 2 days after speaking at @HIMSS. Coincidence? Yes. #HIMSS16 #totallynotrelated

Welcome to Monday morning eHealth where we’re not surprised the Super Bowl winning quarterback didn’t announce his retirement at HIMSS in Las Vegas, but pretty sure the organization’s executives are disappointed he didn’t use their stage for the news dump. Pass along your favorite Vegas memories and other news to dpittman@politico.com and connect with us on Twitter @David_Pittman, @arthurallen202, @DariusTahir @POLITICOPro, @Morning_eHealth.

VANISHING VISTA?: Rep. Phil Roe, who has seen plenty of twists in the VA-DoD EHR saga in his seven years on the Veterans Affairs committee, was not surprised to hear of another turn last week –“it’s the gift that keeps on giving,” he said. At an appropriations hearing, the VA’s CIO, Laverne Council, said the agency had pulled back $40 million from the budget of its VistA update program and was considering whether to ditch the fabled EHR.

— Roe, a physician from Tennessee and head of the GOP Doctors Caucus, thinks that might be a good idea. If the VA decides to go commercial, Roe said, “I hope they use the same system” as the Pentagon (that would be Cerner). Roe noted that the Cerner contract to replace the Pentagon’s EHR stands at less than $4 billion, despite earlier estimates of up to $11 billion. It may be cheaper, in the long run, to replace VistA rather than updating it repeatedly, he told us. This idea troubles many IT specialists who have worked with VistA. The EHR has pieces that need replacement, they say, but its basic functionality is as good as Epic, Cerner or any other hospital EHR, and it would be a shame to toss a system that has evolved over the decades to fit the needs of VA clinicians.

HEALTH IT LEADERS DISH ON INTEROPERABILITY: How has the flow of health information changed in the last year? Is ONC on track to hit the targets in its interoperability roadmap? What should folks look out for in the next year? We took the chance to ask some health IT thought leaders gathered at HIMSS -- Micky Tripathi, Jodi Daniel, Kaveh Safavi, Arien Malec, Leigh Burchell and Bob Cash — these questions and more. Their answers are compiled in this story only Pros can see: http://politico.pro/1LLliwg

COMING THIS WEEK: The Senate HELP Committee on Wednesday will hold a second round of markups for its medical innovation work, including a bill that sets boundaries around FDA’s regulation of low-risk medical software. Also expect committee leaders to release a comprehensive mental health bill.

DOES GOOGLE DATA IMPLY A RISE IN 'DIY' ABORTION?: The Supreme Court last week debated the effects of restrictions on abortion clinics — and New York Times contributor Seth Stephens-Davidowit says the limits are driving more women to consider do-it-yourself abortion. "Google searches can help us understand what’s really going on," Stephens-Davidowitz argues. "They show a hidden demand for self-induced abortion reminiscent of the era before Roe v. Wade." http://nyti.ms/1ROj0M1

MORE ACOs ON THE WAY: CMS announced Friday it would hold a second round of applications for its Next Generation ACO model, which would start Jan. 1, 2017. The Next Gens are free to use telemedicine. The application announcement comes on the heels of CMS saying it hit its goal of tying 30 percent of Medicare payments to alternative payment models a full year ahead of schedule.

HIMSS FATIGUE?: The official headcount of HIMSS16 attendees was 41,815, down roughly 2 percent from the 42,560 who attended last year in Chicago. The popular blogger HIStalk says it’s the first time year-over-year attendance has dropped since 2000.

TITUS TO HEALTH IT: YOU’VE GOT A FRIEND IN ME: Dina Titus — Las Vegas’s Democratic representative in Congress — declared herself a friend to the health IT industry in a speech during HIMSS Friday. As such, she wants to increase reimbursement to telehealth and remote patient monitoring. The Las Vegas Democrat, however, has been slow to back bills thus far and doesn’t sit on any relevant committees. Titus also declared her support for more professionals in STEM fields, and said that a strong health IT sector would be a boon to Las Vegas. Access to records could be particularly important for any of the city’s 40 million annual visitors from around the globe who happen to get sick, she noted.

TELEHEALTH FOR VETS: A bipartisan group of 36 House members sent a letter to House appropriators asking for at least $1.2 billion for telehealth services for veterans. The services are particularly critical for veterans living in rural areas or who have difficulties traveling, argued the group, which was spearheaded by Reps. Ruben Hinojosa (D-Texas) and Charlie Rangel (D-N.Y.).

WHAT WE’RE CLICKING:

The Wall Street Journal profiles Regina Holliday’s Walking Gallery: http://on.wsj.com/1TXV4cA

They Mayo Clinic will spent roughly $1 billion in coming years switching to an Epic EHR: http://bit.ly/1W0ElmG

ONC head Karen DeSalvo answers a few questions: http://bit.ly/1SsOSYY

Utah telemedicine bill seeks to end tele-abortions, and some aren’t happy about it: http://bit.ly/1U4rIYE

Health care underspends — still — on cybersecurity: http://bit.ly/1QqkBHF

Your tweets could assist HHS help you quit smoking: http://bit.ly/1p03lQf

How Twitter can boost clinical trial enrollment: http://bit.ly/1p8Oi7s

Tips, comments, suggestions? Send them along via email to our team: Arthur Allen (aallen@politico.com, @ArthurAllen202), David Pittman (dpittman@politico.com, @David_Pittman) and Darius Tahir (dtahir@politico.com, (@DariusTahir).