At some point in life, nearly all of us face a major medical problem. If it’s a life-threatening illness, price may seem irrelevant. If it’s surgery to correct a less dire problem, price might not matter once you hit your insurance plan’s out-of-pocket maximum.

And, really, who can tell you what the price is, anyway?

Doctors usually have no idea. Hospitals don’t make it easy to find out.

Yet it isn’t as hard to get the basics as I thought. For example, go to www.txpricepoint.org. The website is maintained by the Texas Hospital Association, and uses data reported to the Texas Department of Health Services. Here you can find every hospital in the state, and what it charges for many of the more common inpatient procedures.

At HCA Medical Center of Plano, the average charge last year for a heart bypass was $241,332. The average for all hospitals in Collin County was $164,757.

At Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, the average charge for a bypass was $123,124. The average for all hospitals in Dallas County was $151,027.

Three years ago, only a third of the country’s health insurance plans offered consumers an upfront estimate of their medical costs. Now two-thirds of them do. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, Aetna, Cigna, Humana and United Healthcare all offer consumers estimates or ways to figure out prices in advance.

Hardly anyone uses them. A survey of health plans done in 2012-13 found only 2 percent of insured consumers used these price calculators.

The Texas Price Point website has been up since 2007, but it doesn’t get much traffic either. Since March 1, the site has had 1,477 unique users, Texas Hospital Association vice president Lance Lunsford said Friday.

In Massachusetts, where much more pricing detail is available, consumers aren’t making much use of this service, either. Insurers say the most frequent users are health care providers who are checking out the competition.

Reference price

High-deductible insurance plans could make prices more important to consumers. Most employees who get their insurance at work are facing deductibles of more than $1,000. Many of the new Affordable Care Act plans have out-of-pocket maximums of $6,350 for an individual and $12,700 for a family.

It’s a lot of money. But, as University of California Berkeley health economist James Robinson wrote last fall, “When admitted to a hospital … most patients reach their deductible before they reach the elevator.”

Robinson writes that employees of Safeway and the California state government are finding price guides a lot more meaningful. That’s because of reference pricing — a practice where employers set a maximum hospital price they’re willing to cover for procedures like hip and knee replacements.

If a hospital charges more than the reference price, employees are free to use the hospital — but they are financially responsible for the difference between the reference price and the hospital’s price.

Report cards

Health care consumers want to know about quality as well. There are ways of getting information online about hospital-acquired infections, re-admissions and consumer satisfaction. (See www.medicare. gov/hospitalcompare, for example; there’s a link to it and other quality sites on txprice point.org.)

For some consumers, however, the hospitals with the highest prices tell them who’s doing the best work. Once their financial obligation is met, pushing their insurance to the max can seem like an effective way of getting the best care.

Look again at those prices for bypass surgery. Is HCA’s Medical Center of Plano worth nearly $120,000 more than Texas Health Presbyterian in Dallas?

The Leap Frog Group, a nonprofit created by big self-insured employers, grades hospitals on dozens of quality measures. It issues report cards every six months. The most recent report gave an A to both Medical Center of Plano and Dallas Presbyterian. They both got As last October. A year ago, however, Dallas Presbyterian got a B, while Medical Center of Plano got a C.

Follow Jim Landers on Twitter

at @landersjim.