"If you have different carriers offering the exact same plan, that's actually a really good thing for competition."

BOSTON — Massachusetts residents purchasing unsubsidized health insurance plans through the Massachusetts Health Connector should expect to see their premium costs rise, and some will see their co-pays and deductibles go up as well.

"At the end of the day, health insurance is expensive because health care is expensive," said Mark Gaunya, a member of the Health Connector board and co-owner of Borislow Insurance, an insurance brokerage. "Some of the cost sharing might be shocking. At the end of the day, we have a responsibility going forward to try to deal with underlying health care costs."

Customers will also have fewer plans to choose from next year.

The board of the Health Connector voted unanimously on Thursday to approve a list of plans that will be offered in 2016.

According to information provided at the board meeting, individuals buying insurance through the Connector who earn more than 300 percent of the poverty level ($72,750 for a family of four), will see their premiums rise by an average of 7.8 percent for most plans. Around 38,000 people are covered by these plans. The approximately 10,000 members on less comprehensive plans, referred to as "bronze plans," will see their premiums rise by an average of 2.2 percent. But those bronze plans also have a major increase in out-of-pocket costs – an additional $1,000 deductible compared to last year.

There is significant variability between regions and between plans. "Individual members will see very different changes," said Brian Schuetz, director of program and product strategy for the Health Connector.

For example, for the best coverage, called platinum plans, which will see the biggest price spikes, monthly premiums would range from $355 to $754 for an average 42-year-old Worcester resident, up from $348 to $700 last year.

The major reason for the increases is that people buying insurance through the Connector are part of the state's individual and small group market. The Division of Insurance approved price increases of an average of 6.3 percent for that market. The growth reflects the increased cost of prescription drugs, higher usage of expensive health care, and additional taxes that are part of the federal Affordable Care Act.

The 120,000 people enrolled in ConnectorCare, a state-subsidized plan for people earning less than 300 percent of the federal poverty level, will see the cost of their plans drop by 2.1 percent, with no major changes to the plans being offered. This drop is mostly because the most popular plan was redesigned to be cheaper this year than last year. The actual amount these people pay depends on their income and the type of insurance plan.

Shoppers on the state's health insurance exchange will also notice fewer plans. There will be 84 plans offered through the Connector, down from 126 last year. This was part of a conscious effort by state officials to limit the number of plans to reduce confusion when people shopped for plans online.

Connector officials say more than 90 percent of members will be able to stay on their current plans, and the rest will be moved to similar plans offered by the same insurer.

"We were closing plans nobody was in," said Heather Cloran, associate director of programming and product strategy.

Dolores Mitchell, executive director of the Group Insurance Commission, which covers municipal employees, said she was "concerned about an excess number of choices," though she urged more demographic study to ensure that the state is not cutting out plans that appealed to a particular demographic group.

But other board members were more critical. Michael Chernew, a professor of health care policy at Harvard Medical School, said Connector officials want to make shopping easier and facilitate choice, but they also want competition in order to keep costs down. "If you have different carriers offering the exact same plan, that's actually a really good thing for competition," Chernew said. "The reason we have a lot of plans is because we have a fair number of carriers."

Gaunya said more choice is a good thing for consumers. "I think it's regrettable that 10 percent of people will have to make different choices not because they wanted to give up their product but because we eliminated that option for them," Gaunya said.

This story has been corrected to note that the amounts given for the cost of platinum plans reflected monthly premiums.