Here is one chart I find compelling and want to consider in light of another study that came out this past week:

"A 2013 survey conducted in 11 countries finds that U.S. adults are significantly more likely than their counterparts to forgo health care because of the cost, to have difficulty paying for care even when they have insurance, and to deal with time-consuming insurance issues."

Many of you have seen or heard about the new Commonwealth Fund report: " Access, Affordability, and Insurance Complexity Are Often Worse in the United States Compared to 10 Other Countries ." It's a familiar song we've been hearing for years, and, according to the Fund, it's not getting better:

Many noteworthy aspects here. For example, if we look back at 1980, the U.S. was clearly one of the most expensive systems, perhaps the most. And, it was also in the pack of the most expensive health systems that included Germany, Switzerland and others. Only in the 1980s did we break from the pack and see our medical spending increases far outstrip those of our peer nations. Boy, did it ever!

Also, look at the 1990s, 8 or so years of flatlined U.S. health care spending growth as a share of the overall economy. Remember, this is a two part equation here -- the numerator is the rate of health spending growth, and the denominator is the rate of increase in the overall U.S. gross domestic product. During the mid part of the 1990s, we saw declining rates of health spending tied to the surge in aggressive managed care; in the latter part of the 1990s, costs had started to rise, though disguised by a rapidly growing economy.

Then we can see in the first decade of the new century, a new explosion in the cost growth.

And then, take a look at 2009 and beyond and behold the new flatline. On this chart, it only goes up to 2011, but if we extended to 2013, it would show more of the same and more, as this chart below shows:

And the question is: what's behind the three black dots on the upper right hand corner of the above chart, as well as the indicators in the chart to the left?



This past week, the White House Council of Economic Advisers gave their extensively studied opinion on the topic: "Trends in Health Care Cost Growth and the Role of the Affordable Care Act."

Bottom line? The spending slowdown is about more than the recession (which ended in 2009) -- it's also structural, a significant part of the slowdown can be tied to the impact of the Affordable Care Act. Here are summaries of their conclusions -- worth a close read: