By using technology to streamline the sales process, medical device manufacturers can use e-commerce models, like Endoscopy Superstore, to pass savings directly to the customer. Advanced Endoscopy Devices launched Endoscopy Superstore, an online portal where hospitals can purchase endoscopy products directly from the manufacturer.

With increased patient visits and shrinking reimbursements, hospitals can no longer afford to be complacent in any area of operation. In order to survive, they need to adopt a culture of transparency to better compete for patients and increased reimbursements as they transition to accountable care organizations.

Medical device manufacturers, like Advanced Endoscopy Devices, are changing their sales strategies to become more transparent and meet hospitals’ needs.

Not too long ago, price transparency was just a buzzword. Now, it’s a survival strategy for hospitals of all sizes.

How do hospitals implement price transparency? They can start by moving away from reliance on GPO contracts. Hospital purchasing managers have become complacent and relied on GPO contracts to do their jobs. They purchase what is on the contract, trusting that the GPOs have their best interests and profit margins in mind when they negotiate vendor contracts on their behalf.

For example, a 2002 pilot study by the Government Accountability Office found that hospitals that went through GPOs paid more for safety needles and pacemakers than those that negotiated prices on their own. For some pacemakers, the median gap was as wide as 39 percent.

Today, makers of the costliest devices and equipment tend to be secretive about pricing and generally require buyers to sign gag clauses promising not to disclose what they’ve paid, which makes it even more difficult for hospitals to comparison shop. (In fact, this is one reason GPOs maintain their services are necessary.)

But, by using technology to streamline the sales process, manufacturers like AED can use e-commerce models to reduce overhead costs and pass these savings directly to the customer. This is why AED has launched Endoscopy Superstore, an online endoscopy shopping cart.

With Endoscopy Superstore's launch, hospitals can instantly compare prices of endoscopy instruments from notable manufacturers as well as AED and purchase them directly. With a guaranteed savings of 30 to 60 percent, Endoscopy Superstore can help hospitals meet their budgetary needs in light of the Affordable Care Act. And now that endoscopic surgery is mainstream, hospitals no longer need sales reps to show surgeons and perioperative staff how to assemble and use these instruments. Endoscopy Superstore and AED take it to the next level by providing online tutorials on instrument assembly/disassembly and inservices.

ABOUT AED

At the forefront of minimally invasive surgery since 1985, Advanced Endoscopy Devices is doing our part to help hospitals achieve their Affordable Care Act goals and meet their budgetary requirements. Our experience has enabled us to refine and develop the highest quality endoscopes and instruments for laparoscopy, arthroscopy, urology, gynecology, and ENT. We provide hospitals and surgery centers with the same high quality instruments and scopes that they are used to using but at significant cost savings. Visit http://www.aed.md for more information about AED’s complete line of endoscopes and instruments for all medical specialties.

ABOUT ENDOSCOPY SUPERSTORE

EndoscopySuperstore.com is the premier online provider of endoscopes and endoscopic surgical instruments from AED and other notable manufacturers. We have a vast inventory of new and innovative endoscopy products. All our products are manufactured with the highest quality materials and are trusted by leading hospitals, outpatient surgical centers, physicians, surgeons, and veterinarians. Visit http://www.endoscopysuperstore.com to shop now for instruments for all specialties.