Provocative, insightful, clever, understated, overstated. Blunt, or just plain outrageous.

Ohio politicians spoke, and they got our attention.

Here are some of our favorite things they said in 2014.

The U.S. Justice Department's scathing report that cited "systemic deficiencies" in the Cleveland Police Department and its excessive use of force prompted what could be called the understatement of the year from the city's often understated mayor, Frank Jackson:

"There is always room for improvement."

While Jackson might hold back, the never understated Cleveland Councilman Mike Polensek had this to say in January after receiving an anonymous death threat: "My posture is well known in this community. And I'm not going to back off one iota from these two-bit thug hood rats, who think they're going to define this community and this city. You have to stand for something, or you stand for nothing. Too many people stand for nothing, and the criminal element knows it. They think they can control these streets through intimidation. Well, as long as I breathe air, they are not going to succeed."

It ain't easy being the U.S. House speaker, Ohio's John Boehner told Jay Leno on his late-night television show in January. The Republican leader offered up this observation on his attempt to corral his sometimes ornery caucus: "A leader without followers is simply a man taking a walk."

Sometimes those divisions within the GOP have led to attacks that could be called less than civil. Here's an exchange involving the always quotable former Rep. Steve LaTourette, whose SuperPAC "Defending Main Street" supported centrist GOP candidates who faced Tea Party challengers backed by groups like Club for Growth. Club for Growth spokesman Barney Keller said, "I think Steve LaTourette may have eaten a lot of paint chips as a kid." LaTourette called his taunt "a pretty bold statement for a guy named after a purple dinosaur."

Speaking of bold statements, sometimes politicians make big declarations that set the tone for how they intend to govern. Like this one from Gov. John Kasich, responding to reporters' questions in January about Tea Party angst and his increasingly moderate tone: "You know, I have a right to lead, too. I have a right to shape what conservative philosophy means."

Kasich's opponent in this year's election, Democratic Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald, also had profound words on the occasion of the opening of the new county headquarters in July. FitzGerald used the event to turn the page on previous corrupt county leaders, whose misdeeds led to numerous criminal convictions and a new form of government that FitzGerald was elected to lead:

"We took a symbol of corruption and made it into a symbol of good government."

Political candidates often try to define themselves before their opponents do. Here is Cleveland Democratic State Sen. Nina Turner's take on how she was perceived on the campaign trail: "I always get the question: 'Is it different down south?' And for us up north, that's code for, 'How's it going? Can they relate to you'? – just the whole notion that I'm an African-American and running for office."

And here's the view of the man Turner unsuccessfully tried to defeat, Republican Secretary of State Jon Husted: "I guess it seems like there are two Nina Turners – the one I deal with on a professional level and the one who goes on the Al Sharpton show on MSNBC and starts saying outrageous things."

When it comes to saying outrageous things, few could top Samuel "Joe the Plumber" Wurzelbacher, who always seemed intent on provoking a reaction by saying something over the top. Here's what the Toledo-area Republican activist said in response to the grieving father of a California mass shooting victim who blamed the National Rifle Association for his son's death: "Your dead kids don't trump my Constitutional rights."

Then there was Larry Ealy, the tow truck driver and former stripper who didn't know where Youngstown was, but nonetheless saw himself as a qualified Democratic candidate for governor. One of his proclamations: "I feel that now is the time for a black governor to lead black people ... We've had 63 white governors." (Actually, Kasich is Ohio's 69th governor.)

Another candidate who ended up short on votes, Libertarian David Macko, running for Congress in the 14th District, grabbed some attention when he was asked at a City Club of Cleveland debate what he would do to improve the Affordable Care Act. Macko said the Constitution does not authorize Congress to become involved in health care of citizens and the Bill of Rights prohibits it: "Trying to improve Obamacare is like trying to improve Ebola," Macko said.

The implosion of FitzGerald's candidacy produced a seemingly endless supply of denials, condemnations and quips. The campaign unraveled after revelations that police found FitzGerald parked after-hours in 2012 with a woman who was not his wife and that the former FBI agent drove for a decade without a permanent, valid license. FitzGerald was not cited in the 2012 incident and said nothing inappropriate happened between him and the woman, an economic development official visiting from Ireland whom he said he was helping get back to her hotel.

First, FitzGerald's denial: "There was absolutely nothing – nothing – inappropriate going on. Absolutely nothing. Was it late? Yes, it was late. That's it."

Then this wry crack from Democratic Council President C. Ellen Connally during a presentation on model rooms and planned interior designs for the county's planned convention center hotel: "We were asking about the room for the Irish delegation."

And later, when it was all too apparent that FitzGerald was headed for a crushing defeat and might take down the entire Democratic ticket, then-Ohio Democratic Party Chairman Chris Redfern, grumbled about FitzGerald to The New York Times in September: "I've never met a former FBI agent who doesn't have a driver's license."

Perhaps the best quote of the year wasn't really a quote, but the absence of one. FitzGerald paused for an excruciatingly awkward 40 seconds during his State of the County speech.

He managed to find the humor in it, quipping: "Wish I could blame it on the teleprompter."