SACRAMENTO, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--A college education is less of a privilege and more of a necessity in our contemporary world. As the country’s oldest student aid assistance service, Student Financial Aid Services, Inc. recommends four major changes in student aid to encourage more students to successfully apply for aid and graduate college.

During the last decade, academic researchers increasing have found that complexities in the financial-aid application process deter college-ready students from filing a FAFSA and qualifying for aid. As a result these students don’t enroll or persist in college. Multiple studies show the FAFSA acts more as a “substantial barrier” than a gateway to aid for many students from low and moderate income families, according to Benjamin L. Castleman, Ph.D., assistant professor of education and public policy at the University of Virginia, and Lindsay Page, Ph.D., an assistant professor of education and a research scientist at the Learning Research and Development Center at the University of Pittsburgh, in their commentary Beyond FAFSA Completion published in January 2015.

Ten to 14 percent of students eligible for college financial aid do not complete the FAFSA, according to separate academic studies in 2004 and 2013.

SFAS, which has offered fee-based FAFSA preparation for 23 years, recommends:

using prior-prior year tax data to determine income,

enabling a single sign-on for required financial documents,

translating the FAFSA into more languages, and

promoting the availability of both free and fee-based FAFSA assistance services.

Switch to Prior-Prior Tax Year

Students must prepare a FAFSA each year to be eligible for aid to help pay for college and are required to provide the prior year’s income to help calculate aid eligibility. But various states’ FAFSA deadlines, some of which are “as close to January 1st as possible,” and many college FAFSA deadlines are at odds with the April 15th income tax filing deadline. Many students today file their FAFSA with income estimates to beat state and college financial aid deadlines, and then later must update their aid application with accurate income data.

To improve FAFSA filing timeliness, the company recommends abandoning the current practice of basing aid calculations on the prior year’s income and instead using income from one year earlier. Under this approach, for example, high school students would not have to wait until January 1st of their senior year to complete the FAFSA. Instead, they could prepare the form when applying for college admission in the fall by using information from their family’s most recent income tax return. This would mean a student applying for admission for fall 2015 would be using income data from 2013.

“The current process has a disjointed timeline,” said Christina Kline, Vice President of Marketing and Communications for Student Financial Aid Services. “We recommend switching to prior-prior-year tax information to determine aid eligibility. Students could then apply for financial aid before January 1st, while they are completing college applications, rather than after. Families would benefit because students could receive aid awards earlier and have more time to make college-financing plans.”

A 2013 study by the National Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators (NASFAA) showed using prior-prior year data could give students the information they need to make financial decisions earlier in the process without significantly impacting Federal Pell Grant awards for low-income students.

Open Data Exchange Would Streamline Aid Process, Encourage Innovation

Another way to improve and streamline the financial aid process would be the U.S. Department of Education allowing an open data exchange via application programming interfaces (APIs). Other government agencies requiring people to file complex forms, such as the IRS, have provided the means for third parties to develop consumer-friendly services, while ensuring collected data flows to government systems. The U.S. Department of Education issued a public inquiry about the potential of APIs in June 2014. Student Financial Aid Services’ response recommended APIs could, for example, simplify the aid process by reducing the duplication of data entry by switching to a single sign-on to access FAFSA results, master promissory notes, and student loans. Currently, a student is required to access at least three separate websites to gain a complete picture of his or her college financial data.

“A single sign-on enabled by APIs would encourage students to assume a greater role in managing their student financial aid by providing more focus on specific topics geared toward where the student is in the process and the education lifecycle,” Kline said.

For example, a student just starting at a college could have to a personalized web page that directs them to entrance counseling and the master promissory note process for borrowing funds. This same page could provide financial literacy tools and links to private utilities.

“More open systems can allow innovation and creativity to address the complexities of form filing and other aspects of the process,” Kline said.

Translate FAFSA into More Languages

An estimated 50 percent of the U.S. college population consists of people whose parents never attended college, according to a 2010 study by the U.S. Department of Education. Millions of those students’ families are not native English speakers. To make seeking aid easier for these families, Student Financial Aid Services recommends that the FAFSA be translated into other languages in addition to its current availability in English and Spanish. The 2011 U.S. Census showed that besides English and Spanish, the languages most commonly spoken in the U.S. are the Chinese dialects Mandarin and Cantonese, Tagalog, French, Vietnamese, German, Korean, Russian, Italian and Portuguese.

“Removing the language barrier from the FAFSA for more non-native English speaking families would be another step toward reaching the Obama administration’s goal of extending access and affordability to more first-generation college students,” Kline said.

Promote Free and Fee-Based FAFSA Assistance Services

Difficulties preparing a FAFSA are not limited to first-time college students. A 2014 study found that even after first-year students have filed a FAFSA and received aid, they struggle to file a FAFSA for the following year. Nationally, 15 to 20 percent of low-income students who are awarded a free Pell Grant and are in good academic standing, fail to successfully re-file their FAFSA for sophomore year, according to the study Here Today, Gone Tomorrow? Investigating Rates and Patterns of Financial Aid Renewal Among College Freshmen by Castleman and Kelli Bird of the University of Virginia.

“These trends collectively indicate that additional interventions to provide students information about the FAFSA and access to professional assistance with their financial-aid applications may help reduce socioeconomic inequalities in college entry and completion,” state Castleman and Page.

When submitting required, complex government forms, people like to have the option to get personal help. This option was widely acknowledged by the Obama administration when the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act became federal law and the federal and state governments enlisted the support of “form navigators” to help consumers complete the process of applying for health insurance.

The Higher Education Opportunity Act of 2008 expressly authorizes fee-based FAFSA preparers as an alternative to students self-filing the FAFSA at the U.S. Department of Education’s website. The law requires third-party providers to be transparent about FAFSA preparation options.

Student Financial Aid Services recommends establishing oversight of third-party providers to ensure not only that they meet transparency requirements, but also comply with established standards and protocols of the financial aid processes.

“We believe the U.S. Department of Education should make students and their families aware of their FAFSA preparation options. Similar to the Internal Revenue Service listing reputable income tax preparation services, providing a list of approved or certified FAFSA preparers or other assistance resources would help consumers assess their FAFSA filing options,” Kline said.

Besides the IRS, other government departments that require individuals to complete complex forms, including the Department of Homeland Security and the Board of Immigration Appeals, provide helpful lists of organizations that assist people.

About Student Financial Aid Services, Inc.

Student Financial Aid Services, Inc. (www.FAFSA.com) assists students and their families in securing the most financial aid possible to achieve their college dreams. Established in 1991, SFAS is the nation’s oldest fee-based provider of preparation and assistance services related to the federal student aid application (FAFSA). Our knowledgeable Student Aid Advisors support and assist financial aid applicants as authorized by the Higher Education Opportunity Act (2008). We offer our services online at www.FAFSA.com and by telephone toll free at 1-866-514-8938. More than 10,000 client comments are posted at www.FAFSA.com/clientfeedback. Twitter: @FAFSAPREP • Facebook: SFAS-FAFSA.com

© 2015 Student Financial Aid Services, Inc. All rights reserved. Other company, product or service names may be trademarks or service marks of others.