Jefferson County Public Schools officials are considering moving middle school students from the alternative school Kennedy Metro to a floor at Buechel Metropolitan High as part of a broader plan to make changes to the district’s alternative schools structure next school year.

JCPS chief academic officer Dewey Hensley stressed that no official decisions have been made, although he said he does at this point plan to recommend putting Kennedy at Buechel.

“It’s so early in the process,” Hensley said, saying he doesn’t anticipate putting together a plan until late April, after he’s gotten a chance to talk out ideas with the alternative school principals and staff.

A proposal in April means a somewhat tight deadline for the Jefferson County Board of Education to decide on the plan. And a plan needs to be in place, since Kennedy Metro is losing its location next school year to a new elementary school that is meant to ease crowding in the eastern part of the county.

District officials have repeatedly said they aren’t planning to eliminate Kennedy Metro.

School board member Chris Brady, whose district includes Kennedy Metro, said he’s been told a proposal is forthcoming, but said he hasn’t been given details on what JCPS may want to do with Kennedy and the other alternative schools.

“I would prefer to see it before April,” Brady said. “We need to have an idea of what the proposal is. That needs to be presented to us with a good amount of time so everyone is on the same page.”

Hensley said he laid out his ideas for restructuring the alternative schools to the schools’ principals earlier this week, and asked them for ideas on steps that could be taken to improve the alternative programs.

Hensley said one idea he’s looking at is creating “academies” that are designed more around individual students’ needs or ages than around their grade levels, although he’s also brought up the idea of making the Kennedy/Buechel building a grade 6-10 school and moving grades 11 and 12 to Breckinridge Metro High.

“We are creating a report soon (that) will allow us to look at ages of kids and other criteria for placements to see how that would shift enrollment,” Hensley said.

He said he’d like to potentially see one academy designed as a transition to quickly get students back into more traditional schools, and have another academy with special supports for students with mental and behavioral health needs. Hensley said he’d like to see students placed in schools based more on needs than on the offenses they committed or their grades.

The idea of “success pathway systems” for the alternative schools is expected to be discussed during a work session with the school board Monday afternoon.

“Really, what we’re doing is putting together a framework,” Hensley said. “I’m asking the principals and the leadership teams to ... design an academy that could better differentiate the needs of kids.”

Hensley said he’s heard some who are concerned or upset about the idea of putting Kennedy middle students with the older grades at Buechel. But he said people knew that “Kennedy obviously had to go somewhere,” and said the district is certainly “serious about ensuring safety inside our schools.”

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1D7FP7h