GRAND JUNCTION — Some of the Western Slope’s most influential and most conservative local leaders heard an unspecific plan to change the way Coloradans vote on political candidates, put constitutional amendments on the ballot and pay taxes at Club 20’s fall conclave this weekend.

A new bipartisan, nonprofit civic organization called Building a Better Colorado is crafting its pitch to Colorado voters, who might vote on some of these changes during next year’s general election.

Looming budget crises and potentially unsustainable cuts in state services are driving civic and political leaders to look for remedies, supporters told Club 20 members Saturday morning.

“I hope this is the right conversation,” said Building a Better Colorado member Reeves Brown, the former Club 20 executive director. “I don’t know what the outcome is going to be. We’re giving control to the people to determine that, but what I do know is the path we’re going on is not good for the state. There’s got to be a better way.”

The first of 40 stops Building a Better Colorado will hold around the state to see which ballot initiatives might fly are set for Sept. 21 in Glenwood Springs and Durango. In December, the organization will present “consensus policy recommendations” that could be voted on next year, Brown said.

While the solutions aren’t yet fully formed, a fight over the state’s constitutional Taxpayer Bill of Rights already is taking shape, especially among the hardline fiscal conservatives who are the common opinion-shapers in western Colorado.

“It’s not going to fly over here. This is just a vehicle to try to get rid of TABOR,” Rep. Don Coram, a Republican from Montrose, said during Friday night’s steak fry at a historic local ranch that teemed with fruit orchards.

The executive board for Club 20, a bipartisan organization, on Friday adopted a resolution in support of state transportation projects, even if it means raising the state gasoline tax. Another resolution backed moving a six-year-old state hospital provider fee out from under current state spending caps, which could free up $500 million for transportation and other needs instead of returning it to taxpayers in TABOR-mandated refunds.

Colorado voters passed TABOR in 1992 to apply some of the most restrictive taxing and spending limits in the country on state and local governments.

Building a Better Colorado also wants to talk about whether unaffiliated voters should be allowed to participate in party primaries instead of only general elections.

The group also asks whether it’s too easy to amend the Colorado constitution. Once there, citizen-led amendments are costly and cumbersome to change, even if they cause serious problems or conflicts with other constitutional amendments.

“We’ve got a fiscal situation we’re coming up on with funding Amendment 23, the negative factor,” said Christian Reece, Club 20’s executive director. “We’re bumping up against TABOR, so I think there is a good reason to have this conversation to see if there’s anything we can agree on to actually address that.”

Amendment 23 is the 2000 constitutional amendment and the negative factor is the controversial budgeting formula the legislature has used to restrict school budget increases. A pending lawsuit alleges about $850 million last year alone should have gone to schools under the amendment.

Meanwhile, 1982’s Gallagher Amendment has depressed residential property tax collections that would support schools.

To redirect that money to schools would mean the legislature must take money from other state services — such as transportation, public safety, economic development, environment and wildlife management and aid to the needy — to cover the increases for schools.

Despite the acknowledged problems, it will remain a hard sell to find consensus on divisive, decades-old issues, numerous Western Slope leaders said.

“They can’t get consensus on everything,” Grand Junction City Councilman Duncan McArthur said. “We have problems in this state, but they’re going to have a difficult time passing anything that takes money out of people’s pockets.”

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joeybunch