Colonie High School to remake hill to honor troops School to install stone slabs, one for each branch of service

Photo: Cindy Schultz Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Buy photo Project manager John Lawlor, 18, right, joins John Cogan, 17, president of Colonie High's iCARE program, on the future Hill of Heroes on Thursday, April 21, 2016, at Colonie High in Colonie, N.Y. Lawlor, a member of the Air National Guard, holds a layout of the military emblems and creeds that will be placed in the Hill of Heroes. (Cindy Schultz / Times Union) less Project manager John Lawlor, 18, right, joins John Cogan, 17, president of Colonie High's iCARE program, on the future Hill of Heroes on Thursday, April 21, 2016, at Colonie High in Colonie, N.Y. Lawlor, a ... more Photo: Cindy Schultz Buy this photo Colonie High School to remake hill to honor troops 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Colonie

Before he graduates this June, Colonie Central High School senior John Lawlor wanted to leave a lasting memory in honor of people like his father who serve in the military.

Lawlor approached Thomas Kachadurian, an associate principal, about his idea to remake the hill opposite the main entrance to add a place to pay tribute to the troops.

Kachadurian agreed, and the hedges that now spell out CCHS (installed when Kachadurian's father, Harry, was principal) will be removed to create what the school is calling the Hill of Heroes.

The school has a display inside one hall about former students' military service.

"I felt there needed to be something else to show our honor and respect to those in service," Lawlor said. "I just wanted to do something bigger. All five branches are going to have a granite slab with their emblem and their creed under it."

The slabs are 2 feet by 2 feet tall.

Another student, junior Nick Morrison, heard about the project and decided he wanted to contribute. He is welding an American flag out of steel to be part of the display.

"I really appreciate veterans and was looking for something to do to show my appreciation," Morrison said.

Parent Mario Gabriel will assist Morrison.

Lawlor said his father, John W. Lawlor, who serves in the Air Force, was a source of inspiration.

"He's been in the military since he graduated from here," the younger Lawlor said.

The 18-year-old himself is in the Air National Guard and wants to pursue a military career.

"The way I was raised, you always respect men and women who have given up their time and sometimes their lives so I could have a great life," he said. "I also wanted to pay respect to my dad for what he has done."

The granite slabs are being donated by Empire State Stone, and Capital Communications Federal Credit Union also has donated toward the project. Blaze Pizza donated 20 percent of its proceeds from Thursday evening at Mohawk Commons to the cause. They will do so again with money spent from 4 to 7 p.m. Monday at its Stuyvesant Plaza location.

The student group iCARE arranged the fundraisers, and Lawlor said the Hill of Heroes was partly inspired by that group's support of Project Soldier On and Blue Star Mothers.

In future years, Lawlor hopes other students will add to the tribute. He hopes benches will be placed on the hill, and there will be a path of bricks people can buy, inscribed with the names of those who served in the military.

A longer-term project is to line an upstairs hallway with the names of all the former students who served their country. English teacher James Vardaro, who is working with the students on the projects, described that idea, which is also Lawlor's, as a two-year effort to gather and post all the names.

Standing outside the school looking at where the tribute will be built, Lawlor said the aim is to have it done in time for the May 21 Raiderfest event.

"We want it to be something eternal, that lasts forever," Vardaro said.

tobrien@timesunion.com • 518-454-5092 • @timobrientu