There are those among abortion critics who show a principled concern for poor children

By Cynthia Tucker

Another year, another controversy over Planned Parenthood. Selectively edited videos filmed by an anti-abortion activist have given partisans another excuse to attack women's reproductive services, starting with those provided by a well-established non-profit dedicated to women's health care.

Never mind that abortions represent a tiny percentage of Planned Parenthood's work. Some Republicans have gone so far as to threaten to shut down the government unless all federal funding for Planned Parenthood is eliminated.

By law, none of that money supports abortion services.

Even as prominent Republicans such as Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell try to tamp down that impulse, others -- firebrand Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, among them -- continue to insist that the entire government should be brought to its knees when Congress returns to work after Labor Day.

This is really just another opportunity to try to limit women's reproductive choices, another chance to grandstand and exaggerate.

If this outrage reflected genuine concern about lives ended while still in the womb, wouldn't more conservatives be worried about what happens to poor babies once they are born?

Read More: Wait - Donald Trump is defending Planned Parenthood? (op-Ed)

For decades now, I've listened to anti-abortion activists rail against a "culture of death," a callous disregard for the unborn, the "murder" of babies still in the womb.

I've witnessed protests outside abortion clinics, listened to "pro-life" state legislators mischaracterize rape, and covered misleading campaigns that suggest abortions lead to breast cancer and mental illness.

I've watched as hostility toward Roe v. Wade has become a litmus test inside the Republican Party.

But here's the disconnect: Over those years, I've also seen anti-abortion crusaders become increasingly hostile to programs and policies that would aid poor kids once they've come into the world.

Conservative lawmakers have disparaged welfare, criticized federal housing subsidies and even campaigned against food assistance. How does that affect those children for whom they claim so much concern?

In Alabama, where anti-abortion sentiment is as commonplace as summer heat waves, the state legislature is contemplating cutting millions from Medicaid, the program that provides health care for the poorest citizens, including children.

Read More: Defunding Planned Parenthood isn't the same as banning abortion (op-Ed)

Meanwhile, the state's two U.S. senators, Republicans Jeff Sessions and Richard Shelby, are among those demanding that Planned Parenthood receive no more federal funds because of the controversy over the sale of fetal tissue.

To be fair, there are those among abortion critics who show a principled concern for poor children, whose opposition to abortion is paired with a passion for social justice.

Take Ohio Gov. John Kasich, who is among the rare GOP governors to support the Medicaid expansion offered by the Affordable Care Act.

"Now, when you die and get to the meeting with Saint Peter, he's probably not going to ask you much about what you did about keeping government small. But he is going to ask you what you did for the poor.You better have a good answer," he said in June.

Then there are the Catholic Health Association and the Leadership Conference of Women Religious, led by nuns. They've also adopted assistance to the poor as a core mission.

Their compassion stands in contrast to the U.S. Conference of Bishops, which is largely known for its conservative stances on abortion and same-sex marriage. (That may change with Pope Francis, who has made social justice his hallmark.)

Last year, I attended a Catholic high school commencement where the headmaster, a priest, bragged about the number of his students who had attended anti-abortion protests.

He said nothing about protests over cuts in assistance to the poor. It's easy enough to inflame with the Planned Parenthood videos; without context (again, selective editing), leaders of the organization are heard discussing money for the donation of fetal tissue.

That's not a conversation that's easy to hear. But Planned Parenthood is doing nothing illegal, and fetal tissue research has been vital to improving the quality of life for an aging America.

Many of those who are angered by the videos would be surprised to know that they may have benefited from fetal tissue research. Still, I'd take their criticism more seriously if they'd spend as much time trying to help poor children once they are born.

Since they don't, they're just engaging in a war on women -- especially women who don't have any money.

Cynthia Tucker is a syndicated columnist. Her work appears on Tuesdays on PennLive. Readers may email her at cynthia@cynthiatucker.com.