After losing his U.S. House re-election bid two years ago, Republican Bob Dold completed his comeback Tuesday night, retaking the seat from Democratic Rep. Brad Schneider.

But the second time around in Washington will be different, Dold said Wednesday, in part because of established relationships from his previous term. And there's also the matter of Republicans seizing control of the U.S. Senate.

"We're going to be able to hit the ground running," Dold said in a phone interview. "And with the GOP taking control of Congress, it's incumbent on us to govern and to solve problems.

"And the only way to get a bill to the president's desk and signed into law is through bipartisan cooperation," he continued.

Dold celebrated his 10th Congressional District win Tuesday night with his family and more than 200 supporters at Austin's Saloon & Eatery in Libertyville. On Wednesday, he was up early, thanking voters at the Ogilvie and Union train stations in downtown Chicago.

Dold said his top priorities were helping to pass a federal budget that the president will sign and working on comprehensive immigration reform. The latter will take a multipronged approach, he said, including reforming the legal system, border security and the guest worker program, which allows foreigners to work in the United States temporarily.

Dold said his willingness to listen resonated with immigrant communities in the north suburban 10th District, including Latino, Russian and Armenian voters.

"We need to bring them into the Republican tent and make sure they're welcomed, while also making sure we're resolving real-world issues," Dold said.

During the campaign, Schneider hammered Dold on the Affordable Care Act, saying Dold voted 28 times against the health care law.

In interviews, Dold has said only four of those votes were for repeal and the rest were attempts to fix problems with the law such as the medical device tax. Schneider also favored the repeal of the tax on the sale of some medical devices.

On Wednesday, Dold said he wouldn't work toward repeal of the law.

"I'm going to be more focused on — 'How do we fix what's there?'" Dold said.

Asked what he made of the Republican Party's big gains on election night, Dold stopped short of saying it was a statement of voter dissatisfaction toward Obama.

Instead, he characterized it as general discontent with gridlock in Washington and invoked a well-worn image from his campaign trail.

"I think American people are sitting around the kitchen table, worried about how they're falling behind," Dold said. "I see this as an opportunity to roll up our sleeves and move forward."

In unofficial voting results in Lake County, which makes up the majority of the district, Dold won about 52 percent of the vote over Schneider's 48 percent. In Cook County, Dold claimed about 51 percent of the votes, according to unofficial returns.

Schneider declined to be interviewed, according to his campaign spokeswoman.

gtrotter@tribune.com

Twitter @NorthShoreTrib