Once considered the most conservative member of the Senate, Republican Bob Deuell of Greenville now finds himself under attack from right-wing groups — and even called “liberal” by his GOP runoff opponent.

When he was first elected in 2002, Deuell was the ultra conservative challenger to a Democratic incumbent. Now, 12 years later, he is lambasted by local tea party officials and a handful of conservative groups as out of step with the majority of Republican voters in Senate District 2, which includes eastern Dallas County and Rockwall County.

“Deuell was the Dan Patrick of his day,” said Austin political consultant Bill Miller, who has close ties to leading Republicans. The comparison was to GOP Sen. Dan Patrick of Houston, a leading candidate for lieutenant governor.

His challenger is retired businessman Bob Hall of Edgewood, who is trying to turn his tea party connections into a win in the May 27 runoff. Deuell finished first in the March 4 primary, narrowly missing outright victory with just less than 50 percent of the vote in a three-man contest.

Political experts are closely monitoring the race to gauge whether GOP voters will turn out an incumbent who has a history of supporting legislation championed by his party, such as abortion restrictions and property tax cuts.

“It’s a close race, although Senator Deuell appears to be in front,” Miller said. “What has happened is that Deuell has been in the Senate long enough that he is viewed with suspicion by some conservative voters. They believe that anybody who has been in office a long time is part of the problem, regardless of their voting record.”

Deuell, a family physician, has a significant financial advantage over Hall and has used his campaign war chest for TV spots, mailers, phone banks and block walkers across the nine-county district.

Hall has raised far less than the incumbent but has benefited from attack mailers sent out by a key conservative organization, Empower Texans. That group, primarily funded by conservative West Texas oilman Tim Dunn, gave Deuell poor marks in its legislative scorecard for the 2013 session.

“I am pro-life, pro-Second Amendment and voted for a conservative state budget, but I still got a failing grade from the group,” Deuell said.

Hall has argued that Deuell is “out of step with conservative values” and “votes more like a liberal Democrat than a conservative Republican.”

As an example, he cited an end-of-life bill that Deuell wrote, designed to give doctors and hospitals more authority in making end decisions for ailing patients. Hall called the bill, which did not become law, a “horrible piece of legislation.”

Hall, who calls himself “the right Bob” for the post, also has criticized Deuell for voting for a state budget last year that increased spending by 25 percent.

“I have yet to hear him suggest where we could cut spending in the budget,” Hall said, adding that the senator also wants to raise the gasoline tax to provide more money for roads.

The 25 percent figure was publicized by one conservative group that was critical of the budget, but GOP legislative leaders note that actual state and federal spending in Texas increased only 3.7 percent over the previous budget. Most Republicans in the Legislature voted for the budget.

Deuell said Hall has “repeatedly twisted my record and attempted to undermine my conservative accomplishments with outlandish campaign statements.”

Hall’s campaign has been dogged by a 20-year-old court order that forbid him to go near his former wife after she accused him of assaulting her at her Florida residence. Hall denied he ever physically hurt his wife and said he also obtained a protective order after she stabbed him with a ballpoint pen.

Hall also racked up nearly $165,000 in federal tax liens on his Florida properties over a 20-year period for failing to pay federal taxes. The last lien was released in November 2011.

Deuell said that GOP voters will have to decide whether they believe Hall’s negative view of Texas government or his positive view based on the good things that are happening with the Texas economy.

“The whole nation likes what Texas is doing, but there is so much negative stuff being circulated out there, and a large number of people are believing it,” said Deuell, who is backed by the Texas Association of Business, National Rifle Association and Texas Alliance for Life.

There is no Democrat in the race, but the winner will face Libertarian Don Bates in the general election in November.

Follow Terrence Stutz on Twitter at @t_stutz.