Middle-schooler Anthony Conklin Williams is turning his love of math into a college experience.

Anthony, a sixth-grader at Lucille Erwin Middle School, will be attending the National Youth Leadership Forum: Explore STEM this summer at Menlo College in San Francisco, Calif.

"I'm most excited about math, because I'll get to learn more about different stuff in that area," Anthony said. "This (will) be a good opportunity to learn more about the college experience and how to prepare for when I do go to college."

The six-day Envision program introduces 1,000 high-achieving middle school students to academic experiences and careers in science, technology, engineering and medicine.

Williams ( Picasa )

Nominated by his mathematics teacher, Anthony, 12, will be attending workshops and panel discussions, engaging in hands-on learning and going on field trips during the forum July 13-18.

"It boils down to a very, very intelligent kid. He can be shy, but he definitely has leadership potential when we work in class," said Grant Elwood, sixth-grade mathematics teacher at Erwin. "The conference will help him realize how much potential leadership abilities he does have, so when he comes back to Erwin, he can be a schoolwide leader."

Anthony and his mother, Deb Conklin, are raising funds and seeking sponsors to help pay for the trip, which will cost $1,995 for tuition, plus airfare. So far, they have raised $300.

"I think it's a unique opportunity for somebody his age to be able to get out there and learn this stuff and have a head start to college," Conklin said. "This is a kid with limitless potential."

Anthony and the other students will engage in a variety of experiences, according to Envision's website. They include:

Practicing basic medical techniques, such as checking vital signs and doing triage.

Collecting samples, recording observations, synthesizing data and forming conclusions during an environmental field work experience.

Attending interactive workshops to get hands-on experience in mechanical, electrical, computer and civil engineering.

Participating in a competitive robotics simulation and putting principles of engineering and design to the test.

Visiting a local science museum to gain hands-on experience with cutting-edge technology.

While engaging in the various experiences, the students will gain skills in time management, critical thinking, conflict resolution, communication and public speaking.

"Only very high achievers are eligible for the program," Conklin said. "I'm so proud of him. He's so bright. He's funny. He's sarcastic and has a great sense of humor."

For more information or to make a contribution, contact Conklin at debnbetz@yahoo.com.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.