BLUE BELL, Pa., Oct. 29, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- CCI Consulting (formerly Career Concepts) the largest independently-owned human capital consulting firm in the Mid-Atlantic Region, is introducing a new business, CCI Compass. The new venture was created in response to client requests for help in managing the increasing complexities, additional regulations, and personal liability associated with insurance, employee benefits administration, and compliance.

CCI Compass transcends the role of the typical insurance broker. It will help organizations define and execute strategies to improve the cost effectiveness of employee benefits administration, manage complex compliance requirements, and leverage HR technology to achieve optimal efficiency and profitability.

Industry expert Evans Pancoast is President of CCI Compass. He is a former U.S. Healthcare/Aetna broker manager, former Trion consultant and is Founder of Managed Care Consultants. Managed Care Consultants (MCC) has been integrated with CCI Compass, providing immediate scale, resources and support for clients. Combined, MCC and CCI Consulting have over 2,700 clients.

As a highly respected human resources consulting firm, CCI Consulting brings deep expertise in compliance and risk mitigation. Sharon Imperiale, President of CCI Consulting, notes, "The Affordable Care Act (ACA), combined with additional federal, state and local regulations, is overwhelming human resources professionals. Unable to keep pace with the crisscrossing paperwork of benefits, payroll and compliance, they seek new ideas and strategies. They see the potential to save hundreds of thousands of dollars, but also the risk of six-figure penalties from the IRS."

CCI Compass recognizes in the power of HR technology but believes the clients' organizational structure, business processes, procedures and requirements should drive system selection. Unlike other firms that are vested in selling their own systems, CCI Compass will review dozens of software solutions to select the right system or combination of solutions for the client, and blend them into a single, easy-to-use interface that makes benefits administration a breeze. HR departments can use the same interface to streamline onboarding and recruiting, learning management systems, time and attendance, and scheduling.

Evans Pancoast and his team have found that increased compliance obligations, regulations and reporting requirements are putting organizations at risk for significant ERISA and ACA penalties. CCI Compass conducts ACA and ERISA audits with new clients and, according to Pancoast, "We discover ACA and ERISA violations in over 75% of new clients. Most of these companies had been using large brokerage firms, but the support to do customized audits and proactive benefits strategizing was missing, so audits were not done on a regular basis or not done at all."

About CCI Compass

The CCI Compass leadership team has been providing holistic employee benefits consulting for over 25 years. The team's extensive knowledge and experience with benefits, compliance and HR technology helps clients achieve optimal efficiency and profitability. With CCI Compass as their partner, employers reduce program costs, mitigate risk by complying with regulations, promote a healthier workforce through education and wellness programs, and resolve employee advocacy and administrative challenges. Learn more at www.ccicompass.com.

About CCI Consulting

CCI Consulting provides personalized human capital management consulting to drive targeted business results. Founded in 1988, CCI Consulting is a woman-owned small business, and the largest privately-held human capital management consulting firm in the Delaware Valley, with local offices in Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Delaware. CCI provides global reach through its ownership in Career Partners International, a worldwide partnership of more than 70 talent management and career transition firms with nearly 300 offices in over 45 countries. Learn more at www.cciconsulting.com.

Contact:

Brian Clapp, Chief Operating Officer, CCI Consulting

610-941-4455

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20151029/282077

SOURCE CCI Consulting