Kiz: I’m not sure Broncomaniacs love to hate the Chargers as much as the dastardly Raiders or tomahawk-chopping Chiefs. But I do know this: The old AFL city that Denver fans love visiting the most is beautiful San Diego. Dress up Qualcomm Stadium in a sea of orange jerseys and the old dump doesn’t look too bad. But the Chargers seem intent on moving to Los Angeles. And if they leave San Diego, they might also depart from the AFC West. Would you miss the Chargers on the schedule?

Renck: The Chargers received their nickname from a credit card. Can’t blame them for chasing more luxury-suite money in Los Angeles given their current stadium. But darn right, I’d miss the Chargers. I love Qualcomm Stadium, even if my favorite memories were watching Tony Gwynn hit and closer Trevor Hoffman enter to AC/DC’s “Hells Bells.” San Diego might not be Denver’s rival, but some of the best games I have ever covered featured John Elway facing off against the late Junior Seau.

Kiz: Here’s why I fear an 110-game-old rivalry with the Chargers is in danger. If NFL owners approve a move of the Raiders and Chargers to a proposed stadium that the two teams would like to share in Carson, Calif., wouldn’t it make more financial sense to split the lucrative L.A. television market between the broadcast partners that hold the rights to the NFC and AFC games? That could mean a Chargers move to the NFC West, and do the Broncos really want a new division rival, especially if it’s Seattle?

Renck: There remains no question it’s better to split the L.A. market between the AFC and NFC. But the St. Louis Rams’ elasticity provides a potential solution to keep the division aligned. Either the Chargers or Raiders could partner with St. Louis. While the Chargers would be missed, if it goes that route, Seattle as a division replacement eases the sting. The teams already own plenty of history together.

Kiz: As odd as it might sound, the best hope to keep the Broncos’ old AFC rivalries intact might be our old friend Stan Kroenke. Kroenke wants to move the Rams to his own new stadium near the L.A. airport, and recently revealed he’s now open to sharing the facility with another team. Under this scenario, the Rams could stay in the NFC West, and the Chargers could share Kroenke’s stadium, without the hassle of having to switch divisions. The left-out Raiders could whine, stuck in Oakland. I like the sound of that.

Renck: As do I for different reasons. The Raiders belong in Oakland. It fits their image, fits their ardent fans. No tailgating experience brings more energy than Oakland. It’s colorful, loud, if not a bit frightening. Moving San Diego to Los Angeles is a traffic issue. Moving the Raiders to Los Angeles is character lobotomy surgery. Keep the silver and black in the bay.