Then, a jarring experience turned him from advocating for the companies to working against them.

Potter, who was employed as health insurance company CIGNA’s vice president of communications, left the high-paying job behind in 2008 after having a “crisis of conscience” upon seeing poor and under-insured people waiting in the rain at a Remote Area Medical clinic for medical attention.

Born in Banner Elk, North Carolina, and raised in Mountain City, Potter said the experience put him “face-to-face with the consequences of our broken health care system.”

“It shook me to the core to see that,” he said, speaking to a group of 17 gathered in the basement of Elizabethton’s First Presbyterian Church. “I realized I could have been in one of those lines if my circumstances had been different.”

After having the epiphany, he set out to challenge and change the country’s health care system, from one run by for-profit insurance companies focused on the investors’ interests to one in which all citizens have access to quality health care. He quit his job and testified before a Senate committee in 2009 regarding the ills of the HMO system.

He’s written a book about the corporate climate in health insurance. A second book, detailing the effects of lobbying groups on democracy, is set to debut later this year.

“Even with the reforms that we’ve gained, we’re all still vulnerable,” he said. “Nobody in this country can have peace of mind when it comes to health care.”

Potter was invited to the Elizabethton church, and an appearance later Thursday at Kingsport’s Waverly Presbyterian Church, by grassroots groups supporting Gov. Bill Haslam’s Insure Tennessee proposal to expand Medicaid coverage to more than 250,000 residents. The proposal, after months of negotiating between the governor’s office and the federal Health Department for a more conservative approach than the standard expansion enacted in other states, was killed early in the state General Assembly’s session without making it to the full floor for a vote.

He said part of his job before 2008 was to convince the public socialized health care systems, particularly Canada’s “was the worst in the world,” but he’s since “spent a lot of time in Canada, and they love it.”

“We were able to influence public opinion in ways people aren’t aware of,” he said, speaking of his days in public relations. “You can see it in Tennessee, for instance, where so many people oppose expanding Medicaid, when it actually would be in their best interests.”

Potter said the ultimate goal for the country should be a single-payer system, in which the government pays for all citizens’ health care costs. The Affordable Care Act passed in 2010, was a first phase in overhauling the health care system, he said.

That health care law, and the state’s refusal of federal dollars to expand its Medicaid program, has pushed hospitals and hospital systems to merge, providing more administrative efficiencies and more bargaining power to leverage better rates from health insurance companies, he said, a phenomenon seen locally.

As Mountain States Health Alliance, based in Johnson City, and Wellmont Health System, based in Kingsport, prepare to merge, residents can expect to pay more to insurance companies, as the new system uses its power as a “must-have” system, Potter said.

“Hospitals need to do what they can to reduce costs, which means some people will lose their jobs as you get administrative efficiencies,” he said. “It will be a challenge keeping insurance rates lower, because so many Tennessee hospitals have been making due with less money because of the reductions from the Affordable Care Act and the state’s refusal to expand Medicaid coverage.