Doug Diny is a candidate for Wausau City Council District 4. (March 2016) (Photo: Courtesy of Doug Diny)

My dad, Doug Diny, will lead on Council

EDITOR: As an ROTC cadet at University of Wisconsin-La Crosse, I am surrounded by leaders; however, the leader I have learned the most from is my dad.

My dad taught me how to shake hands like a man, how to treat elders and authority figures with respect, how to compete, play as a team member, how to lead and how to follow. I learned how to be on time for work, to study hard, shine my shoes and how to change a tire on the car he helped his kids buy with sweat equity. He taught me how to play cribbage, chess and to hunt and fish. He smoked a cigar on the front porch with me on my 18th birthday. Most importantly, he has shown me how to be a supportive, loving father I hope to be one day.

I’ve never met a person who couldn’t get along with my dad, Doug Diny.

This constitutes my endorsement for Doug Diny for Wausau City Council.

Nick Diny,

La Crosse

I’m a millennial and I support Doug Diny

EDITOR: I have known Doug Diny for over five years in both a personal and professional setting. I, too, primarily work remotely, and agree with Diny’s ideas on attracting millennials back to the Wausau area. It would be great to see Wausau open up to more high-tech industries. I am excited for what the new east side riverfront development will bring in that regard.

Diny certainly has the modern mindset required to understand the changing world and what it means for Wausau. Anyone who knows Diny also knows that he is overflowing with ideas for Wausau. His ideas are what Wausau needs. As a millennial, I couldn’t think of a better person to lead Wausau City Council’s District 4.

Peter Goetsch,

Wausau

Doug Diny is a man of character

EDITOR: I am a graduate of Wausau East High School and a graduate from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Wausau is my hometown and any chance I have to return home is valued beyond words because of the character of the city and the community. This character needs to exist in the city government and Doug Diny is the right man to bring this to the council.

The City Council truly makes a difference for individuals in Wausau. Diny has the ability to create positive change for this community and that is why I would encourage all individuals in Wausau City Council District 4 to vote Diny on April 5.

Amy Hasenberg,

Corning, N.Y.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1MyBcdL