Matt Yglesias has kicked up a mini-commotion with a piece hailing any potential Obamacare-driven cuts to physician income as basically exactly the medicine our overpriced medical system needs. Here’s his argument:

You’ll note a slight difference in both tone and substance between the first paragraph (where Yglesias sounds like, shall we say, a particularly hepped-up MSNBC host ranting against the selfish Republican-voting rich) and the second paragraph (where he sounds more like Milton Friedman, who once described of the American Medical Association as “the strongest trade union in the United States”). For a heterodox liberal writing mostly for mostly partisan audience, it’s a savvy way to structure an argument: Come for the defense of the Affordable Care Act (and to watch the outrage from conservatives who like their doctor and mistakenly imagine that ours is a free market in medical services), and stay for a little unconventional, even right-of-center wisdom about the problem with government-subsidized cartels and the uses of deregulation.

But I’m not sure the combination holds together analytically. If supply-side reforms are the real answer to the problem of inflated medical salaries (and I’m pretty sure they are) then should we be praising a policy, Obamacare, that tries to restrain salaries and payments by fiat instead? Jokes about doctors fleeing to Canada notwithstanding, unless Democrats have a plan to completely nationalize health care there’s still going to be somewhere else for the best physicians to go: They can stop participating in public plans, stop participating in exchange plans, and and then eventually stop taking insurance entirely and just opt to serve an exclusively upper middle class clientele via concierge medicine. And if you combine this opting-opt out at the top of the talent distribution with the fact that Obamacare will presumably dramatically expand the demand for physician services for the newly-subsidized, you have a recipe for basically importing Medicaid’s existing access and quality-of-care problems into the rest of the publicly-subsidized insurance market.

Would this shift also restrain doctor salaries (or the average doctor’s salary, at least), and with them, medical costs? Well, yes, to some extent it might — and so in a sense, this is just taking us back into the ideologically-charged debate over whether “Medicaid for all” would be a good idea or not. But it’s noteworthy that Yglesias’s nominally liberal and pro-Obamacare piece actually suggests a very different prescription (and yes, admittedly, one that many A.M.A.-funded Republicans would oppose) than the Medicaid-for-most model that Obamacare might end up delivering. He’s basically acknowledging that what we actually need is medical-industry deregulation to counteract the market-distorting impact of a heavily-subsidized medical cartel, but then still embracing as a second-best option a policy that answers that cartel with wage and price controls instead, essentially piling a new set of distortions on top of the old set in the hopes that they cancel each other out. And given his own analysis of the underlying dynamics, I think it’s reasonable to doubt whether that second-best solution is really much of a solution at all.