Former Bears offensive coordinator Adam Gase is drawing attention as head coach of the Dolphins for his novel approach to rookie minicamp: There is no camp.

Nothing in pads. Nothing in shirts and shorts. Nothing on grass, except top draft pick Laremy Tunsil.

Gase brought the Dolphins draft choices and undrafted free agents to the team’s training facility last weekend for nothing but classroom sessions on football and life.

Gase planned to school the players on schemes, positions and plays. It was like taking just the written part of the driving test.

Other sessions included subjects similar to the NFL’s old rookie symposium -- managing money, proper eating habits, handling the media and, presumably, proper bong headwear.

I can’t see Gase’s former boss, Bears coach John Fox, going along with this idea. Fox always says he doesn’t know anything about players "until we get them on the grass" (Tunsil notwithstanding, I figure).

Gase’s plan would be a radical change for Fox and all the other football coaches who love having their guys play football and love saying “football’’ when talking about football coaches and football players and football, football, football.

Gase talks about changes in rookie camp and the draft Miami Dolphins head coach Adam Gase starts rookies in the classroom instead of on the field in rookie camp. Miami Dolphins head coach Adam Gase starts rookies in the classroom instead of on the field in rookie camp. See more videos

Speaking of football, football, football, the players Gase took to school might’ve been all footballed out. They’ve played a season of college football, then worked out for the football combine, then worked out for their football pro days. That’s a lot of football. That also seems to catch up to a lot of rookies in November, even though the NFL season doesn’t end until January, or February if you’re lucky.

In a division that includes Bill Belichick, the Dolphins rookie coach might’ve hit upon a Belichickian move that cuts down on rookies hitting the rookie wall.

But good luck to Gase turning Ryan Tannehill into Tom Brady.

Desposed Bears safety Antrel Rolle just never got it: The Halas Hall practice fields are bad in order to get players ready for Soldier Field.

Wait, they’re changing almost everyone on ESPN’s NFL pregame show except Chris Berman? Seriously, Bristol? OK, then someone help me out here: Is hate-watching Berman considered a medical event covered by Obamacare?

Wait, Michael Jordan was never a unanimous MVP? Shaq? Wilt? Russell? Seriously, people? Idiots.

Photos of Bulls legend and NBA Hall of Famer Michael Jordan through the years.

Spurs general manager R.C. Buford was named Executive of the Year. I get the feeling the Bulls named Gar Forman Executive For One More Year.

The Big Ten reportedly is close to a football and basketball broadcast deal with Fox. Jim Harbaugh and Jesse Watters -- now there’s a party.

Just because John Danks and his regularly scheduled lousy starts are gone doesn’t mean Carlos Rodon has to try to fill that role.

Some of the late innings of both the Cubs and White Sox games Tuesday night made you wonder how Carlos Marmol could be in two places at the same time.

What’s up, Steve Buechele?