CHRISTIANSBURG — A decorated combat veteran hopes to represent the “Fighting 9th.”

Derek Kitts of Christiansburg, who recently retired from the U.S. Army after three tours in Iraq and another in Afghanistan — and three years of teaching ROTC classes at Radford University — said this week that he is joining the ranks of possible Democratic contenders for the 9th Congressional District seat. It is now held by Republican Morgan Griffith of Salem, who won election to Congress in 2010.

Kitts, 46, said Monday that he thinks that his military background, which includes earning two Bronze Stars and a Purple Heart, sets him apart from other Democratic hopefuls. He said that he is exploring fundraising possibilities and plans a formal announcement of his candidacy soon.

“I feel a gap,” Kitts said of Griffith’s representation of the sprawling 9th District, which covers all of Virginia south and west from Salem.

“There’s a big difference between being a politician and being a leader. … A leader is needed out here, not another politician,” Kitts said.

Kitts is joining about a half dozen Democrats who have expressed interest in taking on Griffith, Democratic district committee Vice Chairwoman Aviva Frye said Tuesday. The field includes Roanoke Mayor David Bowers and farmer and retired postal worker Bill Bunch of Tazewell County.

Democrats are still setting their schedule for choosing a candidate, Frye said. Local delegates will be picked on the weekend of April 16, she said. The delegates then will select a nominee at a district convention in May, Frye said.

Contacted Tuesday, Griffith said that while the district’s Democrats had not yet chosen his opponent, the party’s national priorities suggested the candidate would be “not in step with the people of Southwest Virginia.”

Kitts is a Roanoke native whose father runs a fasteners manufacturing company in Lynchburg. Kitts is married with two daughters — one now deployed with the 82nd Airborne, he said, and the other a freshman at Christiansburg High School. In November, he retired from an Army career that took him to Germany and Saudi Arabia, as well as to war in Iraq and Afghanistan. He earned a bachelor’s degree in public safety along the way, stacking up credits at different institutions, then finishing with two years at Bluefield College.

In a book about the surge campaign in Iraq, Lt. Col. Michael Silverman’s “Awakening Victory,” Kitts is described as one of the unit’s brightest platoon sergeants, and also “the biggest smartass in the battalion.”

A first sergeant when he retired, Kitts said that his time in the military taught him about taking care of people and about the consequences of actions.

As an example, he cited a 2005 incident that he later wrote about in the Army Times. Patrolling near a checkpoint, Kitts’ squad was approached by a car that looked like one they had been warned could carry a bomb. When the car sped toward them, squad members opened fire. They wounded the driver, who turned out to be an Iraqi Army solider, an ally, who said that he hadn’t seen their signal to stop. A bullet also went past the car and hit a 5-year-old girl down the street.

Kitts said the girl was rushed to a U.S. hospital and saved. He wrote that he ended up in the same medical facility with her after spraining his ankle, and talked to her as she recovered.

On Tuesday, Kitts said that though the child’s shooting was accidental and he hadn’t fired the shot, he had commanded the unit.

“You can delegate authority but you can never delegate responsibility,” he said.

Kitts was wounded himself — in a separate incident — when a bomb blew up beneath his vehicle, he said. His Purple Heart medal now hangs on a wall at home on a plaque with a piece of the armor plating from the vehicle’s floor, he said.

If elected, Kitts said he would support the Affordable Care Act but would consider changes to improve it. He said that he would oppose banning immigrants of certain religions or from certain countries because doing so seems to fly in the face of the principles on which America was founded.

As an avid target shooter and the owner of “more than one and less than 100” firearms, Kitts said he strongly supports gun ownership. But he said he believes background checks should precede all sales and that people should receive more firearms safety training.

Kitts said he agreed with Republicans’ call for more mental health care as a partial solution to gun violence, “but that comes under the Affordable Care Act.”

Overall, “I’m moderate. I’d honestly call myself a Blue Dog,” he said, referring to the name for a group of fiscally conservative Democrats.

He sounded eager to start campaigning against Griffith.

“When I really believe in something, I’m a bull in a china shop. I’m a hammer,” Kitts said. “But I’ve always believed in taking care of people first.”