CLEVELAND, Ohio -- The Greater Cleveland Partnership sees a momentous task in the year ahead. Ohio's largest chamber of commerce is resolved to prepare Cleveland for the Republican National Convention in 2016 and the city's debut on a world stage.

Getting the town convention-ready ranks as a high priority in the GCP's new public policy agenda, and no wonder. The political convention is expected to draw 50,000 visitors and the eyes of the world in July of 2016.

Already, downtown hotels are booked and the GCP is pushing the state to finish a key bridge over the Cuyahoga Valley sooner than planned, the better to speed the flow of conventioneers.

"This is an opportunity to showcase all the great things that are happening in Cleveland," including the teamwork that landed the convention, said Thomas Zenty III, chief executive officer of University Hospitals and chair of the GCP's government affairs council.

The council worked with GCP staff to map out a two-year agenda designed to identify and advance the GCP's public policy priorities. The Plain Dealer received an advanced copy of the agenda, which is being released Monday.

Not surprisingly, the chamber recommends actions it believes will support business and enhance regional competitiveness. Those range from reforming taxes to transforming Cleveland public schools to keeping NASA Glenn fully funded.

The agenda also reflects a shift in job creation strategy, one that might slow the region's advance into the new economy. In keeping with a recent economic development trend, the GCP plans to champion the potential of existing businesses over startups and new arrivals.

Marty McGann, the GCP's vice president of government advocacy, said the agenda follows the lead of the Regional Competitiveness Council, a business-philanthropy group that is refining the region's business attraction play.

That council is pushing the idea that the surest way to new jobs is through the expansion of existing companies.

Zenty stressed that the GCP still sees entrepreneurship and new business as critical, and he noted the agenda endorses the work of the Third Frontier Commission, which is responsible for leading Ohio into high technology. Nevertheless, the agenda bestows favored status on companies with a local legacy.

"Working with companies already doing business in Ohio provides the highest return on investment and opportunity for growth," the report said.

The GCP also appears to be taking a step back from a political issue with demographic and economic consequence. While citing the need for immigration reform, the GCP takes a quieter position than the recent past, to the chagrin of some members.

The policy paper argues that immigration reform is smart, practical and would boost the local economy. But it makes no mention of how to help achieve it, even though Ohio holds powerful influence in the debate.

Many of the reforms sought by the business community, including more visas for high-skill immigrants, were contained in the bipartisan reform bill passed by the U.S. Senate. The bill was never allowed to come up for a vote in 2014 the U.S. House of Representatives, which is led by an Ohio Congressman John Boehner.

Jose Feliciano, a member of the GCP's policy council and president of the Hispanic Roundtable of Cleveland, argues Ohio's largest business group "needs to be more robust" in pursuit of immigration reform and immigrant-attraction efforts.

While other Midwest cities are taking assertive steps to welcome immigrants, to boost economies and population, Cleveland's civic leadership has been largely silent on the issue, council members included.

"From a policy-setting standpoint, it's not something that came up," McGann said.

Maybe it should have, Zenty added.

Zenty said that industries like his, healthcare, need international talent. Meanwhile, Cleveland needs people. He said both goals could be furthered by a broader effort to welcome and integrate immigrants.

"I think that's a concept we need to explore," he said.

While traditionally a conservative group, the GCP is politically non-aligned. The report reveals how it often straddles political camps in pursuit of a businesses agenda.

For example, the plan calls for expanding the Ohio Capital Fund to boost venture capital investment, a move opposed by many Republicans in the statehouse.

It also tells the EPA to back off the coal industry, a position sure to dismay supporters of alternative energy. The report argues that Ohio's manufacturing renaissance is based in part on low-cost fossil fuels.

Meanwhile, the agenda endorses a key component of Obamacare. It calls for Ohio to continue to extend Medicaid eligibility to the working poor, as allowed under the Affordable Care Act.

"That will be critical to providing healthcare access for many of our citizens," Zenty said.

The RNC is the newest economic windfall to hit the city and it rises high on the GCP agenda. Business leaders helped to secure the convention and will now lead efforts to prepare for it.

"It's a very complex undertaking," Zenty said, noting that the city has not welcomed a major political convention in 80 years. "I think the GCP will play a very important coordination role."

That may mean lobbying to accelerate projects -- like the $32 million renovation of Public Square -- to ensure the city is ready when guests arrive, according to the report.

The GCP already has been urging the Ohio Department of Transportation to try and complete the second Inner Belt Bridge sooner than planned.

Other key infrastructure projects include the construction of a Convention Center hotel, already under way, and a pedestrian bridge connecting downtown and the lakefront.

Once the convention convenes, Zenty said, the GCP will play another role. It will help to show off Cleveland, its civic assets, and the esprit de corps that lured the RNC in the first place.

"I think that is a real testimony to the fact that this regain can come together and make extraordinary things happen," he said.