Topics: apologies, Editor's Picks, Gender, Sorry, Video, women, Life News

Last week, in a salon and under a hot, blasting dryer, halfway through the draconian process that strips my hair of its darkness to reveal a shiny, Pantene blonde, I reached for a magazine.

“Sorry,” I said to the woman next to me, when my fingers accidentally grazed her towel-draped shoulder.

“Sorry,” she quickly echoed my apology, leaning gratuitously out of my way. I laughed self-consciously. These days it seems we’re supposed to feel sorry about saying sorry.

The verdict is indeed in: It appears that some of us — pointedly, women — are saying the word “too much.” The articles and the pretty female-empowerment ads argue that “sorry” is tantamount to supplication and to admitting our worthlessness — that it undermines our power and denies our self-possession, or that it betrays our gender and progress.

But my salon “sorry” did not diminish my sense of worth, or stem from a blithering lack of self-confidence. It was simply meant to acknowledge that the space was limited, and that I could imagine my neighbor’s discomfort in my making it, for a moment, tinier still. My neighbor’s “sorry,” even further from an apology, was a small kindness nonetheless — a verbal token to let me know that she did not blame me for limitations beyond my control, but shared in their burden with me. It was not, in short, a finger-pointing damnation, but a benign commiseration.

Sure, we would have survived without the exchange. It was a fleeting near-nothing. But it lightened that unpleasant space, and our moods. Why should we feel sorry for that?

The confusion seems to be, at root, definitional. In Georgetown University linguist Deborah Tannen’s book “Talking from 9 to 5: Men and Women at Work,” she argues that “for many women, and a fair number of men, saying ‘I’m sorry’ isn’t literally an apology; it is a ritual way of restoring balance to a conversation.”

I’ve seen this disparity at work: In a rush, rounding a corner, I narrowly missed running into an equally harried male colleague – and he into me. “Sorry,” I offered.

“It wasn’t anyone’s fault,” he chastised. “But it’s OK.” My empathic intention had been commandeered.

Tannen describes this kind of situation as a conversational imbalance: I used “sorry” to mean “I’m sorry this happened,” to express regret without taking or assigning blame. My colleague took my “sorry” as an admission of wrongdoing, and worse.

The problem, then, is no one’s, or, more precisely, everyone’s. The question, therefore, should not be, “Why do women apologize too much?” but “Why do men and women use ‘sorry’ differently?” It could be neurologic difference, or socialized pressure, or enculturated American individualism, or most likely all that and more, combined and twisted. But it is striking that before we understand the answers, we are only asking American women to apologize less, and not American men to apologize more.