By Liz Freeman of the Naples Daily News

One of the largest physician groups in the region and Florida Blue are launching a patient care practice that aims to coordinate services for patients and reduce unnecessary costs.

Millennium Physician Group will launch Oct. 1 an accountable care organization, ACO, with Florida Blue, an independent licensee of Blue Cross Blue Shield. Millennium has 180 doctors in practices from Sarasota to Marco Island.

An ACO is a contractual arrangement between groups of doctors and other health care providers who agree to come together to manage patients’ conditions together. The goal is to improve patient care and reduce redundancies, like duplicated tests and frequent emergency room visits, which drive up costs.

Florida Blue has 63,000 patients under 65 in commercial-based or marketplace plans under the affordable care law in Charlotte, Lee and Collier, Florida Blue spokeswoman Christie Hyde DeNave said.

Who will be enrolled in the ACO with Millennium will be made jointly between Millennium and Florida Blue, she said.

“Patients can opt out at any time,” DeNave said.

A move toward these agreements came in 2010 under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, with Medicare patients who are frequent users of health services and often have multiple doctors who do not interact with one another.

A key component of an ACO is shared responsibility and commitment between the medical groups to reduce costs with an incentive that insurers will share some of the savings with medical groups when they achieve measurable quality improvements.

Critics say the model will lead to more consolidation in the health care industry, with hospitals buying physician practices, which will give large consolidated hospital/physician groups more leverage in negotiating with insurers.

The agreement between Millennium and Florida Blue is not tied to any hospital system, according to Millennium.

Commercial agreements like the one between Millennium and Florida Blue are different than Medicare ACOs where the federal government decides who to assign to an ACO. Still, Medicare patients retain their rights to go to any doctor they wish.

Florida Blue has 19 other ACOs statewide, including one that was formed in 2012 with the NCH Healthcare System in Collier County.

Millennium has an ACO with Medicare and received $3.8 million as part of its Medicare shared savings, out of $275 million in total claims that Medicare paid, which includes claims to providers who are not part of the ACO. That includes paid claims to the region’s hospitals.

Geurt Peet, chief executive officer of Millennium, said he is proud how the group practice has been successful in developing these agreements that are beneficial to patients.

“Over the past two years we have expanded our quality initiatives in order to meet our mission of raising the quality of health care while at the same time lowering the overall costs for our patients,” he said in a statement.