iStock

RITA GUNTHER MCGRATH: At this juncture, I think what is needed are ways that employers can stop shortcutting the quest for productivity gains by bludgeoning their employees with so-called productivity-enhancing innovations that take control out of the hands of workers, limit their prospects and virtually guarantee that employees are unable to better their lots.

Let’s start with workforce management systems. Introduced in industries that employ many low-wage hourly workers, these systems promise employers data about exactly how many hands they need on deck at any given time. Many employers, even fairly enlightened ones, have turned around and used this information to fine-tune the hours they ask their employees to work. Not that there is anything inherently wrong with this, but in the fine-tuning, they have further assumed the right to schedule their people virtually on-demand.

What that in turn means is that employees can’t predict when they will be on call, throwing their child care, educational and family responsibilities into total disarray. Evidence that these practices are far from acceptable? When the New York Times published a story of just how grueling ordinary life was made by unpredictable hours, within days, Starbucks announced plans to give its 130,000 workers greater stability in scheduling. Such practices go together with people cobbling together two or more part-time jobs just to make ends meet–in a recent tragedy, a young women holding down 3 jobs died from gasoline fumes in her car as she tried to take a nap between commitments.

In another disturbing development, some employers have begun to insist that employees sign noncompete agreements, even for jobs as unremarkable as camp counselors, hairdressers and even sandwich makers. These practices further weaken employee’s bargaining power and diminish their prospects.

Getting back to new technologies that could significantly improve productivity, we need to stop thinking of employees as interchangeable units of cost. The work of Zeynep Ton (of MIT) and others have found that counterintuitively, excellent operations capabilities coupled with decent wages and opportunities for self-development have been core to the success of companies such as Costco, Quick-Trip, Mercadona and Trader Joe’s. So perhaps what we need is a radically different “technology” for unlocking human potential that goes beyond thinking only of an hourly wage.

Rita Gunther McGrath (@rgmcgrath) is an associate professor at Columbia Business School and author of the recent book “The End of Competitive Advantage: How to Keep Your Strategy Moving as Fast as Your Business.”

Read the latest Leadership Report.