(Optional Musical Accompaniment To This Post)

Once again, the regulars at the shebeen are reminded that, for all its entertaining clownery at the presidential level, the Republican party is still damned formidable down in the states, where the real mischief gets done, and where people like Scott Walker, Rick Scott, and Sam Brownback get re-elected for the purposes of doing more damage, and despite the fact that, according to most polls, they all have approval ratings that belong in an airlocked lab at the CDC. Joining that poxy crew on Tuesday night was Matt Bevin of Kentucky, a cockfighting aficionado who is the new governor of Kentucky despite the fact that almost everyone down there, including a great number of actual Republicans, cordially despises him. Bevin's primary campaign promise, which he made right from jump, in his announcement speech, is that he will reverse incumbent Governor Steve Beshear's acceptance of FREE MONEY! under the Affordable Care Act, and that he also will demolish KYNECT, the exchange program Kentucky set up that has been widely praised as a model for health-care reform in states that were skeptical of it, and that also is more popular with Kentucky voters than Matt Bevin ever has been.

Mr. Obama's health care law was an especially contentious issue in the race, and some see the Bevin victory as a rebuke to Gov. Steve Beshear, a Democrat, who expanded Medicaid under the measure. An estimated 420,000 Kentuckians, nearly 10 percent of the state's population, now have coverage as a result. Mr. Bevin, a fierce opponent of the health care law, at first said he would reverse it, but has since softened his position and said he would stop enrolling new people but would not take coverage from those who had it.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Yeah, and Scott Walker never said he was going to blow up collective bargaining, or sign a radical anti-choice law, or make Wisconsin a right-to-work state. I don't believe Bevin as far as I can throw American Pharaoh.

Make no mistake. Kentuckians voted to decimate a popular health-care system, and to make Kentucky a right to work state last night. They did so because Bevin mobilized the Kim Davis vote and spread enough Jeebus around that people (again) voted against their own best interests. (Also, it should be noted that Bevin plans to throw responsibility for the poor and the sick onto the rest of us. You're welcome, dickhead.) If your outrage over the treatment of a crackpot goldbricking county clerk outweighs the possibility that your aging grandmother is going to die of a treatable illness then, well, I don't know what to say to you except good luck and enjoy your freedom.

Most Popular

There are a couple of lessons that the Democratic Party can take from yet another ass-kicking, this in a freakish off off-year election. (The results in Virginia, where Democrats hoped to overturn the state senate, were particularly painful, and not much of a testimony to Governor Terry McAuliffe's influence.) The first one is an old lesson, but one the party has yet to learn. Debbie Wasserman Schultz has to go, and she has to take her approach to building the party with her. How many times does Howard Dean's 50-state strategy have to be vindicated before the Democratic Party admits that he was right, and that Rahm Emanuel (and DWS) were wrong? Pay attention. These elections are where your next Louie Gohmerts and Joni Ernsts come from. If you want to kill crackpot politics in the cradle, this is where you have to do it.

The second lesson is one more apropos to the set of circumstances surrounding this election. (And, yes, I also am suspicious of the fact that no poll showed Bevin leading prior to the election and yet he won going away. There seems to be one of these in every election now, and the Republican almost always wins it.) Please stop running retreads, what we here in the Commonwealth call "the Coakley Factor." I'm sure Jack Conway is a swell fella, but, like Coakley in Massachusetts and Tom Barrett in Wisconsin, this is the second statewide race he'd lost in five years, and the last one he lost was to Rand Paul. In addition, how can a major political party not exploit the fact that the elite of the opposing party dislikes their candidate? Nominate strategically and then campaign strategically and then vote strategically. The Republicans do all these things at once, and the Democrats seem incapable of doing any of them.

I guess I should be happy that the Pennsylvania Supreme Court flipped but, since an elected judiciary is the Second Worst Idea in American politics, I give that result a golf clap and go on my way.