Reuters U.S. Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen will have to put on her glasses to review the incoming data.

The August employment report doesn’t seal the deal for the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates in just under two weeks, but it makes a move a bit more likely, economists said Friday after reviewing the report.

The U.S. added 173,000 job in August, while the unemployment rate sank to 5.1%, a seven-year low. Wages picked up a bit, rising 0.3% in the month and 2.2% over the past year. Read more:Job rate lowest since 2008

“We’re a little closer to it being game on rather than game over for a September rate hike,” said Andrew Grantham, economist at CIBC World Markets, in a note to clients after the report.

Economists said the report was “strong” except for the headline number.

FYI, #jobs report puts @FederalReserve in complex uncertainty jam as below-expectation job creation offset by several other positive factors — Mohamed A. El-Erian (@elerianm) September 4, 2015

Fed officials will gather Sept. 16-17. Policy makers had seemed quite close to deciding to hike rates, but sharp financial-market volatility, tied to questions about the health of China’s economy and what that would mean for the global economy, has upset the carefully laid plans. Even Richmond Fed President Jeffrey Lacker, who supports a rate hike, said on Friday that “no discussion of macroeconomic conditions at this moment would be complete without mention of recent financial market volatility.”

After his speech, Lacker called the jobs report “a pretty much right down the middle of the fairway sort of employment report,” adding that this was “good” and didn’t change the picture for monetary policy, according to The Wall Street Journal.

Fed officials have said they want to see “some” further improvement in labor market conditions in order to hike rates. They also want to be “reasonably confident” inflation is moving higher.

“Unfortunately, this number while good is neither so strong as to make clear the need for a rate hike nor so weak that it makes standing pat a clear option,” said Carl Tannenbaum, chief economist at Northern Trust Co. in Chicago.

That was clear from the reaction of other economists.

Gus Faucher, senior macro economist at PNC Financial Services Group, said the report gives the Fed all the reason it needs to hike.

“The headline was weak but it is generally a decent report in line with what we’ve been seeing,” he said.

MarketWatch’s Rex Nutting says the economic data tell the Fed to raise rates.

Brian Bethune, an economist at Tufts University, said the data showed an economy “in slowdown mode.”

“The bottom line is the Fed is just going to sit here,” he said.

He said it didn’t make sense for the Fed to “pop rates and sit” because the market would not stand still, speculating about where the process of higher rates would end up.

Traders who bet on rate hikes using fed funds futures contracts currently project only 1 in 3 chance of a September rate hike. Economists are split fairly evenly, according to surveys.

Tim Mullaney offers 4 reasons we know we’re not ready for the Fed to raise rates

Tannenbaum, who thinks the Fed will raise rates this month, says Fed Chairwoman Janet Yellen would follow up its move with a message that the Fed “would rest for awhile” before hiking again.

This view of a September move followed by a period of quiet for as long as six months has been gaining ground among proponents of an increase in rates.

Michael Feroli, chief U.S. economist at J.P. Morgan Chase, said during the Fed’s Jackson Hole summit that “strong communication” about the gradual pace of subsequent hikes might help gel officials around agreeing to a hike on Sept. 17, according to the Financial Times.

More from MarketWatch