A giant clock looms over the trauma bay, a reminder that time is of the essence. The goal is to stabilize and assess each patient within 10 minutes.

An overhead page announces an Alpha patient, the most critical, and a team materializes seemingly out of nowhere — an attending physician, trauma surgeon, nurse, tech, respiratory therapist, chief resident — each donning paper scrubs and masks with splash guards. As they dress, they scan the board for information about the incoming patient — gender, vitals, circumstances, all recorded in shorthand.

As EMS personnel wheel the patient in, team members take their preassigned positions on either side of the gurney — there's a chart on the wall — cut and strip off the clothing, and start the ABCDE protocol: airway, breathing, cardio, disability, exposure. Within seconds they're taking vitals, drawing blood, staunching bleeding, taking an ultrasound and calling out the numbers. The chief resident this night, Jennifer Ottino, a fourth-year from Portsmouth Naval Hospital, stands at the foot of the bed, slightly removed from the action, directing operations. A surgeon hovers nearby.

This year Sentara Norfolk General Hospital marked its 30th year as the region's designated Level 1 Trauma Center, taking all comers, all the injuries that other hospitals cannot treat, more than 61,000 over three decades. It's home to the Nightingale helicopter transport. It has a lock on burn victims, it has instant access to specialists of every stripe, and handles any complex injury from car accidents to multiple shootings.

And it's bleeding cash.

A monetary drain

The annual costs of the trauma program are $28.5 million, said Kurt Hofelich, president of Sentara Norfolk General. Not including the bevy of physicians and specialists required, the support team amounts to 134 full-time employees. It operates at an annual loss of $3.2 million, almost one-third attributable to helicopter transport, with about 30 percent of patients unfunded or underfunded. That's significantly higher than the rest of the hospital, as patients with penetrating wounds, the result of violence, tend to be concentrated in underserved areas, he said.

To combat these losses, Hofelich and some other hospital leaders are pushing for Virginia to join the 49 other states in levying a hospital assessment. They want the state to add a 2 percent charge on all hospitals' net revenue and put the money into the Medicaid budget, which would then return 4 percent under the state's 50-50 arrangement with the federal program. The revenue would then be returned to hospitals on a prioritized basis.

"It would create enough incremental revenue to give a certain percentage to rural hospitals, a percentage to preserving and expanding graduate medical programs to assure a future workforce, and a percentage to assure a safety net of Level 1 Trauma Centers," said Hofelich. He emphasized that the assessment proposal is not connected to Medicaid expansion, but rather "a way to optimize current Medicaid funding."

Sentara Trauma Rob Ostermaier / Daily Press Doctor Brooke Harris calls up to ensure a cat-scan machine is available for a car crash victim as she is evaluated at the Sentara Trauma center. Doctor Brooke Harris calls up to ensure a cat-scan machine is available for a car crash victim as she is evaluated at the Sentara Trauma center. (Rob Ostermaier / Daily Press) (Rob Ostermaier / Daily Press)

The Virginia Hospital and Healthcare Association has historically opposed an assessment, or bed provider tax, but current economic conditions have the group re-evaluating the idea, said spokesman Julian Walker. Citing intense financial pressure on hospitals from increasing charity care, reimbursement shortfalls, government mandates and funding cuts due to the Affordable Care Act and sequestration, along with "a lack of offsetting state-based policy relief," the association is considering "a range of creative options," including a provider assessment program, Walker confirmed by email.

The state has five Level 1 Trauma Centers. Two are state-supported, Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond and the University of Virginia in Charlottesville; and three are private nonprofits, Sentara Norfolk General, Carillion in the Roanoke area and Inova in Northern Virginia. The two university-connected centers have other ways to draw down federal funds through education grants and internal transfers, Hofelich said.

The patients

Contrary to popular belief, the trauma department sees patients from every walk of life.

"Eighty percent of what we do is blunt-force trauma injuries," said attending surgeon Jay Collins, head of Sentara trauma and a professor at Eastern Virginia Medical School, which partners with the hospital. Most are the result of vehicle accidents, including those involving pedestrians and bicyclists. By comparison, he estimates the number of patients with gunshot wounds at approximately 260 a year. That's a small fraction of the 2,600 patients that cycle through the hospital's two trauma bays and five critical care rooms that can be repurposed in the event of a mass trauma.

"It's a misconception that only bad guys end up in trauma care," said hospital spokesman Dale Gauding. "It's a program for the community. People fall off roofs, there are industrial accidents, fires and a rising number of falls by the elderly living at home." In fact, falls account for more than 10 percent of cases.

"The great advantage is the speed with which you're evaluated. We can operate right this second if there's bleeding," said Travis Polk, attending surgeon. "It's very focused, very organized."

The team has instant access to a CT scanner, to massive amounts of blood from the blood bank at the touch of an emergency call button, and pre-emptive use of an operating room on the third floor. Every patient gets a thorough head-to-toe examination.

When patients are admitted, the same team follows them, making formal rounds of the intensive care unit with a multi-disciplinary team each morning. Additionally, every Monday, the team reviews videotapes of all Alpha cases; on Wednesdays, they hold quality review meetings.

"We see what we could do better. There's zero margin for error," said Collins, a general surgeon who like many of the participating physicians has a military background.

A typical night

The night shift starts at 7 p.m. Little more than an hour later, an Alpha page goes out. A gunshot victim, unresponsive, no vitals recorded.