Lawrence + Memorial Hospital is in talks with the Yale New Haven Health System for an affiliation that would keep the New London hospital as a separate operation under the Yale umbrella, the L+M CEO told employees Friday.

Bruce Cummings took the unusual step of announcing the talks before a deal was struck because, he acknowledged, word was leaking out.

So it was no surprise for many at the hospital, not only because of the leaks but because changes in health care economics are making it ever harder for small and midsize independent hospitals to stand on their own.

"As the environment has evolved more rapidly — and as hospitals and health systems across the nation are trying to prepare for and adapt to an emerging 'accountable care' world — we have begun to carefully explore options and opportunities that would best position L+M Healthcare and its affiliates," Cummings wrote in an 800-word email to employees.

Yale was a fairly clear choice. It's the largest hospital system in the state, with the $2.2 billion Yale-New Haven Hospital at its core, including the former Hospital of St. Raphael, which merged with Yale in 2012, and affiliations with Bridgeport and Greenwich hospitals. It's the nearest system to New London geographically among the four big, nonprofit systems in Connecticut.

And Cummings added, "After all, given our longstanding tradition of clinical partnerships — in radiation oncology, neonatology, telestroke, pediatric emergency medicine, invasive cardiology/angioplasty and vascular surgery — we already have a close working relationship with Yale New Haven."

Vin Petrini, a senior vice president at Yale New Haven Health System, confirmed that the talks are ongoing.

Pressures on hospitals, especially independents, are all the more intense in Connecticut because of a state budget squeeze in which Medicaid reimbursement reductions and added taxes will cost the state's 29 acute care hospitals an added $750 million over the next two years. Cummings did not mention Yale until the fifth paragraph of his email, but he bemoaned the state budget in the very first paragraph.

"Achieving our vision — to improve the health of the region — has become more challenging," Cummings wrote, "especially in light of the recently passed State budget with its reliance on taxing hospital revenues while further reducing Medicaid reimbursements."

L+M Healthcare, the parent of L+M Hospital, also includes Westerly Hospital in Rhode Island, which affiliated with L+M in 2013, a local Visiting Nurse Association unit, and a medical group. Under an affiliation deal with Yale, the separate hospitals would retain their own boards, the L+M group would retain its board, and the Yale New Haven Health System would oversee all of it, just as Hartford HealthCare oversees several hospitals.

It's too soon to say how deeply Yale would or could enact staff cuts in an affiliation deal. Typically, an affiliation brings cuts in support staff and management ranks, though not necessarily in clinical staff. And if a deal does happen and cuts ensue, it will never be known whether L+M would have had to make the same or worse moves on its own.

"We're going to make sure that whatever takes place, leadership … puts patients ahead of profits," said Matt O'Connor, spokesman for AFT, which represents 1,600 of about 2,250 people who work at Lawrence + Memorial Hospital, in three bargaining units.

Cummings made it clear in his email that no deal has been reached but that the target timetable for a deal would be this summer. "In any type of agreement, it's important to know that our goal is for L+M Healthcare to remain intact," he wrote.

Hospitals are seeking mergers and partnerships at a faster clip under Obamacare. In Connecticut, we've seen a proposed merger of five hospitals with Tenet Healthcare, a for-profit chain based in Texas, fall apart six months ago over regulatory issues, and at least five hospitals are in talks or have deals in place to combine with larger groups.

With just 13 Connecticut hospitals still independent, affiliation deals are attracting less controversy than they did just a few years ago. L+M spokesman Mike O'Farrell described a positive day after the CEO's email was reported Friday. "People seem to understand why we're talking," he said.

That doesn't mean the process is simple; nothing in hospital management is easy in 2015.

For example, a hospital regulation reform law that Gov. Dannel P. Malloy is likely to sign would either add transparency to hospital combinations, or add regulation hurdles, depending on who's talking. That law would take effect Dec. 1 and might apply to a Yale-L+M affiliation, depending on when the hospitals file for approval.

Lawrence + Memorial Hospital, with 256 beds, has had an up-and-down five years of financial performance, but is generally in the midrange among Connecticut's hospitals. Like other independent hospitals, L+M has cut staffing and costs in recent years, mostly by attrition.

In its 2014 fiscal year, L+M reported operating revenues of $349 million but a surplus margin of only 0.15 percent, largely as a result of a strike and lockout of nurses and technicians that winter, which increased expenses sharply. To be considered healthy, operating margins should be between 3 percent and 5 percent so a hospital can afford technology and building upgrades.

In fiscal 2013, L+M reported results slightly below state averages. The hospital had very strong years in 2011 and 2012 but only a tiny surplus in 2010, less than half the state average.

State taxes and cutbacks under Malloy have amounted to at least $15 million a year, and rising, O'Farrell said. Still, state documents show, the hospital's debt and cash position gave it a healthy balance sheet.

L+M, in short, with $200 million in assets, is not among the state's ailing hospitals. That gives it bargaining power in talks with Yale.

L+M has moved some positions out of the hospital itself to its affiliated units, which are not under the AFT union. That was a significant cause of the 2013 strike and could become a factor in the Yale affiliation talks.