Militants of Islamic State (IS) stand near their flag on Tilsehir hill near Turkish border on October 23, 2014, at Yumurtalik village, in Sanliurfa province. (Bulent Kilic/AFP/Getty Images)

The Islamic State group is the ultimate predatory state. It has obtained vast amounts of financial and other resources in a relatively short period of time by theft or extortion. The fact remains, however, that most of its revenues are unsustainable, which is a significant organizational weakness that will likely be its downfall. The Islamic State group must either grow or die.

To hasten its defeat, Iraqi security forces and the international community must exploit this weakness by strangling the group's existing revenue sources – which are already in decline – and focus military efforts on preventing the organization from accessing new ones.

The Islamic State group has already claimed revenue from a number of different sources including: the seizure of state-owned banks ($500 - $800 million), agriculture theft ($10 - $50 million), business taxation ($20 - $70 million) and the capture of weapons, equipment and supplies from the Iraqi security forces ($20 - $50 billion). However, these sources are drying up.

Since no one is going to deposit more money in a bank that was looted by the Islamic State group, the opportunity to steal more assets from previously looted banks is gone. Agricultural revenues are also down. Following the confiscation of crops in 2014, planting, for obvious reasons, has dropped dramatically and the rural regions have changed from a source of revenue in 2014 to a drain on resources.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Islamic State]

A similar story can be told about businesses in Islamic State-occupied territories. The high and arbitrary "taxes" imposed on businesses are forcing them to either conceal their economic activities or cease them entirely, sharply reducing income from these sources.

Rachel Brody for USNWR

Capturing weapons, equipment and supplies from the Iraqi security forces has provided a tremendous short-term advantage to the Islamic State group by providing resources to its fighters while, at the same time, denying them to the Iraqi forces. However, such equipment will rapidly deteriorate without constant skilled maintenance, which Islamic State group fighters and equipment operators cannot provide.

In addition to the decline in revenues already underway, the Iraqi security forces and the international community should act to choke off revenues from skimming government employee paychecks ($100 to $300 million), oil trafficking ($100 million) and kidnapping for ransom ($25 to $45 million).

[READ: A Parade of Warnings]

To shrink these resources, the government of Iraq must cease payment of salaries and pensions for government employees in Islamic State-controlled territories. Though some say there are humanitarian reasons to continue such payments – to reduce the hardships endured by these employees – rampant corruption weakens that argument, as it is estimated that more than 25 percent of Iraq's government employees are "ghost" workers who receive a paycheck but rarely show up for work or may not exist. Payments to ghost workers and ghost retirees supposedly in Islamic State-occupied territory is diverted into the accounts of corrupt officials in Baghdad.

The collapse of world oil prices since November has already sharply reduced the group's income from oil smuggling. Further reduction is likely to continue because of OPEC's decision to continue high levels of oil production and the fact that neighboring states, especially Turkey, are clamping down on oil smuggling. To further reduce revenues from oil smuggling, the U.S. and other coalition air forces should continue to target transportation of both crude oil and refined fuels.

[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

Finally, the international community must enforce existing laws forbidding the payment of official or unofficial kidnapping ransoms. The immediate cost of enforcing these laws will be high, as the Islamic State group has tortured and murdered persons who are unable to pay the ransom demanded. But if the payment of ransoms can be stopped, there will not only be a reduction in Islamic State revenues but also – more importantly – a saving of lives in the future.

The Islamic State group will, no doubt, respond to the expected loss of revenue, possibly by staging "smash and grab" raids outside its current territory to steal everything of value, including foreigners that might be held for ransom, and then return to territory it controls.

The Iraqi security forces, with the support of the international coalition, must deny the Islamic State group any further geographic expansion, not only to prevent humanitarian tragedy but also to thwart the looting of banks, farms and businesses. It will not shorten the conflict if the security forces reconquer an already devastated town in one part of Iraq while Islamic State group fighters loot another town elsewhere.