The federal Affordable Care Act enabled millions of previously uninsured Americans to get health coverage, but a new report says Pennsylvania hospitals still provide lots of care they aren’t getting paid for.

In Western Pennsylvania, that means many hospitals are operating in the red.

“The continued growth of uncompensated care remains a major concern for Pennsylvania hospitals,” said Joe Martin, executive director of the independent Pennsylvania Healthcare Cost Containment Council in today’s report release.

The report, which can be viewed online at www.phc4.org, says the state’s 171 general acute care hospitals provided $1.07 billion in uncompensated care during the fiscal year that ended June 30, 2014, a 2.2 percent increase, or $22 million more, than the previous year.

While not the only factor, the bill for charity care and bad debt ties closely to a troubling line item in the PHC4 report for Western Pennsylvania hospitals: In the southwest sector including Allegheny County, nine of 29 hospitals (31 percent) had negative operating margins.

In the northwest sector, 13 of 23 hospitals, or just under 57 percent, were operating in the red.

The most notable Pittsburgh-area hospitals with negative operating margins were West Penn in Bloomfield (negative 36.22 percent) and Forbes in Monroeville (negative 23.62 percent).

Allegheny Health Network spokesman Dan Laurent said some of that loss can be attributed to restructuring and startup costs as Highmark Health sets up its own provider network. Also, he added, the data reflect only the final six months of 2013, when AHN switched to calendar year reporting, and do not include the hospitals’ improved performance in the first six months of 2014.

Of UPMC’s six local hospitals, only UPMC Mercy recorded a negative operating margin (negative 4.13 percent) and all five of its hospitals in outlying areas were in positive territory.

But more than half of the other northwest hospitals, including Ellwood City (negative 9.93 percent) and Sharon Regional (negative 4.17 percent), saw expenses outpace revenue.

Why would this happen when more people have insurance?

Denis Lukes, chief financial officer for the Hospital Council of Western Pennsylvania, said there are a number of reasons, starting with the Affordable Care Act itself.

Many people’s insurance plans, whether through their employer or the federal marketplace, now carry high deductibles. As a result, he said, people might face a $5,000 or $10,000 outlay on “their first trip to the emergency room” that they can’t afford to pay.

Those newly eligible for medical assistance also may be seeking care they’d been putting off until they got insurance, Mr. Lukes said, and medical assistance covers only about 30 percent of the hospital’s cost for outpatient care.

Those factors — combined with declining Medicare payments and added federal requirements, such as buying and maintaining electronic medical records — all have put pressure on hospitals’ bottom lines that Mr. Lukes said threatens their ability to reinvest in their facilities or even maintain some clinical services.

“The changes in the last five years have been somewhat draconian from a Medicare perspective,” he said. “The Affordable Care Act did nothing that reduced the cost of health care. What they’ve really done is reduce payments to providers and said, ‘You guys figure it out.’ ”

Steve Twedt: stwedt@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1963.