As the caregiver to a beloved who has early-onset Alzheimer’s, I sympathize with Meryl Comer’s experience [“Alzheimer’s — thief and killer,” Metro, Aug. 31]. It is shocking that there is no care protocol for Alzheimer’s. Medical professionals remain abysmally ignorant of how various dementias affect the senses. Many are afraid of an incurable, progressive disease that destroys one’s cognition, the very source of much of their medical power.

When a loved one receives a diagnosis of dementia, caregivers should be assigned an experienced social worker to manage the case and stay with the family throughout the course of the disease. This person would be an expert in local resources, know techniques for dealing with symptoms at different stages and, most important, be a source of emotional support for the patient and family members. This service should be covered by health insurance, including Medicare. Until a treatment or cure is found, the least we should do for the millions affected is provide knowledgeable care.

As it is, caregivers are largely abandoned to cobble together care models using books, the Internet and support groups. If this shocks you, it should.

Nicole Burton, Riverdale Park

●

Kudos for The Post’s recent article on Alzheimer’s and to Meryl Comer for her strength and courage to write the book “Slow Dancing With a Stranger” and to speak so frankly.

My wife is at a less developed stage of early-onset dementia than Ms. Comer’s husband. She has never had the violent outbursts that Ms. Comer has had to face from her husband, and I am thankful. Much else she writes and speaks of we have in common. My wife, who once was an accomplished senior Foreign Service officer and a very fine crisis manager, steadily lost the ability to plan and negotiate and finally had to retire. She had dreamed of continuing her travels by doing contract work for the State Department and had looked into using her considerable counseling skills to volunteer at the Walter Reed National Medical Center. Now she is disoriented by travel and can’t drive.

Once ours was a partnership of equals, and our strengths complemented and reinforced each other. Now I do my best to carry on in the spirit of the love we shared in better days and the knowledge that my wife would do so were our lives reversed.

John Collinge, Bethesda