Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share The Pierre Toussaint office, which turned 20 in October, has been helping uninsured adults with fillings, cleanings, extractions, dentures and partial dentures.

Buy Photo Dr. Gary Isaacs works on long time patient Rob Roy of Wilmington at the Pierre Toussaint Dental Office which has been providing basic dental services for uninsured poor patients ages 19 to 64. (Photo: SUCHAT PEDERSON/THE NEWS JOURNAL)Buy Photo

The rain was steadily falling when 49-year-old Rob Roy pulled his bike in front of the Pierre Toussaint Dental Office on Wilmington's East Side.

Roy was a little wet, but was warmly greeted by the office's program director, Beverly Byrd, as he brought his bike into the dental office that provides basic dental services to uninsured poor adults across Delaware. Without the office, run by the Ministry of Caring, hundreds of poor adults would endure dental problems.

In addition to the dental care he gets at Pierre Toussaint, Roy also receives a confidence that allows him to beam a smile.

"I like to smile. I like to look good for people I'm around," he said flashing his teeth. "It also makes me feel good. It builds up my self-esteem."

The Pierre Toussaint office, which turned 20 in October, has been helping uninsured adults with fillings, cleanings, extractions, dentures and partial dentures. Located at 830 Spruce St., it helps fill a void for many indigent people in need of dental health care, which is hard to come by in Delaware.

Dental care is not mandated under the Affordable Care Act and Delaware is one of just a few states without Medicaid coverage for adult dental care, forcing patients to pay out of pocket for care considered to be the first line of defense against health risks, including premature births, heart disease and complications from diabetes.

Dental care, especially among those with little money, is usually one of the last things they seek, usually out of fear of pain and anxiety about costs.The average national cost of teeth cleaning without insurance is $82.08, according to the American Dental Association. A root canal or porcelain crown costs about $1,000.

"It is very expensive to maintain good health," Roy said.

Approximately 25 percent of children do not have some form of dental insurance, while about 50 percent of adults in Delaware are estimated to not have dental insurance, according to state officials.

Buy Photo Rob Roy, 49, of Wilmington arrives in the rain on his bike for his dentist appoint at the Pierre Toussaint Dental Office which has been providing basic dental services to residents across Delaware, including fillings, cleanings, extractions, dentures and partial dentures for uninsured poor patients ages 19 to 64. (Photo: SUCHAT PEDERSON/THE NEWS JOURNAL)

State medical experts say reform is clearly needed, but it comes with a hefty price tag of more than $6 million to implement in Delaware.

The Delaware Department of Health and Social Services included a budget request for Fiscal Year 2017 to expand Medicaid services for adults to include dental care, said Jill Fredel, director of communications for the department.

"We will not know until the governor releases his budget in January if the change is included," Fredel said. "When Secretary Rita Landgraf presented her budget in November to [the Office of Management and Budget], she asked that dental services for adults begin in January 2017, so the budget would include an additional $3 million for the first six months of expanded coverage."

She added that while many states identify adult dental care as a covered benefit in their Medicaid programs, in some states it is limited to emergency services only. "Among the states there is a wide scope of adult dental coverage," she said.

In the meantime, Pierre Toussaint and a handful of other clinics across Delaware are there to provide dental care to the poor and uninsured.

"Clinics such as Pierre Toussaint are able to provide dental services that can meet a family's limited budget, and provide affordable, quality oral health care," said Dr. Greg McClure, Delaware Division of Public Health Dental Director. "These services can range from emergencies to serious infections to restoring the mouth to health with regular care."

Untreated oral diseases can result in pain, infection, effects on general health, and a reduced quality of life, McClure said. "While tooth decay and gum disease are the most common diseases, there are other serious conditions such as ulcers, soft tissue disease, and oral cancer," he said. "And, having good oral health affects quality of life factors such as employment, speech, nutrition, and self-esteem."

Pierre Toussaint's patients vary from individuals with good health care, but who have for some reason lost access to their dental health care provider and need ongoing maintenance to people who have not had dental care for as many as 20 years. Some suffer from various addictions, which have fed into neglect of or deterioration of their teeth and gums.

"So when they come in, their needs are tremendous and we save the teeth that we can," said Dr. Gary Isaacs, who has been at Pierre Toussaint for 15 years. "For some individuals, all we can simply do is remove all the remaining diseased teeth or replace them with partials or full dentures."

Isaacs, who spent nine years in private practice in Milford and then 17 years as pastor of Christian Tabernacle church and administrator of the Christian Tabernacle Academy in Lincoln, has one word to describe his coming to Pierre Toussaint: Providential.

"The opportunities afforded here at Pierre Toussaint Dental Office seem to mesh well with my focus and my desire to serve people who are under-served," he said. "The need was here. It wasn't down in Sussex County. God provided a way that I could connect with the Ministry of Caring.

"And for 15 years, I think it's been a good marriage."

If there is any doubt as to the devotion Isaacs has for the dental office's mission, one only needs to take into consideration that for the last 15 years he has driven 72 miles to work. That's the distance – one way – he drives from his home in Lincoln to the Wilmington location.

Isaacs used to drive five days a week, but now only makes the trip three days a week, although the office is still open Monday through Friday.

While a majority of people who go to Pierre Toussaint are in dire need, there is an appreciation that the patients display to the clinic staff that one does not see in private practice.

"When people are paying for service, they have certain expectations and it can be a more formal business relationship," Isaacs said. "But when people are being served, there's an element of grace there.

Buy Photo Dr. Gary Isaacs (left) lets Rob Roy, 49, of Wilmington in as he arrives in the rain on his bike for his dentist appoint at the Pierre Toussaint Dental Office which has been providing basic dental services to residents across Delaware, including fillings, cleanings, extractions, dentures and partial dentures for uninsured poor patients ages 19 to 64. (Photo: SUCHAT PEDERSON/THE NEWS JOURNAL)

"It changes the dynamic of that one-on-one relationship."

Contact Esteban Parra at (302) 324-2299, eparra@delawareonline.com or Twitter @eparra3.

DENTAL OFFICES FOR LOW-INCOME ADULTS

New Castle County

Christiana Care Wilmington Hospital Health Center, 501 W. 14th St., Wilmington, (302) 428-4850

DelTech Dental Health Center, 333 Shipley St., Wilmington, (302) 571-5364

Division of Public Health, DeLaWarr State Service Center, 500 Rogers Road, New Castle, (302) 4540.

Henrietta Johnson Medical Center, 600 N. Lombard St., Wilmington, (302) 761-4610

Nemours SeniorCare, 1801 Rockland Road, Wilmington, (800) 292-9538

Pierre Toussaint Dental Office, 830 N. Spruce St., Wilmington, (302) 594-9476

Westside Family Healthcare, 1802 W. Fourth St., Wilmington, (302) 655-5822

Kent County

Delaware Hope Dental Clinic, 1121 Forest Ave., Dover, (302) 735-7551

Division of Public Health, Williams State Service Center, 805 River Road, Dover, (302) 857-5120

Nemours SeniorCare, Milford, 909 North DuPont Blvd., Milford, (800) 763-9326

Westside Family Healthcare, 1020 Forest Ave., Dover, (302) 655-5822

Sussex County

Division of Public Health, Shipley State Service Center, 350 Virginia Ave., Seaford, (302) 628-6780

Division of Public Health, Thurman Adams State Service Center, 546 Bedford St., Extension, Georgetown, (302) 515-3272 or (302) 515-3273

La Red Health Center, 21444 Carmean Way, Georgetown, (302) 855-1233

To learn more about other dental services programs that participate in Medicaid and provide low-cost or special dental services, such as care for homeless populations, visit: http://www.dhss.delaware.gov/dhss/dph/hsm/files/oralhealthresources.pdf

Source: Delaware Department of Health and Social Services

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1Y5VsTT