File this under ‘Things are not always what they seem.’

The old adage seems to apply to the newly launched Open Payments database launched this week by the federal government. The database contains payments made by drug and device makers to physicians and teaching hospitals, and was created as part of the Affordable Care Act in response to concerns that industry ties may unduly influence medical practice and research.

But consider this: the database lists two payments totaling nearly $2.9 million made in 2013 by GlaxoSmithKline to Stuart Winter, the vice chair for pediatric research at the University of New Mexico Health Sciences Centers. These appear on a list of research payments and refer to work on Arranon, a Glaxo medicine for lymphoma and leukemia.

As a result, Winter is listed among the 10-largest recipients of research payments as receiving more than any other individual researcher. In fact, the rest of the top 10 is otherwise populated by some of the best-known medical institutions in the country, including the Mayo Clinic, the Dana Farber Cancer Institute and the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center.

Keep in mind that the database, which is administered by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, has so far only released data for the last five months of 2013. When looked at this way, Winter received, on average, more than $570,000 each month from Glaxo for research.

So why did one individual researcher get all that money? And where did it go?

As it turns out, the listing is an error. How so? Glaxo goofed. A spokeswoman explains that Winter was the principal investigator for Arranon research, but the payment was sent to the National Cancer Institute, not Winter. “Attributing the payment to Dr. Winter was an error in the data we submitted to CMS in July, but we corrected and resubmitted the data to CMS in September.”

However, as she noted, CMS is not using any data submitted after July, “so unfortunately, this error has been posted,” she writes us. “We regret that the correction is not part of this posting.” The Glaxo spokeswoman added that the payments were used to cover the cost of the drug that was being studied.

We attempted to reach Winter, but a university spokesman says he is traveling out of the country. The spokesman sent us a statement on behalf of the university saying that “we’re glad GSK acknowledged the error in the data and corrected the mistake. It’s unfortunately that the inaccurate information was subsequently posted in the CMS database. We hope it can be updated soon with the correct data.”

[UPDATE: While on vacation, Winter was contacted by Glaxo to explain what happened. Winter copied us on his email to Glaxo, in which he wrote that he is “shocked by the enormity of this mistake… I am very, very upset about this..”]

A CMS spokesman tells us he will attempt to reply with an explanation. We will update you accordingly.

For the record, problems arose even before the debut. Most notably, the data, which only contains payments from the last five months of 2013, is incomplete. CMS removed about one-third of the payment records from a physician preview because some state medical license numbers reported by companies didn’t match a database the agency used for verification.