It is August and for lawmakers, that means it’s time to check in with the voters back in the home district. First-term New York North Country Congresswoman Elise Stefanik, a Republican and the youngest woman ever elected to Congress, started her district work session in Plattsburgh on Monday.

After seven months on the job, Stefanik said she still has to convince people that she is in fact a congresswoman for New York’s 21st District. When she approached a fellow member of the United States House of Representatives, he thought she was a young reporter. She said, “I said I’m Elise from New York 21. And he’s looking at me sort of quizzically and he finally figured out and said, ‘Oh my gosh, when you said New York 21 I thought that was a TV station.’ And I said to myself, ‘They’re letting the press on the floor?’ As though his life was ending. So that’s a great way to get to know your colleagues.”

In a speech to a hotel conference room full of business leaders, Stefanik said she has been “digging in” on behalf of the North Country. She said, “We’ve focused on over 700 constituent case files which we’ve closed. These are questions related to veterans’ benefits, related to immigration questions, regulatory challenges for small businesses.” She reminded the crowd she sits on the Armed Services Committee. “Which is very difficult for freshman to get assigned to. And our big focus the first few months was ensuring that Fort Drum was protected from the devastating cuts stemming from defense sequestration,” she said.

The U. S. Army has cut thousands of troops on bases around the country due to budget tightening, but the military base at Fort Drum, which is in Stefanik’s district, was largely spared. Stefanik said, “And the announcement last month that Fort Drum only lost 28 active service positions and did the best out of any military base in the country who was undergoing cuts shows that we as a community are tremendously effective at pulling together.”

Stefanik said her goal when she returns to Washington is to pass a long-term bill that would fund federal highway repairs and construction. Republican House leaders have held up that highway bill as a way to leverage their opposition to the federal Export Import Bank.

Stefanik said she is against that strategy. She said, “Many of us ran including myself at a time in late 2013 when the government shut down. So we ran against the gridlock and against the – both sides going to the far right and the far left. So we have growing numbers of people who are willing to come together and compromise. And that’s what a multi-year transportation bill is going to take.” The transportation bill almost expired, but Congress recently agreed to extend it for three months.

In her first term, Stefanik supported the Keystone oil pipeline and a trade deal with Asian countries. She also backed two bills that would chip away at President Obama’s Affordable Care Act.

Her district tour moves on to Keene and Lake Placid today.