ST. LOUIS — Saturday night at Busch Stadium, Matt Holliday hit a solo home run on the 15th pitch of the night delivered by Rockies starter Franklin Morales.

The Cardinals led 1-0. The game was over.

Not officially, but with Morales on the mound, and given the Rockies’ road travails this season, it was pretty close to being a sure thing.

The Rockies did put a scare into the Cardinals in the ninth inning with three runs and the tying run at second base, but the Cardinals went on to win 5-4. It was the Rockies’ fifth consecutive loss — all on the road. In those five games, the Rockies have scored a total of seven runs.

At 20-54, and with seven road games remaining, the Rockies will likely set a franchise record for most road losses in a season. That black mark is currently held by the 2003 team that went 25-56.

Another reason why Holliday’s first-inning homer worked as a crystal ball? The Rockies are now 8-40 on the road when the opposing team scores first.

Morales went on to serve up a two-run homer in the second to Matt Carpenter. Nothing unusual there. The 24 home runs Morales has allowed this season are the fourth-most by a National League pitcher.

“They take advantage when you miss,” Morales said. “This is the big leagues. I missed two pitches, and they got me. I threw a good curveball and good changeup and a good cutter, but I missed two pitches and I paid for that.”

The left-hander’s night was a short one. Manager Walt Weiss gave him the hook after four innings in which he allowed four runs on five hits, walked two and struck out two. Morales — clearly better suited for the bullpen and simply a fill-in starter this season — fell to 6-8 while his ERA rose to 5.32 ERA.

Weiss agreed that missing locations has hurt Morales all season.

“If you look at the replays of the home runs, you will see that they are in the middle of the plate,” Weiss said. “That’s what happens in this league — they get hit out of the ballpark. For the most part, the pitches are over the plate, and they are elevated.”

A bright spot for the Rockies was the play of Michael Cuddyer. The 35-year-old outfielder will be a free agent at the end of the season, and he’s missed 111 games because of three stints on the disabled list. But he wants to keep playing, and he’s proving he can still hit. He went 3-for-4 with a double, lifting his average to .322.

Though Weiss has said he wants Cuddyer to return to Colorado next season, the Rockies have not yet contacted Cuddyer about a new contract.

St. Louis right-hander Shelby Miller, who’s starting to pitch his best when the Cardinals need him most, allowed one run in six innings, striking out five and walking none.

Colorado scored its lone run off Miller in the fourth when Cuddyer led off with a single, moved to second on a wild pitch and scored on first baseman Ben Paulsen’s single to right.

The Rockies did manage to stage their improbable, but ultimately hollow rally in the ninth, making the Cardinals faithful a tad nervous.

Pinch-hitter Drew Stubbs walked and Matt McBride, another pinch-hitter, doubled with one out against reliever Sam Freeman. Pat Neshek entered the game for St. Louis and promptly gave up an RBI single to Wilin Rosario, a sacrifice fly to Josh Rutledge and a pitch-hit, run-scoring double by Michael McKenry’s RBI double. However, Neshek got pinch-hitter Rafael Ynoa on a fly ball to center to end the game and earn his sixth save.

“We put together some good at-bats there in the ninth, some good pinch-hit at-bats and some RBIs there in the ninth,” Weiss said. “Guys are battling, and we were pretty much emptying the bench there in the ninth to try and win that game.”

Coupled with Arizona’s 10-4 victory over the Padres on Saturday night, the Rockies (59-89) are now alone in the basement of the National League West, one game behind the Diamondbacks (60-88). With 14 games remaining, the Rockies are on pace to finish 64-98, tying them with the 2012 team for the worst record in franchise history.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp