Health Overhaul: Jonathan Gruber isn’t the only one who got rich off ObamaCare. Several big government contractors are raking in megabucks to help the government take over the nation’s health care system.

Gruber made news when it came to light that the Obama administration had paid the stupid-American-calling MIT economist roughly $400,000 to help build ObamaCare, and several states paid him big bucks as well to build their exchanges.

But this is just the tip of the ObamaCare bonanza.

In the last fiscal year, Health and Human Services spent $21 billion on contracts with private firms. That’s more than it spent on ObamaCare exchange subsidies ($17 billion), or new Medicaid enrollees ($20 billion), the Congressional Budget Office reports.

And this largesse is climbing. Fast.

A report from Kaiser Health News finds that spending on HHS contracts has shot up more than 50% since 2008. Compared with a decade ago, it’s up 148%.

Defense Department contracts, in contrast, are down since 2004 and by nearly 40% since 2008.

As a result, HHS is now the third-largest contracting agency in government, behind only Defense and the Energy Department.

The Kaiser report also shows that traditional defense contractors like General Dynamics, Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman and Booz Allen are increasingly turning to HHS for business, thanks to cutbacks in defense and the explosion in ObamaCare spending. Last year alone, six of the biggest cleared $2.3 billion.

General Dynamics got $814 million mainly to help with ObamaCare call centers. Defense giant Serco got more than $400 million, much of it for collecting paper applications after the online marketplaces failed.

What’s the rest of the money for? “Buying medical-record software, insurance websites, claims processing, data analysis, computer system overhauls, consumer education and consulting expertise,” Kaiser says.

In other words … overhead. Worse, this is overhead that didn’t exist before ObamaCare.

Remember that Democrats promised ObamaCare would wring out bureaucratic waste and inefficiency from health care, not add to it.

What it’s done instead is redistribute money from millions of businesses, workers and families across the country to a handful of well-heeled and well-connected government contractors orbiting Washington, D.C.