Stylish, check; fun to drive, check; glamorous, another check and with lots of choices the 2015 Audi Q5 keeps the love coming with an extra bonus, since each Q5 no matter the trim has upgrades like xenon headlights, LED taillights and daytime running lights and a power liftgate. See, now we’re talking and it just gets better from there.

The competition for the 2015 Audi Q5 crossover includes the regular suspects like the Porsche Macan, BMW X3 or the Volvo XC60.

With the compact moniker in a world of luxury crossover, the trims include a total of seven to choose from also with a variety of engines depending on the trim level too. From the 2.0T Premium, 2.0T Premium Plus, 3.0T Premium Plus, 3.0T Prestige, 3.0 TDI Premium Plus, 3.0 TDI Prestige to a 2.0T Hybrid Prestige, didn’t I say you have choices?

On the 2.0T Premium, you get a turbocharged four-cylinder engine, 18-inch wheels, automatic xenon headlights, LED running lights and taillights, automatic wipers, heated exterior mirrors, aluminum roof rails, power liftgate, eight-way power front seats, tilt-and-telescoping four-spoke steering wheel, leather upholstery and a sliding and reclining 40/20/40-split folding rear seat. For technology, it’s Bluetooth connectivity, Audi’s Multi Media Interface and that comes with a dash-mounted control as well as 10 speakers and iPod/USB capability.

Opting for the 2.0T Premium Plus, you get the additional aluminum exterior trim with not only a panoramic sunroof , but also an auto-dimming interior mirror and auto-dimming and power-folding exterior mirrors, keyless ignition and entry and heated front seats.

The next level and you have the 3.0T Premium Plus with the supercharged V6 engine and with that comes 19-inch wheels, “S line” exterior styling tweaks, headlight washers and a three-spoke steering wheel or the 3.0T Prestige with additional adaptive headlights, 14-speaker sound system and even heated and cooled cupholders with rear door sunshades too.

You can also add the Technology package here with safety extras like a rearview camera and a blind-spot monitoring and front and rear parking sensors, but as well there is a navigation system that even offers voice controls and the Audi connect online service capability.

For the 3.0 TDI Premium Plus, this is for diesel-engine lovers, but all the other bells and whistles match the 3.0T Premium Plus with the exception of the S line exterior trim and the headlight washers. However, there is a “S line plus” package. For the 3.0 TDI Prestige, the features figure roughly the same as on the 3.0T Prestige.

For the Hybrid, it’s the 2.0T Hybrid Prestige and this trim offers 19-inch wheels, hybrid insignia and hybrid-appropriate instruments as needed along with the goodies from the Prestige trims.

Take note too that the Prestige Technology package can be had on any of the trims except the 2.0T premium, and you can get a Navigation package for the 2.0T without the Audi connect and minus a few of the safety features. There is also a Sport Interior package that you can opt for on all the trim levels except the base with a three-spoke steering wheel and shift paddles, front sport seats and four settings for the throttle. The Luxury package is equipped with ventilated front seats, upgraded leather upholstery and a leather-wrapped dashboard. This package, however, is offered exclusively on the 3.0T/3.0 TDI trims and the 2.0T Hybrid Prestige.

On the Prestige trims, you can also choose to add the “Audi exclusive line” package, and that will give you the Sport Interior package with upgraded leather upholstery and on the 3.0T Prestige and 3.0 TDI Prestige only there are suspension dampers and Driver Assist package.

When talking engines on the Audi Q5, begin with the fact that all the 2015 trims have not only all-wheel drive, but also an automatic eight-speed transmission. For the 2.0T Premium and Premium Plus, you get the turbocharged 2.0-liter four-cylinder engine pounding out 220 horsepower and 258 pound-feet of torque. However, for more horsepower the 3.0T trims are supercharged with the 3.0-liter V6 engine offering 272 horsepower and 295 pound feet of torque. These trims also come with automatic stop-start and that means when you aren’t driving or are stopped at red lights the engine shuts off automatically until you need it again.

For the Audi Q5 3.0 TDI that is the 3.0-liter turbocharged diesel V6, and on this one you will get 240 horsepower with 428 pound-feet of torque. Again, you get the stop-start system and with the Q5 Hybrid you will find the 2.0T engine and the 54 hp electric motor and a battery pack giving you 245 horsepower with 350 pound feet of torque.

For safety, Audi offers a variety of options, but coming standard are the stability and traction control as well as front side and side curtain airbags. The rear side airbags are an option and the Technology package offers some additional safety features worth looking into as well.

A good part of the likeability of the Audi Q5 is its interior, which is comfortable and stylish. Indeed, it is a classy ride that benefits from the detail and thought put into the interior design. In the center console the controls are made easier for the driver since it is angled in an easy-to-use direction. Depending on whether you opt for the navigation addition, the knobs and buttons will be a bit different, but more conveniently placed with the addition of the navigation system.

There is also plenty of room in the front and the back seats, and the rear seats even recline. Overall, you get 29.1 cubic feet of space behind the rear seats and you can fold these seats down for more room, which will be 57.3 cubic-feet.

The version I had was equally impression, with its on/off engine when I was idling. It purrs and the ride is a smooth one even with plenty of power from the engine. As well, it is a smooth and quiet ride overall with sharp handling and a responsive sporty, yet firm feel all around.

Should You Need to Know: The 2015 Audi Q5 also comes in a SQ5 version offering an even higher performance rendition of the seven standard trims listed above.

Miles Per Gallon: The 2015 Audi Q5 TDI quattro Tiptronic I drove came at 24 mpg in the city and 31 mpg on the highway.

Cost: The 2015 Audi Q5 TDI quattro Tiptronic I drove had a price tag of $62,025 with the Exclusive Line Package included.

For more auto tips and information follow Rita @RitaCook13.