Christmas came early for people in the pews of LaSalle Street Church the first Sunday in September. That morning their pastor handed them $500 checks.

The Rev. Laura Truax, pastor of the evangelical church in Chicago's Near North neighborhood, told worshippers that the money came with no strings attached, only encouragement to do good works and an early December deadline to either spend, cash or deposit the checks.

The money, totaling $160,000, came from a windfall of more than $1.6 million — proceeds from the sale of Atrium Village, a racially integrated housing development that was the collaboration of four neighborhood churches: Fourth Presbyterian, St. Matthew United Methodist, Holy Family Lutheran and LaSalle.

While each church has managed the income differently, LaSalle began by setting aside the traditional tithe — 10 percent of its share — for about 320 of its worshippers.

Since handing out the checks, Truax has witnessed the sort of extraordinary generosity that Christmas is all about.

"The birth of Jesus was the most generous act of humankind," Truax said. "The fact that God generously offers his son to the world, being willing to let Christ's life unfold as it was meant to unfold, being willing to trust that Joseph is going to be a father to Jesus, that Mary is going to be a fit mother, that Jesus, the human Jesus, is going to choose God, seems to be the most gracious, open-handed gift of generosity we could ever conceive of."

How a 'reverse tithe' is inspiring good Pastor Laura Truax of LaSalle Street Church gave 10 percent back to her congregants in the form of $500 checks. Truax hoped the reverse tithe would inspire some good in the world. (Nancy Stone, Chicago Tribune) Pastor Laura Truax of LaSalle Street Church gave 10 percent back to her congregants in the form of $500 checks. Truax hoped the reverse tithe would inspire some good in the world. (Nancy Stone, Chicago Tribune) See more videos

When Truax doled out the money, she preached on the parable of the talents in the Gospel of Matthew — a biblical story often used to urge Christians to give their time and talent and take risks to serve God.

But since then, the checks have been dubbed the "Loaves and Fishes checks," named after another parable, in which Jesus fed a crowd of thousands with what started out as a small amount of bread and fish.

Truax hopes members' decisions will advance the legacy of LaSalle, a socially progressive church with a history of turning its members' altruistic ideas into full-scale ministries, such as a legal aid clinic for the poor and a soup kitchen.

Members have put their $500 gifts toward a skate park in Amman, Jordan, a scholarship fund for engineering students, an eyeglass ministry, a no-kill animal shelter, food pantries, homeless shelters and struggling family members. A few endorsed their checks right back to the church. Truax shared her check with her son, a college student in Minnesota, so he could buy winter coats for disadvantaged students he tutors there.

Truax hopes the variety of causes will help shape the congregation's discussion about where the rest of the $1.6 million should go. Many congregants have joined one of about 15 prayer schools in people's homes and via conference calls to discern the answer. Multicolored ink on a dry erase board in the church's basement spells out dozens of ideas.

Truax said her No. 1 concern is the tension that could emerge in the congregation as it begins to winnow down the possibilities for the remainder of the treasure. After all, the New Testament says money is the root of "all sorts of sin."

"It can change institutions and how you view the other person and understand motivations," she said. "That's why I felt this tithe was so important and giving it to people and letting them do whatever they wanted with it and letting them hear all these amazing ways other people are being led. It might open space in each one of us to recognize there are many wonderful ideas, not one of them is any better than the other idea."

"There will hopefully be a blessed blend of advocacy and open-handedness with each other," she said. "We'll be able to be generous both in our spirit and the way we talk about these things with each other."

Here's a look at how some of the parishioners spent — and didn't spend — their $500.

'Keeping people comfortable'

Faith Bonecutter has been a member of LaSalle Street Church since 1975 and remembers the spirit of the Atrium Village project — to bring together people from the Gold Coast, Cabrini-Green and Near North neighborhoods along with nearby students.

Atrium also housed the church's offices and ministries, including a counseling center and the Sunday school her daughter attended. She wanted to invest her money in an organization similarly devoted to housing.

"The purpose of our involvement from those days, as I understood it, was really about social and racial and economic justice — to bring those divergent communities together," she said.

But Bonecutter, 61, a social work educator at the University of Illinois at Chicago, became overwhelmed every time she considered the level of need facing any organization or individual, always coming to the conclusion that $500 just wouldn't make a difference.

"I was really struggling and praying about it and not coming up with too much," she said.

On the third anniversary of her father's death in November, Bonecutter heard Truax preach a sermon encouraging members to choose a cause that's personally important. Bonecutter thought about how important it was to her father, who was 96 when he died, to live independently until the end. She remembered that a good friend who had been a pastor at LaSalle when it helped develop Atrium Village now led an agency called HOME — Housing Opportunities and Maintenance for the Elderly. The solution had been right under her nose.

"All of those things came together for me," she said. "It was honoring, in a sense, the original intention of Atrium Village: housing and keeping people comfortable in their communities and with each other."

Bruce Otto, executive director of HOME and a former pastor of LaSalle for 23 years, said Bonecutter's contribution arrived on Giving Tuesday, when another foundation agreed to match donations — doubling Bonecutter's gift. That gift will finance upkeep programs, affordable housing and handicapped-accessible grocery shopping for senior citizens.

'He speaks life'

When Chris Ford suffered a heart attack last year, he began to rethink his priorities. A former high school and college football player, Ford, 53, stepped back from his real estate career in July and volunteered as the linebackers coach at North Lawndale College Prep, a charter school on Chicago's West Side.