A girls scouting program that emphasizes traditional moral values has found a home in two Topeka churches.

American Heritage Girls, founded by a group of parents in 1995 in West Chester, Ohio, as an alternative to other girls organizations, is up and running at both Central Church of Christ, 1250 S.W. College, and Most Pure Heart of Mary Catholic Church, 3601 S.W. 17th.

The group, which is open to girls from 5 to 18 years of age, has a strong Christian emphasis that isn’t found in other organizations.

“All of the programs in American Heritage Girls are Christ-centered,” said Stephen Davidson, a pack leader for the Most Pure Heart of Mary group and father of two daughters who are active in the organization. “Everything we do represents Jesus Christ.”

Davidson said the group started as an evangelical program but its values can be embraced by Christians of various denominations, including Catholics.

He said the troop at Most Pure Heart of Mary Catholic Church is open to all girls, regardless of their denominational background. In that way, it is similar to Cub Scout and Boy Scout troops that may meet at a particular church but be open to young people outside of that particular congregation.

The national American Heritage Girls organization had a four-year alliance with Boy Scouts of America, but cut ties in May 2013 after the Boy Scouts adopted a new policy permitting openly gay members. American Heritage Girls now has a partnership with Trail Life USA, a new boys scouting group formed in July 2013 that is based on Christian principles.

The national American Heritage Girls organization boasts about 20,000 members, a number that Davidson expects to go up in coming years.

The Most Pure Heart Group has seven girls in it at present, but all of them just finished first grade this past academic year. Six of the girls go to Most Pure Heart of Mary School, while the other girl goes to Kennedy Learning Academy.

Davidson said he was hopeful the small group of first-graders from Most Pure Heart group would stick with the program and form the nucleus of the group in future years.

Like other scouting programs, American Heritage Girls uses a manual for its programs and projects.

The organization is divided into age-related groups. The names of the groups are: Pathfinder for kindergartners, Tenderheart for girls in first through third grades; Explorers for fourth-through-sixth grade students; Pioneers from seventh to ninth graders; and Patriots for high schoolers.

Davidson said girls complete projects and earn badges, which they can sew onto their American Heritage Girls sash or red vest.

Badges can be earned for a variety of accomplishments, including areas such as swimming, sewing, cooking, Bible, science, technology, government, citizenship and proper handling of the flag.

Beyond learning life skills and teachings from the Bible, American Heritage Girls also offers recreational opportunities to the girls, including cookouts, campouts and lock-ins.

“We had a lock-in at St. Vincent’s, which used to be an orphanage here at Most Pure Heart of Mary,” said Vikki Lindemuth, another adult leader for the group based at Most Pure Heart of Mary Church in Topeka. “Our goal is to have a lock-in at every Catholic church in Topeka.”

Activities, community service projects and lock-ins are ways of exposing the group to people in other churches, Lindemuth said, and possibly attracting new girls to the organization.

Lindemuth said the girls are “making friendships here that will last a lifetime.” Their favorite activities so far, she said, are the lock-ins, where the girls stay up past their bedtimes before they “finally” go to sleep.

Cecelia Davidson, 13, who will be in eighth grade this coming fall at Most Pure Heart of Mary School, has been involved with American Heritage Girls for the past four years at Central Church of Christ.

Besides learning new skills, she said the best part of American Heritage Girls was meeting new friends “from all over town and all different religions.”

For more information about American Heritage Girls, which will be meeting throughout the summer, visit www.ahgonline.org or call (785) 554-5556.