Despite being signed to RCA for quite a while, Dee-1 has remained loyal to his very specific fanbase. He hasn’t sold-out. Earlier this year, David Augustine even found himself interviewing acclaimed neurosurgeon and aspiring United States presidential hopeful Ben Carson about everything from Stacy Dash’s controversial remarks about BET to blacks earning generational wealth. If anyone would be up to that task, it would be the Louisiana State University graduate and former middle school teacher.

Utilizing his signature ability to spit rhymes that split between biting socio-economic commentary and earnest comedy without crassness or profanity, HipHopDX premiered the video for “Sallie Mae Back” this week. While most rappers celebrate buying extravagant houses, foreign sports cars and expensive clothes after earning the much sought after major label deal, the rapper just wanted to celebrate paying off his student loans. It is no wonder as to why he’s become a respected figure in the culture.

Taking time to speak with HipHopDX, Dee-1 discusses the need for affordable higher education, healthcare and the progress of his major label debut.

Dee-1 On The Responsibility Hip Hop Has In The Upcoming Presidential Elections

“I definitely was paying attention because I did interview Dr.[Ben] Carson. I’m more engaged than ever this year because by me being in Iowa, I saw what that environment was like and people were going hard for the vote of Iowans. Politicians really wanted to start off by doing well. The way I feel this year is that it feels unpredictable because the whole time for the Republicans, we were hearing that Donald Trump is so far in the lead and he lost to Ted Cruz. Meanwhile, everybody thought Hillary Clinton was going to win and she ended up in a dead tie with Bernie Sanders. I do think that we as the Hip Hop community, we’re tastemakers. We’re not even just artists. Pop culture is always looking to Hip Hop to see what’s cool, relevant or important. When it comes to who we’re feeling as far as political candidates, we have a lot of power that we need to put into use by getting out to vote and engaging in the process.”

How Affordable Higher Education Influenced “Sallie Mae Back”

“For me right now, I would say that moving forward, it’s about a couple of things. Because I’m so tied to anything education related being a college graduate and teacher, definitely I’m interested in what someone can do to make college more affordable for people. Student loan debt is crazy and out of control. I just read a figure that students are in debt $1.2 trillion in the United States. For me, making higher education more affordable for people and try to help people when it comes to getting rid of some of this debt that they’ve encountered. That’s important to me moving forward. Matter of fact, it’s funny because of the video I released called “Sallie Mae Back.” It’s super fire. I did it because it’s not a gimmick. It’s something that’s a real part of my life. When I signed my record deal, I took a chunk of my money and finished paying Sallie Mae because I had been making the minimum payments every month and that wasn’t getting me anywhere. I kept the same car. I still drive a 1998 Honda Accord bruh and that’s my baby because I’ve been through so much with that car. It just felt great to live life debt free.”

Being Grateful Obama Repealed No Child Left Behind

“I felt like it was something that was helpful because honestly, people in the education system know it’s very tough when you’re trying to teach for the test. When you’re trying to have these standardized test hold so much weight that messes the whole classroom experience up for the students and teachers. I think that’s something that was needed honestly. That’s not true learning when you’re just trying to teach someone just to pass a certain test.”

Being A Rapper On Obamacare

“The other issue that I’m concerned about is health care. The difference between me being an artist and school teacher is that health care didn’t cross my mind when I was in education because you get that stuff as part of your salary. Being an artist, I basically work for myself. With that being said, the different health care packages and I know there’s Obamacare. There are Republicans trying to do away with Obamacare. I’m real interested in that. Literally, we don’t have an employer who gives us a salary. I have to ask my lawyer or something, but to my knowledge, it’s not something that labels really help with. So, you literally have artists out here thuggin it and praying that they don’t get sick.”

“Currently, I have Obamacare which I had to do on my own and sign up for that. I’m interested in seeing how the issue of health care comes up in the election because a couple of years ago, I didn’t have health insurance. Maybe I wasn’t educated enough to know what all the options were. I was thinking if I was sick, what doctors would I be cool with to just text real quick. I’ve had issues with my health growing up honestly which is a whole other conversation. I’ve definitely been hospitalized and had surgery with issues in my chest, stomach and esophagus. I had all kinds of issues.”

“I know that those bills are real. I’ve been in something simple like a car accident. I remember being in a car accident in Alabama and the hospital visit was a few thousand and I was there overnight. The ambulance ride from the scene of the accident to the hospital was like six or seven hundred dollars. I’m like bruh, the hospital was like five blocks away. I cut my finger and sprained my shoulder. I would have walked to the hospital if I knew it was going to be that much or at least caught an Uber.”

Will The “Separated At Birth” Mixtape Featuring Lil Wayne Instrumentals Ever Drop?

“Yeah, it’s going to see the light of day. It’s just something where I had to make a chess move and decide. I have the music still so it’s totally up to me. Nobody can stop me from putting out something I want to, but I want to make a chess move. It was a better long term move for me for me to not put it out. If the situation is right for it, then I’ll put it out. The answer is, I don’t know if it’ll ever come out being honest.”

Status Of Major Label Debut

“It’s just time for it. I never wanted to force an album out just because of a record label timeline or being next on the list to put an album out. I feel like it’s time. So many of my fans have been asking me when the album was coming. What’s up with the album? What’s poppin' with the album homie? That’s what really made me feel that I have a narrative that I want to tell. That’s the thing. I just don’t want to keep making random songs and throwing them out. I have a story I want to tell in one body of work. Therefore, it’s that season right now. I’m in that mode right now. I realized that I am a symbol of hope for people in the hood. That’s what I’ve come to realize because I really come from that environment, but I really took a different path then a lot of people who come from where I come from. I really made some distinct choices in my life that took me down a different route. That’s all I am. I’m a symbol of hope for other people who have gone through that and are still going through that. That’s who I want to make music for. I’m finally embracing the fact that I need to be someone who always sets the bar higher for people who come from the hood. The bar is set so low in the hood.”

“The major label situation brings more pressure. With David And Goliath, I was in Baton Rouge, in college just finishing exams and just trying to find your way in the world. There are no expectations as far as sales. If this sells 300 copies, that’s OK because no one else is depending on this or anything. There are more expectations on a major label album because it’s more business now. Back then, it was literally a hobby for me. It wasn’t my career. I think that’s the main thing. What the label is going to push the album? I don’t know. This is my first go-around and I’ve heard horror stories from artists in my position. I have other artists friends who said the label did help out and allowed the music to reach a wider audience. I just have to record the best music that I can and turn it in.”