Timothy Jost

December 12, 2014

The “Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015” or “Cromnibus” legislation moving through Congress contains a number of provisions that relate to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

Risk Corridors

The provision that has been most widely noted so far requires the risk corridor program to be budget neutral for 2014. The risk corridor program moves funds from qualified health plans (QHPs) that have lower than anticipated allowable costs to those with higher than anticipated allowable costs. Section 1342 of the ACA, which creates the risk corridor program, contains no explicit appropriation.

A report issued earlier this year by the Government Accountability Office (GAO), the most respected voice on the legitimacy of government expenditures, determined that the continuing resolution for 2014 permitted the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to fund the risk corridor program for 2014 both from payments collected from plans with lower than anticipated costs, which were properly characterized as user fees, and from funds transferred from other CMS accounts. No risk corridor payments were in fact payable in 2014, however, as risk corridor payments will first be made in 2015 for 2014.

Section 227 of Cromnibus provides that CMS may not transfer other funds from other accounts to pay for the risk corridor program. The CMS program appropriation section, however, does appropriate user fees, which can therefore be used to fund the risk corridor program. Expenditures on the program, however, cannot exceed the funds collected. In guidance issued earlier this year, CMS stated that if funds collected for the risk corridor program in a given year did not equal payments claimed by insurers for that year, it would pay out claims pro rata and carry over deficiencies to be paid in the following year before any other claims are paid in that year. In the preface to most recent benefit and payment parameters rule, CMS stated again that it expects the program to be budget neutral over its three-year life. If it is not budget neutral, CMS stated that it would seek additional appropriations for 2016.

Insurers have counted on risk corridor payments in setting their QHP rates for 2014 and 2015. Some insurers are also including estimated risk corridor payments in reporting their capitalization to insurance regulators or their income to shareholders. CMS has consistently said risk corridor payments would be budget neutral, and insurers may have believed this. If budget neutral risk corridor payments fall well short of insurer claims, however, QHP premiums may be higher for 2016, the first year in which insurers can make adjustments, and some insurers may leave the marketplaces or face capitalization issues.

Expatriate Health Plans

A second provision of Cromnibus provides for special treatment for expatriate health plans. This provision is quite complicated and will not be explained in detail here. It basically provides that if expatriate plans meet certain basic requirements they will qualify as “minimum essential coverage” for purposes of the individual mandate.

Employers and insurers that offer expatriate plans will not be subject to most of the requirements of the Affordable Care Act, however, including the section 9010 health insurer fee for expatriate coverage. Expatriates are defined as individuals who are working temporarily in the United States but require coverage in multiple countries as well as the United States and work outside the United States for at least 180 days in a 12 month period; or persons, such as student or missionaries, who relocate or travel internationally as members of groups that serve charitable or educational purpose. This is legislation that has been debated for some time, and the final version seems to be much more focused than earlier versions.

Medical Loss Ratio Requirement

A third provision of Cromnibus redefines the medical loss ratio requirement applied to Blue Cross/Blue Shield (BCBS) plans by section 833 of the Internal Revenue Code. This provision has long granted certain tax benefits to BCBS plans. It was amended in the ACA to provide that these benefits would only be available to BCBS plans whose medical loss ratios were not less than 85 percent. The section defined medical loss ratio differently, however, than section 2718 of the ACA, which provides for consumer rebates where insurers fail to achieve minimum medical loss ratios, as the 833 definition only included medical claims in the numerator and not quality improvement expenses.

The amendment harmonizes the 833 requirement with the 2718 requirement by allowing BCBS plans to count quality improvement expenses in calculating their medical loss ratios for determining compliance with section 833. The IRS had allowed BCBS plans to count quality improvement expenses under earlier guidance implementing the 833 amendments, but a final rule issued earlier this year had concluded that the statute did not allow this. The amendment effectively reverses this rule and aligns the 833 method of calculating the medical loss ratio with the 2718 method.

ACA Funding

In a substantive swipe at the ACA, Cromnibus rescinds $10 million in appropriations for the Independent Payment Advisory Board (IPAB). The original ACA appropriated $15 million a year for the IPAB, adjusted for inflation. As the IPAB has never been operationalized, and Medicare spending projections indicate that it will not need to make a recommendation in the near future, this action seems largely symbolic.

In what is likely preparation for further attention to ACA funding for 2016, Cromnibus requires CMS to detail in its 2016 budget all funds that have been spent since the enactment of the ACA and what spending is anticipated for 2016 on a list of activities specified in the Cromnibus explanatory statement, as well as milestones completed for data hub functionality and readiness. The activities listed in the explanatory statement include:

Federal Payroll and Other Administrative Costs; Marketplace related Information Technology (IT); Non IT Program Costs, including: Health Plan Benefit and Rate Review, Marketplace Oversight, Payment and Financial Management, Eligibility and Enrollment; Consumer Information and Outreach, including the Call Center, Navigator Grants and Consumer Education and Outreach; Marketplace Quality Review; Small Business Health Options Program and Employer Activities; and Other Marketplace Activities.

Cromnibus prohibits CMS from using Medicare program funds for funding non-Medicare ACA activities, but does not prohibit the use of CMS program appropriations, except for the risk corridor program. The legislation also reportedly cuts $350 million from funding for the IRS, which will have major ACA implementation responsibilities during the remainder of FY 2015.

The House explanatory statement accompanying Cromnibus states that the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is directed “to provide additional clarification to qualified health plans, based upon relevant and related GAO findings, to ensure greater consistency and full transparency of coverage options included in health insurance plans prior to plan purchase in the marketplace enrollment process.” It asks HHS to provide clarifying guidance within 30 days of enactment. This seems to be directed at GAO findings that some health plans are not providing information as to abortion coverage. The transparency requirement mentioned in the explanatory statement does not appear, however, in Cromnibus itself.

Finally, Cromnibus places further restrictions on the use of the prevention and public health services fund created under section 4002 of the ACA.

Insurance Agent and Brokers

On other fronts, CMS continues to issue Affordable Care Act guidance at its REGTAP.info web site on an almost daily basis. Most of this guidance concerns the premium stabilization programs or SHOP exchange details, but occasionally a frequently asked question is posted of more general interest.

FAQ 8134, released on December 10, 2014, addresses the question of when insurers can credit or compensate agents and brokers for active or passive re-enrollments of 2014 enrollees in 2015 marketplace plans. The guidance states that insurers are responsible for ensuring that agents and brokers whom they compensate for enrollment assistance comply with legal requirements, including the requirement that they be registered with the marketplace. Insurers can either request verification of registration from the agent or check the agent and broker registration completion list at the CMS agent and broker resource page.

Agents and brokers must be registered to assist in active re-enrollments. Because passive re-enrollment does not require active assistance for an enrollee, an agent or broker does not need to be registered to be listed on a passive re-enrollment transaction. The FAQ is not entirely clear, however, as to whether non-registered agents or brokers can be compensated for passive re-enrollment transactions.

2015 Enrollment Figures

Also on December 11, CMS released enrollment statistics from the third week of the 2015 open enrollment period, covering the period from November 29 to December 5. Enrollments picked up considerably following the Thanksgiving holiday, with 618,548 individuals making plan selections during the third week, bringing the total for 2015 to 1,383,683. Again, about half of these (48 percent) were new consumers and half (52 percent) were consumers renewing coverage. Over 3 million consumers used healthcare.gov and almost one million called the call center.

These enrollment figures are only for the federally facilitated marketplace (FFM). Many more individuals have enrolled through the state marketplaces. Over two months remain in the 2015 open enrollment period, and experience tells us that the bulk of new enrollees will come late in the period.

The report tells us, however, that many current enrollees have not yet returned to the FFM to update their eligibility information and to shop for the 2015 plan that best meets their needs. They can still do so at any time before February 15, of course, but if they wait they will not be enrolled in the new plan for January 1. If they do not return to update and reenroll, they will be passively reenrolled in their current plan or a similar plan and will in most instances receive a tax credit that will be the same as that they received in 2014. But for reasons discussed before, this could leave enrollees paying higher premiums than necessary.

As of the date when the third week enrollment report closed, ten days remained prior to the December 15 cut-off date for January 1 plan enrollment (four days remain today). It is to be hoped that many more return to the marketplace to actively enroll before the December 15 cut-off date.