BOSTON — Gov. Deval Patrick on Thursday announced that he was hiring new management to oversee the contract for developing the state's Health Connector website and bringing in a new technology vendor to help fix the ongoing problems.

"The point is to catch up on the backlog and deliver a system that will give our residents convenience and confidence when it comes to health care coverage," Patrick said.

The announcement came the day the state released a report by MITRE, an independent company hired to review the Connector website. The report detailed numerous flaws in management and in production of the website on the part of technology contractor CGI but also on the part of the state, which was responsible for overseeing the project. [The full report is included at the end of this article]

As a result of the technology glitches, thousands of people have been unable to enroll in new health plans, as is required by the Affordable Care Act. The state has placed people on temporary insurance while they work to process applications.

"To the people whose transition has not been smooth, I join my colleagues from the Connector and MassHealth in apologizing to you for the inconvenience, and I want to thank you for your patience," Patrick said. "I also want to assure you that we are not going to let anyone slip through the cracks."

Patrick hired Sarah Iselin to oversee the project of repairing the website. Iselin, who is on leave from her job as chief strategy officer at Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts, was previously director of the state's Division of Health Care Finance and Policy under Patrick.

Iselin said she is "confident we'll get back on track and back where we need to be."

Secretary of Administration and Finance Glen Shor said Iselin will not be involved in daily activities of the Connector, will not have access to plan-specific data unless it is de-identified and will not have access to information or make any decisions that could provide a competitive advantage to Blue Cross Blue Shield.

The health care technology firm Optum will coordinate efforts to eliminate the backlog of people waiting for new coverage. Optum plans to bring in 300 workers in the next couple of days. Patrick said he authorized Optum "to bring in as much operational support as necessary" to ensure that people who applied for coverage can get it, whether through a call center, paper application or the website.

"The most important thing, and the guidance we got from the governor, is focus like a laser beam on making sure that we do everything possible to make sure that the residents of the commonwealth who are seeking coverage or transitioning from coverage, allow that to happen in as seamless a way as possible," said Andy Slavitt, group executive vice president at Optum.

The board of the Health Connector voted Thursday to approve the contract with Optum, which also helped fix problems with the federal health care exchange. The contract runs this week through April 30. The charges for the first 30 days are capped at $9.8 million. The company will provide temporary workers to put data into the health information system to address the backlog and will advise state officials on information technology, workarounds and other technical parts of the project.

Linda Odorisio, CGI's vice president of global communications, said in a statement, "CGI looks forward to continuing our work with Optum to accelerate improvement of the Massachusetts Health Connector. We remain determined to help Massachusetts residents get insured by enrolling in health plans via the Connector, and we fully intend to meet our contractual obligations."

Patrick also removed UMass Medical School from its role overseeing the CGI contract, and gave those responsibilities to state government. "Managing a sub-par performing vendor…is best done by some individual with a lot of authority and a short leash and not by a committee," Patrick said.

Mark Shelton, a spokesman for the University of Massachusetts Medical School, said the CGI contract represented 40 percent of the work the medical was doing for the Connector, and the medical school will continue to manage contracts for other parts of the project. "The medical school is completely supportive of the governor's decision and of the action he's taking," Shelton said.

The national health care reform provided new subsidies for people to buy health insurance and required that anyone already on the state's Commonwealth Care insurance plans re-enroll. The new state website went live Oct. 1. By then, the state had already reduced the scope of the project and, Patrick said, relied on representations from CGI that more work would be done in October and November.

Patrick called CGI's performance "consistently substandard" and said it was understaffed, missed deadlines and "failed to deliver the system we hired them to deliver." Patrick said he met personally with CGI's CEO to express his disappointment. Patrick did not rule out ending the contract with CGI, but said that would be complicated due to the complexity of the website and CGI's ownership of the computer code. "We still need CGI for the time being to help us fix what's largely a fixable system," Patrick said.

The MITRE report provides the first comprehensive look at what went wrong. On the state side, the report said UMass, the Health Connector and MassHealth all had different priorities for the system. "There does not appear to be a consistent, unified vision for the system nor clear lines of accountability for implementing the vision," the report stated.

It identified significant problems with CGI's project management and its implementation. The report found CGI did not have the ability to accommodate the needs for data manipulation; did not require that bugs in code were identified and fixed; did not adhere to schedules or procedures developed early in the project; and took on more work than it could handle. The report said it is "highly unlikely" that all the technical aspects of the site design were tested. There were flaws with software design, data being incorrectly used and other technical problems.

Currently, the automated determination process, through which the Connector determines what subsidy someone is eligible for and what insurance plans they can enroll in, does not work. There have been problems with account creation, slow performance, timeouts and error messages. The state discovered in November that some data that applicants put in got recorded incorrectly.

State officials have used call centers, paper applications and other workarounds to enroll people. As of early January, only 4,100 people had been processed for eligibility and enrolled in new plans while 26,000 were placed in temporary plans, paid for by MassHealth. The state extended the insurance plans of 124,000 people who were enrolled in Commonwealth Care and two smaller plans until March 31.

Now, with uncertainty around whether those people will be able to re-enroll by March, a delegation from Massachusetts will travel to Washington, D.C., on Friday to meet with officials at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, including administrator Marilyn Tavenner. State officials will ask for a waiver allowing them to extend the plans of individuals currently in Commonwealth Care past March 31, if the state cannot enroll people in new plans by then. Ashley Hague, deputy executive director of strategy for the Health Connector, said discussions with the federal government have been ongoing since late 2013.

"We're not going to let people's coverage lapse," Patrick said.

So far, the state has paid just $15 million of its $68 million contract with CGI. Patrick said he anticipates that the state will still complete the project within the $68 million budget. "We are not going to pay them for what we don't get," Patrick said.

Shor said any additional costs for keeping people on temporary health insurance will be paid for through the MassHealth budget. The state does not have an estimate for those costs, but Shor said the state anticipated more people would enroll in MassHealth under the Affordable Care Act and already budgeted for those costs.

MITRE FFRDC Technical Assistance Report