Looking for a sign from the past?

Turn a corner in an otherwise nondescript warehouse in Winter Park and you'll find yourself in a glowing, neon fantasyland — as if your fondest memories of nighttime car rides across Central Florida all reassembled themselves in one location.

Of course, whether your fondest memories include the Circus Circus Gentlemen's Club is up to you.

For now, though, The Charles Hosmer Morse Museum of American Art's vast collection of classic signs remains hidden away, stored behind the scenes until the potentially far-off day when they can be exhibited.

Hugh McKean, the museum's original director, started the collection in the 1970s, mostly with smaller signs from Winter Park.

"At some point, he realized that some of these [larger] signs were going to be destroyed," said current director Laurence Ruggiero. "So he began collecting them to save them. … He felt, which is quite true, that they are vernacular architectural ornament, as well as information-bearing vehicles."

A variety of vintage neon signs are displayed as Dr. Larry Ruggiero, director of the Charles Hosmer Morse Museum of American Art, lead's a tour in the museum's private warehouse, Thursday, January 15, 2015. (Joe Burbank/Orlando Sentinel) (Joe Burbank)

Well, that and neon is cool.

"Look, see!" said Ruggiero as the Parisian Cleaners sign began to glow. "In a way, they're like Tiffany glass. You have to put light on it!"

Many of the signs were designed by the same man, Bob Galler of Graphics Systems Inc. of Orlando. Galler really didn't get his due until after his death last year, when one of his most beloved creations, the Merita Bread sign overlooking Interstate 4 in Orlando, was taken down from its perch in November.

"There's so much emotion and sentiment tied to it," said Catherine Hinman, director of public affairs. "It wasn't just about the sign. You can never separate the aroma [of bread] from the sign. And for most people, it meant 'home.'"

The Merita sign arrived, as many of the signs do, in pieces, a little rusty and worn for wear and heavier and far more electronically complicated than most people would imagine.

"It takes 14 circuits just to do one side, 28 circuits altogether to run both sides," said building manager Tom Mobley of the difficulties of rehabilitating the 18-foot-high, 30-foot-long sign.

"That, and it's 17,000 pounds."

Eventually, the gigantic sign will work as well as another of the Morse's largest signs, the sky-blue neon logo of the once enormously popular Ronnie's Restaurant — itself requiring 100 amps to be lit up, compared with 150 amps for an entire house.

Separated into sections, each with wheels, the sign can be lowered and taken apart for easy transport in case the signs are ever exhibited.

"We want to be ready for the day we can do that," Ruggiero said.

Until that happens, staffers and visitors can reminisce about the mostly vanished businesses once fronted by the signs.

"It was a real New York deli, the genuine article," Ruggiero said of Ronnie's, the famous Colonial Plaza restaurant that closed in the mid-1990s. "It wasn't any of this modern, marketed stuff. Just a good old-fashioned deli …. A real '40s-'50s kind of place."

Many described the service as sort of endearingly rude, but local historian Joy Dickinson was more diplomatic about its the strict rules and grudging service:

"It had a lot of character."

McNamara Pontiac's red, white and yellow sign, complete with an Indian head silhouette, was made of porcelain, while The Fairbanks Inn sign was a remnant of when the Winter Park club hosted Battle of the Bands in its parking lot.

Some signs had to be restored to their former glory. When the museum acquired Club Juana's diamond-speckled neon sign, "it didn't look like much," Ruggiero said. "But the Morse Museum had the insight to know that when they took off the lavender from the '50s and '60s, we got to the true Las Vegas [style] original design."

Club Juana in Casselberry was famous for its "nude Shakespeare," Ruggiero said — "MacBuff?" as Hinman recalled one production — but was considered a legitimate theater in its time.

Though maybe not the nearby Circus Circus, "A Gentlemen's Club," as its big-top, neon-flag-bedecked sign proclaimed.

A number of signs were stacked against the wall: the Runestone, a Winter Park toy store; a Best Western crown; and the uber-'60s zigzag sign for Orlando's all-you-could-eat lobster hot spot, Gary's Duck Inn.

"And we've got the duck," Ruggiero said.

If you followed the massive block letters of Leedy's Around the Corner, a Winter Park store that sold everything from fabrics to lingerie, you would find smaller, but no less significant, signs.

There's Enzor's, the throwback drugstore in downtown Orlando where politicians, judges, lawyers and reporters gathered for eggs and coffee. The coffee stopped brewing at Enzor's, which opened in 1925, to make room for the 25-story Orange County Courthouse.

And there's the latest arrival, the sign for Winter Park's recently closed Red Fox Lounge.

The most stunning of all is the first large sign ever acquired. Dating from the 1920s, Orlando's Orange Court Motor Lodge displayed its white neon sign inside a giant, green emblem with dancing, sparkling lights.

It looked as though you could open it up and champagne would pour out.

"The active light quality is just so overwhelming," Ruggiero said, entranced. "It's wonderful, just terrific. It's just happy, isn't it?"

When could the collection be displayed?

There's no time frame, but Ruggiero said, half-seriously, that "what we'd love to do is put them on the exterior of the building."

Hinman said they were recently sent a Photoshop rendering of the Merita sign plastered across the museum's Park Avenue entrance.

But Winter Park's code enforcement need not worry.

"We got a big kick out of that," Hinman joked. "But that's never going to happen."

slemongello@tribune.com or 407-418-5920