Odd Couple Trade Victory Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images What Happened:



The trade saga came to a quiet end this week as the House and Senate approved bills providing President Barack Obama fast-track trade authority. They also completed work on three related bills, providing assistance to workers who lose jobs thanks to international trade and extending Africa preferences program and enhancing customs enforcement, which pro-trade Democrats and the president had insisted come as part of a package deal with fast-track.



Why it Matters:



Obama has insisted that he needs fast-track authority in order for his trade representative to complete negotiations on a Pacific Rim trade deal that will cover 40 percent of the world’s gross domestic product. All but about three dozen House and Senate Democrats staunchly opposed his efforts – and lost.



But the issue hasn’t been completely put to rest. On Thursday, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., vowed to continue the fight when Congress considers the final Trans-Pacific Partnership.



“The Senate’s final passage of the trade promotion authority ends one phase, but it is not final. The fight will continue,” she told reporters Thursday. “This phase is over, but the fight is not. We will continue for America’s families. We will be shining a bright light, clear focus on what is going on in the trade promotion, the TPP.”

Supremes Deliver Major Victories to Liberals

Supremes Deliver Major Victories to Liberals Alex Wong/Getty Images What Happened:



The Supreme Court dropped two major decisions Thursday and Friday as it nears the end of its term. In a 6-3 decision Thursday, the court ruled in favor of Obama’s signature health care law, finding that the law’s intent was to offer subsidies to help people in all states pay for their insurance – not just in states that set up their own insurance exchanges.



“Congress passed the Affordable Care Act to improve health insurance markets, not to destroy them,” Chief Justice John Roberts wrote in the majority decision. “If at all possible, we must interpret the Act in a way that is consistent with the former, and avoids the latter.”







“It would misunderstand these [gay] men and women to say they disrespect the idea of marriage,” Kennedy writes. “Their plea is that they do respect it, respect it so deeply that they seek to find its fulfillment for themselves. Their hope is not to be condemned to live in loneliness, excluded from one of civilization’s oldest institutions.”



“They ask for equal dignity in the eyes of the law. The Constitution grants them that right.”



Why it Matters:



Republicans in Congress, who have voted as many as 60 times to dismantle the Affordable Care Act, were openly disappointed in Thursday’s ruling. While they privately acknowledged the particular battle over subsidies was not one they wished to fight, GOP lawmakers in Washington and around the country



While leadership would not say Thursday whether they would move forward with plans to repeal the law, piecemeal, through the appropriations process, without a veto-proof majority, the best chance they have to undo the law is by electing a Republican president in 2016.



Many Republicans



“I believe that marriage is a sacred vow between one man and one woman, and I believe Americans should be able to live and work according to their beliefs," House Speaker John Boehner said.



Most states do not include sexual preference as a protected class in anti-discrimination laws, and some have passed religious freedom bills that allow businesses to refuse to serve gay people if it violates their faith. Legal experts expect the next stages of the battle will take place along these lines.

Then, Friday, the court ruled 5-4 that bans against same-sex marriage were unconstitutional, legalizing the unions in all 50 states. Justice Anthony Kennedy, writing for the majority with the court’s four liberal members, determined that marriage is a constitutionally protected right.“It would misunderstand these [gay] men and women to say they disrespect the idea of marriage,” Kennedy writes. “Their plea is that they do respect it, respect it so deeply that they seek to find its fulfillment for themselves. Their hope is not to be condemned to live in loneliness, excluded from one of civilization’s oldest institutions.”“They ask for equal dignity in the eyes of the law. The Constitution grants them that right.”Republicans in Congress, who have voted as many as 60 times to dismantle the Affordable Care Act, were openly disappointed in Thursday’s ruling. While they privately acknowledged the particular battle over subsidies was not one they wished to fight, GOP lawmakers in Washington and around the country vowed to continue efforts to repeal the law in its entirety.While leadership would not say Thursday whether they would move forward with plans to repeal the law, piecemeal, through the appropriations process, without a veto-proof majority, the best chance they have to undo the law is by electing a Republican president in 2016.Many Republicans expressed similar disappointment with Friday’s marriage ruling, and while a few (including presidential hopeful Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas) urged a constitutional amendment to undo the ruling, the majority focused their statements on religious liberty.“I believe that marriage is a sacred vow between one man and one woman, and I believe Americans should be able to live and work according to their beliefs," House Speaker John Boehner said.Most states do not include sexual preference as a protected class in anti-discrimination laws, and some have passed religious freedom bills that allow businesses to refuse to serve gay people if it violates their faith. Legal experts expect the next stages of the battle will take place along these lines. Confederate Symbols Fall Out of Favor

Confederate Symbols Fall Out of Favor (Win McNamee/Getty Images) What Happened:



Last week’s mass shooting at a Charleston, South Carolina, church led to calls from across party lines to remove symbols of the Confederacy from public spaces, including the U.S. Capitol.



Statuary Hall, a space next to the more famous Rotunda, in the U.S. Capitol displays two statues from each state – including 10 that represent people who figured prominently in the Confederate States of America.



“I want to see it go. I want to see it go," said Rep. John Lewis, D-Ga., of a statue of Alexander Stephens, vice president of the Confederacy.



Statues of Confederate President Jefferson Davis and General Robert E. Lee are also present in the Capitol. And Thursday, a bill to remove from the Capitol grounds the Mississippi state flag, which includes the Confederate battle emblem in its design, was introduced in the House.



Sparked by shooter Dylann Roof’s affinity for the Confederate battle flag, South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley called for her state’s legislature to remove the flag that flies on Statehouse grounds. Confederate flags were removed from Alabama’s Capitol building, and in Mississippi some lawmakers have called for a change in the state’s flag.



Why it Matters:



The swiftness of the Confederate flag’s fall took some by surprise.



Haley, considered a rising star in her party, was lauded for taking an important step. But it was also a shrewd political move, providing cover for members of her party to follow suit in condemning the flag and removing it as a potential issue.



Focus on Confederate symbols also distracted from tougher conversations, including continued failed efforts in Congress to pass meaningful legislation to prevent gun deaths. A House panel on Tuesday also voted to prohibit the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention from conducting research on gun violence.

Conservative Rebellion Roils House GOP

Conservative Rebellion Roils House GOP The Associated Press What Happened:



The ongoing House Republican crackdown on dissenters continued this week – and then seemed to backfire.



It all began earlier this month when conservatives in the House Freedom Caucus voted against the party position on a procedural vote on trade, and Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-La., booted three members of his team from the leadership. Then, over the weekend, Oversight Committee Chairman Jason Chaffetz, R-Utah, took away a subcommittee chairmanship from Mark Meadows, R-N.C.



Members of the Freedom Caucus threatened outright revolt, with rumors swirling that they would back a Democratic motion to unseat Boehner as speaker. By Thursday, Meadows had his gavel back.



Why it Matters:



Boehner’s grip on his caucus has been tenuous at best all year, and his move to instate order may have done more to hurt his cause.



Officially, Meadows was punished because he not only defied leadership in voting against the trade rule, but also neglected to pay dues to the party’s campaign apparatus. But Freedom Caucus Chairman Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, was spared from losing his oversight subcommittee gavel, even though he had ostensibly committed the same infractions as Meadows.



Throughout the week, Jordan worked fellow members of the Oversight Committee, gathering support for Meadows and forcing Chaffetz’s hand. The trouble probably isn’t over: Frustrated with the “culture of punishment and fear,” conservatives are losing patience. Congress Leaves for Recess With Ex-Im Set to Expire