Photo

Laure S. Katz, 30, is the seascapes program director for Conservation International, based in Arlington, Va., where her job includes leading scuba expeditions across the Asia-Pacific region to help develop marine protection programs.

Q. When did you realize you wanted to make a career out of protecting the ocean and its inhabitants?

A. Around my 12th birthday, my family went on vacation to Australia, and I had my first dive on the Great Barrier Reef. I saw amazing coral and hundreds of fish species and Christmas tree worms; a baby black-tip reef shark followed us the whole dive. I surfaced and proudly announced that I knew what I wanted to do for the rest of my life: to be a dive instructor. I figured there was no way you could see these life-forms and not want to protect the oceans. The day after my 18th birthday, the youngest age allowed, I registered for a dive master training program. Five months later, I was certified as an instructor and taught environmentally focused scuba classes for the next six years.

What other education do you have?

I have a master’s degree from Stanford’s Earth Systems Program, which approaches environmental problem-solving in an interdisciplinary manner. My studies and research led me to the Galápagos Islands, Monterey Bay, the Pacific Line Islands and Tanzania, where I spent as much time as I could learning from the ocean and from the people whose lives are connected to it.

What was your first assignment with Conservation International?

I was sent to Indonesia for four years to support a team of Indonesians designing large-scale marine conservation programs in the Bird’s Head Seascape in the province of West Papua, which Conservation International had identified as hosting the highest concentration of marine species on earth. I left Indonesia as a serious marine conservationist and a believer in the power of local communities.

What exactly do you do now for Conservation International?

I work to amplify the lessons we have learned from our marine field programs and to advance marine conservation. I am still very dedicated to Indonesia, traveling back about four times a year to work with the government on a system to train as many as 2,500 staff members in marine-protected areas. Everything I do focuses on the interconnection between the conservation of nature and human well-being.