Volunteers and contributions are welcomed to help make the 27th annual event a success.

Graduating students of the Class of 2014 take part in the annual Fun Fest at Cañon City High School in May 2014. ( Courtesy Photo )

Fremont County Graduations Cañon City High School, 9 a.m. May 23 at Citizens Stadium, 1313 College Ave. Cotopaxi High School, 10:30 a.m. May 23 at 345 CR12, Cotopaxi. Florence High School, 2 p.m. May 24 at 2006 Colo. 67, Florence.

Cañon City High School graduating seniors will carry on a tradition that began before any of them were even born.

For the 27th consecutive year, the CCHS Fun Fest will offer seniors an afternoon and evening of fun, food, prizes and memories from 3-11 p.m. May 22 at the school, on the eve of graduation.

Sunflower Bank President Larry Stringari and the late Rhody Heinen, a retired Cañon City High School JROTC instructor, created the Fun Fest in 1988, two years after Cindy Javernick and Chris Berry were killed in an automobile accident the weekend prior to Javernick's graduation. Berry and Javernick had not been drinking, but the car that hit them was racing with another vehicle.

"We're giving them a place to be, as a group, for one last big hoorah before they walk across that stage," said Shad Johnson, event volunteer and co-organizer.

He said there will be more than 60 different games throughout the evening, running simultaneously. Festivities begin outside, weather permitting, then transition into the auxiliary gym around the time dinner is served.

Advertisement

"Everyone sticks around until the very end because that's when we have the major prize drawings," Johnson said.

Some of the larger prizes include flat-screen TVs, Xboxes, laptops, iPads and more.

Games are geared to suit all participants interests and abilities, whether they like more physical games or those that are mentally challenging. There will be a couple of new surprise games this year, Johnson said, that the students are sure to enjoy.

Washington Elementary School teacher Shelly Stringari took part in the inaugural Fun Fest event when she was a senior in 1988. Her two oldest children, Trevor and Demi, participated in Fun Fest when they were seniors, and her son, Trenton, will take part this year.

"I love how the community, especially the people from Sunflower Bank, are making this huge impact on kids," she said. "All these dedicated people are putting kids first, caring about their safety and providing them a place to go — as a parent, it's huge."

Along with Johnson and Larry Stringari, Claudine Paolino, Larry Weaver, Patty Ritter and Deanna Johnson also volunteer their time and services to make the event fun and memorable.

Sunflower Bank, formerly First National Bank, has been the main sponsor of the event, and the Cañon City Rotary Club and the CCHS Tiger Booster Club also co-sponsor the event, along with individuals, families, groups, organizations and businesses who contribute their time, resources and prizes.

Contributions of cash or prizes may be dropped off or mailed to Sunflower Bank, 831 Royal Gorge Blvd., or at Mueller Financial Solutions, 303 N. Seventh St.

For more information, call Claudine Paolino at Sunflower Bank at 275-2311 or Johnson at 275-1651.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com