By of the

Madison — Former Gov. Jim Doyle is teaching Harvard students this fall and may teach graduate students at Wisconsin's flagship university next spring, his latest steps to ease back into public life.

The Madison Democrat has avoided the spotlight since leaving office in 2011 but has gradually taken on modest public roles in addition to his work for a Milwaukee law firm.

The La Follette School of Public Affairs at the University of Wisconsin-Madison hopes to have the two-term governor teach one class in the spring, the school's director Susan Yackee said.

"We're definitely both interested. The exact details have not been approved by us, the governor or the university," Yackee said.

If the class moves forward, Doyle would be paid at the standard rate for adjunct lecturers of between $6,500 and $8,500, she said. The La Follette School is also seeking Republicans from the political world to teach classes to students looking to serve in government or public policy, she added.

Doyle did not respond to a request for comment on the possible class next year — he's done relatively few interviews since leaving office after choosing not to run for a third term in 2010.

But Doyle, 68, clearly has an interest in teaching.

In the fall of 2012, he was a fellow at the Institute for Politics at Harvard University, where Doyle attended law school more than four decades ago. At Harvard's School of Public Health this fall, Doyle will be teaching a class on how states are making health policy in areas such as the implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

In addition to his eight years as governor, Doyle served for 12 years as the state attorney general. He is currently an attorney at the firm of Foley & Lardner LLP.

Yackee, who became director of the La Follette School last summer, said Doyle's class at UW-Madison would focus on several yet to be defined policy topics. She said both Doyle and the school reached out to each other about the possibility.

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) has worked with the La Follette School in the past to provide education for legislative staff. Vos, a critic of Doyle, said he could understand why students would benefit from hearing someone like the former governor who had actually practiced politics, as opposed to being educated purely by academics.

But Vos said he hoped that the La Follette School was also reaching out to Republicans such as former Gov. Tommy Thompson.

"As long as there are conservatives and liberals on the faculty, I have no problems," Vos said.

Yackee said she's interested in having former Republican officials teach, though at this point that she didn't have specific candidates to share.

"I can say that we have had prominent Republicans give our primer lecture in our lecture series. For instance, (former GOP congressman) Steve Gunderson was our most recent speaker, and we hope to continue to have all types of political voices in our lecture series and in the classroom," she said.