Joseph Whelan

At the May 10 meeting of the Board of Fremont County Commissioners, the board adopted a resolution to oppose passage of Amendment 69, a single-payer health care plan for Coloradans, also known as ColoradoCare. The board stated a number of reasons for their opposition. Their concerns are addressed below.

ColoradoCare would replace Obamacare and private health insurance with publicly funded health insurance. Think cooperative, like the rural electric companies, where folks got together to pay for services none could afford on their own, and saved money, as well. Every Coloradan would be a member of the health care co-op. And 100 percent of Coloradans would be covered with no premiums, deductibles, or co-pays for primary care. At present, only about 80 percent of Coloradans have health insurance.

ColoradoCare's $25 billion price tag, a figure larger than the entire state budget, caught the Commissioners' attention. This is a big number, but, it is roughly $4.5 billion less than Coloradans are currently spending for heath care. Projections indicate that 80 percent of Coloradans would be spending less (many much less) on health care than they are today. The savings would come, largely, from the elimination of insurance company profits, negotiating lower drug costs, and reducing other waste.

The money would be raised via a 10 percent tax on income collected by the Colorado Department of Revenue and useable only by ColoradoCare. Neither the executive nor the legislative branches of Colorado government would have access to this money. This is not a "government-run" program.

Advertisement

ColoradoCare's Board would consist of 21 trustees elected by the residents of Colorado. The Board would not have the authority to raise taxes at will. Unlike your current for-profit insurance, rates could be increased only with voter approval.

One Commissioner spoke about loosing choice. The current system of private, for-profit, health insurance (with its narrow networks of physicians and hospitals), or Medicare/Medicaid (often rejected by physicians) already restricts our choices. Under ColoradoCare, you can choose the provider you prefer — there are no narrow networks.

ColoradoCare would impact business in the state. Businesses currently providing health care insurance for employees would likely save money by lower insurance and administrative costs. Small businesses not currently covering their employees could, however, see their costs go up; this would be balanced by those businesses no longer having to pay the medical portion of Workmen's Comp and the tax would be deductible at both State and Federal levels.

The largest impact on the State's economy would likely come from the $4.5 billion in savings that Coloradans would be able to spend in other ways. Economic projections indicate that this infusion of new dollars into the State's economy would produce roughly 40,000 new jobs. Forty thousand!

Furthermore, the lower cost of providing insurance and reduced headaches from negotiating and administering health plans for employees would appeal to businesses considering a move or expansion into Colorado.

Finally, ColoradoCare would produce substantial savings for municipal and county governments. Compared to current costs, ColoradoCare would produce $1.6 million in savings for Fremont County and $900,000 for Canon City. Our tax dollars could then go to better services, roads, parks, etc. rather than to bonuses for and health insurance and pharmaceutical company CEOs.

ColoradoCare would provide Platinum-level benefits that include primary and specialty care; hospitalization; prescribed drugs/durable medical equipment; mental health and substance abuse; emergency and urgent care; preventive and wellness; rehabilitative services and devices; pediatric care (including oral, vision, and hearing); laboratory costs; maternity and newborn care; and palliative and end-of-life care.

With ColoradoCare, health care related bankruptcies, the single largest cause of personal bankruptcy in the US, would be eliminated. Coloradans faced with serious, chronic, or expensive health issues would, at least, not have to worry about losing their homes and savings.

I urge everyone to take the time to become personally familiar with the benefits of ColoradoCare (coloradocare.org). It will very likely save you money and improve your health care.

Joseph Whelan is a retired USGS geologist. He lived in Lakewood for more than 40 years and has lived near Florence since 2011.