The clinic is expected to provide about $1 million in free medical care

MANATEE COUNTY - For area residents in need of medical attention, including dental work and vision screenings not covered by the federal Affordable Care Act, help is on the way.

On Nov. 21-22, Manatee County will become the first location in Florida to be served by Remote Area Medical Volunteer Corps, an international charity that organizes physicians and other volunteers to provide free clinics.

Thousands of people deemed “medically needy” from throughout the region are expected to show up at Manatee Technical College as early as midnight to get in line for services.

“Nobody is turned away,” Dr. Richard Conard, event chairman, said in a presentation to the Manatee County Commission. “There are no questions that will make you ineligible. It's first come, first served.”

Stan Brock, an English-born ranch manager in Guyana who later became a co-host of the TV show “Wild Kingdom,” founded RAM in 1985 after seeing the suffering of people in the Amazon rain forest because they were isolated from medical care.

RAM's initial mission involved “parachuting into the jungle somewhere,” Brock said. In 1991, however, it provided services to a remote area of Tennessee that had lost its only dentist and soon started arranging clinics in other areas of the United States.

“There's a tremendous need throughout the United States for the services we provide,” Brock said.

In 2014, the organization based in Rockford, Tennessee, reportedly served 27,523 patients with more than $9.17 million worth of free medical care.

When Manatee resident Glenn Gibellina heard about RAM, he mentioned the opportunity to Philip Brown, executive director of the United Way of Manatee County. Brown referred Gibellina to Conard, who started making arrangements with Brock.

Conard expects the RAM clinic in Manatee to provide about $1 million worth of free medical care. RAM clinics tend to see 500 to 1,500 patients each day.

Ninety six percent of the patients are adults, Brock said. “It's predominantly dentistry. They can't go to the ER to get their teeth fixed.” Roughly 100 dental stations are expected to be set up. Dental services will include cleanings, fillings and extractions.

While waiting for the dentist, patients are encouraged to see a physician as well. Then they may learn they should also be treated for conditions such as diabetes or hypertension, Brock said.

An optician crew in a truck will make as many as 500 eyeglasses each day for patients who have vision screenings, Conard said.

Conard said he is making arrangements with organizations such as the Salvation Army and Turning Points to make sure the clinic sees “the neediest of our needy.”

RAM accepts no government funding, Brock said. Its support is largely from "$5 and $10 checks” from the public.

So far, Conard told commissioners, the local event has recruited about 400 volunteers and 25 sponsors and partners, Conard said. He is hoping for about 700 to 800 volunteers.