Buy Photo Augusta Health in Fishersville. (Photo: Mike Tripp/The News Leader, Mike Tripp/The News Leader)Buy Photo

Many Virginia hospitals will be paid less in 2015 for having too many patients readmitted after they were sent home the first time. That's the word from the nation's number one payer of hospital bills, Medicare, which is fining 2,610 hospitals across the country, according to records released Wednesday.

Augusta Health is one of just five Virginia hospitals with readmission rates low enough to avoid the rate penalty, the toughest since the Affordable Care Act launched an open season on hospital errors and inefficiencies in 2010.

Augusta Health has been fine free for three years running, since 2013. Western State Psychiatric Hospital also avoided the readmissions fine.

The federal rating program began in 2010 by looking at three common conditions-- pneumonia, heart failure and heart attacks -- and fining hospitals if they had higher than expected readmissions in those categories within 30 days of discharge. This year Medicare upped the cost of performing poorly by adding categories for people who had lung ailments or who elected knee or hip replacements.

Each hospital is rated against the national readmission rate, so it must not only improve its own score, but also perform on an industry-wide playing field. Hospitals complain, but federal officials think the competition will keep hospitals on their toes.

The government estimates it can shave $17 billion off the nation's healthcare bill over time by reducing avoidable hospital readmissions.

In Charlottesville, Martha Jefferson Hospital's readmissions penalty increased from 0.24 percent in 2014 to 1.96 percent in the coming year.

Rockingham Memorial Hospital moved its penalty down from 0.76 in 2014 to 0.47 percent next year.

Winchester Medical Center's penalty moved from zero to 1.47 percent, and University Of Virginia Medical Center increased from 0.29 to 0.50 percent.

Overall, 76 percent of the state's hospitals -- 66 in all -- were penalized at an average of 0.97 percent.

New Jersey performed the worst of all states, with all but one of its hospitals paying penalties. It was followed by Connecticut, Delaware and Massachusetts

The new fines went into effect Oct. 1 and will continue through Sep. 30. They lower a hospital's Medicare payment for every Medicare patient stay, readmitted or not.

One of the first people to document the country's high readmissions rates, Dr. Stephen Jencks believes "This really fairly modest step" of penalties has "persuaded a lot of hospitals to talk in ways they simply were not talking 10 years ago," Kaiser Health News reports.

Hospitals are dealing with the penalties in different ways. Some are sending nurses to patients' homes after they're discharged to make sure they're following orders. Many are giving medications away to those who can't afford them.

Others are putting returning patients under "observation" – a loophole that allows hospitals to treat seniors as outpatients without readmitting them. Medicare doesn't count observation cases as readmissions, KHN reports.

It takes three inpatient days for Medicare to cover a nursing home stay, so no matter how many nights patients spend in the hospital "under observation," they're considered outpatients. If nursing home care is needed, the patient must foot the bill or recover as well as possible at home.

Ironically, people with private insurance plans receive nursing home coverage whether treated on an inpatient or outpatient basis, KHN notes.

Hospitals don't usually tell patients which status they're being admitted under. To avoid surprises, Medicare patients need to ask.

Read or Share this story: http://www.newsleader.com/story/news/local/2014/10/04/virginia-hospitals-get-medicare-report-cards/16714415/