MONTGOMERY, Alabama -- Former Illinois U.S. Rep. Jesse Jackson Jr., who is serving the end of his 2-1/2-year sentence in a Montgomery federal prison, wants presidential pardons issued to all offenders who have served their time, according to a fellow inmate.



Weeks after contacting Jackson inquiring about his ideas for prison reform, AL.com received emails from Jackson as well as a copy of a nine-page letter outlining his plan written by John P. Karoly Jr., an inmate Jackson knew during his stint at Butner Federal Prison in North Carolina.

Jackson told AL.com he wrote two books while incarcerated, "The Tao of Jesus Christ," and "The Last Campaign: A Memoir." He said the work he did with inmates at Butner was important to his "social experiments with the truth regarding the system."

Jackson pleaded guilty in February 2013 of using $750,000 in campaign money to enrich himself and his wife.

A firm run by Karoly's sons, Karoly Law Firm LLC in Allentown, Pa., sent AL.com the letter two weeks ago as well as an affidavit signed by Karoly and Jackson authenticating the document.

"I have come to believe that you really never know a man until you have shared his captivity," Karoly wrote in the affidavit. "Consequently, I took it upon myself to writing my inmate observations about Jesse ... observations that can only be made from 'inside the joint' ... observations that can only be made by an insider."

Dated April 16, 2014, the letter opens with a description of Jackson using a toothbrush to scour the prison's toilets, showers, sinks and floors.

"He's doing a fastidious job... non-stop ... a toothbrush working wonders on a clogged drain," Karoly wrote. "But, no matter how hard he scrubs, he later tells me that it doesn't wipe his slate clean."

AL.com wrote a letter to Jackson last month after he was transferred to the Maxwell Air Force Base federal prison. The Chicago Sun-Times previously reported that Jackson was moved to Alabama after he informed prisoners of their rights at the North Carolina prison, a guard took it the wrong way and sent him to solitary confinement.

According to the letter, Karoly thinks Obama would be open to Jackson's plan in part due to his support for the Affordable Care Act.

"...I am still optimistic that President Obama may find the time and inspiration to subscribe to Jesse's forgiveness formulation, motivated by the same empathy and concern that caused the President to care about some 40 million uninsured Americans," Karoly wrote.

The Bureau of Prisons lists Jackson's release date as Dec. 31, 2015. His wife, former Chicago alderman Sandra Jackson, was sentenced to a year in prison for filing false joint federal tax returns.