LANSING, MI — Thirty six years ago this November, Carl Levin was first elected to the United States Senate.

The Detroit Democrat became one of the strongest advocates for Michigan in the highest chamber of Congress and a leading voice on military and foreign affairs. He won re-election with increasing margins of victory.

When Levin, now 80, announced last spring he would not seek a seventh term, Republicans saw it as an opportunity to gain a U.S. Senate seat, while Democrats strategized to ensure the seat stays blue.

Democrats choice: Gary Peters, a metro Detroit Congressman who had won highly competitive elections. The first Republican to announce was former Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land, who had been elected twice to statewide office. Despite speculation about other candidates, no one else declared.

Neither candidate faced a primary challenge, so for the past six months, the candidates have been making their pitches on why they should replace Levin as the next U.S. Senator from the Great Lakes state.

Also running for the U.S. Senate are third party candidates Jim Fulner (Libertarian), Chris Wahmhoff (Green) and Richard A. Matkin (U.S. Taxpayers).

Attention on the election

Both Land and Peters have been in politics and government for the past 20 years and are known by members of their party.

Land was Kent County Clerk before serving as Secretary of State for 8 years. The Byron Center Republican served as a Republican National Committeewoman.

Peters served in the State Senate before running for Attorney General in 2002, losing to Mike Cox. In 2008, he ran for Congress and beat the Republican incumbent, Joel Knollenberg.

RELATED:

• 5 things you didn't know about Gary Peters

• 5 things you didn't know about Terri Lynn Land

The race started competitive, but recent polls have shown Peters with a lead. Still, the election is not a sure win for either candidate, as seen by the big names who have come out to campaign for the candidates: Mitt Romney stumped for Terri Lynn Land and First Lady Michelle Obama and Hillary Clinton are campaigning for Peters.

Outside spending and influence have been strong in the race. A television ad has run, on average, every two minutes in Michigan. Some $282.8 million has been spent on the ads, according to an analysis by the the Center for Public Integrity. Michigan has the third highest amount of money spent in any U.S. Senate race across the country.

But for voters, there have been no debates and few joint appearances where they can see how the candidates differ on the issues.

Approving Supreme Court justices

The U.S. Senate is often called the “world’s greatest deliberative body.”

First, it’s difficult to get elected: each state has just two members, compared to the 435 House representatives, which are divided by each state’s population.

The U.S. Senate also has some unique powers, including confirming presidential appointees, such as Supreme Court Justices, members of the cabinet and ambassadors.

The Supreme Court could be one of the most important, since the 9-member body is the final interpreter of laws. Such landmark cases include striking down segregation laws, allowing abortion to be a legal right and, most recently, upholding the Affordable Care Act.

When asked last week if the current court is too liberal, too conservative or just right, Land said she will take it up when it comes around and does not have a litmus test.

“It’s important someone understands the constitution and that it's a number one priority,” Land said in a different interview with MLive.

Peters said he has concerns with some of the recent rulings the court has made, including Citizens United, which allows corporations to spend unlimited money on campaigns. He'd like to have justices who understand “money is not speech.”

Like Land, Peters said he does not have a litmus test when it comes to deciding who should approved for the court.

“It’s hard to speculate,” Peters said, “you have to look at the nominees as they come up and evaluate their credentials.”

The Affordable Care Act and health care

An issue that has been at the heart of several elections in the past few years has been the Affordable Care Act. As the exchange is entering its second year in Michigan, people still have questions about how the law could impact them.

If elected, Land said she would vote to repeal the law.

“Obamacare has been a disaster,” Land said on Michigan Radio’s program Michigan Calling earlier this month, saying it has increased costs for some people and contributed to canceled plans.

“We need to repeal and replace it, look at all the aspects of the healthcare plan,” Land added.

When asked about specific components of a replacement plan, Land said it should be up to the patient to have their own private healthcare or through their employer. She has also said people should be able to transfer plans between jobs and across state lines.

Land said many people in Michigan have lost their plans because of the law, she said.

Some health plans that did not meet essential service standards under the law will be phased out. In Michigan, an estimated 225,000 residents said they received discontinuation notices from their insurers late last year, but their plans were extended for a year to provide breathing room for the changes.

On these and others problems with the law, Peters said the government should work to correct those problems and not repeal the law.

“We got to keep it in place and continue to move forward to make it better and to fix it,” Peters said on the same Michigan Radio program in August.

Peters said he would vote for the ACA again because it has given more people coverage in Michigan. As of Sept. 30, 406,000 people have enrolled in the state’s expanded Medicaid

“I’ve never voted for a perfect bill,” Peters said. “I never will vote for a perfect bill.”

ISIS

One of the largest foreign policy issues of the year has been the growth of the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq. The group has killed thousands and beheaded two American journalists.

Before going on recess before the election, Congress approved funding to arm Syrian rebels to fight against the Islamic State.

Peters voted for the legislation, and said the U.S. needs to move forward with the plan, including airstrikes. Also, he said, the United States need to be aggressive in getting Sunni religious and government leaders to condemn ISIS and act against the group.

“But it has to come from Sunni religious leaders,” Peters said.

Land said she would have voted for the request, but added that Obama needs to do more to combat the group.

“The president needs to come up with a clear and concise plan,” Land said.

Neither Peters or Land think there should combat troops on the ground fighting against ISIS.

What could happen in the next 4 weeks

The race was once seen as potentiality one of the most competitive in the country, with several election forecasting websites calling it a “toss up.” But in the past two months, several have said it could be a likely win for Democrats.

Peters has led most major polls since April, and the past 8 polls has Peters up an average of 7.8 percentage points, according to Real Clear Politics.

Many Michigan political pundits have said Land will have a difficult time to win the race in the coming weeks, unless something happens to change the mood nationally.

TJ Bucholz, a Democratic political consultant with Vanguard Public Affairs, has said the U.S. Senate is the most interesting and heated race in the state.

“I don’t think it has disappointed voters,” said Bucholz, who said the “public is starting to accept Gary Peters’ narrative more than they are Terri Lynn Land’s.”

Recent polling shows that it will be hard for Land to make up ground.

Tom Shields, a Republican political consultant with the Marketing Resource Group, agreed it'll be difficult for Land to pull out a win.

She needs to find issues that resonate with voters, he said. So far, she has been “all over the map” on issues and not effective.

“She needs something to put a spark in the campaign that makes people give her a second look,” said Shields.

There have been examples in the past, Shields said, where candidates have been able to make up ground, including John Engler who beat James Blanchard after being down in the polls.

In the Senate race, Shields said nothing prevents independent voters from switching support from Peters to Land, but she needs to come up with something that excites voters.

“You can lose September and win October, and still win the game,” Shields said, “but you have to be in the game.”

Fritz Klug is a news buzz reporter for MLive. Contact him at fklug@mlive.com or 269-370-0584. Follow him on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.