He says a similar approach could work for active blue-collar and white-collar workers.

Buy Photo UAW President Dennis Williams (Photo: Regina Boone, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

UAW President Dennis Williams said the union is open to creating a health insurance pool of 140,000 active Detroit Three hourly workers and is willing to open it up to the companies' salaried workers to save money.

He said the UAW is managing the trust created in 2007 to insure its retirees better than the companies did before that. As a result, he said, a similar approach could work for active workers, both blue collar and white collar.

"I think we have 607,000 re​tirees in our VEBA, 140,000 active. Another 150,000 salaried. If you pool that, that's a pretty good number. I'd be wiling to go to the bargaining table with those numbers," Williams said in a media roundtable this morning at Solidarity House. "I would love to create a pool to insure members across companies."

Currently, UAW workers are insured through plans administered by each company. Health insurance plans, like most services, can be less expensive the larger the pool is of those who are covered.

In other matters, Williams said:

He won't pick a target or lead company in upcoming negotiations until the discussions reach a pivotal point.

He hasn't studied the proposal by Fiat Chrysler Automobiles CEO Sergio Marchionne to partner with another automaker, but said he wouldn't support any deal between FCA and another automaker that would hurt UAW members.

​Negotiations between the UAW, FCA, Ford and General Motors will not start until the middle of July. The current contract expires Sept. 15.

This year's talks are particularly important because this is the first time since the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009 that the UAW has a right to strike. The talks also come after five consecutive years of rising sales. This year, Americans are on pace to buy or lease nearly 17 million new vehicles, the most in about a decade.

"Our members over the last two contracts made a lot of sacrifices, and we think it's our time. Our legacy employees haven't had a raise in eight years," William said, referring to workers hired before 2007.

Williams was asked several times about the UAW's concern that Marchionne is trying to sell FCA with labor negotiations about to begin.

"We're not going to support anything that hurts our members, but I want to be thoughtful about examining something before I comment," Williams said. "Sergio and I have a great relationship. We are very frank with each other. These are very professional people we are working with."

Creating the VEBA health care trust, formally known as a Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Association, was a key element in enabling GM and Chrysler to emerge from their 2009 bankruptcies and helped Ford turn itself around without the same type of federal bailout.

Before the VEBA was created, the obligation of insuring a huge group of aging people -- now more than four times larger than the number of Detroit Three active hourly workers -- was turning GM, Ford and Chrysler into what some experts called health insurance providers who made cars on the side.

Historically, UAW health care has been the envy of the manufacturing world. Williams said active members pay for about 6% of the health care they use through co-pays and deductibles, far less than what the average insured American pays.

To put that in perspective, UAW retirees covered by the VEBA pay an average of 11% of their total health care, Williams said. In 2013, the average insured American paid 15.2% through deductibles and co-pays, according to the Health Care Cost Institute.

But because of this, UAW members face the prospect of paying a tax beginning in 2018 on some portion of their health care benefits. That provision is part of the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare.

Williams said the companies and union will discuss that tax during negotiations, but he made no promise that it will be resolved.

"I think it's very unfair of the U.S. government to penalize people for having a good health care plan," he said.

GM declined to comment on the specifics of Williams' proposal, but it did issue a statement that it is "open to talking through creative solutions to deliver benefits our employees value while improving the long-term competitiveness of the company."

FCA also released a statement that it is open to discussing "options that will reduce cost while both the improving the quality of care and the health of our employees."

Ford said in a statement that it looks forward to "negotiating a fair and competitive labor agreement that enables us to provide jobs and investments here in the U.S. and ensures a prosperous future for the company, our workers and our communities."

Contact Greg Gardner: 313-222-8762, ggardner@freepress.com or on Twitter @GregGardner12

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1LhBCmE