Good News Presbyterian Church in Gilbert wants to post roadside signs for its worship services, but the town's code prohibits them from going up more than 12 hours before an event. (Photo: Alliance Defending Freedom) Story Highlights The U.S. Supreme Court is slated to hear oral arguments for Reed v. Town of Gilbert beginning on Jan. 12, 2015

The case involves Pastor Clyde Reed, who argues that Gilbert's sign code violated his First Amendment rights

The code, until 2008, limited the size, number and amount of time roadside signs can be posted before an event

A local pastor and the Town of Gilbert are set to face-off in front of the U.S. Supreme Court in January over the right to post religious roadside signs.

Pastor Clyde Reed, of Good News Presbyterian Church, argues that Gilbert's sign code is discriminatory by limiting the size, amount of time and number of signs he can post before his religious services.

The town, on the other hand, argues that the code, which until 2008 barred non-commercial signs from being posted more than two hours before an event, did not violate the pastor's First Amendment rights because it did not discriminate based on content. Gilbert amended its town code in 2008 allowing non-commercial event signs to be larger and be posted 12 hours before events. Gilbert also eliminated the number requirement, but the changes did not resolve the case.

MORE: Hobby Lobby support group backs Gilbert church in court case

Reed is represented by the conservative Scottsdale-based Christian group Alliance Defending Freedom. He and his congregation have won the support of a number of religious groups, including the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, which represented Hobby Lobby last summer in a landmark case that struck down the Affordable Care Act's contraceptive mandate. The town also has several proponents, including the National League of Cities, an advocacy group that supports municipalities nationwide.

Reed was first cited in 2005 for posting roadside signs advertising his religious services too early. The church, which has a few dozen congregants, holds services at a Gilbert senior center. When Reed was cited again in 2007, he sued alleging that his First Amendment rights had been violated. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in favor of the town in 2013, causing Reed to appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, which took up this case last summer. Oral arguments are slated to begin on Jan. 12, 2015.

The Gilbert Town Council has received legal advice throughout the fall. Reed gave the invocation at a Town Council meeting on Dec. 18.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1ANYhhI