Russian violinist Aleksey Igudesman and British-Korean pianist Hyung-Ki Joo met at age 12 while both attended the exclusive and prestigious Yehudi Menuhin School in England.

Even then, the two realized they shared similar ideas and passions about music and musical culture. The close friends eventually formed a duo around their first show, "A Little Nightmare Music," in 2004. They have been performing it for 11 years, and will bring the acclaimed and hilarious program to Chautauqua Auditorium at 7:30 p.m. Saturday, Aug. 1, as part of Week 5 in the current Colorado Music Festival season.

Speaking by phone from Steamboat Springs, where they performed Wednesday, Joo said he and Igudesman agreed during their school years that the classical music world takes itself far too seriously.

"Going to classical concerts can feel like going to funerals," Joo said, "and the world was also alienating and ostracizing other types of music, which limited its own audience. We loved other genres as much as we loved classical and didn't see why they couldn't be combined in concert.

"We were young, but we thought about the concert we would want to attend ourselves. We were also interested in theater and comedy, and we thought we could throw that in, as well. Later on, we discovered that this was not as innovative as we thought, and in fact, it's pretty retro. This was done in the time of Mozart and the time of Schumann. Violinists would do magic tricks between movements of the Beethoven concerto."

When they finally decided to make their show a reality, "A Little Nightmare Music" was an instant success. Excerpts have been watched millions of times on YouTube. The duo's popularity continued. Special guests at their 2012 Carnegie Hall debut included great classical violinist Joshua Bell and legendary singer-songwriter Billy Joel.

"It has evolved and transformed since the first time we did it," Joo said. "It's still a work in progress, and we're always tweaking, changing and adding things so that people will enjoy coming to see it again."

The theme remains the same — a hilarious and exaggerated illustration of "nightmares" that can occur in musical performance, or essentially everything that can go wrong.

They have gone on to create other shows, including their second, "And Now Mozart," with which they will tour later this year. Joo strongly emphasized the concerts are for everyone.

"We have kids as young as 3 or 4 and people as old as 88 or 90 who love what we do," he said. "They don't need to know anything about classical music. It encompasses all types of styles, and you can enjoy it if you've never heard a note of Brahms or Beethoven."

And musical connoisseurs laugh as hard as anybody else, he said. In fact, Joo noted that comedy is a way of bridging gaps and providing people with a gateway to the often forbidding classical world.

"When we play, perception is much higher, and audiences are more attentive than they might be at a traditional classical concert," he said. "And we feel that this is very special."

Both have active careers as composers and collaborators. Igudesman is also an actor. As for Joo's connection to Billy Joel, in 2001 the rock star composed a set of classical piano pieces called "Fantasies and Delusions" and asked Joo to record them (as "Richard Joo"). The album topped the classical charts.

Joo said he sees no real difference in aesthetic quality between the duo's musical comedy and their individual so-called "serious" pursuits.

Respected institutions are happy to have us, and big classical superstars want to perform with us," he said. "We are first and foremost musicians, and we actually are serious about what we do. The comedy is always secondary to the music."

To that effect, the show includes funny and true anecdotes about composers.

"We love breaking down the wall between the performer and the audience," Joo said, noting that the presence of that wall persists in classical music culture.

The appearance of Igudesman and Joo at Chautauqua is the second of two special guest artist recitals at the CMF, a new addition this season. The duo follows the solo recital of pianist Olga Kern in Week 1.