New ropes course, playground element teach students interpersonal skills, sustainability

Tom Leahy, owner of Leahy & Associates, cuts hand holds on a climbing wall at the new ropes course on Friday at Dawson School. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

A new ropes course is taking outdoor education to new heights at Lafayette's Dawson School.

Initiated by French teacher Chris Schuhmann, crews are erecting an adventure course on campus that will challenge students 32 feet above the ground.

The course that includes a high course, lower course and grounded props for use by elementary students is underway and expected to be complete shortly after students return from winter break.

Schuhmann, an outdoor enthusiast who has climbed Denali and worked as a summer camp director prior to teaching at Dawson, said the course will teach students interpersonal skills rooted in the kindergarten through 12th grade school's mission.

"Outdoor education is one of the components and is a useful way to connect to the curriculum, but it also speaks to the character realm," Head of School George Moore said. "We're teaching them resilience, courage, compassion, empathy — skills that will be useful to them at Dawson and in the future."

The $125,000 project was funded in partnership with the school's parent association.

Schuhmann is developing a curriculum for the course that will be offered this spring during the school's Winterim — a weeklong intensive study that occurs the week before spring break.

"The idea is to impart a sense of risk but not to create any real danger," Schuhmann said. "We want them to assess themselves, test themselves and make decisions about what they're comfortable with. That will transfer to other life decisions like peer pressure situations."

Advertisement

Other plans for the course are still being derived but will likely include use by extracurricular groups, athletic teams and student leaders, Schuhmann said.

Once plans are in place, every student will touch the course during their time at Dawson, he said.

Another outdoor project is challenging Dawson students to think about energy use.

Last year, the school hosted a contest challenging students to design a playground element that teaches about and generates energy.

One middle school and two high school students won the challenge and are collaborating on a "hamster wheel" design that will be constructed next year, said Erik Nickerson, who teaches physics, engineering, design and robotics.

The plastic cylinder that contains a magnet will generate energy when students run on it, Nickerson said, turning on LED lights lining the design.

"It's a lot like something we already have on the playground," sixth grader Reagan McMorris said. "I was looking at it one day and I thought it would be super cool if it generates energy and lights up. It just came to me."

Materials for the project are funded by a $10,000 grant that Nickerson won last year.

Students are still finalizing the design, which will incorporate a small wind turbine and solar panel that Nickerson received as part of the grant.

"It's going to be really cool to see something I designed get built," Reagan said. "I was very surprised."

Whitney Bryen: 303-473-1113, wbryen@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter