Cougars win second championship in three years

Jake Lohr, second from the left, and Tannen Brand (20) greet Del Chance Richardson with a yell after he scored in the sixth inning of the 2A championship game at Hobbs Field in Pueblo on Saturday. The Cougars won their second championship in three years. ( Bryan Kelsen/ )

PUEBLO — Jake Lohr made sure a myriad of seniors ended their careers with a trophy.

The Resurrection Christian School senior pitcher tossed a 3-hitter and struck out nine, leading the Cougars to their second 2A state baseball title in three years on Saturday at Hobbs Field.

Top-seeded Rez defeated upstart Sedgwick County 5-1 in the title game after disposing of defending state champion Denver Christian 13-3 in the semifinals. Cory Wiggins limited the Crusaders to four hits in the 10-run rule contest. He also struck out nine.

The two senior hurlers, along with five other senior starters, combined to get an opportunity to dog pile on the mound.

"A special group of boys," Rez coach Grant MacAlmon said. "They've been playing together a long time. It's a game of failure, and we try and teach these guys about life. You can learn a lot from this game. It does make it easier when you win.

"Same story, different week with our two pitchers on the mound. They were special for us today like they have been all season."

Lohr gave up two hits in the first inning and another in the second. After that, he was in cruise control. He walked only three batters and received plenty of defense.

"I just wanted to leave it all out there," said Lohr, a 6-foot-2, 195-pounder who is headed to Garden City (Kan.) Community College. "This is all we wanted for four years to win state championships. We wanted it so bad.

Advertisement

"I had nerves the whole game, but I have confidence in the guys behind me. They've played so well all season and I owe it all to them."

Junior Luke Mount was the hitting star. He ripped a leadoff double in the fourth and scored on Josh Miller's RBI single. Then, in the sixth, he triggered a three-run outburst with a run-scoring triple and scored on Miller's grounder.

"We all wanted this from the start," said Mount, who had 10 hits in the final four playoff games. "We kept pushing whether we won or lost all season."

Resurrection Christian's Del Chance Richardson, slides into homeplate safely during the sixth inning Saturday. The Cougars won the state title 5-1 over Sedgwick County. (Bryan Kelsen /)

Sedgwick County, the No. 3 seed, started five sophomores.

"It's been an awesome run. It didn't work out the way we wanted it to," Sedgwick coach Justin Peters said. "We knew Resurrection was a good hitting team and we stayed in the game until the sixth. That's the game of baseball. You play hard and work hard and the ball rolls where it rolls."

Players from the losing side were left to wonder what could have been.

"We definitely don't have many upperclassmen and battled back nearly every game in the postseason," Sedgwick senior Chase Dunker said. "We just couldn't pull this one out. We stranded some runners and made a few mistakes in the field."





Championship

RCS Cougars 5, SCHS Cougars 1

At Hobbs Field

Sedgwick County 000 010 0 — 1 3 2

Resurrection Christian 010 103 x — 5 9 0

W —Jake Lohr. L — Woodhams.





Semifinals

Cougars 13, Crusaders 3 (5 inn.)

At Hobbs Field

Denver Christian 000 21 — 3 4 1

Resurrection Christian 200 83 — 13 20 0

W — Cory Wiggins. L — Kastens.