In 1929, Fred Clatworthy photographed the Fall River Entrance Station when it was located in Horseshoe Park. It was constructed through private donations. It was later moved to a point near today's Fall River Entrance Station. ( Colorado Historical Society )

Entrance stations are an obscure piece of Rocky Mountain National Park history. Over the last century since the park was established in 1915, some were closed and new ones added.

Glacier Basin Entrance

Probably the least known of all the park's entrance stations is the one leading to Glacier Basin. It used a primitive road through the YMCA of the Rockies, a road that predated the founding of the park.

Responding to an increase in traffic, the road was widened in 1921 and was closed in 1932. A new entrance station was opened near the confluence of Aspen Brook and the Big Thompson River.

Thompson Entrance

The Grand Lake Entrance Station was moved four times over the years, but all within a short distance. It is shown here in 1925 shortly after Fall River Road was opened connecting both the east and west sides of Rocky Mountain National Park. (Rocky Mountain National Park)

In 1932, a small structure from the Moraine Park area was moved to a point along Colo. 66. It became a new entrance into the park and was called the Thompson Entrance or Bear Lake Checking Station.

Just beyond the station, there was a split in the road. On the north side of the Big Thompson River, the road continued directly into Moraine Park, while the other branch turned south across a bridge past Tuxedo Park to Glacier Creek. This road ended at Bear Lake.

When a new entrance was established in Beaver Meadows in 1959-60, this entrance was closed and the station removed.

Today, a trail follows the old road from the modern-day bridge across the Big Thompson River and ends at the site of the old station.

Advertisement

Fall River Entrance Station

This station was first located three miles outside the park near Nicky's Restaurant along U.S. 34.

It was constructed through private donations, and in 1928, was moved to Sheep Lakes — well inside Horseshoe Park.

In 1933, the same building was moved to the present location of the Fall River Entrance in Hondius Park.

High Drive Entrance Station

Above today's Beaver Meadows Visitors Center was the original entrance into the park from High Drive.

In 1935, a new road was constructed that paralleled High Drive to allow tourists to enter the park without going through a housing development. At this time, the old entrance station was closed in favor of the Beaver Meadows station.

Grand Lake Entrance Station

This station started as a small, single-story building and has always been located near the Colorado River north of Grand Lake. However, it has been moved four times.

The original structure remains standing north of the Grand Lake Visitors Center.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.