Staying Alive The struggles of a business trying to survive.

Having chosen to continue with my current insurance provider, Independence Blue Cross, and also to continue offering multiple plans for my employees, my next step was to choose which of the company’s 38 plans to offer. Independence’s multiplan option, called “Blue Solutions” allows me to choose any five from a subset of 26 of the company’s 38 plans. Because I had a bad experience with the plan that most of my employees chose last year, a high-deductible bronze plan with low premiums, I wanted to take a look at all 26 plans again and compare their features.

Independence has a portion of its website devoted to its multiplan option. It has a lot of information, arranged in a way that I found difficult to process. There is no premium information at all. There is no one document that compares all of the plans. Instead, Independence provides PDF files comparing their plans within a single metal level.

These are difficult to read online, and when printed on ordinary paper, the text is so small that I couldn’t read it. In the end, I used our 24-inch printer to print very large blow-ups of these grids, and then spread them out on my conference table. The printouts entirely covered a table 15 feet by 5 feet — a huge mess, but at least I could walk around the table and see all of the details in one place.

I asked my agent for pricing for all of the plans and got them in a day. Twenty-six PDF documents, each with an age and price grid. Knowing that the jump in price for each year is the same for every plan, I wrote the premium for a 35-year-old under each plan’s grid column, and at last I had a way to compare features and prices for a large number of plans in one place. I also pulled out the plan information from my offerings last year, and checked to see what had changed. In most of the plans, the premium wasn’t the only thing that had increased. Deductibles and out-of-pocket expenses had increased in 20 out of 26 plans. When there was a change, I wrote that on the paper as well.

Next, I spent a couple of hours looking through the choices, trying to guess which would be a good fit for my people. I wanted some gold policies for those with families, some silver policies, and at least one bronze policy. I was looking for plans that had a lower deductible, and, if possible, no co-insurance. I had found in my own experience that having significant co-insurance left me exposed to very large medical bills, even after I met my deductible. I didn’t want to expose my employees to that same level of financial risk.

In the end, I chose to renew three of the plans from last year. I dropped two and replaced them with two that had lower deductibles and coinsurance. Four of my five plans are HMOs: one bronze, one silver, and two gold. I also chose a silver PPO plan with a health savings account because I liked having the health savings account this year.

Having made my choices, I needed to present them to my employees. I had alerted them in mid-November that enrollment season was coming around again, and we had a meeting just before Thanksgiving to remind them that they would have a choice of plans, and to tell them again about premiums, deductibles and co-insurance. I also told them how much the insurance had cost the company last year, and expressed my hope that we could keep cost increases to a minimum. We have profit-sharing, so they understand that lowering costs will result in a larger payout when we make a profit.

Independence promised that, once I chose my five plans, my employees would be able to comparison-shop online and use a wizard to guide them to a good choice for them. They made this same promise last year, but then withdrew the offer, which meant we had to do all enrollment on paper. When I asked whether the feature was ready to go this year, as the website again promises, my agent told me that I could not access it to see whether it worked or not.

So I took my large sheets of paper, with the premiums and changes in deductibles, and scissored out the five plans I had chosen and then taped them together in one sheet. I pinned that to the wall in our break room. I also prepared a spreadsheet for each employee, showing what the exact premium would be for them and their dependents under each of the five plans — including how much the company would pay and how much they would pay.

I also compared those premium splits to what they had paid for this year. I gave that to every worker who planned to enroll and directed them to the plan sheets pinned to the wall to see details. Some of my workers are immigrants with limited English, and none of them know as much about insurance as I do, so I offered to help all of them make the choice. Several took me up on my offer, and we spent some time looking at the grid and talking about how much health care they normally use and discussing what would happen if they experienced an unexpected event.

I asked my employees to tell me their choices on Monday, Dec. 8, which everyone did. Now I know how much covering my people will cost in 2015. In 2014, the company’s share of premiums to cover 25 employees and their dependents was $50,321.65. In 2015, the company will pay $48,551.06 to cover 21 workers and their dependents. So even though the premiums of the plans I chose went up, I was able to decrease the amount that the company will spend by $1,770.59.

How did I manage this? By covering fewer people. We disenrolled an entire family of four when my engineer’s wife got a new job with better coverage than we offer, and they volunteered to leave our coverage. I fired one worker. And I also took my 21-year-old twins off the policy. (One of them qualifies for Medicaid, the other is now living on his own in Massachusetts and will buy his own coverage.) We added three new employees, all of them relatively young. So the company’s costs dropped. But if I had enrolled all of the same people in the same plans, my costs would have risen. I can’t give you an exact number, because I don’t know whether all of my people would have stayed in their current plans — but the premium increases I was quoted averaged about 11 percent over the range of plans I was offered.

What’s my advice for you? One thing for sure: get everyone off your plan that you can. Make sure that any employee who has coverage through a spouse, or qualifies for public assistance, is getting it. Other than that, I don’t have a recommendation. I have put a considerable effort into understanding my choices over the last two years, but that’s mostly because it bothers me to spend large amounts of money without understanding where it’s going and what my alternatives might be.

The actual amount of money I’ve saved, somewhere between $15,000 and $35,000 is not insignificant. But some might argue that my time would have been better spent on other tasks that would have yielded a larger payoff. Possibly. One thing I do know is that I’m going to stop and think long and hard about whether to go through this effort again next year. If the company continues to grow, and the number of enrollees increases, it will become an even larger effort to offer choices to each worker, and to administer their choices. Even though my agent isn’t capable of providing the same level of analysis that I can, I may just sign what comes across my desk and be done with it.

And that’s when the insurance companies and health care providers will have won. They’ve managed to erect a system that is so complex that only an extreme effort on the part of business owners leads to any understanding of what the choices are and what is the best path forward. When the majority of owners no longer feel like making that effort, then there’s no constraint on future cost increases. The only rational choice will be for small companies to simply stop offering coverage, and pass all of the responsibility to their workers. Was that what the Affordable Care Act was designed to encourage all along? I don’t know.

Paul Downs founded Paul Downs Cabinetmakers in 1986. It is based outside Philadelphia.