(Editors’ note: This story was originally published in The Denver Post on Jan. 2, 2003.)

NASHVILLE, Tenn. – After the first 14 minutes of Wednesday’s Colorado Avalanche-Nashville Predators matinee, when Peter Forsberg already had three points, reporters inside the Gaylord Entertainment Center were asking, “What’s the record in this joint?”

The answer, for most points in a game, was the five assists Wayne Gretzky recorded for the New York Rangers in 1999 in his only career appearance in Nashville.

The new answer is six points. The record holder is “Foppa,” who tied his career best to lead Colorado to a 7-3 victory over the Predators.

Forsberg scored a goal and assisted on five others to give himself nine points in his past two games, and Milan Hejduk set a career best with five points on two goals and three assists. Forsberg scored six points on March 3, 1999, against tonight’s Avalanche opponent, the Florida Panthers, a night he scored five points in the third period to lead Colorado to a 7-5 victory after trailing 5-0 late in the second period.

“I remember Florida pretty well,” Forsberg said. “I think the points came a little easier today. A couple of times all I did was chip the puck out of the zone to get a 2-on-1 or something.”

Indeed, the performance in Florida was more spectacular, considering the circumstances. Forsberg got the second assist on three Avalanche goals against the Predators. But what made his day astonishing is he scored all his points despite playing a little more than 15 minutes. About every 2 1/2 minutes he was on the ice, the Avs scored.

“He’s one of the best in the business when he’s on, there’s no question about it,” Nashville coach Barry Trotz said.

If not for Forsberg, Hejduk would have gotten all the ink. The Avs’ winger scored twice on the power play, with his first goal at 13:19 of the first period the game-winner. He extended his league-leading points streak to 12 games and has eight points his past two games, but still fell one point behind Forsberg for the team scoring lead (41-40).

“It’s fun to play right now,” Hejduk said. “The whole team is playing really well. When we control the puck, we create a lot of scoring chances and lately we’re doing that.”

Hejduk’s goal, which chased Predators starting goalie Tomas Vokoun from the game, made a winner out of Patrick Roy, even though Roy played just one period. Entering the dressing room, Roy began feeling sick with what he thought was the flu. He told coach Tony Granato he couldn’t go on but got credit for the victory because he was in net when the game-winning goal was scored.

That helps make up for a victory he lost in the 1998-99 season, when he made every save in a victory over Anaheim but backup Craig Billington got the win because he was in net for the game-winner after Roy was pulled by former coach Bob Hartley to buy his power play more time to rest.

Roy smashed two televisions and a VCR in Hartley’s office after the game to show his displeasure.

David Aebischer relieved Roy, stopping 22-of-24 shots.

“David did a good job,” Roy said. “I just didn’t feel good at all, but I’m feeling better now.”

The Avalanche was outshot 35-22 by the Predators, a deceiving statistic because the Avs played defensive hockey after a first period they led 4-1 on 11 shots.

The victory upped Granato’s record to 5-1-0-1 since taking over for Hartley. Forsberg and Hejduk are making his transition look easy.

“Peter had a good night, Milan had a good night and a lot of our skilled guys made some great plays offensively,” Granato said.

Rob Blake, Steve Reinprecht, Adam Foote and Mike Keane also scored for Colorado. Blake’s goal, a one-timer off the rush after a pretty crossing pass by Hejduk, gave the Avs a 5-2 lead and took the starch out of a Predators team.

Forsberg snapped a wrist shot over the glove of backup goalie Brian Finley 21 seconds later for point No. 5.

“It’s tight in the division right now and in the conference,” Forsberg said. “Every point is important.”

Adrian Dater: adater@denverpost.com or at twitter.com/adater