This photo, taken in 1967, was used prominently in the campaign for a sales tax to buy a mile-wide band of open space around Boulder. Voters approved the tax that fall, 61 to 39 percent. ( Hal Malde / PLAN-Boulder archive )

PLAN-Boulder County (PLAN Boulder) thanks Mara Abbott and the Daily Camera for its extensive and generous coverage of our organization over the past few weeks. It appears more column inches were expended on PLAN Boulder than on any issue since Folsom right-sizing. We are flattered by the level of coverage provided and proud that (at least partly due to PLAN Boulder) our community has become one of the most desirable places in the world in which to live and work. This is a legacy PLAN Boulder hopes to continue and extend.

Despite the Camera's extensive coverage, it was disappointing that Mara Abbott's writing didn't delve deeper into how and why PLAN Boulder has been so effective over its history and what has made an ever-changing cast of citizens invest significant time and energy to keep this organization flourishing. Only two current PLAN Boulder board members were quoted by name over the course of the Camera's six-part series and none of our newer and younger members were even contacted. The reality is that PLAN Boulder has evolved over 50 years, but the constant throughout has been committed citizen involvement to make Boulder the best place it can possibly be.

Advertisement

PLAN Boulder was founded in 1959 by a group of citizens concerned by proposed development of Boulder's scenic mountain backdrop. This group initiated and successfully campaigned for the Blue Line Amendment that prohibits city water service (and thus development) above a certain elevation. Building on that success, PLAN Boulder helped establish the Parks and Recreation Department, and was instrumental in creating the city's Open Space program. PLAN Boulder was at the forefront of establishing Boulder's Historic Preservation Ordinance, the city's building height limitation, the Transportation Master Plan and every version of the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan. PLAN Boulder has helped create the Boulder we know and love today.

In recent years, PLAN Boulder has advocated for affordable housing, Open Space management and conservation, preservation of neighborhood character, clean energy/greenhouse gas reduction, safe streets, traffic calming, and bike paths — just to name a few issues of focus. PLAN Boulder applies a consistent approach to developing its positions and a broad cross-section of the community has come to trust PLAN Boulder to inform them about complex issues and good candidates for election to City Council.

It takes diligence and effort to maintain an effective citizen organization. PLAN Boulder's success has been a direct result of its engagement of Boulder citizens, clear analysis, and direction. PLAN Boulder attracts board members of all ages with a spectrum of expertise and viewpoints and enlists engaged members through community outreach. The citizens of Boulder have come to know that PLAN Boulder will dependably show up to present well-reasoned policy positions — and it's all done by volunteers, without any paid staff. The current PLAN Boulder board includes people of ages 24-75, full time, part time, and retired workers, small business owners, people with children who attend BVSD, people who care about the place where we live — we are Boulder.

For many years, PLAN Boulder was the only organization providing this level of engagement to Boulder citizens, but the landscape is changing. The business and development community responded to complaints about the pace and quality of development by creating Better Boulder, which has learned and borrowed some of PLAN Boulder's effective approaches. PLAN Boulder welcomes this new initiative of the business community and we believe the involvement of Better Boulder's constituents in city issues will broaden discussion and better inform the community. This benefits all of us.

To the disappointment of some former Boulder mayors, PLAN Boulder County is here to stay. We will continue to promote far-sighted, innovative, and sustainable land use and growth patterns that preserve the area's unique character and desirability, and that reduce our carbon footprint and environmental impact. We will continue to strongly advocate for good, open government that gives the public access to decision-making. We will support effective solutions for affordable housing and transportation. We will continue to be stewards for the preservation of Boulder's Open Space. And, most important, we will continue to actively engage the public in the issues of our time to keep Boulder the wonderful place that all of us love. We invite anyone who finds our message compelling to join us as members or supporters. You can find us at www.planboulder.org, on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram too.

Peter Mayer is a board member of PLAN-Boulder County.

Editor's note: Mara Abbott contacted seven of PLAN Boulder's 11 board members prior to changes in board membership at the end of January. Most declined to be quoted by name.