How Ways and Means will tackle health care

"There's a special place in hell for actions like this," one congressman told officials involved in Flint's water crisis yesterday. But first: The latest health reforms on the Hill, and what we learned from HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell's six-stop tour to pitch the White House budget.

HOW WAYS & MEANS WILL TACKLE HEALTH CARE THIS YEAR — Chair Kevin Brady stressed that the panel will be "very aggressive" when tracking how CMS implements the MACRA physician payment law, even as the committee works to develop an alternative to Obamacare and reform hospital payment laws.

Story Continued Below

In an interview with Pro's Erin Mershon, Brady laid out priorities that include tackling cuts to hospital outpatient departments and changing post-acute care payments. And "there could be bipartisan momentum" to reform the Bipartisan Budget Act, which included a provision on so-called site neutrality for hospital payments, Brady said. The story for Pros: http://politico.pro/1M6c269

SENATE HELP MARKS UP MENTAL HEALTH, OPIOID BILL — The Senate HELP Committee at 10 a.m. will mark up five pieces of bipartisan mental health reform and opioid abuse legislation, Pro's Brianna Ehley reports.

The committee will consider a manager’s amendment to a broad mental health reform bill, and a manager’s amendment to a substance abuse treatment bill, as well as smaller measures addressing substance abuse. The mental health reform bill was chiefly crafted by Chairman Lamar Alexander and ranking Senator Patty Murray but also takes language from a measure sponsored last summer by Sens. Chris Murphy and Bill Cassidy that will not be marked up.

— Murray on the legislation: “I'm glad that we’ve established a strong, bipartisan foundation for work to improve care for mental illnesses and substance use disorders in our country," she said in a release. "And I believe many of my colleagues, on both sides of the aisle, would agree that we should keep building on it."

E&C CUTS $30 BILLION FROM HEALTH PROGRAMS — The House Energy and Commerce Committee on Monday approved roughly $30 billion in cuts to health programs despite Democratic claims that the GOP proposal was a rehashed attempt to undermine the ACA and shift costs to states. The story for Pros: http://politico.pro/1nMLtHs

— CBPP's Bob Greenstein is concerned: "The ACA has reduced the number of uninsured people by about 20 million; the budget would reverse those gains, and its deep additional Medicaid cuts would intensify the damage," the head of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities writes. http://bit.ly/1RNkt2F

WELCOME TO WEDNESDAY PULSE — where we're still on schedule, despite the D.C. Metro system's best attempts to derail us. Tips to ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter, and with help today from Brianna Ehley, Brett Norman and Sarah Karlin-Smith.

WHAT WE LEARNED FROM BURWELL's BUDGET TOUR — HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell on Tuesday concluded her six-stop tour to tout the budget to congressional committees, and PULSE pulls out three takeaways:

— Everyone loves Sylvia. The Republican-led hearings were remarkably friendly, a distinct departure from the pitched battles that Congress fought with Burwell's predecessor, Kathleen Sebelius. "They didn't lay a glove on you," Rep. Tom Cole joked to Burwell as one of those budget hearings, at a House Appropriations Subcommittee, drew to a close.

— There's still a key fight over funding. While Republican leaders agreed that fighting opioid addiction is a top priority, Burwell carefully sidestepped some direct questions about the Senate's new legislation — the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act — which the White House has said lacks the necessary funds.

— She celebrated wrapping up with an on-message rap. "Just wrapped my sixth budget hearing," Burwell tweeted on Tuesday, a day after President Obama said she'd challenged him to a rap battle. "I've got my mind on the budget and the budget on my mind."

'THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT AND BEING PRESIDENT' — In her victory speech en route to sweeping last night's primaries, Hillary Clinton took a subtle shot at Bernie Sanders' Medicare-for-all plan, which many economists have said is prohibitively expensive and politically unworkable.

"Every candidate makes [big] promises … but every candidate owes it to you to be clear and direct about what our plans will cost and how we are going to make them work," Clinton said. "That's the difference between running for president and being president."

— Total votes on Super Threesday, by candidate

PULSE's personal count, as of 4 a.m. ET

Clinton: 3.7 million votes

Trump: 3.2 million

Sanders: 2.8 million

Cruz: 1.9 million

Kasich: 1.6 million

Rubio: 1.0 million

ICMYI: FDA PRIORITIZES REVIEW OF GENERIC DRUGS THAT ADDRESS MONOPOLY — FDA quietly updated a policy on Friday to expedite review of generic drug applications that are looking to copy a drug produced by only one company but not covered by any patents or other exclusivities.

Pro's Sarah Karlin-Smith points out that the move appears to be an agency solution to the Martin Shkreli problem — where the price of an old medicine can be jacked up exponentially because of insufficient competition. The new policy could expedite review of as many as 125 generic drug applications, FDA told Bloomberg. It's worth noting that priority review moves generic drugs to the front of the line, but does not guarantee an agency review within a particular time period. See the FDA notice: http://1.usa.gov/1R1dfZg

CDC ISSUES SWEEPING GUIDELINES ON OPIOIDS — Officials are saying that Tuesday's guidelines are intended to "turn around" a culture of pain management that has largely overlooked the dangers of addiction, Pro's Brett Norman and Sarah Karlin-Smith report.

CDC Director Tom Frieden says the guidelines send a message to primary care providers: the risks of addiction and death from opioids outweigh the benefits for "the vast majority" of patients suffering from chronic pain. The story for Pros: http://politico.pro/1QWbSxc

— Why one expert expects the voluntary guidelines to become rules: "I'm confident that we’re going to see licensing boards and state regulatory agencies pick these up and turn them into laws and regulations and rules," Bob Twillman, executive director of the American Academy of Pain Management, told Pro's Brett Norman.

He said the dosing guidelines in particular were problematic. "A lot of practitioners will take those numbers and make them ceiling doses … as if they are written in stone," Twillman said. Other doctors will say "this is just too much — I’m just going to avoid all the hassle and not prescribe them at all."

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

HOW EBOLA CZAR WOULD FIGHT NEXT EPIDEMIC — Ron Klain lays out six recommendations for the next president, drawn in part from Klain's experience leading the federal government's Ebola response under President Obama. One proposal: "We need a new specialized agency: a Public Health Emergency Management Agency," Klain writes. http://bit.ly/1QWMc3s

HOUSE PANEL GRILLS OFFICIALS OVER FLINT CRISIS — Lawmakers on Tuesday spent hours blistering a former EPA official and two former leaders of Flint, Mich., POLITICO's Annie Snider reports. The House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform is conducting an inquiry into why officials waited so long to address the city's toxic water, and the panel released a new batch of internal EPA emails yesterday.

Two key quotes

— "I'm not so sure Flint is the community we want to go out on a limb for … At least without a better understanding of where all that money went." - EPA official's email from September 2015

— "There's a special place in hell for actions like this." - Rep. Buddy Carter at yesterday's hearing

— Next up: EPA chief Gina McCarthy and Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder will appear in front of the committee on Thursday.

MEDPAC's NEW REPORT IS OUT — Among other recommendations, the commission suggested a slew of Medicare Advantage payment reforms, including doing away with caps on payment based on which county the plan operates in. The report: http://1.usa.gov/1UxyGpt

VALEANT PLUNGES ON WALL STREET — The heavily scrutinized drug maker lost more than $11 billion in market value on Tuesday after executives said that Valeant's revising its strategy of hiking drug prices, lowering its quarterly guidance and may default on its debt. The only good news: Investors who shorted the stock made a killing.

Valeant's closing share price

— Monday: $69.04

— Tuesday: $33.51

ASCO WEIGHS IN ON STATE OF CANCER CARE — The American Society of Clinical Oncology's review of cancer care in America calls out major achievements — such as the declining mortality associated with breast, colorectal and cervical cancers — but notes that there's growing inequity based on affordability and availability of providers and testing. ASCO's report: http://bit.ly/1R1z8HW

— Where cancer care could go. "New approaches to cancer treatment are extending and improving lives, but they also raise tough questions about how to apply what we're learning for patients quickly, efficiently and equitably," ASCO president Julie Vose said. The organization calls on providers to implement tactics such as developing alternative payment models and applying lessons from the "Choosing Wisely" campaign to reduce waste and duplicative tests.

HOW ANTI-VAXXERS HELPED SPREAD DISEASE — A new JAMA review confirms media reports from last year: Recent U.S. measles outbreaks have been sparked by intentionally unvaccinated individuals and further fueled by waning immunity in vaccinated people. http://bit.ly/1VbojIl

Since measles was technically eliminated in the United States in 2000 …

— There have been at least 1,416 measles cases

— 56.8% of these measles patients were unvaccinated

— 70.6% of these unvaccinated patients claimed non-medical exemptions

ON THE HILL TODAY — The American Lung Association’s "LUNG FORCE Heroes" — people who have been personally affected by lung cancer — will be lobbying lawmakers to increase funding for lung cancer.

ON A SAD NOTE — Many of you have heard by now of the death Monday of Peggy Girshman, one of the finest health and science journalists, a founding editor of Kaiser Health News, and a friend to many of us and our readers. (Pro's Jennifer Haberkorn calls her the "kindest, funniest POLITICO Pulse tipster there ever was," and she was instrumental in helping me when I was first starting out in health journalism, too.)

Here’s a remembrance from NPR's Joe Neel http://n.pr/1S2a7ii and from the Association of Health Care Journalists. https://t.co/0ioVjmyf5O Miss you, Peg.

WHAT WE'RE READING

A New York City hospital executive quit over a $764 million electronic health record implementation that he compared to the Challenger space shuttle disaster: http://nyp.st/1Uyeynd

As part of her AHCJ-Commonwealth Fund project, Sarah Kliff digs into the reality of what happens when a provider makes a medical error — and the depression and tragedy that can follow these doctors and nurses as "second victims": http://bit.ly/1ptgphK

A new JAMA viewpoint explores the challenges and opportunity of bundled payments: http://bit.ly/22l4Y9U

Does the FDA get enough love on the Hill? Ex-FDA Commissioner Margaret Hamburg doesn't think so, and she tells STAT News's Rick Berke that the agency is chronically underfunded: http://bit.ly/1MlTNUW

Austin Frakt argues that TV drug ads — yes, TV drug ads — can be helpful to patients after all: http://nyti.ms/22jjeTL

Paul Levy — the hospital CEO who began blogging in 2006 and continued even after leaving health care — is officially hanging it up after 4,646 posts: http://bit.ly/1QWPjbJ

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **