Low-income Washtenaw County residents will have a new place to turn for dental care next year.

The county’s board of commissioners voted Wednesday night to approve the opening of the Washtenaw County Dental Clinic in the Haab Building in downtown Ypsilanti. The clinic is scheduled to open in January 2015.

“It’s a really exciting project that’s going to address a big need in our community,” acting health director for Washtenaw County Public Health Ellen Rabinowitz said.

“We’ve known for years from the community health assessment work that we do that access to dental care services is a huge unmet need.”

Access to dental care can be tricky for low-income residents across the county because even those who qualify for Medicaid often have trouble finding a provider who will accept the government-provided coverage.

“Medicaid reimbursement rates for dental care are extremely low, so private dentists really can’t afford to take it,” Rabinowitz said.

“Community clinics run by county health departments can access additional federal matching funds to supplement the reimbursements and provide a sustainable cash flow.”

Washtenaw County already has a number of community dental clinics that provide care to Medicaid patients, but Rabinowitz and Board of Commissioners chair Yousef Rabhi said that the need in the county dwarfs the available services.

“It’s now going to become even more acute with the expansion of Medicaid a lot more people will qualify for dental care but won’t have anywhere to go,” Rabhi said.

“What we’re doing with this clinic is attempting to make care accessible for everyone.”

There are an estimated 18,000 Washtenaw County residents who are covered by Medicaid dental coverage and an additional 16,000 are expected to become eligible through the Affordable Care Act.

The clinic will provide care to county residents whose household income is less than 200 percent of poverty level and who are either covered by Medicaid or do not have dental insurance. Commercial insurance plans will not be accepted, Rabinowitz said.

The clinic, at 111 N. Huron St., will have 11 chairs and the capacity to serve an estimated 6,000 patients per year with 15,000 patient visits.

Saint Joseph Mercy Health System is providing the space, which is located near the Ypsilanti downtown transit station and is in the same building as the Neighborhood Family Health Center.

"We're so pleased to be able to contribute to this important community program," Michael Miller, Jr., chief mission officer at Saint Joseph Mercy Health System, said in a statement.

"Increasing access to health care and working with the public health department and other community groups to promote the common good goes hand-in-hand with our mission."

Michigan Community Dental Clinics operates 22 dental offices throughout the state and will handle day-to-day operations of the new facility while working closely with Washtenaw County Public Health.

“I’m so proud of the staff and all of the partners that came together to make this happen,” Rabhi said.

“The fact that we’re able to put it on the east side of the county and right next the transit station ensures that it will be able to serve one of the areas that has the most need and that it will be accessible to everyone.”

Renovations to prepare the space to become a dental clinic are expected to cost $1.5 million, which will be provided by the board of commissioners. Rabhi said that the funding will come from public health reserves as well as a reserve set aside in case a court case between Michigan and federal governments had not gone in the state’s favor.

Michigan Community Dental Clinics is expected to pay back the $1.5 million during a 15-year agreement making the project cost-neutral to the county over the course of the contract.

Ben Freed is a general assignments reporter for The Ann Arbor News. Email him at benfreed@mlive.com and follow him on twitter at @BFreedinA2. He also answers the phone at 734-623-2528.