There aren’t many things George W. Bush and Bruce Reed have in common. Bush, of course, was our 43rd president and agitated liberals and Democrats pretty much on a daily basis. Reed worked for former President Bill Clinton, was chief of staff for Vice President Joe Biden and has done a great deal of work on policy and politics in the interim years. In December, he left Biden’s office to become president of the Eli and Edythe Broad Foundation, which focuses on K-12 education.

Here’s what both men should be lauded for: Whatever problems they might have had with a particular president, they kept it to themselves – or have to date – so the men could do their jobs. Reed was a senior adviser on domestic policy to Clinton and worked also for the Democratic Leadership Council during the difficult years – the ones where Clinton was under fire for having a sexual relationship with an intern. Others wrote books or went on TV to separate themselves from the scandal-tarred – yet later, extremely popular – Clinton. Not Reed. He did his job; he focused on the policy issues that mattered to him, and if he had a problem with Clinton’s behavior, he kept it to himself.

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

Bush, too, has been quiet. Aside from going on "The Tonight Show" to display his affable side and show paintings he had done (the best being of his cat, Bob), Bush has been notably mum on matters involving his successor, President Barack Obama. If Bush hates the Affordable Care Act, he’s kept his thoughts out of the news pages and off the Sunday shows. If he is wringing his hands over the more deliberative foreign policy style practiced by the current occupant of the White House, he’s kept it to a close group of confidantes. You can love Bush or hate him for his policies on Iraq, taxes, education or whatever – but you have to give the man props for doing the decent and adult thing and just letting the president do his job without his predecessor rhetorically nipping at his heels.

That’s why it’s so disappointing to see former members of the Obama administration – or for that matter, any administration – come out with tell-almost-all books in which they openly discuss the disagreements and disappointments they had with the man who gave them a high-level job in government. Robert Gates did it; Hillary Clinton did it (though less brutally – one presumes she’d like the president’s help should she indeed decide to run to succeed him); and now former Defense Secretary and CIA Director Leon Panetta has done it.

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

Panetta, who actually has a deserved Washington reputation as a collegial mensch, lit into Obama in his book, “Worthy Fights,” saying the president was wrong to disengage so completely with Iraq. The administration argued (correctly) that the Nouri al-Maliki regime refused to agree to terms, but Panetta said they hadn’t tried hard enough. And, he continues, Obama shouldn’t be promising not to put boots on the ground.

The problem with these complaints is that someone serving as defense secretary doesn’t have to take the wishes of the American public into account. The military is single-minded in its mission (as it should be), but politicians don’t have that luxury. This country does not want to get involved in another bloody, costly war in the Middle East, and Obama is listening. Is it wrong for him to reassure the American public, instead of keeping his options open? That’s an intellectual exercise one can conduct more easily when one is in appointed, not elected, office.

[SEE: Political Cartoons]

And if these former senior officials were so unhappy with Obama, why did they hang around so long? Show me any employee, no matter how high up, who doesn’t have problems and conflicts with the person at the top. Deal with it or leave. Dealing with it and then writing a book about how awful it was, or how you were right and they were wrong, is not the way to go.