Firefighters said the home located in the 1200 block of South Kalanchoe sustained extensive damage.

Fire officials say a couple and their daughter got out of the burning home safely.

Investigators in Broken Arrow are working to see if fireworks may have caused a Fourth of July house fire that heavily damaged a home near 81st Street South and 129th East Avenue. Thankfully, the family got out safely.

On a holiday that often generates a lot of family memories, for one Broken Arrow family, the memory of this year's Fourth of July isn't a good one. A fire heavily damaged their home and destroyed a car in the driveway.

Firefighters kept it from spreading to the house next door.

"Whenever they arrived, the garage was fully involved and it had already vented through to the attic that was directly above the garage," said Deputy Chief, Phil Reid, with BAFD.

A couple and their nine-year-old daughter made it out safely. The mom and daughter had already gone to bed, and as the dad was locking the house up for the night, he saw flames coming from the garage.

The garage door had been up, so some in the neighborhood speculate a stray firework could have started the Fourth of July fire.

Firefighters haven't determined how the fire started yet, but are certainly looking into whether fireworks could be to blame. Pinpointing fireworks as a cause, however, could be difficult.

"There's no one we can go to and say ‘hey did anyone see a firework go into the garage,'" Reid said.

Since 2008, Broken Arrow has allowed people to shoot off fireworks inside the city limits as long as they get a $20 permit beforehand. The permits are for July third and fourth.

"If we do notice there are large amounts of permits in one concentrated area, we'll keep an eye on that area," said Reid.

While it's not known yet if fireworks caused the house fire, the owners said they're not speculating on a cause. They're too busy meeting with insurance adjustors, restoration crews and figuring out what they'll be able to save.

The Broken Arrow Fire Department said any change to the ordinance allowing fireworks within the city limits, for people with permits, would have to go through the city council.