Voters in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut will face several ballot initiatives in next week’s elections. Here are some recommendations:

NEW YORK Proposal One is a constitutional amendment to revise the state’s redistricting procedure. This is a phony reform that purports to establish a new system of drawing legislative districts. Legislative leaders would appoint a committee charged with drawing new districts. If the legislators don’t like the first two tries, they can draw the districts themselves. The net result would be to reinforce, not reform, a system that virtually guarantees job security for incumbents and discourages competition. State Senator Liz Krueger, a Democrat from Manhattan, is correct when she calls it “a sneaky attempt to maintain power.” Vote no on Proposal One.

NEW JERSEY Public Question 1 is a constitutional amendment to change the state’s inhumane and antiquated bail bonding system. The American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey, which supports this reform, says that nearly three-quarters of people in New Jersey jails are awaiting trial rather than serving a sentence. Many who are not considered dangerous are held for months or even years because they cannot afford to post bail. Gov. Chris Christie correctly compared this system to the “debtors’ prisons” of the Victorian age. The amendment would allow judges to keep defendants in jail if they are flight risks or a threat to the community, but it would also allow the pretrial release of lower-risk defendants who cannot afford bail. Vote yes on Public Question 1.

Public Question 2 is a constitutional amendment that would create a continuous source of revenue drawn from the state’s corporation business tax to replenish a popular (but now largely broke) environmental program that acquires open space, preserves farmlands and protects historical sites. Once open space is gone, it is virtually impossible to get it back. This important measure has bipartisan support from legislators, but not from Governor Christie. Vote yes on Public Question 2.

CONNECTICUT Constitutional Question 1, known informally as the early-voting amendment, would amend the State Constitution to allow the Legislature to expand voting hours and ease requirements for absentee ballots to encourage greater voter participation. For many people, rigid voting hours and overly strict requirements for receiving an absentee ballot are a big hurdle. Vote yes on Connecticut’s flexible voting amendment.