TOMS RIVER — After a day of emotional protests, the Kean University Board of Trustees voted unanimously to uphold the denial of tenure — and effective layoff — of six university professors at a meeting in Toms River.

Starting just after 11 a.m., dozens of speakers — some in tears, some angry — pleaded with trustees to reject the recommendation of university administration, led by Kean President Dawood Farahi, that the six professors not be granted tenure and be dismissed from their positions at the end of the year.

The board heard almost uniform protests for three hours before entering into closed session at 2 p.m. They emerged again at 4:30 p.m. and without any statement, read off their vote to uphold Farahi’s decision, along with a list of other agenda items.

While many said they were already resigned to the decision, students and faculty gathered at the university’s satellite campus applauded sarcastically, deriding the board’s decision and their lack of explanation.

"What’s disheartening is that they can’t even share a single sentence," said theater professor Anna DeMers, one of the six denied tenure. "It’s cruel to treat people as a ten-point agenda item."

James Castiglione, President of the Kean Federation of Teachers, said the decision would compromise the university’s academic standards.

"I think it’s shameful that the board would not provide any reason for their decision after all of the public outcry," he said. "It jeopardizes the viability of our academic programs to layoff so many qualified professionals."

The move was considered unusual as the professors were all in their fifth year teaching at the at the Union Township-based public university.

Tenure, which is designed to protect academic freedom, is essentially a permanent contract and means a faculty member cannot be fired except under extreme circumstances. Under Kean’s system, professors and administrators in tenure-track positions are usually granted tenure after a five-year probation period.

In November, after campus protests surrounding the move, Farahi released a two-page statement defending his tenure recommendations.

"A lifetime job in the state university system is not an entitlement, it has to be earned," Farahi said. "That is our responsibility to our students and to the taxpayers of New Jersey."

Yesterday students and faculty alike berated Farahi and defended the professors now facing likely termination.

"This is not the world-class education we advertise; this is an academic crime," said Richard Katz, a professor in the English department at Kean, who noted his department has well over 100 adjunct instructors, but just 17 tenured professors. "Our students deserve more, not less, for their ever-increasing tuition and fees."

Others expressed their befuddlement that the university, which has been plagued by scandals in recent years, would further diminish an already small pool of tenured faculty members.

"This kind of mass firing — and that’s what this is, a mass firing — can in no way be good for the institution," said Tim Haresign, of the Council of New Jersey State College Locals.

RELATED COVERAGE



• Kean University professors plan last stand in tenure fight

• Tensions rise at Kean U. as officials recommend denying tenure to 2/3 of eligible professors