First there was Facebook, then Twitter, now there are a couple social media apps allowing people to live stream events from anywhere in the world as they happen - for instance, your child's soccer game, a concert or even a bar room fight.

Experts say it could revolutionize how we use our cell phones to gather information.

"We're live streaming, so everyone tap the hearts and comment and say hi to Don," Zak Fick said.

Fick has been using the app Periscope, which is owned by Twitter, for the past few weeks to live stream various events throughout his day.

"I have some events that I'm a part of, I can just put my camera right there and broadcast it and people can follow along with what I'm doing," Fick said.

Fick says live streaming video will change how people interact with one another and experience live events, like football games or concerts.

"I think if schools used it, it would be a great way to broadcast your softball games or baseball games or what have you, I would tune into that because I might not necessarily be able to make it to my schools games," Fick said.

On this day, Fick is keeping close tabs on a live feed out of New York City of a police protest.

Not only is the protest broadcast live, but others, who are watching the same broadcast, can leave comments providing viewers instant feedback.

Because this form of broadcasting is somewhat unregulated, there could be legal issues.

"Such as music events, you need to understand there are certain rights violations that can occur, such as trademark or patent rights particularly to music or concerts that they are attempting to live stream," Sioux Falls attorney Sam Goodhope said.

That includes NFL games or MMA fights - anything that is copyrighted.

"Whether or not the proprietor chooses to enforce those is up to them, but the people doing the live streaming need to understand that it's possible they are committing a legal malfeasance," Goodhope said.

Which is a legal term that means an act that is wrongful or illegal.

Now, if you are in a public place, say your child's soccer game, anybody can live stream you and your location.

"It's pretty much fair game, big brother is watching," Goodhope said.

You may not wish to be live streamed, but experts say it's irrelevant, because you're in a public setting.

"Just the public in general has to be aware of an out burst in public, might be caught somewhere and that might come back to haunt you, which is the sad reality of it," Fick said.

A reality we now live in in today's world of social media.

"It's going to be interesting to see where this goes, it's so new nobody knows yet, we're all sort of watching to see what happens," Fick said.

Fick says if you wouldn't post it on Facebook or don't want grandma to see it, don't live stream it.





Featured Stories

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.