RESTON, Va.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--MAXIMUS announced today that its Tax Credit and Employer Services (TCES) division has formed a strategic alliance with iCIMS Inc., a leading provider of Software-as-a-Service talent acquisition software solutions.

The alliance will allow human resource professionals to access electronic Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) pre-screening and I-9/E-Verify management solutions from MAXIMUS through the iCIMS Talent Platform.

Employers may be eligible to receive tax credit incentives for hiring from targeted populations, including veterans and individuals with disabilities. These incentives range from one-time credits of up to $2,400 to two-year credits of up to $9,600 per qualified individual. The new solution allows iCIMS users to quickly and easily check job candidates for tax credit eligibility.

Users will also be able to electronically process the Form I-9, with pre-populated data and encrypted electronic signature, and seamlessly transmit data to E-Verify, for compliance with various federal and state regulations requiring E-Verify participation.

“The combination of iCIMS’ robust applicant tracking and talent acquisition platform with our WOTC screening and I-9 and E-Verify management services provides an enriched resource for human resource professionals. We are pleased to offer our clients the ability to identify tax incentives and an increased confidence around I-9 compliance,” said Mark S. Andrekovich, President of MAXIMUS TCES.

”Through our new alliance, mutual customers with MAXIMUS and iCIMS will experience a streamlined recruiting process and improved efficiencies while taking advantage of tax credit opportunities,” said iCIMS Chief Marketing Officer, Susan Vitale. “By expanding our network with companies like MAXIMUS, we can remove the bottleneck of logging into separate systems for all areas of the hiring process. Together with MAXIMUS, we’re thrilled to be able to support human resource professionals who choose best-in-breed technology to power the increasingly complex needs of talent acquisition.”

About MAXIMUS

MAXIMUS is a leading operator of government health and human services programs in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and Saudi Arabia. The Company delivers business process services to improve the cost effectiveness, efficiency and quality of government-sponsored benefit programs, such as the Affordable Care Act, Medicaid, Medicare, Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), Health Insurance BC (British Columbia), as well as welfare-to-work and child support programs around the globe. The Company's primary customer base includes federal, provincial, state, county and municipal governments. Operating under its founding mission of Helping Government Serve the People®, MAXIMUS has approximately 11,000 employees worldwide. For more information, visit www.maximus.com.

About MAXIMUS Tax Credit and Employer Services

MAXIMUS Tax Credit and Employer Services works with businesses to maximize their tax credit potential through incentives, such as Federal Work Opportunity Tax Credits, Location, Retraining, Empowerment Zone Credits. Some of these programs are designed to encourage employers to hire workers from targeted populations, including veterans, individuals with disabilities and long-term welfare recipients. MAXIMUS Tax Credit and Employer Services additionally provides end-to-end electronic I-9 management services that are fully compliant with guidelines published by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and seamlessly integrated with the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services E-Verify program. For more information, visit www.maximus.com/tces.

About iCIMS, Inc.

iCIMS, a leading provider of innovative Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) talent acquisition solutions, is focused on helping businesses win the war for top talent through the implementation of easy-to-use, scalable solutions that are backed by award-winning customer service. iCIMS' Talent Platform, the industry's premier candidate management solution, enables organizations to leverage mobile, social, and video technologies to manage their entire talent acquisition lifecycle from building talent pools to recruiting to onboarding, all within a single Web-based application. Exceeding 2,200 clients worldwide, iCIMS is one of the largest and fastest-growing talent acquisition system providers with offices in North America, UK and China.