Sioux Falls, SD

The Denny Sanford PREMIER Center is getting a new neighbor.

Sioux Falls businessman Chuck Brennan announced plans today to build a $15-million entertainment complex across the street from the events center. The centerpiece of the development will be a pawn shop that Brennan is touting as the Midwest's largest.

It's being called Badlands Pawn, Gold & Jewelry and Chuck Brennan says it will become one of South Dakota's top tourist attractions within the new Sioux Falls Sports and Entertainment District.

In addition to the pawn shop, the complex would include a 24-hour radio station, a mint that makes gold and silver coins and bars, a gun shop with a shooting range, a deli, a ticket broker and a concert stage with an in-house band.

Badlands Pawn Gold & Jewelry would be built around and over these buildings located on a service road along Russell Street. Chuck Brennan's $15-million project would be the first large development located near the Denny Sanford PREMIER Center.

"Think of it as a Disneyland, or maybe a Scheels or Cabellas," Brennan said.

Or maybe Wall Drug.

"We'll have nickel coffee and free ice water every day," Brennan said

With a little Fort Knox thrown in.

"Nowhere can you go see a million dollars in gold and it's sitting there. And we're going to print that gold right there,"Brennan said.

Rock and roll musician Ron Keel, known as the Metal Cowboy, will lead the Badlands House Band.

"I'm leaving Las Vegas, we're saying goodbye to a lot of wonderful friends, but look, we've got 50,000 feet of Wild West, Badlands, pawn, Las Vegas, guns, gold rock and roll so to speak so I think I'm going to be right at home," Keel said.

Brennan hopes Badlands Pawn will be open by next Thanksgiving, less than a year away. It's an ambitious deadline, but Brennan thinks is doable.

"It's pushing it like we've never pushed anything before, but we've been working on this for almost three years now and they'll be breaking ground in a few weeks," Brennan said.

Brennan says the project encompasses much more than just a pawn shop. He says the complex will lead the way to transforming the entire area around the events center, and beyond.

"It's going to add over 100 jobs to the community, flood the community with all kinds of different tourist opportunities and really be a great financial win for the community," Brennan said.

Brennan says some of the site work will begin as early as next week. Badlands Pawn plans to start hiring as soon as February. For information about job openings, click here.