The video assessment firm Ace Metrix today released an analysis on the most effective themes in Presidential campaign ads across all voters over the past 30 days in an effort to reveal what has been working among the candidates and PACs.

Overall, across Democrats, Republicans and Independents, the theme of job creation and of disparaging Republican candidates, mostly Donald Trump, were most effective. But when the firm looked at each party individually, different themes resonated amongst each group:

On the GOP side, American job creation was mentioned in one-third of the top ranked ads by those who identify as Republican. Another third contained anti-Trump commentary, reflecting the GOP’s rising level of discomfort with the possibility of him winning the nomination. Lastly was the topic of repealing Obamacare.

Largely missing from top performing Republican ads? Any mention of their future Democratic rivals – Hillary or Bernie.

Ted Cruz held sway with conservative voters on the topics of jobs and the repeal of Obamacare. These Cruz ads held seven of the Top Ten Republican ad spots in the past 30 days.

In contrast, half of the 22 top performing ads among Democrats sought to disparage Republican candidates. It’s important to note that most of these ads were funded by Republican-funded Super PACs (10) or the Cruz campaign (1).

While ads aired by the Democratic candidates themselves ranked among the best performing within the liberal voting constituency (nine of the Top Ten television ads in the past month based on Ace Score), neither candidate delivered a focused, consistent message thematically.

The Bernie 2016 camp had seven Top Ten ads to Clinton’s two, but both demonstrated reasonably strong Impact on liberal viewers (Impact Scores between 67-72).

On the Independent side, the most prevalent topic among successful ads over the past 30 days was the denouncing of other candidates. Negative chatter, particularly against Trump, took center stage with Hillary Clinton’s voice being generally ignored by swing voters. Bernie Sanders aired the highest number of top performers among swing voters, with seven spots, to Clinton’s two.