2016 Republican presidential hopeful and Senator Lindsey Graham (R-SC) waved the white flag of defeat on NBC’s “Meet the Press” today, when he told Chuck Todd that he doesn’t believe there is any chance of a Constitutional amendment to define marriage as being between one man and one woman.

Watch here:

“I don’t believe there is any chance of Constitutional amendment,” a defeated looking Graham said.

Pivot Fearfuls!

“What I want to do is protect the religious liberties of those who believe that opposing same sex marriage as part of their faith. So no, I would not engage in the Constitutional amendment process as a party going into 2016. Accept the Court’s ruling. Fight for the religious liberties of every American.”

In other words, that whole part of the Republican party platform is an electoral death wish now, so Graham wants the base to pivot to fears that their religious liberty is being infringed upon when gay people get married. This the party can work with.

This is how you turn a losing platform to rob others of their liberty that you sold to the cult for years as an easy get out the vote tactic into “liberty for all”, which is Republican for “The Republican Party will defend you from those meanies who are getting the same liberties as you.”

This has not been a good month for Graham, who started off peacocking about how while some see the Confederate flag as a “racist symbol”, it is just “who we are”, only to admit after much backlash that this “heritage” needed to come down.

It’s white flag month for Lindsey Graham and the Republican party platform. Wrong on the Confederate flag, wrong on equal marriage, wrong on Obamacare subsidies. Defeat, defeat, defeat.

Instead of talking about those things, Graham and Bush are signaling desperately that it’s time to pivot to “religious liberty”, a made up issue for the majority religion in this country, but let us not forget, this was the last win the Republican party had with Hobby Lobby fighting to take liberty away women and gay people. Also known as “heritage”.

It might not seem like it, but grading on a scale, Lindsey Graham and Jeb Bush are the sane adults in the Republican Party. They are desperately trying to get the party to move quickly off of the issue they’ve been fear-mongering about for years, because they can see it’s a loser that will cost the party elections. In starker terms, this is also known as defeat and surrender.

There is a flag that is most accurately a large part of “who they are” and won’t offend anyone but their base: