If you've only half paid attention to what's happening in Baton Rouge, you probably already know lawmakers are trying to agree on the best way to patch a $1.6 billion hole in Louisiana's budget.

And you may have heard this week that the state's private hospitals are working with House leaders to try to come up with one solution the Louisiana Hospital Association thinks would be mutually beneficial — and that puts Medicaid expansion squarely on the table as key to helping fill that funding gap.

Now you're wondering just how likely it is any of that will work. Is there any chance Louisiana will join ranks with some of the nation's other Republican-led states and turn course on its decision not to provide Medicaid to more than 200,000 of its lowest-income residents who are both uninsured and ineligible now?

Here are a few questions and answers that have surfaced in our recent coverage, all in one place for you:

Support is there for Medicaid expansion, but is it enough to gain traction this year?

Besides having the support the Louisiana Hospital Association, there are several leading Louisiana lawmakers who are either interested in approving Medicaid expansion, tapping into the money that Medicaid expansion would provide — or both.

But as NOLA.com | The Times Picayune reporter Emily Lane reported last week, the interest may not be strong enough to combat the political pressure Republicans are feeling to stay in line with the anti-Obama sentiment likely to surge through upcoming election season. At the very least, supporters such as state Sen. Ben Nevers say, maybe the discussion this session will set the stage for more widespread acceptance next year.

Gov. Bobby Jindal has been completely unmoved in his opposition to participating in Affordable Care Act's plan to extend health care coverage to roughly 200,000 uninsured people who live below 138 percent federal poverty level.

Is it a viable strategy to wait Jindal out?

It depends on what you mean by "viable." If you mean, "Will Louisiana expand Medicaid when Jindal is no longer governor?" signs are looking good.

NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune's Julia O'Donoghue reports all four of Louisiana's current gubernatorial candidates say they support expanding Medicaid in some fashion. The lone Democrat, state Rep. John Bel Edwards, said he wants to see Louisiana expand health care coverage under the terms currently allowable by the Affordable Care Act. The three Republicans — U.S. Sen David Vitter, Public Service Commissioner Scott Angelle and Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne — all say that they would like to accept the federal Medicaid dollars, but have more control over how the funding is used.

The folks at the non-profit Louisiana Budget Project seem to believe its expansion is inevitable under a new governor, too, calling it "inevitable — the financial incentives are simply too good for the next governor to pass up."

Then why doesn't everyone just cool their jets and wait?

Well, here's the case proponents make: Not passing it now means Louisiana is rejecting the opportunity to insure a huge swath of its neediest people while denying health care providers the opportunity to receive compensation when these people show up in their emergency rooms and clinics in need of care.

Already, a study showed that people who live in expansion states are receiving earlier diagnosis and treatment for potentially life-threatening diabetes than those who are not in expansion states. (Louisiana's diabetes rate of 11.5 percent is the second highest in the nation, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control.)

The federal government has offered to compensate expansion states at 100 percent for the first three years through 2016. If Louisiana sits out another year, it will have missed out on those fully compensated dollars and will opt in just as the state is required to kick in a little bit. By 2020, the federal contribution will still amount to at least 90 percent of the cost. That's compared with the roughly 62 percent it pays now for traditional Medicaid in Louisiana.

What Republican-led states have already changed course are leaning toward Medicaid expansion?

Indiana and Iowa were granted waivers to expand Medicaid under plans that differed from what was described in the federal law. Alaska is still discussing it. Governors in Florida, Tennessee and Kansas floated the concept of expansion, largely to have critics pick apart their efforts.

The Obama administration has warned a few non-expansion states with large populations of uninsured the federal government will soon let lapse a separate pool of money earmarked to pay for uninsured health care costs. "Coverage rather than uncompensated care pools is the best way to secure affordable access to health care for low-income individuals," reads a letter the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services sent to Florida, "and uncompensated care pool funding should not pay for costs that would be covered in a Medicaid expansion."

Rebecca Catatalanello can be reached at rcatalanello@nola.com or 504.717.7701.