Topics: Julia Angwin, NSA, Privacy, snowden, Surveillance, surveillance state, Innovation News, Technology News, Business News

Julia Angwin might want to cut Edward Snowden some royalty checks. As a reporter for the Wall Street Journal from 2000 to 2013, Angwin reported for years about the intersection of privacy and new technology. She began work on “Dragnet Nation: A Quest for Privacy, Security, and Freedom in a World of Relentless Surveillance” long before Snowden began shocking the world with his leaked tales of NSA surveillance. But the timing of the publication of her new book couldn’t have ended up being more propitious. At a moment when, largely due to Snowden’s efforts, public interest in and concern over privacy issues is at an all-time high, Angwin has arrived with a deeply researched book that is completely of the moment.

“Dragnet Nation” moves right to the top of the list of books we should all read about privacy, because it goes beyond simply reporting, in detail, the sheer extent of both government and corporate surveillance. If you’re looking for a comprehensible digest of the Snowden revelations and how they plug into our new world of Big Data and ubiquitous tracking, you’ll get plenty of that. But the word “quest” in the title has a specific meaning. A hefty portion of “Dragnet Nation” is devoted to Angwin’s efforts to escape the Panopticon. It’s an impressive and intimidating saga that serves to highlight not only how difficult it is to maintain one’s privacy, but just how essential it is that, as a society, we make it easier to do so.

Angwin spoke to Salon from New York, where she is now on the staff of the nonprofit investigative journalism outfit ProPublica.

Why did you write this book?

I’ve been on this beat for four years. I wrote the book because I felt that all my stories were really scary — they are tracking you here, they are tracking you there — but they weren’t actionable; in other words, people couldn’t figure out what to do about it. I was hopeful a book could provide some advice.

What was it like to be working on the book when the Snowden bombshells started to fall?

I still remember where was I standing when the first Snowden revelation about the Verizon secret order for the phone dragnet came out. My whole world was just turned upside down. I had been chasing that story because I had heard that that it was true. A lot of people that followed this issue had suspected it was going on, but no one had ever seen the proof. It was just mindboggling to see how vast it was. And then what happened after that, the continual flow, I mean even to this day, every week, there has been a new revelation.

You have a great quote early on in the book from when you go to visit the archives of the East German secret police — the infamous Stasi. You describe to the director of the archive the extent of current U.S. government surveillance capabilities and he says “the Stasi would have loved this.” What does it say about contemporary society that our level of surveillance would have stunned one of history’s most notorious police states?

I think it is something that we really have to grapple with. When I went to the Stasi archives I found that they actually only had files on a quarter of the population and it took a lot of work and a lot of human effort to generate those files. They certainly had a population that lived in fear of the secret police, but the Stasi didn’t have files on everyone.

Now we’re in a situation where it is pretty easy for a government to have basically total coverage of their population. So that raises the question: What safeguards do we need to put into place so that these powers are not abused? Because there is no question that they can be abused. We are going to have to readjust our governmental oversight to make sure our government doesn’t become a repressive regime. It currently is not. But the architecture is there.

How did we get here?

I trace our current world of dragnets and ubiquitous surveillance back to 2001 in two directions. First, after 9/11 the government got really interested in increasing surveillance capabilities, for a very obvious and legitimate reason — they had missed the attack. At the same time Silicon Valley woke up and said “Oh my gosh our business model isn’t working.” The dot-com bubble had burst. Both Silicon Valley and the government had a problem and they both came to the similar conclusion that the answer was collecting vast amounts of personal data. From the commercial side it turned out that the way to get advertisers interested in the Internet was to offer them incredible insights on the people that they were advertising against. And on the government side it was: If we collect a lot of information we can find these terrorists.

Unfortunately, what we’ve seen is these two things converge. The companies collecting information — like Google and Facebook — have discovered that they can’t easily say no to a court order saying give me the data, and we’ve also learned that sometimes the government hacks into commercial databases when they are officially blocked. Commercial data has become a honeypot that government likes to dip its hand into.