Democrat Marcia "Cia" Price will be the next 95th District delegate, easily defeating Independent Pricillia Burnett, with nearly 76 percent of the vote to succeed retiring Del. Mamye BaCote, D-Newport News.

Complete unofficial results from the State Board of Elections are Marcia Price, 4,654; Pricillia Burnett, 1,417.

Price said her message of progress and inclusion resonated most with voters.

"People want to move forward, they want to work with youth and they saw something in my vision and put trust in me," Price said. "I'm 100 percent honored for this and ready for the hard work that's ahead."

It was a successful first run for office for Price, daughter of Mayor McKinley Price and niece of longtime U.S. Rep Robert C. "Bobby" Scott.

During interviews with the Daily Press, Price, who grew up in the Southeast Community and still lives there, said reducing youth and gang violence was a top priority.

Photos from around the Peninsula on Election Day 2015. Follow our live coverage here: http://bit.ly/1NapG2u (Daily Press Photo Staff) (Daily Press Photo Staff)

She'd like to serve as the state-level link between local programs, such as Newport News' Summer Training and Enrichment Program, which matches young adults in the Southeast with summer internships, and federal programs like the Youth Prison Reduction through Opportunities, Mentoring, Intervention, Support and Education Act (Youth PROMISE Act).

Price also wants to help reduce the number of Standards of Learning tests to the federal minimum.

"Hopefully that would bring some time in the classroom for character building, technology, bringing back arts and music so we can really build the whole child so it's not just about memorization, but also about their development," Price said. "I think that will help them in the long run to be more competitive in the global market but also better citizens."

She supports expanding Medicaid as called for in the Affordable Care Act, which the General Assembly has rejected.

"It's a fiscally responsible decision because we're actually keeping and retaining hard-earned taxpayer money in our state," Price said. "I fully support it and have not heard a cohesive argument against it."

Price was appointed in July to the Virginia Council on Women by Gov. Terry McAuliffe.

Burnett is a former Newport News School Board member and 25-year veteran of the city's police department. She has also run for mayor and sheriff in the past 10 years.

Clift can be reached by phone at 757-247-7870.

House of Delegates, 95th District

Marcia Price, D: 75.8 percent

Pricillia Burnett, I: 23 percent