Buy Photo Salinas Fire paramedics respond to a medical emergency in this 2011 file photo. (Photo: The Salinas Californian)Buy Photo

Salinas city council passed a resolution Tuesday that will lower Salinas Fire paramedic care bills for the elderly, poor and others as it looks toward a future of overall lower healthcare costs and a city-run transport service.

The Emergency Medical Services and Vehicle Accident Collision Cost Recovery Fee Program went into effect in June with the purpose of recouping paramedic care costs through insurance companies.

However, government programs like Medicare and MediCal don’t cover first responder fees at this time, and residents who are recipients of Medicare and MediCal have been receiving $350 bills from the Salinas Fire Department for a medical call.

Medicare recipients are the most prevalent users of the 9-1-1 system, and with the resolution passed Tuesday, the fee will be reduced by 50 percent for Medicare and Veterans Assistance recipients, meaning their bills will total $175.

Those on Medicare, MediCal, Veterans Assistance or are uninsured, and who also fall under the federal poverty line, will have their bill reduced by 75 percent.

Those significantly under the poverty line, as well as those who do not receive services based on signing an Against Medical Advice form, will have their fees entirely forgiven.

Also, with the resolution passed Tuesday, the fire chief and finance director will now meet at least twice annually to determine if any invoices need to go into collections.

Salinas Fire Chief Ed Rodriguez said that with the resolution, costs will be reduced for many now and ultimately, will help reduce EMS costs for all residents.

By continuing the program as the “community’s safety net,” it positions emergency medical services for future funding, he said.

This type of cost recovery program is already being used in more than 50 other California jurisdictions, and a similar program will be adopted by the entire state of Washington next year, Rodriguez said.

With the change by the state of Washington, it will implement Affordable Care Act changes that will make EMS first response a reimbursable service, allow EMS to have a billing code for payments, and by 2016-2017, Ground Emergency Medical Transport, a reimbursable program through MediCal, will apply to all the states, he explained.

With those changes in the Affordable Care Act, the City of Salinas hopes to be able to then have full ambulance transport and full reimbursement for the city by 2020.

Once that change occurs, the City of Salinas could save 50 percent on EMS costs and recoup revenue from previous years now that it’s already implemented this cost recovery program, Rodriguez said.

“Cal Chiefs has encouraged all California-based fire departments to implement an EMS Cost Recovery Program to ensure readiness when full reimbursement takes effect through the federal health insurance programs,” Rodriguez wrote in the agenda item’s back-up information.

However, many in the audience were still unhappy with the cost recovery program.

Salinas resident Janet Collins said she would like to request that the fee be rescinded entirely since a reduction of 75 or 50 percent is still out of range for some people.

Many residents are a paycheck away from needing to go to the food bank, she said, and added that she feels this erodes people’s confidence in calling 9-1-1.

Residents such as Al Espindola and Mike Jones said that though they support the fire department, they felt that there should be other options explored that don't impact people's out-of-pocket expenses.

And several others wondered why Measure G monies aren't covering these costs.

Rodriguez said that those funds are covering new equipment, facility improvements and more for the fire department now, and later, Measure G funds will go toward staffing.

Councilwoman Kimbley Craig voted in favor of the resolution Tuesday and said it's about taking a look at what's best overall for Salinas residents and moving away from using private ambulance services when the City of Salinas could provide its own transport service with better response for lower costs.

Councilman Steve McShane agreed that while the "looks of this doesn't sit very well," it's ultimately about getting better service at a lower cost.

Councilmen Tony Barrera and Jose Castaneda were the opposing votes to the ordinance. Barrera cited concern that people will be discouraged from calling 9-1-1 based on the fee while Castaneda called it an "indirect taxation."

Rodriguez underscored again that the care will always be provided regardless of ability to pay and that the fee is not meant to be a hardship for anyone.

The Salinas Fire Department is experiencing a record year in calls, totaling near 14,000 this year. More than 3,000 of those incidents have been billed with gross collections totaling more than $770,000.

Net collections at this point are more than $60,000, and the changes in billing from the resolution will begin Dec. 1. Bills already received can be addressed individually.

The fire department reminds residents that payment plans can be set up for bills and to contact either the third-party billing company Wittman Enterprises LLC or the Salinas Fire Department if they have questions.

Contact Public Safety Reporter Chelcey Adami at 831-754-4261 or cadami@thecalifornian.com

Read or Share this story: http://bit.ly/1j6MLLg