The new name spelled a new start for J.D. Paige.

When the former Rangeview High School star arrived at Colorado State in 2014, he went by Jeremiah. He couldn’t wait to drape a green-and-gold jersey over his shoulders and play in his first college basketball game.

“Redshirting wasn’t on my mind at all,” he said.

One long year later, after a season in which he could only practice and not suit up for games, Paige entered the 2015-16 season eager for a new beginning in almost every way.

“My dad actually gave me the name (J.D.) when I was younger, so a lot of family members called me that,” said Paige, a 6-foot-3 guard. “So after I redshirted, I said, ‘Why not a new start?’ “

It’s easy in this age, with Kentucky’s annual batch of fabulous freshmen making title runs and LSU’s Ben Simmons drawing Le- Bron James comparisons, to think every college player should be ready to help a team from the moment he moves into his dorm room.

The reality is, outside of the prospects playing in the McDonald’s All-American Game to end their prep careers, being thrown into the Division I fire isn’t an easy proposition for most first-year players.

A year to grow physically, to study and soak in the game, to plant roots into the college environment, are benefits that can come from taking a year away from in-game competition.

One example: Colorado has received great contributions this season from wing George King, who played as a freshman and then redshirted last year to continue working on his game.

The struggle for an 18- or 19-year-old who has played dozens of games per year though AAU and high school seasons — spring, summer, fall and winter — is viewing his situation through long-term lenses.

“That’s the hardest thing to do, to accept what happens and move on from it,” Paige said of redshirting. “As soon as you accept it, you can move on from the situation and start to get better.”

Paige said missing games, not being on the court with his teammates during their 27-win season last year, was difficult. But it was not idle time. He said he built his body like he never had before, and now has noticed an improved ability to finish through contact at the rim.

Entering CSU’s game against Utah State on Saturday, Paige was averaging 5.6 points, 2.0 rebounds and 1.5 assists in 18.6 minutes per game. He had the biggest game of his career in the Rams’ 66-65 victory over UNLV on Jan. 6, scoring seven points in the game’s final minute to help CSU pull off a huge Mountain West victory.

“It was fun being able to be out there with my team after we all put the work in,” Paige said. “It was great that I was able to contribute like that.”

Paige isn’t the only member of this state’s talented 2014 high school class to benefit from a year on the bench.

Gonzaga’s Josh Perkins, a former Regis Jesuit standout, wasn’t supposed to redshirt during his first year in Spokane, Wash. But a broken jaw a couple games into the season altered plans and he was forced to put on that metaphorical shirt he never intended to wear.

But Perkins got to travel with the team last season and watch star point guard Kevin Pangos up close as he led Gonzaga to the Elite Eight. Now, he has stepped into Pangos’ role and is averaging 10.4 points for the Bulldogs.

“Everything happens for a reason,” Perkins told The Seattle Times. “Hopefully, it’s for the greater good.”

Paige wasn’t forced to the sideline by injury, but he now sees the benefits of the time off the court.

“It was about getting stronger and learning,” he said. “Just being a student of the game, learning from the older guys and growing.”

Nick Kosmider: 303-954-1516, nkosmider @denverpost.com or @nickkosmider