BEAVER CREEK — So now we know. It’s not that Mikaela Shiffrin is immune to pressure. She just has found an effective weapon to combat it.

“Maybe I’m in a little bit of denial about it,” Shiffrin said Saturday after claiming her third slalom gold medal in three years, this one at the alpine world ski championships 4 miles from her family home and a month before her 20th birthday. “I always say that I don’t really feel pressure.”

She did Saturday, with thousands of hometown fans hanging on her every turn, if not holding their breaths. She felt it, she tangled with it and she overcame it.

After posting the fastest first run in the morning, Shiffrin slid into the starting gate almost five hours later with 67 gates and just over 48 seconds of skiing in front of her. All of the other medal hopes were in the finish, where the crowd was in full throat pulling for the hometown girl and waving American flags. That’s when denial quit working.

PHOTOS: Day 13 of 2015 FIS Alpine World Ski Championships

“I was so worried that I was going to screw it up,” Shiffrin said. “I was telling myself that I wasn’t feeling pressure, that I’m just going to go out and make my best turns and it’s going to be fine. And no matter what happens it’s OK, even if I don’t get the gold, it’s OK because life goes on.

“Then I’m in the starting gate and I’m like, ‘God, I want this!’ “

Her heart-stopping winning run didn’t start out so well. At the first of two intermediate timings, she was behind the leader in the finish, Sweden’s Frida Hansdotter. After the second split, Shiffrin was still behind.

Then Shiffrin hit the accelerator. What would be shown by the clock was plain to the eye: Shiffrin was ripping the last 10 gates. She crossed the finish line 0.34 of a second ahead of Hansdotter, who had briefly allowed herself to think the gold medal might actually be hers.

“For a couple of seconds, I was thinking, ‘Oh, could it be?’ ” Hansdotter said. “But then I saw her last part and she was skiing really good, so then I knew she would take it.”

Shiffrin said she skied hard early in the run but took too conservative a line.

“It’s like a mental battle with myself about how much to push to win it by as much as I can, versus how much to hold back so I don’t screw it up,” Shiffrin said. “Hopefully at some point in my career, I get to the point where I can charge every run top to bottom no matter what.”

She was the favorite when she won her first world championships title two years ago in Schladming, Austria. She was the heavy favorite last year at the Sochi Olympics. Sochi was about making America proud. This one had a different edge. She didn’t want to let down the home folks.

And she heard it from them after the race. Why did you have to scare us like that?

“I’m very thankful,” Shiffrin said. “Everybody that I’ve seen so far has said, ‘Whoa, you almost killed us down here.’ I guess that’s the point, to have a good show, right? But it was not purposeful.”

In Schladming, Shiffrin was third after the first run, 0.18 of a second behind Hansdotter. In Sochi, Shiffrin had the fastest first run and survived a scary bobble on the second. This time she led, trailed and ultimately prevailed.

“I can’t really rank it, honestly,” Shiffrin said. “It’s so hard to rank these races, and sometimes I feel like ranking races — Sochi versus Schladming versus here — it puts me in the mind-set that some races are more important than others and some turns are more important. I don’t really believe that.

“It’s really special to win this medal in front of the home crowd, and that’s why it’s going to be close to my heart for the rest of my career. To have the opportunity during my career to go to world championships in my hometown, and to actually win a medal, and it’s history, that’s pretty cool.”

And, yes, there was pressure. There was no denying that anymore.

“It does mean a lot and I’m admitting that, now that the race is over and it came out in my favor,” Shiffrin said. “I get to admit how much I wanted this race.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer

Mikaela makes her mark

Mikaela Shiffrin, who turns 20 on March 13, has compiled a remarkable record since making her World Cup debut two days before her 16th birthday in 2011:

2013: Gold medal in slalom, world championships, World Cup slalom title

2014: Gold medal in slalom, Olympics, World Cup slalom title

2015: Gold medal in slalom, world championships

Note: Shiffrin also has 12 World Cup victories.