NEW YORK--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The worldwide Association of Executive Search and Leadership Consultants (AESC) recognized during today’s AESC Global Conference in New York City the outstanding achievements of three executive search and leadership consulting professionals for their significant contribution to the profession.

Karen Greenbaum, AESC President & CEO, said: “We are honored to recognize the exceptional achievements of our members at our 2016 Global Conference. Through their commitment to standards of excellence within the profession and the community at large, our 2016 award recipients are shining examples of how AESC members serve client organizations worldwide as trusted advisors. Not only do our members help build successful businesses, they help build successful and inspired communities, too.”

AESC’s Gardner W. Heidrick Award is a capstone award, presented annually to an individual who has made an outstanding contribution to the profession. The 2016 award was presented to Kevin Cashman, Senior Partner, Korn Ferry. This is the first time that this award was presented for lifetime achievement in leadership consulting. Cashman joined Korn Ferry in 2006 via its acquisition of LeaderSource, a firm he founded and ranked as one of the top three in leadership development globally. Over the last 10 years, Korn Ferry’s advisory services in leadership and talent consulting have grown from $20 million to $800+ million. Cashman has overseen the CEO and Executive Development offerings globally during this time of transformative growth. He is also a Founder of the Chief Executive Institute (CEI), which accelerates the development of CEOs and CEO successors. Over the past 30 years, Cashman has advised, coached and developed thousands of senior executives, CEOs and senior teams in more than 60 countries. He is the author of six books on transformative leadership including bestsellers, Leadership from the Inside Out and The Pause Principle.

The Eleanor H. Raynolds Award is awarded annually to an executive search professional who combines excellence in search with a strong commitment to volunteerism. The 2016 award was presented to David Moyer, President, Moyer Sherwood Associates. Moyer has served for more than 20 years in AESC member firms, specializing in searches in corporate communications and public relations. He has also served on the AESC Board and on AESC committees. He has had a lifelong commitment to service as an active supporter of nonprofits for many years, concentrating his volunteer work in the arts, as a board member of the Helicon Foundation for over ten years now. Helicon promotes chamber music with performances on period instruments featuring world-class musicians and rarely heard compositions. Moyer has also served on the board of The Waltz Series, promoting classical dance. Moyer has also been active with Dancing Classrooms, a youth program promoting respect and self-confidence which was profiled in three award-winning films: Mad Hot Ballroom, Take the Lead and Dancing in Jaffa.

The Future of the Profession Award, now in its second year, was designed to engage the next generation of leaders in executive search and leadership consulting. The 2016 recipient of this award was Andrew P. Chastain, Managing Partner & Chairman, Healthcare Practice, Witt/Kieffer. Recognizing the dramatic wave of healthcare industry change underway as a result of the Affordable Care Act, Chastain drove a deep analysis of the issues and opportunities that would impact Witt/Kieffer’s largest practice group. Reflecting his vision and thought leadership, he was tapped in 2014 to serve as Witt/Kieffer’s national Healthcare Practice leader with a charge to drive increased success of the core practice. An active member of the American College of Healthcare Executives, Chastain serves on the Xavier University Graduate Program in Health Administration’s Advisory Board. He is a frequent speaker and noted author on industry related trends pertaining to career management, CEO succession planning and governance.

About the Association of Executive Search and Leadership Consultants

Since 1959, AESC has set the standard for quality and ethics in executive search and leadership consulting worldwide. Because AESC members must commit and adhere to AESC's industry and government recognized Code of Professional Practice and Standards of Excellence, clients can be assured that AESC members are able to serve as trusted advisors for their most important engagements. As the voice for executive search and leadership consulting worldwide, today AESC is comprised of more than 300 member firms in 72 countries. To learn more about AESC and its membership, visit www.aesc.org. For information about AESC's career service for executive-level professionals, visit www.bluesteps.com.