If you do not have a Medicare Advantage plan that includes Part D drug coverage, you must sign up for it separately.



When to sign up



You should sign up for Medicare Part D at the same time that you enroll in Part B.

Do not delay even if you do not take any prescription drugs regularly right now. If you wait until later to sign up, you will be charged extra on your premium for every month that you waited.

The amount of the premium penalty changes every year. In 2015, you will be charged one percent of $33.13 for every month you are late in starting Part D. So if you have waited for two years, the extra charge would be 24 percent of $33.13, or about $8 extra per month.

The only way to avoid this penalty without signing up for Part D is having equivalent drug coverage, called "creditable" coverage, from another source, such as a retiree plan. Your plan administrator can tell you whether your plan is equivalent.



What you will pay for Part D

The average Part D plan costs about $32 a month but prices can vary. In general if you buy a plan with a higher premium, you will pay less out of your own pocket when you actually use the plan.

If your 2013 income was above $85,000 for a single person or $170,000 for a married couple filing jointly, you will be charged extra for your Part D premium in 2015.



In 2015 the maximum allowable deductible for a Part D plan is $320, though many plans have lower or even no deductibles. And plans also charge varying amounts for the prescriptions. Sometimes they charge a flat-dollar co-pay and sometimes they charge a percentage of the cost of the prescription, called co-insurance.

Most plans sort drugs into "tiers," with drugs in the lower tiers costing less.



The three coverage phases of Part D

You can think of your Part D "coverage year" as divided into three phases that come in order. If you don't take a lot of costly drugs, you probably will never get out of the first phase.



Phase 1: Initial coverage

In 2015 you will pay an average of 25 percent of the costs of your medications until you and Medicare together have spent $2,960. But that's only an average. Your personal share of expenses might be different depending on whether your plan has a deductible, how many drugs you take, and how much your drugs cost.

Phase 2: Donut hole

When you and your Part D plan together have spent $2,960 on drugs, you will enter this phase, also called the "coverage gap." While in the donut hole, you will have to pay a larger share of your drug costs. In 2015 you will pay 45 percent of the cost of brand-name drugs and 65 percent of the cost of generics.



One part of the Affordable Care Act created a schedule for closing the donut hole. It is about half-closed now and will be completely eliminated as of 2020. Then there will be only two coverage phases in a year. (For more information on how the donut hole is closing, download this guide from Medicare.)

Phase 3: Catastrophic coverage

When total cost of your brand-name drugs and your share of the cost of generic drugs together add up to $4,700 for the year, you will exit the donut hole and enter the "catastrophic coverage" period. With catastrophic coverage, you will pay only 5 percent of the cost of your drugs until the end of the year.