Buy Photo CentraState Medical Center in Freehold Township. (Photo: Asbury Park Press file photo)Buy Photo

FREEHOLD TOWNSHIP – A patient who just returned from West Africa and is experiencing flu-like symptoms is in isolation at CentraState Medical Center, said officials at the state Department of Health.

More: Ebola advisory issued by NJ health officials

But there is no reason to believe that the outbreak of Ebola has reached New Jersey, said Donna Leusner, director of communications for the department.

World Ebola news:

Nigeria Ebola delay creates fears of more cases



Saudi being tested for Ebola dies in hospital



Nigeria: 1 new Ebola death, 5 cases confirmed



"There are no reported or confirmed cases of Ebola in New Jersey at this time," Leusner said in a released statement.

"There is a patient under evaluation at the hospital with flu-like symptoms who recently returned from West Africa," said Abbey M. Luterick, via a statement for CentraState Medical Center. "(Monday) night, after consultation with the CDC and the New Jersey Health Department, it was determined that the patient, despite recent travel history, has no known exposure to Ebola. The patient improved since yesterday and remains under evaluation."

The patient arrived via ambulance Monday and the hospital "immediately implemented our infectious disease protocol in our Emergency Department by identifying an isolation room, specifically designed for management of infectious diseases. Upon arrival, the patient was escorted through a separate entrance and was immediately seen by a physician and tests were completed as part of the evaluation to determine the cause of the patient's condition," Luterick said.

The health issues the patient is experiencing could be from a "myriad of other common illnesses," state officials said.

Despite recent travel history to West Africa, this patient has had no known exposure to Ebola, she said.

"Nonetheless as a precautionary measure, upon transit and initial arrival at CentraState, the hospital implemented infectious disease protocols, including using an isolation room specifically designed for management of infectious diseases. The patient remains in isolation as a precaution and under evaluation as further tests are administered."

The state's health department is working closely with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ebola is not airborne and can only be spread by direct contact with an infected person.

The state and federal health officials are providing information via the Internet to help quell concerns and raise awareness of the situation.

Margaret F. Bonafide: Bonafide@app.com; 732-557-5734

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1sbW4fy