Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

CINCINNATI (AP) — A photograph of the bat and ball from Pete Rose’s record-setting 4,192nd hit has adorned the back of the enormous video board at Great American Ball Park for a dozen years, reminding everyone of one of the city’s biggest sports moments.

It’s also a reminder of something more: Even with the gambling scandal, a lifetime ban and the fact that he hasn’t lived in Cincinnati for a long time, this is still Pete’s place.

Baseball’s hits king remains revered in his hometown, no matter how much evidence surfaces about how he violated the sport’s cardinal rule by betting on baseball. For a generation, he represented Reds baseball with his grit and hustle.

Still does for many Cincinnatians, who will get another chance to cheer him during the All-Star Game at Great American next week.

“When you play in your hometown and you’re a great player like Pete was, you’ve got to be loved,” said Hall of Famer Tony Perez, a teammate on the Big Red Machine in the 1970s. “The people appreciate what I did for the team and the great years I had here, which is why they love me, too. But it’s different. When it’s your home and you’re doing great, they love you more.”

They’ve never stopped loving him, even though he’s been banned from the sport since 1989 for betting on baseball. The Reds have moved into a new ballpark since then, and Rose’s fingerprints are all over the place.

Beyond the photo that was replaced by one of many All-Star Game banners throughout the stadium last week, the ballpark is located on Pete Rose Way, which was named before before his gambling scandal.

Fans in Rose jerseys dot the stands at home games. The team’s adjacent Hall of Fame includes Rose prominently in the displays. A rose garden just outside the ballpark marks the spot where his record-breaking hit landed at old Riverfront Stadium in 1985.

The 74-year-old hits king visits town a few times a year and attends games, sitting in the seats like any other fan. When he’s shown on the video screen, fans cheer and chant “Pete! Pete! Pete!”

Those chants will fill Pete Rose Way again next week before the All-Star Game. Rose is being honored in Major League Baseball’s Franchise Four promotion — fans got to pick four top players from each team.

Rose says Hall of Famers Johnny Bench, Joe Morgan and Barry Larkin also were chosen to represent Cincinnati’s baseball tradition.

How will everyone react when he makes a rare on-field appearance with baseball’s permission?