It has been raining more than usual this spring, causing water to spill over the banks of some ponds, rivers, streams and lakes in Kansas.

But the state’s wildlife seems to be adapting pretty well to the extra moisture.

“Floods and droughts are natural, and wildlife has a way of adapting,” said Brad Rueschhoff, district wildlife biologist with the Kansas Department of Wildlife, Parks and Tourism.

May will go down in the record books as the third wettest May since 1895, according to the Kansas Weather Data Library. The statewide average precipitation for May was 7.73 inches, which was 188 percent of the normal rate.

The National Climate Prediction Center has indicated this summer — which begins Sunday — has an increased chance to be wetter than normal, too.

Rueschhoff, who works at the KDWPT Region 2 office, adjacent to Kaw River State Park on the south bank of the Kansas River in west Topeka, said deer and other animals may move to higher ground to escape wet areas, but they also will return once the land dries. Likewise, heavy rain and flooding may destroy nests of grassland birds, such as quail and wild turkey, but the birds have the ability to re-nest later.

And, he added, what may be negative for one species of wildlife may be a positive for another: An abundance of rain benefits habitats that attract amphibians and migrating waterfowl and serves as breeding grounds for insects.

“We assume with more standing water, we would have more mosquitoes,” he said.

Slithering concern

In addition to taking measures to guard against mosquito bites, people living in Kansas and Missouri might want to be on the lookout for snakes.

Stephen Thornton, medical director of The University of Kansas Hospital Poison Control Center in Kansas City, Kan., said in a video posted on YouTube that venomous snake bites are on the rise because the reptiles are moving from their natural habitats in search of drier ground.

“In Kansas and Missouri, we have what we call pit vipers — the rattlesnakes, copperheads and cottonmouths further south,” Thornton said, adding the venom from those snakes can cause tissue destruction, pain and swelling.

A common myth, he said, is that many people die from snake bites in the United States.

“In reality, we have very few deaths nationwide. Probably most of them are related to allergic reactions to the snake venom itself,” he said. “In America if you’re bitten and you see a physician, you’re more than likely going to be OK.”

Snakes bites are treated with antivenom, which can be expensive and difficult to find at smaller hospitals. The University of Kansas Hospital is a Snake Bite Center, which means antivenom is available and doctors and nurses are trained to handle snake bites.

“Once bitten, the best thing to do is stay calm. … Most of the ways snake bites are made worse are by people trying to do stuff before they get to the hospital,” he said.

Thornton warned against cutting the skin at the site of the snake bite or trying to suck the venom out of the wound. If bitten on the arm, it can be placed in a sling or immobilized in some other way, but a tourniquet shouldn’t be placed around the arm. Ice or warm compresses shouldn’t be applied to the snake bite area.

Snake bites need to be checked out by a physician who can determine whether the individual was bitten by a poisonous snake and if treatment with antivenom is warranted. Thornton said about 25 percent of the people bitten by a venomous snake aren’t injected with venom.

“So their bites aren’t any worse than a bite from a water snake,” he said.

Another threat

Jeff Bender, region supervisor at the KDWPT Region 2 office, said the effect of increased rainfall on animals isn’t as worrisome to him as the invasion of some plant species on habitats, such as bush honeysuckle at the 76-acre Kaw River State Park, which has hiking and biking trails that wind through an oak-hickory forest.

Greater moisture boosts the growth of such plants.

“Honeysuckle is more of a problem in the long term, more of a threat,” Bender said. “Honeysuckle can do long-term damage to the forest and can displace the native species. Without control, we will have a honeysuckle forest instead of native hardwood trees and shrubs.”

Honeysuckle can’t be eradicated by simply cutting back the thicket, he said. A combination of cutting and herbicide application is most effective.