Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

SAN DIEGO (AP) — The cast and filmmakers of “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” debuted a new behind-the-scenes reel and teased some new information at Comic-Con about the highly secretive film to a rapturous Hall H audience.

Filmmaker J.J. Abrams and Lucasfilm President Kathleen Kennedy were eventually joined on stage Friday by “Star Wars” veterans and “Force Awakens” stars Harrison Ford, Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher.

Ford, making his first public appearance since his plane crash in March left him hospitalized and injured, assured the audience and host Chris Hardwick that he was fine. The already excitable crowd exploded when Ford, the last to be introduced, walked out.

Seated next to Hamill, the gruff Ford was not hesitant to talk about his reluctance to revisit the world of “Star Wars” and the character of Han Solo.

“It should have felt ridiculous, it was 30 years ago,” Ford said. “I sort of grew up.”

He never thought that he’d do another film after the original trilogy.

“I was very gratified when I read the script because I read something that I thought was really remarkable, really well-written and with some very intriguing developments,” Ford said. “I was delighted to be involved and I was very happy to be part of the story and the cast again.”

“The Force Awakens,” which hits theaters on Dec. 18, picks up about 30 years after the events of “Return of the Jedi.”

Before fans were treated to the “Star Wars” veterans, they were introduced to the newcomers on the light side of the force and, for the first time, those on the dark side.

Adam Driver, Gwendoline Christie and Domhnall Gleeson were on hand representing the bad guys. As the mysterious three-pronged lightsaber-wielding Kylo Ren, Driver tried to skirt any questions about his character.

When pressed, he talked vaguely about the philosophy of evil.

“We didn’t really have a lot of conversations about bad or evil when we were shooting it,” said Driver. “It was more the difference between being bad and being right.”

Gleeson, whose character’s name was revealed to be General Hux, didn’t hesitate to say that he was evil. While talking about getting the role, Gleeson accidentally “spoiled” the name of his command station, much to the dismay of Abrams.