Ben Carson speaks Friday, Oct. 2, 2015, to the Rotary Club of Des Moines at the Wakonda Club in Des Moines, Iowa. (Photo: William Petroski/The Register)

DES MOINES, Iowa — Ben Carson doesn’t think hardship and hurdles are necessarily bad, but he says he disagrees with liberal critics who claim he wants to pull away government safety nets that provide opportunities for many Americans to escape poverty.

“Nothing could be further from the truth. Some people are very skillful liars. They think they will throw out a headline and people will believe it,” the Republican presidential candidate told a Des Moines Rotary Club breakfast crowd of more than 100 people Friday.

He added, “What I would like to do is to provide a ladder for people on the lower rungs of society to climb up and not be dependent on something else. I think that is what is destroying our society. We are going from a ‘can-do’ society to a ‘what-can-you-do-for-me' society?”

Carson, who grew up poor in Detroit and became an internationally known neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, spoke passionately about his belief that education can help anyone become successful in America.

He explained how he and his wife founded a scholarship program that includes a reading room project to help children develop literacy skills, and he said his presidential candidacy is driven by his concerns the country is headed in the wrong direction.

The best education is provided at home through home schooling, Carson said, followed by private schools, charter schools, and public schools. He added that he favors a voucher system for educational choice so that children are not stuck in failing school systems.

Asked about the U.S. Department of Education, Carson described it as federal agency that is bloated with inefficiency and with employees who are overpaid “and don’t do anything.” The department should be shrunk in size, he added.

One thing that needs to be recognized is that this country is behind in STEM education — science, technology, engineering and math — compared with other industrialized nations, Carson said. But there is “incredible technology” that can bring students up to speed academically, particularly in math, because it can evaluate how a student solves math problems, which can allow a student to be tutored more effectively.

“We need to start taking advantage of that 'virtual classroom,’ ” he said.

Ben Carson, center, talks Friday, Oct. 2, 2015, in Des Moines, Iowa, with John Bouslog, left, a lawyer from Urbandale, and his son, Jordan, a commercial real estate agent. Carson spoke to the Rotary Club of Des Moines at the Wakonda Club. (Photo: William Petroski/The Register)

.

Carson spoke later before more than 300 people at Des Moines Area Community College in Ankeny. He proposed replacing President Obama's Affordable Care Act with a health care plan that would be focused heavily on individual Health Savings Accounts and catastrophic health insurance policies with high deductibles

He suggested that people could accumulate enormous amounts of money in Health Savings Accounts over time that would allow them to cover nursing home bills when they get older. He also said he rejects the idea that poor people aren't responsible enough to manage such a plan, saying most low-income people have shown they can responsibly use food stamps.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Rlgn3C