Topics: #yesallwomen, Domestic abuse, Editor's Picks, Gender, Marriage, Media Criticism, Rape, Violence, Washington Post, women, Life News, News, Politics News

Probably the best thing about the latest piece of garbage that the Washington Post opinion section has given the Internet is that an editor seriously thought that he (or she) could save the thing by changing its headline and subhead. So while it was first announced as, “One way to end violence against women? Stop taking lovers and get married,” with the subhead, “The data show that #yesallwomen would be safer hitched to their baby daddies,” the piece soon became, “One way to end violence against women? Married dads,” with the subhead, “The data show that #yesallwomen would be safer with fewer boyfriends around their kids.”

Shockingly, people stayed pretty mad about the whole thing. Because the headline was hardly the only problem. Rather than present the social science with the heavy dose of qualifiers, context and skepticism deployed by the the actual researchers who produced it and the experts who have grappled with it, writers W. Bradford Wilcox and Robin Fretwell Wilson — a professor of psychology and a professor of law, respectively — decided to go all in and argue that women should stop being so promiscuous and/or selective about whom they legally bind themselves to if they don’t want to be raped or violently abused. Because apparently marriage contracts and diamond rings have the power to turn violent men into not violent men?

Now both of these writers are going to call this a misrepresentation of their argument. They will probably say that they are just presenting social science and data as it stands and not trying to turn it into a behavioral proscription, despite the fact that the piece is exactly that.

And here are the reasons why these excuses will be bullshit.

The piece leaves out everything that actually makes the presence of a husband or father in the home a sometimes positive indicator when it comes to physical and sexual abuse. Here is one of the experts Wilcox and Fretwell Wilson referenced in a passing link — without actually going into any detail about — on what’s actually more important than the mere presence of fathers and husbands in the home:

David Finkelhor, a professor at the University of New Hampshire and director of its Crimes against Children research center, said that how a father relates to his family matters more than his mere presence in reducing sexual abuse. “I do think the quality of the parental relationship is the most important thing,” he said. “Having an open, secure and communicative relationship with at least one parent is important.”

And here are Jenny Murphy-Shifflet and Scott Berkowitz — two other experts on sexual abuse linked to but not quoted — on the same:

Murphy-Shifflet said fathers can be role models for their children. “Model good, healthy relationships with their partners,” she said. “I know it’s important that children grow up in homes where they see adults being respectful.” Berkowitz said how fathers relate to their children can play a vital role in reducing and preventing sexual abuse. “A kid who has a good relationship with their parents is, hopefully, more likely to let their parent know if someone is mistreating them,” he said.