THE full force of Herefordshire’s shortage of five year housing land supply was felt last week when county planners gave the go-ahead to a new scheme in Cradley.

Despite many councillors raising concerns about a proposal for up to 60 new homes in the East Herefordshire village, they were warned that the local authority could face significant costs should the applicant appeal against a refusal.

Deferring a decision was also not recommended, with fears that an appeal could be made against non-determination.

Quercus PRF LLP was seeking permission to put up to 60 homes on land off Pixiefields, Westfields, in Cradley, with all matters, aside from access, to be reserved for future consideration.

The scheme proposed to take that access from the residential estate road that serves Pixiefields and onto the B4220. Of the 60 homes proposed, 39 would be open market and 21 affordable.

Councillor Tony Johnson, ward member for the area, told the committee he had concerns about the size of the development.

That was shared by others, with Councillor Marcelle Lloyd-Hayes indicating that she would be much happier to support the application if it was for between 40 to 50 homes.

Though there were no speakers at last Wednesday's meeting, Cradley Parish Council had previously registered objections to the proposal.

Concerns were raised about the site's distance from the school, the possibility of Cradley losing its bus service and the local doctor’s surgery being unable to cope with additional patients.

Councillor Sebastian Bowen highlighted his fears about access to the site.

“Access is terrible,” he said. “The lanes are all very narrow. The impact on the present inhabitants will be dire. It doesn't seem very good stuff.”

And Councillor Liz Harvey added that she would like to be seeing affordable houses which are "affordable to live in, not just to buy".

Following a lengthy debate and after taking advice from planning officers, a new recommendation was proposed by Cllr Harvey.

Sixteen councillors voted to approve the application – subject to the detailed matters coming back to the committee.

One councillor voted against that recommendation, while two others abstained.