Pulling punches? Yeah, that’s not Peter Thiel’s style. (David Paul Morris/Bloomberg)

Entrepreneur Peter Thiel has been making the media rounds lately as he promotes his book, Zero to One. The PayPal co-founder and first outside investor in Facebook is notoriously blunt and provocative. In the past week, he’s said of Twitter — “It’s a horribly mismanaged company — probably a lot of pot-smoking going on there.” He’s also shared eye-catching tidbits, such as that four of the six PayPal founders — a distinguished group renown for its later successes — built bombs in high school.

Tuesday afternoon, Thiel, who is a libertarian, found himself at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, D.C. Just a stone’s throw from the White House, he didn’t hold back his views of America’s government during an entertaining hour-long talk with AEI’s James K. Glassman. From the NSA to the FDA, Thiel had stern words.

“There was a time when our government actually was able to plan things better, we were able to get a Manhattan Project and in three and a half years you could build a nuclear bomb. Or in the 1960s, you could do Apollo and get to the moon within a decade,” Thiel said. “Today we’re sort of living in a time when you sort of get a sense that a letter from Einstein to the White House would get lost in the mailroom.”

He said this of HealthCare.gov: “Even as a hard-core libertarian, I would not have thought that the Obamacare Web site wouldn’t work. That is not something I predicted. Because building a Web site that works is much easier than building a functioning nuclear bomb.”

Thiel also touched on the NSA and Edward Snowden.

“The first thing a spy agency is supposed to do is it’s supposed to figure out, is there anyone inside who’s spying on them and if you have someone in the IT department downloading all the files, that normally gets people’s attention,” he said. “It would never happen even in a Facebook, Google. Even in a Silicon Valley company, that would never happen. And once somebody had downloaded all the files, you say ‘Okay they ran away to Russia,’ you’d be able to figure that out.”

He pointed out how the world of atoms — which is heavily regulated — has had far less innovation than the world of bits, which is lightly regulated.

“If the FDA decided it was going to start looking at video games and seeing whether it did damage to people’s brains, whether they’re addictive, what sort of effect did they have on your brain, you’d have far less innovation in video game technology than you’ve had before,” he said.

While admitting there could be a place for regulation regarding telecommunications powers Comcast and Verizon, Thiel saw flaws in most regulation of technologies.

“The history of government involvement with technology has been quite bad. I think the whole anti-trust thing against IBM with 20-20 hindsight feels like it was completely unnecessary because things were shifting to software and away from IBM already in the 70’s and definitely by the early 80’s,” Thiel said. “The Microsoft antitrust thing, I suspect Microsoft would have lost ground in the age of the Internet with or without the government doing it.”

When asked about Bitcoin, Thiel cautioned that government could ruin its potential by shutting it down.

“I think we have a very poorly functioning government, so it’s quite possible they will decide slowly over the next 10 or 15 years to do something,” he said.

Government wasn’t the only area to draw Thiel’s ire — he also touched on education.

“We have an education bubble today that is as distorted and crazy as the housing bubble the of last decade,” Thiel said.

As a graduate of a private college where the tuition and fees have gone up 86 percent since I enrolled 13 years ago, I think he’s onto something. Anyone else?

Related: Watch video of Thiel’s talk here