Gov. Scott Walker gives a foreign policy speech Friday on the campus of The Citadel in Charleston, S.C. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

In his first foreign policy speech, presidential candidate and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker on Friday called for increasing military spending, securing the Mexican border, boosting surveillance programs and establishing a no-fly zone in Syria to help overthrow Bashar Assad's authoritarian regime.

"As president, I will send the following message: The retreat is over," Walker told cadets at the Citadel military college in Charleston, S.C. "American leadership is back. American leadership is back and, together with our allies, we will not surrender another inch of ground to terrorists or any other power that threatens our safety.

"America will not be intimidated. And neither will I."

The GOP governor sought in his speech to put new substance and momentum behind his stalled campaign. Once soaring in Iowa and elsewhere, he has suffered in the polls in recent weeks as reality television star and real estate mogul Donald Trump's campaign has shot skyward.

Meanwhile, U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida, a GOP 2016 rival, sought to regain traction with his own foreign policy speech in Charleston on Friday in which he rejected Walker's call for canceling a U.S. visit from Chinese leader Xi Jinping.

Like most governors, Walker has little foreign policy experience, but he has tried to bolster it this year with trips to Europe and Israel and crash courses on world affairs from a growing number of aides and advisers.

Much of Walker's 25-minute speech focused on pushing back against Iran and the Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

"We cannot afford to lose the fight against radical Islamic terrorism," he said. "How can we possibly deter our sophisticated adversaries in Eastern Europe and our competitors in the South China Sea if we cannot defeat the barbarians of ISIS and roll back the theocrats in Tehran?

"Clearly, we can no longer afford to be passive spectators while the world descends into chaos."

The Islamic State is Sunni and Iran is Shiite, but Walker contended U.S. officials cannot count on the long-standing animosity between these two Muslim denominations to protect the United States. Walker said that represented the joint approach of President Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton, the front-runner for the Democratic nomination and a former secretary of state under Obama.

"Confronted by these two forms of evil, President Obama and Hillary Clinton seem somehow to believe they can sit on the sidelines, hoping Iran will defeat ISIS for them," he said. "They fail to realize that, in this prevailing anarchy, the two sides feed off of each other, growing stronger at the expense of our Sunni and Shia allies trapped in the middle.

"To believe that a stable and lasting Middle East can be built by working with Iran, any more than by working with ISIS, isn't statesmanship. It is pure fantasy," Walker said. "...Everywhere in the world that Hillary Clinton has touched is worse off today than when she and the president took office."

Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who served under then-President Bill Clinton, disagreed in a recent opinion column.

"Today, America's place in the world is far stronger than it was in 2009 thanks to the leadership of President Obama and former Secretary Clinton. They renewed alliances, relentlessly pursued our terrorist enemies, and forged international coalitions on Iran sanctions and on the fight against climate change," Albright wrote.

As he has in the past, Walker said he would cancel the Iran deal on his first day as president. In an interview on MSNBC's "Morning Joe" before the speech, he said he would end the deal even if Iran were abiding by it at the time he took office. Under the 15-year agreement, Iran would dismantle much of its nuclear program and countries around the world would lift economic sanctions.

New details of vision

As he renewed his tough rhetoric Friday, Walker laid out some new details on his vision for national security.

He said the nation must "restore counterterrorism and surveillance programs," drawing a sharp contrast with U.S. Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky, a presidential rival who has said the government's bulk collection of data violates the constitutional rights of everyday Americans.

Saying the U.S. military has been weakened by budget measures, Walker called for reversing that trend, saying that defeating ISIS and containing Iran would require a "greater investment of U.S. resources."

The United States should work with allies to put in place a no-fly zone in Syria and recruit more fighters who oppose the Islamic State and Assad's regime.

Walker is making a series of policy speeches, and two weeks ago announced his plan for repealing the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, and replacing it with a new set of tax credits.

On Monday, Walker weighed in on China, saying Obama should cancel next month's state visit from that nation's president, Xi, because of the Asian giant's manipulation of its economy, human rights abuses, intellectual property theft and cyberattacks against the United States.

The governor and foreign policy advisers such as former U.S. Sen. Jim Talent of Missouri have pushed that view through the week.

"The Chinese attacked the American homeland through cyberspace and are aggressing against America's rights and allies in the South China Sea," Talent said in a statement. "We ought to be pushing back, but the least we should do is not heap honors upon the leader who is responsible for these acts."

But in a Friday interview on "Morning Joe," Walker also said maintaining a close relationship with China is important to help deter threats from North Korea.

"You do have to have (a close relationship) and I'm not talking about walking away from that, nor am I talking about walking away from trade," he said.

Rubio rejects approach

At the Charleston Metro Chamber's World Trade Center on Friday, Rubio focused his remarks on China and pointedly rejected Walker's approach to canceling the upcoming official visit.

Rubio warned that under Xi, China has "intensified its campaign to push America out of Asia" but said that Obama should downgrade rather than nix the visit.

"While I do not believe that we should cancel Xi Jinping's visit to Washington next month, I also don't believe we should be rolling out the red carpet for him," Rubio said. "This is an opportunity to speak bluntly to this authoritarian ruler, not treat him to a state dinner."

Walker delivered his speech at a storied military college in the crucial state of South Carolina, which holds the nation's third nominating contest and the first in the South. The cadets remained quiet for the speech, so it wasn't sprinkled with applause and cheers, as political speeches often are.

Walker misspoke a couple of times. He quickly corrected himself after saying tourism instead of terrorism and he garbled what was to be one of his more memorable lines.

Walker was to say, "Yes, the world is complex, but some things are simple: There is good and there is evil." Instead, he said, "Yes, the world is complex, but there are simple things out there: There is good and there is bad."