PHILADELPHIA — Bill Cosby faces a preliminary hearing Tuesday to determine if his criminal sex-assault case in suburban Philadelphia goes to trial.

Prosecutors had declined to charge the comedian-actor over the 2005 complaint, but arrested him in December after his explosive deposition in the woman’s lawsuit became public.

In the testimony given in that deposition, Mr. Cosby is grilled about giving drugs and alcohol to women before sex; making secret payments to ex-lovers; and hosting Andrea Constand at his home. They knew each other through Temple University, where he was a trustee and she managed the women’s basketball team.

White House scare

WASHINGTON — A cluster of balloons caused a security scare at The White House on Sunday afternoon, two days after a man approached a guard booth outside the complex and was shot after he refused to put down the pistol he was carrying.

The U.S. Secret Service said some party balloons floated over the executive complex, and a couple of the balloons landed on the property. The scene was cleared about 1:20 p.m., the agency said.

The White House was put on lockdown Friday after a man approached a guard booth with a pistol and refused to put it down. A Secret Service agent shot and critically wounded the man, who remained in critical condition Sunday morning. On Friday, a U.S. law enforcement official said that authorities identified the gunman as Jesse Oliveri of Ashland, Pa., about 80 miles northwest of Philadelphia.

GOP look to replace ACA

WASHINGTON — As senior House Republicans work on a promised replacement for the Affordable Care Act, two GOP lawmakers plan to introduce an alternative Thursday that would dramatically reshape the nation’s health care system.

The legislation — co-sponsored by Rep. Pete Sessions, R-Texas, and Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La. — stands little chance of becoming law as long as a Democrat is in the White House.

The centerpiece of the Sessions-Cassidy plan is a major change to the tax code that would provide every American adult with $2,500 to purchase health coverage, but also shake up the nation’s current employer-based health insurance system. This new standardized tax credit would replace tax breaks that many Americans currently get if their employer provides health coverage.

N.J. beaches shrink

BRIGANTINE, N.J. — A stormy winter chewed up New Jersey’s beaches more than usual, requiring greater efforts to restore them before the summer crowds hit the sand.

In some places, erosion and beach loss was greater this past winter than it was after Superstorm Sandy in 2012, while other places appeared to come through the winter relatively unscathed.

With Memorial Day crowds a week away from storming the coast, beachgoers will find the Jersey shore ready for visitors, even if some spots are narrower than they were last year.

Jon Miller, a coastal expert with Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, said two major storms did significant damage to the beaches: Hurricane Joaquin in October, which passed offshore but still churned up enough surf to cause erosion; and a winter storm the last week of January that carved 15-foot drop-offs into some beaches.