Spend some time checking over last year's return, speaking with an accountant and contributing to your retirement accounts.

Tax-filing season is months away, but the time to start planning is now. Until the end of the year, you have time to take steps to significantly cut your tax bill.

Start by pulling out last year’s return and evaluating what will be different when you file for this year. If you made more money, perhaps you want to contribute more to a 401(k), donate to charity or buy tax-deductible business equipment by the end of the year.

If you own a small business, had a major life event or face different financial circumstances than you did a year ago, fall is a good time to seek professional advice. You may be able to take steps to improve your tax situation before the end of the year.

“I highly, highly, highly recommend meeting with your tax preparer every quarter if you can afford it,” says Kelly Phillips Erb, a columnist and tax attorney in Pennsylvania. “It’s better to have that conversation now rather than in April when you can’t do anything about it.”

[See: 14 Legal Secrets for Reducing Your Taxes.]

If you don’t have an accountant or would like to make a change, this is the best time to find one. After filing the last individual tax returns, which are due Oct. 15, accountants and other tax preparers head into a less busy season. That means they have time to talk to potential clients or offer analysis and advice to existing clients.

“If you’re thinking about changing tax professionals, now is the time,” says Meisa Bonelli, managing partner of Millennial Tax, which provides services to home-based business owners and entrepreneurs in New York City. “You don’t want to be looking for a tax professional in January or February.”

Many small business owners wait too long to find the right accountant. “We always suggest to our clients when you start earning about $75,000 a year, start looking for a professional that specializes in your industry,” Bonelli says.

Here are 12 tax issues to tackle before the end of the year.

Catch up on quarterly tax payments. People who are self-employed or receive income that is not subject to withholding are supposed to make estimated tax payments. If you pay too little, you could be slapped with a penalty. The sooner you send the money, the smaller the penalty.

Decide who takes the children or other household members as dependents. If you share custody of children with an ex-spouse or partner, or you share responsibility for supporting another relative, only one of you can deduct that person as a dependent. This is also the case for children and the Earned Income Tax Credit. Do some math and figure out what makes sense for your situation.

[Read: How to Survive an IRS Audit.]

If you don’t have insurance, apply for an exemption. Those who did not purchase health insurance this year face a tax penalty, unless they meet some of several exemptions, says Lisa Greene-Lewis, a certified public accountant and TurboTax tax expert. To complete your tax return, you’ll need an exemption number, which you can get from the Health Insurance Marketplace, she says.

Check your Affordable Care Act subsidy status. If you underestimated your income and received too much subsidy, you may have to pay it back. If your income was less than you estimated, you may get a subsidy via your tax return. If your circumstances have changed, you can make changes now at the Health Insurance Marketplace.



Use the extra money in your flexible spending account. In most companies, you can carry up to $500 into 2015, but you don’t want to leave any additional money in your account. Make sure you understand the rules of your company’s plan. “Evaluate your expenses this year and look ahead to what you expect to spend in 2015 and see whether to adjust your withholding,” Greene-Lewis advises.

Consider whether to accelerate or reduce income. For some taxpayers, it may make sense to prepay your mortgage and real estate taxes and incur business expenses in 2014. For others, paying those expenses in 2015 may be more advantageous. The only way to make those decisions is to calculate where you are financially this year and where you expect to be next year. “There’s no cookie cutter for who should accelerate and who shouldn’t,” Bonelli says.