CLEVELAND, Ohio – Ohio has yet to recover all the jobs lost not only to the Great Recession, but the one in 2001.

Employment in the state is still down 42,000, or by 0.8 percent, since the Great Recession, according to George Zeller of Cleveland, an economic research analyst. Nationally, the recession ran from December 2007 to June 2009. He starts counting from March 2006, which was just after Ohio's pre-recession employment peak. The Ohio labor force reached its lowest number of jobs in 2010. The same year, the state had its highest post-recession unemployment numbers, which were over 10 percent.

He said Ohio lost 225,100 jobs, or 4.0 percent, from 2000 to 2015, which have still not been recovered. The nation already has recovered the jobs lost stemming from both recessions.

Ohio has been creating jobs at a much slower pace than the nation, said Brendan Duke, policy analyst at the Center for American Progress in Washington, D.C., a liberal educational institute funded primarily by donations

"National job growth was faster than Ohio's job growth from 2011 to 2015," he said.

A major characteristic of Ohio's job loss since 2000 has been the disappearance of manufacturing jobs. They went from comprising 18 percent of the state's employment in 2000 to 13 percent by 2015, according to analysis by Veronica Kalich, who chairs the economics department at Baldwin-Wallace University.

"In early 2000, Ohio employed over 1 million workers in manufacturing jobs," she said. "By 2009, the number had plummeted by almost 40 percent to its all time low of about 612,000. Since then, there has been a small recovery in manufacturing jobs, but in total, the number is below 700,000 -- at 686,800 -- as of August 2015. Ohio has not recovered over 340,000 jobs in manufacturing."

At the same time Ohio was losing manufacturing jobs, the state was gaining jobs in the education and health services sector. Most of the growth was in health care, which increased by 33 percent from 586,800 jobs in 2000 to 781,700 by 2015, Kalich said. Jobs in education grew about 36 percent, from 86,000 in 2000 to 117,400 in 2015. Education and health went from being 12 percent of Ohio's jobs in 2000 to 17 percent by 2015.

This shift has had an impact on wages. Average hourly wages in manufacturing, at $24, are about $3 more than they are in education and health services.

"The health care sector also includes a lot of lower-paying jobs," she said.

Kalich said other sectors increasing their share of jobs included professional and business services, which went from 11.5 percent in 2000 to 13.2 percent in 2015. Leisure and hospitality increased from 8.5 percent in 2000 to 10 percent by 2015. While wages in professional and businesses are similar to those in manufacturing, the leisure and hospitality sector has many low-paying jobs.

The federal auto bailout helped stem manufacturing job loss, Duke said. Additionally, the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, helped in adding health care jobs, he said. Duke said these sectors accounted for nearly 19 percent of the jobs created since 2011.

David Cooper, a senior economic analyst at the Economic Policy Institute in Washington, D.C., examined Labor Department data to look at the prime age employment to population ratio, based on the share of those 25 to 54 who are currently employed.

"It is the single best measure of the health of the labor market," he said. "It excludes all the folks who may be retiring and excludes all the folks who might be going to school." The institute's goal, according to its website, is to broaden the discussion about economic policy to include the interests of low- and middle-income workers.

In the second quarter of 2015, Ohio's prime age employment to population ratio was 78.9 percent. Nationally, 77.4 percent of the prime age working population was employed. In the second quarter of 2000, Ohio's prime age employment to population ratio was 82.3 percent and 81.7 percent for the nation.

"That means about 4 percent fewer of Ohio's population today in their prime working years have a job than did 15 years ago," he said.

Cooper said discouraged workers have played a role in lowering the prime age employment to population ratio.

"It is a significant factor," Cooper said. "I don't know specifically whether it is the dominant factor."

The post-recession job creation trend, in Ohio and the nation, has seen the growth of better paying jobs – that often require education – such as registered nurse. Or they have been low-paying jobs, often low-skilled jobs, such as home care worker. The middle-income jobs-- often requiring only a high school diploma or limited training – such as those in manufacturing, have tended not to have been created.

Ohio hasn't only lost jobs, middle- and working- class families in the state have lost income. For example, in 2000, median household income in Ohio was $58,115, but by 2013, it had dropped to $46,398, Duke said. All figures are in 2013 dollars in his analysis of Census data.

This story details that income decline: Ohio's middle class still struggling to recover, not only from Great Recession, but also the one in 2001

For experts such as Zeller, developing a strategy for growing jobs in Ohio should focus on increasing manufacturing jobs. He said the state – as well as the national economy – hasn't been able to find a suitable replacement.

"All recoveries are led by manufacturing -- not just this one, all of them," he said.

Zeller said it is not just those working in manufacturing who would benefit. He said more manufacturing jobs would spur job creation in the industries that are apart of its supply chain. Also, manufacturing creates many middle-class jobs, Zeller said. Since these consumers have more disposable income, he said there could potentially be an economic spin-off in other areas.

Mark Sniderman, executive in residence in the economics department at the Weatherhead School of Management at Case Western Reserve University disagrees.

"This decline in the overall share of manufacturing employment has been a trend that has been going on in Ohio and the United States and many other countries of the world, including China," he said. "As manufacturing enterprises become more and more efficient, they are able to produce more value of production with fewer people."

Sniderman said education is the key to improving Ohio's labor market. According to recently released Census data, Ohio ranks 36th nationally in the percentage of residents, 25 and older, holding at least a bachelor's degree. In 1990, only 17 percent of Ohioans held degrees, with the state ranking 39th. He noted that states with the highest levels of education, such as Connecticut and Maryland, also had higher median household incomes.

"Wages, broadly speaking, seem to be correlated with skill level," he said. "If we want to get the wages of working people to be higher, then we want people to have more skills. If we want to be able to attract employers, the workers have to have higher skill levels."

Sniderman said education is a long-term prospect that isn't always politically expedient. For example, he said improving early childhood education would ultimately lead to a better-educated labor force.

"It is a lot easier to say why don't we build this bridge or repave these streets or do this or that because you could actually see the bridge, and people feel that they could understand where the money is going," he said.

"Maybe they don't have that much confidence when they can't see it right in front of them when money is used to enhance education, but there is a huge social benefit to doing that," Sniderman said.

Some of the experts noted that wages have fallen or become flat – not only in Ohio, but nationally – as jobs in once heavily unionized sectors, such as manufacturing, have disappeared.

"The percentage of union membership is declining, so good or bad, the pressure isn't there anymore for wages to be higher," Kalich said.

Duke said several studies have shown that up to one-third of declining wages among men may be do to declining union membership.

Greg Lawson is policy analyst at the Buckeye Institute for Public Policy Solutions, a conservative think tank in Columbus, which supports right-to-work laws. He said while union members have higher wages than their non-union counterparts, he believes unions ultimately lead to fewer jobs being created.

"They can be a little intransigent when it comes to management relations," he said. "One of the biggest problems in Ohio is that public-sector unions increase the cost of government. That creates tax issues and competitive issues that don't create the right environment for businesses wanting to come to Ohio."

Duke said because the Midwest was traditionally one of the most unionized regions of the country, income inequality hadn't been significant here. Troubling to him, is that income inequality in Ohio has risen.

He found that in 2000, the middle class' share of income generated in the state was 49.5 percent. By 2013, it had fallen to 47.2 percent.

While the middle class' share of income is greater than the U.S. average of 45.8 percent, Duke still expresses concern about rising inequality here.

"In Ohio, we see a 4.6 percentage point decline in the share of income going to the middle class," he said referring to difference in share between 2000 and 2013. "In the U.S. there was also a decline, but it was a 1.9 percent decline."Follow @OPinfo