"Normal" is the last word one would used to describe Theatre Tulsa's production of "Next to Normal." It's pretty darn close to perfect.

The only downside to this show, which opened Friday as the company's entry in the Tulsa PAC Trust's SummerStage Tulsa Festival, is that it runs only this weekend.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

And that, frankly, is a shame. This is a show that deserves an audience, not simply because it deals with a challenging subject in artful and compelling fashion, but also because the cast and crew of this production are operating on a remarkably high level.

If you're one of those people who think that "local community theater" is by its very nature inferior to whatever you think of as "professional theater," then you need to go see "Next to Normal" and have a few of your preconceived notions swept away.

Granted: The actual show "Next to Normal" is not perfect. The second act has some longueurs that drag the pace almost to the point of making one think, "Yeah, all right, we get it, now move on."

Friday's night performance also had a few moments where the sound mix of vocals and on-stage band were not well-balanced, making lyrics unintelligible. But these minor distractions do not dull the power of this story, nor the artistry of the people who present it.

The story of "Next to Normal" is that of the Goodmans, whose have all the outward attributes of the Typical American Family — a father, mother, sister and brother; a nice house in a good neighborhood; and so on.

Yet this facade has slowly been crumbling for the past 16 years. That is how long the matriarch, Diana (Cathy Rose), has been struggling with bipolar disorder.

There are days when Diana's condition is managed well enough that her husband Dan (Mike Pryor) believes things are getting better and he can relax a bit, not have to be so vigilant about everything Diana does.

Their daughter Natalie (Hannah Finnegan) tries to immerse herself in music in order to avoid the pain of dealing with a mother with whom she has never been close.

In fact, the only person in the family who seems to understand Diana and what she's feeling is their son Gabe (Cody McCoy), whose bond with his mother is preternaturally close.

Of course, that's because Gabe is dead, and his presence in the Goodman home is a manifestation of Diana's delusional state. When Diana brings out a cake to celebrate Gabe's birthday, Dan and Natalie realize that the latest round of pharmaceuticals isn't working anymore.

The thing is, for Diana, the delusions and mania, the highs and lows, the soaring euphoria and crushing depression, is what is normal for her, just as the vision of a seemingly flesh-and-blood son growing to the teenager Gabe is now is in her mind is a source of comfort that she does not find anywhere else in her life.

The cornucopia of drugs enumerated in "Who's Crazy/My Psychopharmacologist and I," ultimately numb her into not feeling anything, to the point where Diana laments, "I miss my pain...I miss my life."

"Most people who think they're happy," Diana tells one of her doctors, "just haven't thought about it enough."

But a new doctor (Thomas Williams) has some new ideas — some traditional, some extreme, all of which require Diana to lose something in order to progress closer to normalcy. But what, exactly, is "normal"? And who gets to define it?

All this may sound more than a bit heavy, but Brian Yorkey's book and often conversational lyrics are liberally seasoned with welcomed nuggets of spiky humor, and Tom Kitt's music — extremely well-played by the six-piece band led by Catherine Ratliff — melds modern, contemporary pop and rock with unnerving harmonic twists.

The role of Diana is an epic one, and Cathy Rose is quite simply extraordinary in it. Her portrayal of a woman besieged by her own mind is perfectly nuanced — the confusion, the clarity, the rage, the fear, it's all there but never overplayed. And Rose is a powerhouse of a singer. Diana performs at least a part of almost every song in the show, and from start to finish song every note with authority and character.

As Dan, Pryor's lyrical tenor voice perfectly captures the character's vulnerability and earnestness, whether insisting that "It's Gonna Be Good" or trying to explain his faithfulness in "I Am the One."

Finnegan handles that angst-ridden Natalie well, from the prickliness that makes her relationship with Henry (a fine David Moreland as a semi-stoner with a good heart) more problematic than it should be, or finally finding some measure of connection with her badly damaged mother in "Maybe (Next to Normal)."

McCoy does an excellent job as Gabe, a figure who becomes increasingly, if subtly, more menacing as the show progresses — a presence that owes its existence to other people's pain. Williams is very good as two sides of the medical profession: the hyper-clinical Dr. Fine, and the "rock star" Dr. Madden (the sequence where Diana takes this description literally is maybe the comic highlight of the show, and Williams handles it with winning aplomb).

Vern Stefanic has crafted these individual performances into a stunningly effective ensemble, who make these people and their struggles at times painfully real.

"Next to Normal" is a powerful show, one that treats mental illness with a depth of empathy and understanding that is rare. And it is performed by this cast in a way that can only be described as thrilling.