Talk about unbelievable. There is a surge of stupid statements from the left along with incredible (as in "beyond credulity") claims coming from those quarters that are so nonsensical that it's clear they place their ideology above all else.

When President Obama and his White House deny that the San Bernardino massacre was an act of terror—literally one hour before his own FBI declares it so—am I supposed to believe that Barack H. Obama, super-genius, is really that dumb?

When Hillary Clinton says, just days after ISIS's Paris massacre, Muslims have no connection whatsoever to terrorism, am I supposed to believe that?

And when, amid the violence, the nation's top law-enforcement officer says her "greatest fear" is the "incredibly disturbing rise of anti-Muslim rhetoric"—as opposed to, you know, actual violence—must I believe that whopper, too?

From ISIS is "contained" to "Obamacare is working," liberal politicians are telling us things we know are just plain wrong. Do they really want us to think they're this intellectually challenged?

I'm not talking about lying. Well, not in the traditional sense, anyway. When Donald Trump claims thousands and thousands of Muslims celebrated in the streets of New Jersey on 9/11, he's not telling the truth. And nearly all politicians promise things today ("If you like your doctor," "no boots on the ground," etc.) that they fail to deliver tomorrow.

This is different. This is what we Southerners describe with an axiom involving urination and precipitation.

The most glaring example from recent American political history is "I did not have sex with that woman, Ms. Lewinsky." I can't tell you the number of pundits, PhDs, and progressive women who looked me in the eye in 1998 and said they believed Bill Clinton's claims of innocence. They insisted—no, they demanded that I believe they were sincere when they insisted—that they accepted Clinton's claims as honest and accurate.

Of course they didn't believe them. What a demeaning insult it would have been on my part to think they did.

More recent and relevant are Secretary of State Clinton's continued claims she believed Benghazi was a spontaneous uprising over a videotape—a movie review gone wrong.

There are many, many more examples (Obamacare won't add "one dime to the deficit") of this intentional obfuscation, none more obvious—and obnoxious—than the left's conversation about Islam and terrorism.

Forget the fact that the Obama administration refused to call San Bernardino a terror attack four days after the rest of America knew it. Did you know they still haven't acknowledged the same about the attacks in Chattanooga from five months ago?

Those were the attacks at two different military recruiting offices that killed five members of the U.S. military. Attacks committed by Mohammad Youssef Abdulazeez, who called violent jihadists "the best human beings that ever lived," other than the prophets, and listened to the recordings of infamous al Qaeda recruiter Anwar al-Awlaki.

A serious question for sincere liberals: What is a typical voter supposed to do with statements like ISIL is not Islamic? Or Muslims have nothing whatsoever to do with terrorism? Or assertions that Christianity has the same problem with theology-inspired violence as Islam?

Whatever it is Americans are to make of these claims, we can't be expected to take them seriously.

But we can conclude that the leaders of the Democratic party think that we are, in fact, idiots.

Or that the truth is so awful that they'd rather look dumb telling us something we know is untrue. That is frightening.

It also helps explain why Donald Trump is doing so well: Why do voters seem willing to consider ugly, unserious ideas like shutting down mosques and forced government registration based on religion?

Because the supposedly serious people with the job of keeping them safe keep telling them things that are clearly crazy. When your commander in chief describes the worst Islamist attack on the U.S. since 9/11 with the intentionally-obtuse phrase "extremist violence," voters rightly wonder why. Is he too scared of the truth to tell it? Or just do deluded he can't see it.

Just as Obama has created more Republicans than any politicians since Reagan, his policy of denial and intentional dumbness pumps life to the Trump movement. How is "let's register all Muslims" any more insane than "The problem isn't Islam—it's extremism?"

If there are two crazy people on the ballot, but only one of them is going to get you killed, which one would you vote for?