Shenendehowa wrestler Kevin Parker sets sights on 2nd state title Senior's older brother, Greg, has been influential in his development

Clifton Park

Shenendehowa senior wrestler Kevin Parker aimed to join his older brother, Greg, as a state champion last year.

In the 170-pound Division I final, he did so with one of his strongest influences in attendance at Times Union Center.

"That was pretty awesome," Kevin Parker said. "He's always good at helping bring me back down to Earth, de-stress things a little bit, put things into perspective and help me understand the lay of the land a little bit more."

Added Greg, "It was incredible. The New York State wrestling tournament is one of the more difficult athletic endeavors out there. Knowing how hard he worked, it was a crowning achievement."

Kevin defeated Clarence wrestler Nate Schwab 5-1 for his first state title last year.

Greg won the 91-pound championship in 1996.

This week, Kevin will be preparing for what he hopes is a run to a second straight title. The state championships return to Albany on Friday and Saturday.

"Just to have one kid be a state champion is a rarity," Shenendehowa coach Rob Weeks said. "I think Greg has had a fatherly influence on (Kevin) where he's been through it."

More Information State wrestling When: Friday and Saturday Where: Times Union Center

Last year, Kevin committed to wrestle for Princeton, the same program for which his older brother wrestled. Greg was a two-time All-American with the Tigers.

"I grew up around that culture, and I feel that's where I fit in the best," Kevin said.

Greg said, "I couldn't be happier. It's a great environment there. I'm really excited for the next stage in his life."

Greg periodically comes back to the Shenendehowa wrestling room to help his younger brother practice. "He's one of my biggest mentors," Kevin said. "I've been able to model a lot of my wrestling after what he's done, and I've used him as a great resource. It's great to be at a similar level as he was."

Weeks coached Greg in his junior and senior seasons. Shen's coach said the two grapplers have similar styles on the mat.

"Their styles are very similar, I think probably because Greg had a big influence on teaching Kevin how to wrestle," Weeks said. "They're both defensive on their feet. Very good leg riders. Very good on top. Good match control."

This year, Kevin earned his automatic bid to states with a win over Ballston Spa's Jake Cook at the Section II state qualifier on Feb. 14.

"My goal is to wrestle the best I can every match and try to maximize my potential at this point," said Kevin, who was named the Section II Division I Most Outstanding Wrestler. "I can only wrestle as well as I practice from this point on."

Greg joked that his younger brother will have some added bragging rights should he take home a second title.

Greg again plans to be in attendance at Times Union Center to provide support.

"If he's healthy and in a good mind-set, he's very tough to beat," Greg said. "I think it would be a great way to end his career with a state title."

jkoehler@timesunion.com • 518-454-5411 • @JKoehlerTU