Police blotter in Hunterdon, Somerset and Union counties (Photo: ~File photo)

CLINTON TOWNSHIP

POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA AND UNDERAGE POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL, 10:50 a.m. Nov. 13. A teacher at North Hunterdon High School discovered three female students, ages 15, 15 and 16, consuming vodka while in the cafeteria of North Hunterdon High School. The girls’ bags were searched and vodka and a pipe containing suspected marijuana residue was discovered, police said. Two of the girls are from Franklin Township and the third is from Clinton Township. Detective Thomas Hash, the Clinton Township Police Department’s school resource officer, responded and will be handling the matter, police said.

MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT, 5:40 a.m. Nov. 18. A 2003 Buick LeSabre, driven by George Xenakis, 51, of Pittstown, was traveling on Route 31 South near Payne Road when a tarp that was in the roadway blew onto the vehicle’s windshield, obstructing Xenakis’ view, police said. The vehicle then swerved off of the roadway to the right and struck a curb. Xenakis was taken to the Hunterdon Medical Center for chest pain and his vehicle had to be towed from the scene.

CARELESS DRIVING AND MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT, 8:55 a.m. Nov. 18. A 2012 Toyota Sienna, driven by Amy Simpson, 38, of Hampton, was traveling on Route 31 North when it traveled through a red light at the intersection with Walnut Pond. The vehicle struck a 2006 Honda Civic, driven by Kelly Leeds, 35, of Glen Gardner, that was crossing over Route 31 North on a green light. Both women were taken to the Hunterdon Medical Center and both vehicles had to be towed from the scene, police said. Simpson was charged with careless driving.

DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED, 9:50 p.m. Nov. 19. Police received a report of an aggressive driver on Route 31 South near Halstead Street. Police found the vehicle, a 2004 Honda Odyssey, and stopped it after observing it fail to maintain lane numerous times. During the stop, the officer smelled alcohol beverage on the breath of the driver, Rashmikan Patel, 60, of Brick, and determined Patel was intoxicated. Patel was charged with driving while intoxicated and failure to maintain lane.

NORTH PLAINFIELD

POSSESSION OF A CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES AND POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA, 10:32 a.m. Nov. 19. Javon Alleyne, 19, of Westfield, was charged with possession of a controlled dangerous substances and possession of marijuana after a motor vehicle stop for having tinted windows on his vehicle.

RARITAN TOWNSHIP

POSSSESSION, 3:19 a.m. Oct. 8. Police charged Emma M. Ghezzi, 20, of Denville, with possession of less than 50 grams of marijuana and possession of drug paraphernalia. Ghezzi was a passenger in a vehicle that was stopped for failing to maintain its lane of travel on Route 202 near Greenwood Place.

SHOPLIFTING, 12:30 p.m. Nov. 3. Police responded to Wal-Mart for a report of a theft where two individuals stole several video games. Jared K. Scott, 19, of Lambertville, and Conner P. McAvenia, 18, of Pennington, traded the games at one of the local businesses, police said.

AGGRAVATED ASSAULT, 8:32 p.m. Nov. 13. Police responded to the area of Voorhees Corner Road near Barley Sheaf Road for a report of an assault. Police learned that Alba Gonzales, 57, of Flemington, while driving her taxi, was assaulted by a fare, Melvin Cruz-Lara, 22, of Flemington. Cruz-Lara punched Gonzales in the face and choked her while she was driving the taxi, police said. Gonzales was able to stop her taxi, get away from Cruz-Lara and call the police. Cruz-Lara ran off prior to police arrival. Cruz-Lara was charged with aggravated assault and police are trying to locate him, police said.

POSSESSION, 8:35 p.m. Nov. 15. Police charged Joseph Romola Jr., 28, of Levittown, Pennsylvania, with possession of less than 50 grams of marijuana, possession of drug paraphernalia, failure to maintain lane, failure to change address, and possession of a controlled dangerous substances in a motor vehicle after he was stopped for failing to maintain his lane of travel on Route 202 near Ranch Haven Road, police said.

DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED, 3:42 a.m. Nov. 16. Police charged Selvin Cruz-Velasquez, 26, of Baltimore, with driving while intoxicated following a motor vehicle stop on Route 31 near Walter Foran Boulevard for failing to maintain his lane of travel, failure to maintain lane and reckless driving.

Source: Central Jersey police departments

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1qW2LU0