Three high-school football players have died this year playing the game that—let's face it—has probably eclipsed baseball as the national pastime. The NFL is sports' most lucrative franchise, and colleges and universities reap millions from their football teams' ticket sales and media rights.

But something has gone wrong with the game. The NFL and the NCAA both face lawsuits from former players claiming head injuries. The family of a Montclair High School student who died in 2008 got a $2.8 million settlement last year from the Montclair Board of Education.

The deaths may be the tip of the iceberg of football-related problems. Many of my friends at Cornell were on the football team in the late 1960s and early '70s. One of them blew out his knee during freshman year and walked on crutches for weeks after surgery. This December, he will undergo knee-replacement surgery.

"It catches up with you later in life," he said, adding that new equipment and the intense conditioning of players that began in his college years have contributed to the increase in traumatic injuries and deaths. "The players are very big and very fast, and they believe the equipment will protect them from serious injury. In the old days, when they used those leather helmets, it was more like a rugby match. Today, I cringe when I watch the hits, particularly on kickoffs and punts."

Another friend played all four years at Cornell. He has had 17 orthopedic surgeries. The Ivy League is not the NFL or the Big Ten or the Southeastern Conference, but both friends live with serious disabilities.

And both are dads who discouraged their sons from playing football.

"I think the entire culture of football is detrimental to our society," said the four-year player. "There are many elements of football culture that I find destructive and debilitating, not only physically but also psychologically."

I played football my freshman year in high school in southeastern Ohio. Only six freshmen tried out for the team, so we were put with the varsity. We were little more than blocking and tackling dummies for the upperclassmen. The coach seemed to take a sadistic delight in our pain. I quit and joined the golf team.

I follow the New York teams and enjoy watching football on TV. It is clear that something must be done to prevent the serious injuries and deaths that we read about too often.

Given the value of the game to the team owners and the NFL, and to colleges and universities, I don't really see how it can be dialed back voluntarily. It seems to me that change will only come from liability lawsuits. That means the toll of injury and death will continue to rise.

The four-year player from Cornell, now recovering from his latest knee replacement, said that, in retrospect, "I wish I had played on the golf team, or maybe the beach volleyball team, or the dart team."

Contact sports bring benefits to players, fans, schools and pro teams, but I hope the days of players who "get their bell rung" being told to "shake it off and get back in there" are ending.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments