CRESTVIEW, Fla. (AP) - Four men have been arrested in connection to the killing of a Florida Panhandle teenager.

The body of 18-year-old Mark Anthony Williams Jr. of Crestview was found Jan. 21 along a highway near Niceville. The Okaloosa County Sheriff’s Office said he had been shot at least seven times with three different guns.

The sheriff’s office said three men were arrested Friday in Fort Walton Beach. The Northwest Florida Daily News reports (http://bit.ly/1CXAKRM ) that each was charged with one count of first-degree premeditated murder and two counts of racketeering.

One was turned over to the state Department of Juvenile Justice because he was 17 years old when Williams was killed, according to the sheriff’s office.

Another, Bernard Jamill Nunnally of Crestview, is a soldier at Eglin Air Force Base. The Pensacola News-Journal reports (http://on.pnj.com/1SIR4HV) that Nunnally is assigned to the Group Support Battalion, 7th Special Forces Group (Airborne).

Okaloosa County jail records did not show whether Nunnally, 23, had an attorney.

A fourth man, 37-year-old Marvin Wilkins of Crestview, was arrested Sunday on racketeering charges, according to the sheriff’s office. It wasn’t immediately known whether Wilkins had an attorney.

The sheriff’s office said Wilkins led a gang and marijuana distribution operation known as “Money Mafia,” and he believed Williams had been giving information to a rival gang.

According to investigators, Wilkins sent Nunnally and the other suspects to pick up Williams at his Crestview home. The sheriff’s office said the men then pulled off the highway between Crestview and Niceville and shot Williams multiple times before going to Wilkins’ hotel in Fort Walton Beach.

According to arrest reports, Williams had told friends he was in a gang and needed a weapon, and a confidential informant told investigators that Williams was killed because he was “bouncing back and forth” between gangs in the Panhandle.

___

Information from: Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Fla.), http://www.nwfdailynews.com