Serfdom: Don’t think that ObamaCare is the Democrats’ last word on health care. They won’t be content until both patients and doctors are under their command.

Democrats won’t say out loud in public that it’s their goal to drive physicians under the government boot. But sometimes ambitions are revealed in unguarded moments.

Consider the confession of a Democratic candidate running for the Virginia House of Delegates during the Great Falls Grange Debate on Nov. 1. According to reports, Kathleen Murphy, who lost the 34th District race to Republican incumbent Barbara Comstock, said she supported the idea of forcing doctors to accept Medicaid and Medicare patients against their will.

Yes, this is one Democrat running for a state office. But it’s foolish to think her comment isn’t in line with her party.

A few years ago Massachusetts Democrats were behind a bill in the state legislature that would strip doctors who didn’t accept Medicare, Medicaid and the state plan of their licenses to practice.

This isn’t a political molehill. If doctors can be forced to participate in a government payment system they don’t want to be in, then doctors are owned by government. Their education, labor and intellects will have been seized by the state. They are no longer free agents — they are serfs, the bondsmen of legislators who will sweat them like galley slaves.

Roughly a fourth of physicians across the country already don’t take Medicaid. About 10% to 12% don’t participate in Medicare. Here’s why: Government plans don’t pay well.

According to the Office of the Actuary for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, doctors are reimbursed by Medicare at a rate of about 80% of what private insurance pays, while Medicaid pays them only about 58% of what private coverage will take care of.

“Physicians say they just can’t afford to be part of a system that generates so many patients for so little compensation,” says, Richard Jackson, chairman and CEO of Jackson Healthcare, a medical staffing and technology solutions company that has surveyed doctors.

Four years ago, our IBD/TIPP Poll found that 45% doctors said they “would consider leaving their practice or taking an early retirement” if the Democrats’ health care overhaul became law.

How many more would leave if Washington required them to accept Medicare and Medicaid? How many brilliant students would choose other professions? No one wants, or deserves to be, chattel of the state.