Tom Lackey (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

If you go What: Preventing Teen Suicide Benefit Concert When: Saturday, August 29, 5 p.m. Where: Roosevelt Park Cost: Free, $10 donation encouraged More info: tinyurl.com/npor734

A day in 2009 changed Longmont resident Tom Lackey's life forever.

He was in Las Vegas, and got a call from his wife that his daughter's ex-boyfriend, 17-year-old Ryan Crowder, had committed suicide in Lackey's Longmont home.

After that, Lackey, a meat cutter at a local Safeway, decided to become dedicated to helping children and teens, and in 2012 organized a local concert aimed at teen suicide prevention in Roosevelt Park. Called the Preventing Suicide Teen Benefit Concert, the event featured 10 local acts, but everything didn't go exactly as planned.

"Last time I said I would never do this again," Lackey said. "But now here I am."

The reason he didn't want to do it again is because, after covering the cost of putting the event on in 2012, Lackey was only able to donate $100 to the Second Wind Fund of Metro Denver.

Advertisement

However, three teen suicides in Frederick in 2014 has prompted Lackey to try again.

"That's what got me going this time, is those three suicides in Frederick," Lackey said. "I'm going out and I'm doing it again."

This time, it doesn't appear the planning is going any smoother than it was in 2012.

"I never wanted to do it again, it's too hard," Lackey said. "The reason I did the first one, is God wants me to help, somehow, to help with teen suicides. I always wanted to be in the music business, so I thought I'd go down this road. Now that I've gone down this road, it's not as glamorous."

To help ease the complications this year, the event will only feature four performances — two local DJ's and two bands (Red Stinger and Dead Ringer Punk). The event will also only go from 5 p.m. to 9 p.m., instead of noon to 10 p.m. like last time.

The concert will be free, with a $10 donation encouraged. The $10 donation will get an attendee a shirt as well as a raffle ticket. Lackey said the concert will feature door prizes.

However, Lackey said he has no idea how much money this concert will make, or if, after the costs are covered, there will be any left to donate.

"I don't know how much money I'm going to take, and how much I'm going to give," Lackey said.

Lackey said that one of the reasons he is throwing a concert again, knowing it may not make a large financial impact, is due to "the lack of compassion in the community."

"I was so sad and distraught by people in the community," Lackey said. "I just want to get it (his message of suicide prevention) out there so people will talk about it. I'm not doing much, but it's something."

The event will also feature Mitch Anthony, founder and former executive director of the National Suicide Help Center, who will be MC-ing between bands, speaking briefly, and will match any donations the concert receives.

Lackey was originally in talks with the Longmont Breakfast Optimist Club to be the recipient of any money he raises.

"We'll be helping out, but the proceeds won't be going to us," said Garry Selby of the LBOC.

According to Selby, the club will help distribute the money to a suicide prevention non-profit in the area. Lackey said that since the club doesn't want the money directly, he is planning to donate it directly to the REACH (Recreation, Education, Affirming Children's Hope) Program, run by former Longmont High School coach David VanderMolen.

VanderMolen could not be reached for comment.

While Lackey is unsure of how much will be raised or where it will go, the concert is scheduled to go on, and he said he hopes the local youth gets something out of it.

"When I went to the schools and started handing out flyers, the kids are so jazzed," Lackey said. "They are excited. They are starving for this information-- about suicide prevention. I just want to get it out there and get them (kids) talking."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones