Community, police leaders reflect on fatal shooting that sparked crucial dialogue

El Comite members Rich Lathrop, front left, and Dan Benavidez protest to the Longmont City Council as marchers look on in November 1980. ( Times-Call file photo )

Before Darren Wilson shot Michael Brown, before police in Ferguson, Mo., and St. Louis County were criticized for their methods of crowd control, before the grand jury and the no bill and the riots, Longmont public safety chief Mike Butler called up longtime community activist and leader Dan Benavidez in Longmont.

Butler wanted Benavidez to join him in walking the neighborhoods and talking with Longmont residents.

"He'll say 'How are you doing? Any complaints with police or anything going on with the fire department?'" said Benavidez, who serves as an interpreter for Butler as he walks Latino neighborhoods. "I thought that's what needs to be done across the country."

As the country roiled in protests following the lack of indictment of former Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson for fatally shooting Michael Brown, Longmont leaders talked about the police shooting and the 34 years of work it took to get to a point where there's an open line of communication between police and the minority community.

On Aug. 14, 1980, rookie Longmont police officers John Davis and Glenn Herner were working a traffic stop on Main Street when a vehicle rolled by with five people inside. A young white man leaned out of the window and shouted "(Expletive) you, pigs!" according to Times-Call archives.

Herner pulled over their the car over and attempted to arrest the young man, who had been drinking at a wedding. The young man refused to identify himself and tried to leave, so Herner and Davis pinned him on the ground while he screamed. Jeff Cordova and Juan Garcia, both 21, stayed behind as the driver of the car drove away with a passenger. Cordova and Garcia tried to intervene on behalf of their friend, but in the struggle, Herner shot Garcia dead, and then Cordova tried to run away across Main Street. Herner, mistakenly thinking Cordova had wrestled Davis' weapon away from him, shot Cordova too. Cordova died later.

The incident enraged the Latino community, and soon the incident between two white cops and a white man and two Latino men was at the center of a racially charged situation, Benavidez said.

"Even after the civil rights movement and everything, there was some pent up hurt and some pent up frustration then in 1980, and it all came undone," Benavidez said. "It all boiled up, the frustration and it simmered up and got tense. Big time tense."

'We'll burn the damn place down'

Through the tense atmosphere, the Longmont Latino community came together.

They met in the basement of St. John's Catholic church and Benavidez, Tony Tafoya, Marta Moreno along with others began to organize under the name El Comité. They held a candlelight march to city hall to talk with Longmont public officials where El Comité presented the city council with a list of demands that the U.S. Justice Department had helped the group define. Those demands included several review panels, affirmative action, drafting a use of force policy and establishing a hotline to report harassment.

But in the tense atmosphere, a group out of Denver called up Benavidez. The group asked to meet him at night in Erie. They had different ideas on what to do about the fatal police shootings.

"They said 'We've come here to help you out and we'll burn the damn place down if we have to'" Benavidez said. "They wanted to make this, and this is my summation of it, they wanted to make this like an LA-type of thing, the big fires they had there and all that."

Benavidez said he left the nighttime meeting thoroughly "spooked." As El Comité talked to local business owners and residents, it was clear Longmont did not want to follow the example of Los Angeles in the 1965 Watts race riots.

"We met with people in the community on both sides," Benavidez said. "They said 'Don't let this get out of control. We'll work with you.' and I said that I hoped that we could work it out, and I thought 'God, I hope I'm right.'"

Benavidez was right. Though it was tense for several years, Longmont didn't burn. Herner went to trial, where he was acquitted. Benavidez went on to become the first Latino member of the Longmont City Council elected at large and the first Latino mayor pro tem.

Focus on partnerships, joint accountability

Tony Tafoya, one of El Comité's founding members, laid out this story of saying no to riotous outsiders in a letter to Ferguson leaders he sent in August. He advised them to follow El Comité's model and keep whatever solution they sought local.

Marta Moreno, now El Comité's executive director, echoed Tafoya's advice.

"Everybody is kind of sad, frustrated and angry at what is going on," Moreno said. "But they need to respect each other's community and (outsiders) need to back off and let that community come together. . .The outsiders are just there to go make a ruckus."

Through El Comité and other advocacy groups' work with the police department, Longmont looks much different from 1980, and from most other police departments around the country.

Cmdr. Joel Post is the department's newly appointed liaison to El Comité but has not yet attended a board meeting. A five- member panel of one high school student, two civilian police department employees, two police officers and one police supervisor questions potential police officers before they are hired on at the department. There is also input from the Latino community on a panel that reviews any complaints of excessive force against officers, and there is a Longmont Police Department Latino Advisory Council, of which Benavidez is a member.

Butler said the police department's relationships with various organizations and community advocates has created a system that is greater than the sum of its parts.

"The focus has been on these partnerships, on joint accountability, relationships and connections and that has been institutionalized over time into how business gets done so it's not personality driven," Butler said.

Reflecting on Ferguson, and other communities, Butler said that "the police have too much power because the community has abdicated that power. What we've done is restored some of that and said 'We're here to share that.'"

When Benavidez reflects on Ferguson, he admits he has "flashbacks" to those charged times in the 1980s, when he would get threatening calls and there were heated conversations on both sides. But now, he also thinks of Butler calling him up to go walk the streets.

"You've got to walk the walk to talk the talk," Benavidez said.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci