Last week’s cover story in The Times Magazine, “Scott Walker and the Fate of the Union,” drew hundreds of reader comments – and some mail to the Public Editor’s office. Two of the emails presented questions that I decided to pose to the magazine’s editor, Jake Silverstein.

Reader question from Rand R. Cooper:

I’m wondering about the cover piece of the June 14 NYT Magazine, “Labor’s Last Stand,” by Dan Kaufman. Methodically it assembles a persuasive case (to me, anyway) for the importance of defending unions, and for the cynicism and wrongheadedness of Scott Walker and others who are trying to dismantle them.

I understand that an article in the magazine is a feature and doesn’t have exactly the same function as a news story in the daily paper. But I also know that The Times cherishes a practice and philosophy of impartial reporting, one that is being eroded on all sides amid the clash of partisan views that shapes today’s journalism. Formally, “Labor’s Last Stand” functions and reads like standard, traditional Times journalism. Yet it takes a passionate and committed stand. I happen to agree with that stand, but I’m wondering: Is this advocacy journalism? And if so, does it represent the new normal for The Times?

Mr. Silverstein’s response:

Thanks for your question. It’s a perfectly reasonable one. To me, the answer lies in the distinction between a magazine story and a story produced by the newsroom for the daily paper. As you note, “an article in the magazine is a feature and doesn’t have exactly the same function as a news story.” The major difference is that magazine feature writing allows for a reasonable amount of a writer’s subjectivity to be present in the formulation of a narrative. The magazine is extremely rigorous in terms of accuracy and fairness, of course, and it eschews direct argument (which is the province of Opinion); what it does best is tell stories, and all good storytelling is based on the teller having a perspective, a vantage on the events described. I absolutely don’t believe that this is the same thing as advocacy journalism.

*************

Reader question from Clay Steinman:

This seems quite the tendentious, anti-union picture to feature on the website and to put on the cover of Sunday’s magazine. The image seems more like what I imagine Cindy Sherman might make (I believe she’d decline) as a riff on a horror film still about unions as monsters if the Koch brothers were paying her to demonize union workers. Of course photographs can, do and should have points of view, and I can imagine that someone might have thought this represents a point of view promulgated by Scott Walker. However, it would be quite a leap to expect viewers to see a photo as a representation of a campaign prejudice without the clearest of captions. For anyone seeing this with mixed or anti-union feelings, the picture may well remain a visual symbol of what defenders of collective bargaining are really like.

Why would the magazine or the website promote such an anti-worker image? Pictures (especially journalistic pictures) have an aura of indexicality that no matter the stylization threatens to be taken as a sign of life.

Kathy Ryan, the magazine’s photography director, writes in Sunday’s “Behind the Cover” that the photo by Philip Montgomery “evokes labor protests of the past.” Perhaps in the theater (a production of “Waiting for Lefty”? “The Cradle Will Rock”?). I wonder which labor protests Ms. Ryan attended that resembled the picture to human eyes, without benefit of the photographer’s “cinematic lighting and shadows” – unmentioned on the magazine cover or on the displays on the web.

Mr. Silverstein’s response:

I differ pretty strongly from you in my thoughts about the images and what they convey. Yes, they are “hot” images that show people in moments of passionate anger, but they don’t demonize workers. The lighting is cinematic, but to me — and to Kathy Ryan, our wonderful director of photography — it doesn’t evoke horror films. Rather, it creates a certain kind of dramatic intensity. And it’s important to note that these are not staged photos. Philip Montgomery’s style simply heightens what was actually taking place. More than anything, what he managed to capture is desperation, the feeling that a critical battle is being waged (and possibly lost). That tracks perfectly with Dan Kaufman’s story and the language we used to describe it.

This is the latest in my series of Perfectly Reasonable Questions, where I pose readers’ questions to Times editors and present the questions and answers without comment. (Feel free to submit questions for a Times editor’s response to public@nytimes.com.)