Gov. Doug Ducey (Photo: The Republic)

Gov. Doug Ducey has "a plan of action" if the U.S. Supreme Court decides that federal health care exchanges can no longer offer subsidized coverage.

As it stands, Ducey's "plan" is to allow about 150,000 of our brothers and sisters to lose their health insurance.

He signed a bill that would prohibit the state from using public money to run a health insurance exchange under the Affordable Care Act.

Arizona is one of 34 states that did not set up a state-run exchange. We let the federal government do it for us.

MONTINI: Will Ducey let 200k Arizonans lose health insurance?

So, if the Supreme Court rules against federal subsidies, which have allowed all those Arizonans to get health care, a big bunch of people will be in trouble.

And so will the rest of us, since people without insurance simply go to the emergency room and those costs are passed on to us. Not to mention the untreated illnesses that eventually send indigent people to the hospital. Those costs trickle down to us, also. Not to mention the sheer misery for all those people.

Still, the new governor adamantly says he is not in favor of a state exchange, adding, "I've been outspoken on this issue and what my opinion is of Obamacare, and that I'm no fan of it."

Fine. Most multimillionaires aren't fans. Or at least they don't need to be. Whereas Obamacare has been pretty nice for those who struggle along closer to the bottom of the economic ladder.

So, what happens if the Supreme Court rules against the subsidies and Arizona now has a law saying it won't set up its own exchange?

"We will have a plan of action," Ducey said.

We will have?

Wouldn't that have been a good thing to have all mapped out before he signed a law banning a state exchange and possibly leaving 150,000 of his constituents without health care?

The governor added, "I think we'll be prepared with some good ideas."

He thinks?

That we will be prepared?

He doesn't know already? And if he does, why not show us the plan? Why not share those "good ideas?" I'd guess that making public his plan would, hopefully, put at ease the minds of tens of thousands of Arizona residents. It's the least the governor could do.

I understand that it can be difficult for those who have power and wealth to relate to those with … less. But look at it this way. I'd guess that Gov. Ducey knows exactly what he would do if he or someone in his family got sick.

I'm sure he has a plan for that.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1FY2ymy