What does enduring love mean? For one local couple it means perseverance even in the darkest times, times that begin in 1944 when hamburgers cost 19 cents, love was forever and Raymond Cochran asked Ruth to marry him.

This is a story about a Yankee and a southern belle, about soldier and his dutiful wife, about Ray and Ruth.

"I thought he was awful nice looking and very calm," Ruth said, sitting next to Ray in the library at the Sims Veterans Nursing home. "But he was a yankee! And I was a southerner!"

In the fall of 1944, Ruth was a cadet nurse at the Hillman Hospital in Alabama. Ray was visiting with his army buddies from Fort Benning, Georgia. According to Ruth, Ray and his buds chased her and the other young "liberty bells" out of the local Five and Ten. He then asked her out on a date.

"We climbed those steps and looked all over Birmingham," Ruth recalled. "And we ate at the little white inn or something like that. Hamburger 19 cents?" she said, jogging her husbands memory.

"Yeah," he nodded, "we went way all up and walked around."

It turned into a second date and then a proposal.

"I knew that's who I wanted was her," he said.

How did he know?

"I just knew!" he chuckled.

They were married November 7, 1944. Only a few weeks after they first met. That first Christmas together was one of their best. What they lacking in money they made up for in merry.

"We had a good Christmas!" Ruth said smiling. "Ray bought me a pair. That was our big Christmas present, 25 cent nylon pair of panties."

They knew they would be together. They also knew what would pull them apart. A few weeks after they pledged their love, Ray fulfilled his pledge to his country and was shipped off to war.

"We were sitting down to supper and a taxicab came in, and I said that's for me," Ruth said. "Her [her brother] said no sis I'll go see who it is. It was a taxi with a message that he was Missing in Action."

"They marched, marched us 45 days," Ray said.

"They didn't have hardly nothing to eat," Ruth said. "Except when you could steal a rutabaga one time."

"Yeah," he nodded. "We’d reach down and grab something that was growing, we’d pick it up and eat it. Something to eat. Anything. “

When Ray returned from war, Ruth said he wasn't in good shape.

"You weren't in good shape a lots of the time," she said.

He had lost 50 pounds but was weighed down by war.

"You have to share what they’ve shared. You try to help them if you can. Or you do like most of them, let them go on the street when they have that post-traumatic stress disorder. Or you get them out of it the best you can," she said. "He was a Prisoner of War for 45 days. I’ve been a Prisoner of War since the day he got home.”

Ruth said that while war was over she kept up the fighting for love.

"Back in my mind was one little phrase. Patience, Perseverance and Bottle of sweet oil any snail could reach his destination," she quoted. "His sweet oil mighta been a pat sometimes banana pudding too wasn't it?" she said to Ray's laughter.

Ray and Ruth have endued more than seven decades of memories, of war, of the loss of one of their son's and Ray's recent move to the nursing home.

“People have to be strong. And at times when someone needs to only give 10 percent, the other gives the 90. And if you can’t give the 90, well the 10 percent will be on the street," she said. "And that’s all I can say about it. Because 71 years taught me a little bit of something. Got to feed him lots of banana pudding.”

Ruth and their son visit Ray every week.

"He's still chasing me!" Ruth said as Ray followed her to the door, she with her walker, he in his chair.

On this visit, she brought sweets for her sweet, sugar for his nurses who do for him what age now keeps her from doing herself.

"He's a good man. He's a wonderful person. And he's my sweetheart," Ruth said.

They've shared a lot of good over the years and a lot of grief. She hopes they now make it to 100 years old.

"I wouldn't trade her for a million dollars!" Ray said.

"You better not!" Ruth laughed. "I'm not worth that much."