The Health Resources and Services Administration said it stands by its interpretation of the Affordable Care Act orphan drug exclusion, despite a recent court ruling that challenged its authority to engage in legislative rulemaking.

The ruling may have implications on another HRSA legislative rule, the “mega-rule,” which would clarify many of the fundamental definitions in the controversial 340B Drug Discount Program (The Cancer Letter, June 13).

Federal Judge Rudolph Contreras of the U.S. District Court of the District of Columbia vacated HRSA’s attempt to expand the 340B drug discount program to include some uses of orphan drugs May 23.

HRSA released a statement on its website June 18, reaffirming its original interpretation, regardless of the court ruling.

“The Court did not invalidate HRSA’s interpretation of the statute,” the statement reads. “HHS/HRSA continues to stand by the interpretation described in its published final rule, which allows the 340B covered entities affected by the orphan drug exclusion to purchase orphan drugs at 340B prices when orphan drugs are used for any indication other than treating the rare disease or condition for which the drug received an orphan designation.”

In addition, HRSA urged hospitals that take part in the 340B program to follow their posted guidelines for using discounts to purchase orphan drugs for non-orphan indications.

“HRSA…posted the Orphan Drug Designation List and the Orphan Selection File in order to assist the 340B stakeholders with complying with HRSA’s policy before the new quarter start July 1,” the agency said in a statement to The Cancer Letter.

“In terms of enforcement, covered entities and manufacturers should attempt to work out any issues in good faith. Manufacturers that do not comply with the statute may be subject to termination of their Pharmaceutical Agreement (PPA) and required to refund covered entities if those entities are overcharged.

“HRSA is assessing the impact of the recent U.S. District Court ruling on the proposed 340B Program omnibus rule. HRSA will convey information about next steps as soon as we know a path forward.”

PhRMA, the industry group that challenged the HRSA orphan drug rule in court, refuses to comment directly on HRSA’s decision to proceed with its previous interpretation.

“PhRMA cannot comment on matters concerning the ongoing litigation,” the industry group said. “However, as indicated in our filing with the Court, we think the law is clear that HRSA may not issue interpretive rules implementing the orphan drug exclusion, as HRSA itself acknowledged in proceeding through rulemaking last year.”

Safety Net Hospitals for Pharmaceutical Access, a Washington coalition, praised HRSA’s decision to continue with its earlier interpretation of the orphan drug program.

“SNHPA is very pleased that the Health Resources and Services Administration is holding fast on its well-reasoned and legally valid interpretation on the use of orphan drugs in the 340B program. HRSA’s policy will go far in helping rural and cancer hospitals better serve their vulnerable populations. These savings are absolutely vital to helping providers stay open and supply much-needed services.”

Ted Okon, executive director of Community Oncology Alliance, said he hopes HRSA’s different interpretation of the court ruling will give way to the mega-rule, which is expected to define who should qualify for 340B discounts.

“It’s clear that HHS will not take the court ruling lying down,” Okon said to The Cancer Letter. “It’s a very interesting play, because they are interpreting a court ruling differently. I hope that now, with that, they will come out with the mega-rule.”