There is no mystery as to why the Indian electorate rejected the ruling Congress Party, giving Narendra Modi and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) a landslide victory. People were disillusioned, not only with economic mismanagement by the government, but also with a spate of scandals and a major leadership deficit at the prime minister’s level.

Modi ran a charismatic and social media-savvy campaign on the platform of economic growth and good governance, and as chief minister of Gujarat state, he amply demonstrated his ability to deliver both.

I have been a long-time BJP and Modi supporter. He invited me to Gujarat about a dozen years ago to assist him in establishing the Gujarat National Law University, and I was deeply impressed with his work ethic and his life dedicated to selfless service.

In Modi’s younger and leaner Cabinet, downsized for efficiency and to reduce bureaucracy, two of the highest positions — speaker of Parliament and minister of external affairs — are now held by women. The man in charge of finance, corporate affairs, and defense, Arun Jaitley, is a highly regarded lawyer who plans to “pull the country out of the present economic situation.” I have known Jaitley, too, for many years. He rose from being president of the Delhi University Student Union, of which I was the founding president, to become a major figure in the BJP.

An innovative initiative by Modi was his invitation to the leaders of the South Asian region, including his Pakistani counterpart, Nawaz Sharif, to his swearing-in ceremony, which they all accepted. Sharif’s presence was a major geopolitical coup, as relations between these two countries have soured since the 2008 Mumbai attacks by Islamist terrorist groups based in Pakistan.

Before leaving New Delhi, Sharif told Indian journalists that he hoped the two leaders would “succeed in turning a new page” in their relations. But these countries have fought three wars since 1947, when British India was partitioned, and it will take a major effort to mend the strained relations.

Relations with China will be a major challenge. The Chinese government, media and think-tanks have hailed Modi’s victory. Modi will primarily focus on bilateral trade ties, but the unresolved issues include tension in the South China Sea, the border dispute with China, and China’s possible territorial designs on the Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh.

Modi’s initial thrust in foreign policy will be to engage with the neighbors and the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, China, and South Africa). But relations with the U.S. are also of prime importance, and Modi has accepted President Obama’s invitation to visit Washington next September. Washington’s continuing insistence that India open its markets and faithfully comply with international intellectual property rules, some of which are subject to varying interpretations, has often led to tensions. Domestically, the new government’s priorities include attracting investment, infrastructure development and high-speed rail, and a better tax system.

Modi has had a dark cloud over his head since the 2002 Hindu-Muslim riots in Gujarat, in which 1,000 people, mostly Muslims, were killed in retaliation for the burning deaths of 59 Hindu pilgrims in a train attack in nearby Godhra. He was alleged not to have taken adequate action to prevent the riots, allegations the Indian Supreme Court said were unproven.

Can the Modi government rule India in a democratic and inclusive fashion? I believe that the fears of the government not being inclusive are unfounded. Since 2002, there have been no major Hindu-Muslim riots in Gujarat, and Modi’s party did surprisingly well in this election among Muslim constituents. As the new prime minister told the nation after being sworn in, “Let us together dream of a strong, developed and inclusive India that actively engages with the global community to strengthen the cause of world peace and development.” This augurs well for India, the region, and the world.

Ved Nanda is Thompson G. Marsh Professor of Law and director of the Nanda Center for International and Comparative Law at the University of Denver Sturm College of Law. He can be reached at (vnanda@law.du.edu).