Nathan R. Shrader is assistant professor of Political Science at Millsaps College. (Photo: Special to The Clarion-Ledger)

Bill Cassidy's landslide defeat of incumbent U.S. Senator Mary Landrieu in last Saturday's Louisiana runoff election marked the end of a brutal election cycle for Democrats. Meanwhile, Republicans, who some believed to be on life support following the 2012 elections, are buoyed by the fact that they will enter the 114th Congress with solid majorities in both the U.S. House and Senate.

Beyond this angle of the story, the press and punditry have missed perhaps the most significant outcome of the 2014 midterm elections. Unfortunately, the fixation on races for the U.S. Senate has been excessive since GOP Senate candidates largely won seats in GOP states while Democrats chiefly won seats in Democratic states. In fact, nine of the 14 "battleground" Senate races were held in states that the Republican presidential nominee captured by considerable margins in both 2008 and 2012 while another—North Carolina—has long been friendly to the GOP.

This begs the question: if the U.S. Senate turnover leading to Republican majorities in both federal legislative chambers is not the big story, what exactly is?

Most significantly, Democrats exploded like a 1970s Ford Pinto in gubernatorial races that they should have won in states like Maryland, Maine, Michigan, Florida, Wisconsin, and Massachusetts and got thumped in state legislative contests by historic margins. According to Tim Storey of the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL), an analysis of the almost 6,000 state legislative races on the November ballot found that "Republicans ran the table, taking the majority in 11 legislative chambers previously held by Democrats."

Based on the most recent NCSL data, the GOP now controls 30 of 49 partisan state legislatures (Democrats will control only 11), 68 of 98 state legislative chambers, and 31 of 50 governorships. According to Storey, "Republicans will have a net gain of between 300 and 350 seats and control over 4,100 of the nation's 7,383 legislative seats." Not since Warren G. Harding's "Return to Normalcy" campaign in 1920 has the GOP fared better at the state level.

The critical outcome of the 2014 midterm elections is that come January, one party will hold a lopsided amount of power over the levers of government at the state level. As a result, policies like drug testing for welfare applicants, Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act, voter identification requirements, Common Core education standards, decriminalization and regulation of marijuana, adequate taxation of natural gas extraction, pension reform, paid sick leave for workers, and funding for roads and infrastructure will likely take a rightward trajectory in many states.

Forget Washington, President Obama, and the incoming GOP majorities in the House and Senate. If you take Tip O'Neill's axiom as seriously as I do, you are well aware that all politics is indeed local. The types of decisions most likely to directly touch the daily lives of American citizens will happen closest to home. Simply put, while the Democrats under Obama talked about hope and change, Republicans are now poised to deliver some version of it in most states.

While Washington is mired in hopeless gridlock and dysfunction for the foreseeable future, the policies produced at the state level become even more critical in our daily lives. Democrats have allowed themselves to become a Washington-focused party that has forgotten that every race in every state, county, and district is unique and in need of a distinctive message. This has helped position the GOP to lead on policymaking in the states at a critical moment in American history, producing the true legacy of the 2014 midterm elections.

Nathan R. Shrader serves as assistant professor of Political Science at Millsaps College. He can be reached at shradnr@millsaps.edu.

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1DsQMCz