Alibaba Group Holding Ltd.’s online payments affiliate will seek strategic investors under a reorganization that is taking place at a time when China’s e-commerce giant is preparing for its own initial public offering.

Zhejiang Alibaba E-Commerce Co Ltd., the parent of online payment service provider Alipay, will be absorbed by a new company, Alibaba Small and Micro Financial Services Group, which plans to offer 60% of its shares to strategic investors. The remaining 40% will be held by employees of Alibaba Small and Micro as well as Alibaba Group employees, including founder Jack Ma.

Alibaba’s Alipay website displayed on a tablet. Bloomberg News

An Alibaba spokesman declined to identify the potential strategic investors. The decision to seek new investors comes as Alipay, which was established in 2004 as a payment system for Alibaba’s Taobao online marketplace, is trying to expand its business beyond Taobao and offer payment services to corporate clients other than Alibaba. The move also comes as Alipay is beefing up its capabilities as a broader platform for offering financial products.

As part of the arrangement, Mr. Ma, who owns 80% of Zhejiang Alibaba, will only hold about 7% of Alibaba Small and Micro after the reorganization, Alipay said. Alipay split from Alibaba Group in 2011 to become an affiliate effectively owned by Mr. Ma, a decision that triggered a dispute with major Alibaba shareholder Yahoo at the time. According to the Alibaba spokesman, the decision to reduce Mr. Ma’s stake in Alipay’s parent is in line with the group’s original plans to eventually let Alipay employees hold an equity stake in the company.

Alipay, which processes e-commerce transactions using an escrow payment system, has been a key factor behind Alibaba Group’s success in China. Over the past few years Alipay has evolved into a broader financial services platform. Consumers can, for example, use their Alipay accounts to pay utility bills or even invest in financial products.

In the latest move to expand its financial capabilities, Alibaba said that China’s securities regulator last week gave it the green light to allow Taobao – Alibaba’s largest online marketplace — to make financial fund products available on the site. According to Alibaba’s official website, Taobao users will be able to buy into money-market funds, bond and stock funds as well as hybrid funds offered by 17 fund companies including Guotai Asset Management Co. and Great Wall Fund Management Co. The payments for the fund products will be made through Alipay.

Alibaba and its affiliate have already taken several steps to strengthen financial services operations. Last month, Zhejiang Alibaba E-Commerce agreed to acquire investment firm Tianhong Asset Management Co. by taking a 51% stake.

In June, Alipay and Tianhong teamed up to launch a service called Yu E Bao, which allows users to invest in financial products operated by Tianhong.