WASHINGTON -- As the city hunkered down for a possibly record-setting snowstorm, the Supreme Court turned away a challenge to the Affordable Care Act.

Supreme Court Turns Away Another Obamacare Challenge

The U.S. Supreme Court, which delivered major rulings in 2012 and 2015 preserving President Barack Obama's signature healthcare law, on Tuesday declined to take up a new, long-shot challenge to Obamacare brought by an Iowa artist.

The court turned away an appeal by Matt Sissel, who had asserted that the 2010 Affordable Care Act violated the U.S. Constitution's requirement that revenue-raising legislation must originate in the House of Representatives, not in the Senate, as the healthcare law did.

The high court left in place a 2014 ruling by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit upholding a lower court's dismissal of the lawsuit, which was backed by the Pacific Legal Foundation, a conservative legal group. The suit targeted the law's "individual mandate" that Americans obtain health insurance or pay a tax penalty.

FDA Mulls Parameters for Allergy Therapies

Faced with rising rates of allergic conditions in children and a dearth of interventions available to stop them early in life, the FDA brought in a group of independent advisors Thursday to help it decide how to move forward in developing and approving immunotherapies for curing, not just managing these conditions.

With no specific products to review and no up-or-down voting questions, the agency's Allergenic Products Advisory Committee heard from FDA officials and academic experts, who discussed a range of issues, including clinical trial design, appropriate end points, age-unique testing issues, and safety and efficacy for novel products aimed at asthma prevention and treatment and food allergies.

The panel spent a lot of time discussing the unique and challenging safety issues involved with testing and treatment of young children and infants.

"I can't help worrying about traumatizing infants with immunotherapy," one of the panelists said.

Panel members worried that young children -- an important population to try to treat -- would be unable to articulate when they are experiencing symptoms such as pruritus, mouth edema, and throat irritation before anaphylaxis becomes life-threatening. And that a lack of reliable data on trials involving infants and children under 5 would make it difficult to know where to set parameters.

NIMH Should Change Research Direction, Senators Told

The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is going in the wrong direction on mental health research, an expert told a Senate committee Wednesday.

"In building programs related to brain research, the National Institute of Mental Health has lost its focus on public mental health, and it has abandoned what should be its natural interest in diagnostic categories," said William Eaton, PhD, a professor of mental health at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. "These new programs at NIMH have confused a huge range of researchers and puzzled the international community."

This new focus "also has [eviscerated] the probability of developing research-based prevention programs for mental health and substance use disorders," Eaton told members of the Senate's Health, Education, Labor, & Pensions Committee at a hearing on how to improve the federal government's response to mental healthcare challenges.

Tax Dollars Pick Up Two-Thirds of Healthcare Tab

Taxpayers funded nearly two-thirds of all U.S. health expenditures in 2013, and that figure is expected to rise even higher by 2024, a study has found.

The percentage of federal, state, and local taxpayer funding of healthcare expenditures rose from 59.8% in 1999 to 64.3% in 2013, and is projected to increase to 67.1% by 2024, according to David Himmelstein, MD, and Steffie Woolhandler, MD, MPH, both of City University of New York School of Public Health at Hunter College in New York City. The study appeared online Thursday in the American Journal of Public Health.

"The big thing that went up was Medicare [spending], and that went up about 2.5 [percentage] points," Woolhandler told MedPage Today in a phone interview. "The rest pretty much stayed the same. We expected over the next decade that Medicaid was going to be the piece that goes up, but in fact the thing going up was the Medicare program."

Next Week

The House Energy and Commerce Committee announced that it has canceled all activities for next week due to the snowstorm in the Washington area. But some other activities are continuing.

On Tuesday, the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform will hold a hearing on developments in the prescription drug market.

Also on Tuesday, the Senate Judiciary Committee is holding a hearing on mental health and the criminal justice system. On Wednesday, the same committee will hold a hearing on the epidemic of heroin and prescription drug abuse.

On Thursday, the Senate Health, Education, Labor, & Pensions Committee will hold a hearing on the generic drug user fee amendments.