For more than 25 years, Pat Longo has been a stalwart of the Connecticut Republican Party - raising money, helping win elections and attending every national convention since 1992.

As she prepares to retire from the Republican National Committee, Longo on Tuesday night won the state party's highest honor - the Prescott Bush Award.

A resident of Fairfield County for nearly 50 years, Longo has been a major presence in GOP politics - serving with the past 10 chairs of the state party. As the vice chairwoman for 14 years, she worked closely with then-chairmen John Mastropietro and former state Rep. Chris DePino under Gov. John G. Rowland. With DePino, she raised $12 million for the party coffers when she said "we managed to win a lot of elections in those days.''

State Rep. John Frey, a fellow RNC member who introduced Longo at the Bush dinner in Stamford, said she is "a legend'' who played a behind-the-scenes role instead of seeking public office.

"Pat has never been one to seek the limelight,'' Frey told the crowd.

The Republican national chairman, Reince Preibus, taped a brief video message that was played to the crowd before Longo received the award.

"Pat is a good friend who I rely on for advice and counsel,'' Preibus said in the video.

Many friends of Longo, including RNC members from Michigan, Pennsylvania and New Jersey, traveled to Stamford for the event.

Speaking of her childhood in public school in New Jersey, Longo said, "Believe it or not, we said a prayer every morning before class started. ... In those days, we respected authority, and what a long way we've come from that.''

After saying that she voted for Richard Nixon and touching on various highlights, Longo fast-forwarded to the 2016 race.

"Why Donald Trump?'' Longo asked the crowd of insiders and contributors. "Well, I think the American people are so sick and tired of what Obama has done to our nation - a great damage. It could be Obama. It could be Obamacare.''

She added, "Donald Trump, with his bluntness and his lack of acceptance of political correctness, just happened to say the right things to a very, very angry American electorate at the right time. ... I think Donald Trump gets it. He gets it that we want change.''

Longo concluded her remarks by telling the partisan crowd: "If you love freedom and if you love America, then you must vote Republican. And this year, our Republican presidential candidate will be Donald J. Trump.''