Topics: ESPN, Football, Health Care, Health issues, NFL, Sports, trauma, Entertainment News, Politics News

When Thomas Jefferson wrote that all men are created equal, his Monticello farm team was obviously not what he had in mind. They were chattel, possessions toiling in his fields. So it’s not lightly – or unreasonable – to invoke the plantation mentality to describe the National Football League.

Tom Van Riper, who covers sports for Forbes magazine, points out that of the 31 owners of NFL teams, seventeen – more than half – are billionaires. Many boast of being self-made, in the image of Horatio Alger, but are now ensconced in luxury skyboxes far above the proletarians whose own dreams of glory ride vicariously on the grunts and groans of bulky but agile gladiators only one play away from a career-ending collision with the laws of physics.

For more than a year, public television’s award-winning investigative journalism series FRONTLINE had been collaborating on a new documentary about brain trauma in pro football with journalists from ESPN, the giant sports network. The title: “League of Denial: The NFL’s Concussion Crisis.”

A hard-hitting promo for the investigation upset ESPN President John Skipper. “Over the top” was his description — too “sensational.” He was so “startled” – his word – that he pulled the plug on ESPN’s partnership with FRONTLINE. The network has had a reputation for solid, even bold reporting of controversy and scandal in pro and amateur athletics. Not this time.

You have to ask, what was the actual reason for ESPN’s decision? Could it really be what John Skipper claims? Or is it that NFL games are, as The New York Times recently wrote, “probably the most valuable commodity in televised sports.” ESPN is paying 15.2 billion dollars – billion! – for the rights to telecast “Monday Night Football” for ten years through the year 2021, but it then reaps a fortune in advertising and subscriber fees. The monthly price to watch ESPN is four times higher than the next most expensive national cable network. More than six billion dollars are hauled in from cable ever year. It’s the cash cow for the entire Disney empire. In an interview with the Times, former Disney CEO Michael Eisner said, “To this day, the Walt Disney Company would not exist without ESPN. The protection of Mickey Mouse is ESPN.”

Shortly before his decision, John Skipper had lunch with NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell and two others in New York City. Sources told the Times, “The meeting was combative… with league officials conveying their irritation with the direction of the documentary.” Skipper also admitted to ESPN’s independent ombudsman Robert Lipsyte that he had spoken with Disney chairman and CEO Bob Iger. But he insists that the choice to remove ESPN from the FRONTLINE investigation was his own.