Rams have lost four out of past five games

Colorado State coach Larry Eustachy talks with his team during a timeout in the second half of the Rams' 73-64 loss at Northern Colorado. ( Michael Bettis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

GREELEY — Defense and rebounding are supposed to be the pillars of a Larry Eustachy-coached team.

But instead those fundamentals have been weaknesses recently for Colorado State, and they were noticeably lacking again Sunday night in the Rams' shocking 73-64 loss at Northern Colorado.

CSU was beat on the glass 41-34 against a UNC team that came in with negative rebounding margin on the season (-0.9) while allowing the Bears to shoot a season-best 50 percent from the field (24 for 48).

And so, in a season that began so promisingly with a win at Northern Iowa as part of a 5-0 start, the Rams (6-4) have now lost four of five, the most recent to a team that had yet to beat a Division I opponent this season.

"There's a reason why we're losing," CSU coach Larry Eustachy said. "It's because we're giving up 90 points a game and are getting outrebounded. It's as simple as that. It's really simple. And until we start doing those things with players that are capable of doing them, then it will not turn around."

So going forward, how will the Rams adjust with just three more games before the start of Mountain West play? Don't expect drastic changes — perhaps other than giving more minutes to freshman guard Prentiss Nixon, who didn't play Sunday after suffering a concussion in Wednesday's win over Arkansas-Fort Smith.

"I'll hold myself accountable to where the team is at, but I'm not gonna change," Eustachy said. "What are you gonna change? What are you really gonna change to give you your best chance to win?"

Meanwhile the Bears, who were hosting the Rams as part of a football contract between the two schools, improved to 2-6 while beating the Rams for the first time since 2009.

Jordan Wilson led all players with 20 points and the newly eligible Dallas Angin (a mid-year transfer from Southern Miss) had 19 off the bench for UNC, which never trailed in the second half to snap a five-game losing streak in the series.

After trailing 39-33 at halftime, the Rams scored the first five points of the second half to get within one, and it appeared order would be restored and the bigger program would take over.

But CSU's big run never came. Instead the host Bears stood firm, aided by seven second-half turnovers by the Rams.

Once considered a deep team before the season, CSU had just seven players log minutes. Clavell, playing through an illness, led the Rams with 18 points while Antwan Scott had 13 and John Gillon 10.

Joe De Ciman had three points and three rebounds, but was the only Ram available for postgame interviews for the second straight game.

Colorado State guard Gian Clavell (3) drives around the defense of Northern Colorado guard Anthony Johnson (24) Sunday in Greeley. (Michael Bettis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"We were on our heels the whole game," De Ciman said. "They were attacking us in every aspect of the game. They were driving on us one-on-one, outrebounding us. They're getting free throw misses. ... We have to look at ourselves in the mirror and see what we can do, because our coaches have done everything they can do."

The Rams shot just 38.6 percent from the field (22 for 57) and scored 25 points below their season average (89.0).

"This year to start the season I think we got a false identity. Everyone was shooting at a high percentage, shooting the 3 well, but we were still giving up 80 points," De Ciman said. "You're not always going to hit all your shots every night. It's also what we care about, we care about stopping people and rebounding. Offense will come, we're talented offensive players. But our problem isn't on the offensive end. It's not stopping people and not getting to loose balls and not outrebounding people. Not attacking them back."

Things started off well enough for CSU as a 3 by Clavell gave the Rams an early five-point lead four minutes in, but the Bears stormed back and controlled the rest of the first half, leading by as many as a dozen before settling for the six-point lead at the break.

Anglin was the difference in the first half for UNC as the guard made all three of his 3s and scored 16 of his 19 before the break.

The Rams weren't much better in the second half.

After trailing by six with 3:08 to play, CSU was able to get within three on a layup by Clavell to make it 64-61 with 1:40 to go. But the Rams couldn't get the stop they needed as Anthony Johnson scored the game's final four points, punctuated by a transition dunk in the closing seconds.

Eustachy and the Rams will have five days off to figure things out before playing a neutral-court game against Kansas State on Saturday in Wichita.

"The time will come when the players will buy into how we have to play. I'm not a salesman. They have to understand how hard you have to play," Eustachy said. "I think there's time to correct it, but not if we continue to not block out. It's just a simple game. Unless you perform it with effort, you're going to struggle.

"It could take lessons like this to really buy in."

Sean Star: 970-669-5050, sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/seanvstar