The candidates in New Hampshire's 2nd Congressional District clashed in an often-contentious debate Tuesday night.

Click here to view News 9’s report.

U.S. Rep. Annie Kuster accused Republican challenger Marilinda Garcia of missing hundreds of votes as a state representative. Garcia accused Kuster of not being available to her constituents and missing hearings on veterans issues.

Click to watch videos from the full debate.

"The votes I did miss were entirely average in terms of what most people in our volunteer legislature tend to do," Garcia said. "We all work other jobs and do the best we can to be there all the time."

Garcia said Kuster missed 40 percent of the hearings of her committee during the Veterans Affairs scandal, but Kuster said that wasn't true.

"I attended every single event and hearing we had in the Veterans Affairs Committee, and I'm very proud of the work our bipartisan committee did to reform the (Department of) Veterans Affairs," Kuster said.

The campaign has featured negative ads from both sides. Garcia was asked to respond to a Kuster ad accusing Garcia of voting to ban abortion. Garcia called the ad a "scare tactic," claiming it was false to say she was in favor of preventing doctors from helping women.

"Doctors are always authorized to save the patient's life," Garcia said. "And, of course, when that comes to a pregnant woman, that is exactly the case as well."

Kuster said Garcia took votes in three different years that would criminalize doctors' activities.

"These are the most private, personal issues and shouldn’t be made by state," Kuster said. "It shouldn’t be the government that comes in to make this decision."

Kuster was asked to respond to an ad from the Garcia campaign that brought up an issue from the 2012 campaign, when Kuster was criticized for having unpaid property taxes.

"Aside from it being not true, the point is, our taxes are paid in full, and they have been for several years, and Miss Garcia knows that," Kuster said.

On international issues, the two disagreed whether the United States should declare that it's not going to send ground troops to fight ISIS.

"I know my opponent has said she doesn't feel we should take this off the table," Kuster said. "We can't afford in blood or treasure to be the world's police any longer. The first Iraq war was a mistake. We got bogged down in Afghanistan."

Garcia said she opposes declaring that the U.S. won't send troops in, saying the country shouldn't telegraph its intentions to the enemy.

"Due to a lack of leadership from our president and his surrogates, such as Anne Kuster, the congresswoman, our friends don't believe they're our friends," Garcia said. "They don't believe we have their back. And our enemies do not respect us, and they do not fear us."

Both agreed that the privacy rights of Americans must be protected while still allowing investigators to do their jobs.

But there were few areas of agreement. Garcia asked Kuster a couple of times to not interrupt her, while Kuster said she wanted to correct false statements.

Kuster said more must be done to ensure that women are paid equitably, but Garcia said economists have shown that there isn't a wage gap.

On energy policy, Garcia said she supports an all-of-the-above approach to bring down energy costs. Kuster said she wants to focus on building a renewable energy economy that she said would also provide new jobs.

Kuster said she wants to fix the Affordable Care Act, which she said was bringing increasing benefits to Granite Staters. She said she was shocked to learn that Garcia wanted to repeal the law.

Click to view behind-the-scenes photos from the debate.

In a light moment at the end of the debate, the candidates were asked what candy trick-or-treaters could expect at their homes. Kuster said she plans to hand out Snickers, while Garcia said she's a fan of Kit Kats.

Polls had shown Kuster and Garcia in a close race, but a WMUR Granite State Poll released Tuesday showed Kuster with a significant lead.