Closing arguments set for Wednesday in Mile-Hi Skydiving trial

The Twin Otter faintly droned overhead, the sound barely beating out the rustling leaves of a nearby tree, as 11 people listened intently from a back patio in south Longmont on Saturday afternoon.

Two of the people — attorney Anthony Leffert and Mile-Hi Skydiving employee Nate Banton — were there representing the defense in a high-profile lawsuit against the skydiving company.

Four others — Kimberly Gibbs, Carla Behrens and attorneys Randall Weiner and Matthew Osofsky — were with the plaintiffs, who say the skydiving company's signature plane is too loud and flies too frequently.

Boulder District Court Judge Judith LaBuda was on the Behrens' patio, too, walking the length of it to hear better and asking Banton questions about the plane's altitude and direction while the court stenographer trailed along with a portable stenotype machine.

LaBuda ordered the site visit to two of four plaintiffs' homes so she could hear the noise from Mile-Hi's flights for herself ahead of closing arguments in the trial, which are scheduled for Wednesday.

The judge offered no comment about the noise levels during the site visits on Saturday.

The flights from Mile-Hi, carrying and releasing jumpers at first, but then holding off because of the wind, made noise at both locations, but rarely were louder than rustling leaves, bird songs or a revving engine.

Gibbs, who has served as organizer of sorts for the group Citizens for Quiet Skies, said the demonstration for the judge was unusually quiet.

"We witnessed here today the quietest skydiving operation that has ever been conducted in the history of skydiving," she said incredulously before talking with one of her attorneys.

She then clarified: "What I meant was, wouldn't it be great if they could fly that quietly all the time?"

Mile-Hi denied altering flight paths for the demonstration.

A screen shot from Webtrak (http://ems02.bksv.com/webtrak/den3) shows Gibbs' home and the flight paths of the two Mile-Hi Skydiving planes during Boulder County District Judge Judith LaBuda's visit Saturday afternoon. (Times-Call)

Timothy Lim, Gibbs' husband and a fellow plaintiff, printed off from Webtrak.com Mile-Hi's flight paths for the trips the company's plane took while LaBuda was standing in the couple's Gunbarrel backyard.

"Look at this obtuse path," Lim said, pointing to a printout that indicated a flight path rather like an upside down heart with the house in question at the bottom of the map, not crossed by the plane's trajectory. "That's not normal. They could (fly like that regularly). But they don't unless the judge is here."

Gibbs added that, usually, she can read the numbers off of the Twin Otter's tail. When they flew over for the judge on Saturday, the Mile-Hi planes were T-shaped dots in the sky.

A screen shot from Webtrak (http://ems02.bksv.com/webtrak/den3) shows Gibbs' home and the flight paths of the two Mile-Hi Skydiving planes on the Saturday one week before Boulder County District Judge Judith LaBuda's visit. Gibbs alleged Mile-Hi flew a different flight pattern for the judge. (Times-Call)

Carla Behrens also said she thought Mile-Hi differed from how it usually flies over her house during the judge's visit from 3 to 3:30 p.m.

"I feel that's not a realistic picture of what happens every day when they're flying," Behrens said at 6 p.m. "And they're back to normal now. It's reverberating inside the house."

But Mile-Hi owner Frank Casares, who flew one of the planes during the site visit, insisted the two aircraft flew normal flight patterns, as required by the judge.

"This pattern did not deviate from the typical pattern we fly on any given day with similar wind conditions, which were also typical for this time of year," Casares said in a written statement.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci