Stage

Summer lovin': Dirty Dancing's stars Kirby Burgess and Kurt Phelan. Photo: Peter Rae

"Nobody puts Baby in the corner" isn't exactly Shakespeare but for actor Kurt Phelan, it may as well be, "To be or not to be".

"In the final scene, you can feel it coming, coming, coming," says Phelan, who plays the role of holiday resort dance instructor Johnny Castle in the revival of the musical Dirty Dancing. "The audience has been anticipating it all night and that line feels completely different because it's so famous. Your actor brain switches off and you're going, don't mess it up, please don't mess it up!"

Patrick Swayze, who created the role of Johnny in the 1987 movie hit, hated the line, Phelan says. "He actually wanted it cut from the film and when you watch him, you can see he kind of shies away from it. But, apparently when he saw the finished film he agreed it was completely right for that scene."

Phelan's co-star Kirby Burgess, who plays the naive 17-year-old Frances "Baby" Houseman, has an even harder line to deliver: "It's 'I carried a watermelon', " she says. "Again, it's one of those lines the audience will probably say before I do."

Advertisement

Getting key lines right is one thing. Nailing Dirty Dancing's famous "lift" – the show's iconic poster shot – is another.

"It's such a hard position to hold and we have to hold it for a long time," Burgess says. "But one of the things we've learned as dancing partners is to relax into it. The more energy you put into making it happen, the less successful it is. I think of it like swimming: you're holding yourself but there's all the support you need. But at the end of a non-stop two-hour show, it still takes everything you've got left in the tank."

Dirty Dancing is a quintessentially American coming of age story with an Australian pedigree. After it debuted in Sydney in 2004, the show went on to become an international smash. When it opened in London's West End in 2006, it broke box office records. Dirty Dancing's American premiere took place in Chicago in 2008 and the show continues to tour nationally to this day.

American critics were perplexed by the show, however. A musical featuring pre-recorded music in which the lead characters don't sing? "What the heck is this thing anyway?" asked the Chicago Tribune's stage writer Chris Jones. "And why do so many people seem to love it?"

Phelan says he thinks of Dirty Dancing as more like a play with songs. "I can understand why musical theatre fans think it's a bit strange that the leads don't sing but when you see it you understand why," Phelan says. "It's about reinforcing the realness of these people and their story. And no one wants to hear a tough guy sing. It breaks the wall."

In the end, says Burgess, Johnny and Baby's dancing sums up everything that might ordinarily be said in a sung duet. "This show is about partner work and vibing off each other," she says. "It's a skill to be led, then take the initiative, and then allow your bodies to become one. What I love about it is that you have to have no inhibitions as a dancer. It's about more than technique. You have to let go."

Dirty Dancing

When Previews from Friday, 8pm. Opens December 3 – January 11, 2015.

Where Lyric Theatre, the Star, Pyrmont Bay. Wednesday – Saturday 8pm. Sunday 6pm. Matinees Wednesday 1pm, Saturday 2pm, Sunday 1pm.

Tickets $89.90-$149.90, ticketmaster.com.au

Show It's 1963. He's the working class hotshot, she's the Jewish-American princess, and he's about to show her the time of her life.

Stars Kurt Phelan, Kirby Burgess, Nadia Coote, Mark Vincent, Mike Bishop, Penny Martin.

Director James Powell