Louisiana Sen. David Vitter, left, with Republican Rep. John Fleming, who plans to run for Vitter's Senate seat. (Photo: File photo)

WASHINGTON — Republican Rep. John Fleming is on a mission to highlight his conservative record as gets ready to run for the Senate seat held by David Vitter.

Fleming and 30 other conservative House members recently wrote to GOP leaders saying they would refuse to support any measure that includes funding for Planned Parenthood — even if doing so shuts down the federal government .

In keeping with that pledge, Fleming voted Wednesday against a stopgap spending bill that contains money for Planned Parenthood.

“Americans, not just Republicans, want a more conservative and a more activist member in the House and the Senate,’’ said Fleming, R-Minden. “Obviously, I’m the most conservative among those interested in what we think will be an open seat here very soon... It’s simply a reflection of where this country, and in particular the state of Louisiana, is going.’’

Fleming, a favorite of the tea party movement who is serving his fourth term, has said he will run for the Senate if Vitter wins the Louisiana governor's race. Others expected to run include Republicans Rep. Charles Boustany, retired Air Force Col. Rob Maness and state Treasurer John Kennedy.

Jeffrey Sadow, a political scientist at the Louisiana State University at Shreveport, called Fleming’s campaign “pre-emptive.’’

“He’s out there laying claim to the conservative real estate,’’ Sadow said. “By all indications, he’s doing a pretty decent job of it. If he’s successful, there’s no room for these other kinds of candidates and so they’ve got to try to claim space elsewhere.’’

Fleming is a founding member of the arch-conservative Freedom Caucus, which had pushed for a no-confidence vote in House Speaker John Boehner. That was the major reason Boehner recently announced he will leave Congress at the end of October.

Fleming also belongs to the Congressional Prayer Caucus.

He opposed the nuclear deal with Iran, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street reforms passed in response to the Great Recession, and the 2010 Affordable Care Act, which he called a “disaster for our economy and for businesses.’’

Last week, Fleming introduced a resolution calling for President Obama to declare a National Day of Prayer for law enforcement officials.

Sadow said Fleming and other Republicans don't want a repeat of 2014, when Maness, also a tea party favorite, took votes away from Republican Rep. Bill Cassidy in the race to unseat Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu. Maness' participation forced Cassidy into a costly runoff against Landrieu, which Cassidy won.

“They don’t want an insurgency candidate like that, whether it’s him (Maness) or someone else,’’ Sadow said. “If (Fleming) can really demonstrate conservative credentials, there’s no room for a guy like Maness.’’

But Maness already is working with national and state fundraisers and has interviewed a possible campaign manager.

“We’ll be ready,’’ he said. “It’ll be fast and furious.’’

Maness said he hopes to take advantage of the “outsider momentum’’ of Republican presidential candidates Donald Trump, Ben Carson and Carly Fiorina.

“There’s no doubt that Mr. Fleming is the most conservative voting member of the Louisiana delegation in the House,’’ said Maness. “Unfortunately, he’s not an outsider. I think the people of Louisiana are looking for someone that’s got the leadership experience, and that’s not leadership experience based on politics.’’

Pearson Cross, a political scientist at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette said the race for donors, campaign staff and super PAC support already is underway in the contest for Vitter's seat.

“All the steps (candidates) take now will save them time and money later on,’’ he said.

Fleming spent much of the August recess ginning up support and raising money. He said he met with groups throughout the state, including pastors in the Bossier City/Shreveport area, bankers and law enforcement officials.

“I’m basically sitting down and talking with anybody that wants to talk about the future of our nation, especially in our state, and how we need to reform how government works for us, because it doesn’t seem to be working for us,’’ he said.

— Contact Deborah Barfield Berry at dberry@gannett.com. Twitter: @dberrygannett

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/news/2015/10/04/fleming-highlights-conservatism-ahead-senate-race/73164606/