HAMPTON, Va. (WAVY) – Wait times for primary care at the Hampton Veterans Administration Medical Center remain near the longest in the country, but the hospital has made recent incremental progress. The chief administrator says an ambitious plan of construction, renovation and hiring will accelerate that improvement.

“Primary care has been our highest wait times,” said Hampton VAMC Director Michael Dunfee. “When the access to that is not convenient, a lot of other processes really break down.”

The average wait time for a primary care appointment at Hampton has improved since June 2014, when it was 58 days. By December, Hampton had cut the wait in half to 29, and the current average is 27 days. In each case, Hampton was either at or near the worst in the nation. The current national average is seven days.

10 On Your Side sat down with Michael Dunfee last week, and toured areas of construction and renovation in the 140-year-old hospital.

“A number of the things that we’ve been talking about the last couple of times that we’ve spoken (with 10 On Your Side) have been plans,” Dunfee said. “Now we’re starting to see things actually take place, getting resources in place to bring down the wait times.”

Veterans Affairs Wait Time Data

Dunfee says he knows the formula to get wait times on target – add more space and more providers. 10 On Your Side learned that the Hampton VA has added about 100 full-time positions in each of the last two years, and expects to expand its staff at the same rate in 2015.

It is now in the middle of $80 million worth of short and long term construction. What used to be administrative offices on the first floor are now 15 new exam rooms, ready for use in early March. Upstairs, Hampton is adding a new operating room complex. In Virginia Beach, the hospital will add 10,000 square feet near its Community Based Outpatient Clinic.

History of Hampton VAMC

Dunfee says these projects, combined with adding staff members, will lead to shorter wait times in the near term. “I think that it’s reasonable to think that we will be at 20 (days wait time) within the next three months.”

By the end of February, Hampton will have added nine new providers in 2015. Dunfee says the Department of Veterans Affairs is supporting his recruiting efforts by authorizing a pay increase for new hires. A department press release from September indicated a pay raise for doctors and dentists ranging from $20,000 to $35,000 annually.

The centerpiece of the longer-range plan will take pressure off the main hospital, and greatly improve access to VA medical services where they’re needed most. Hampton will add a clinic on the Southside with 150,000 square feet. The site has yet to be chosen, but Dunfee says it will be located to maximize access.

The Southside project is slated for completion in 2020. Vietnam Veteran Bob Staicer of Virginia Beach is encouraged and looking forward to it. He gets treatment at Hampton for heart disease and diabetes, connected to exposure to Agent Orange from his days in a mortar platoon.

“Many times I’ve left for my appointment with time to spare. And then I ended up calling them from a traffic jam to let them know I’d be late,” Staicer says.

“I think (the new Southside clinic) is going to be a huge advantage for those of us here in the Southside of Hampton Roads,” Staicer says. “There are by far more veterans on the Southside than on the Hampton side.”

In the meantime, Hampton has plans to address another persistent problem at the main hospital, parking. A two-phase program will add 150 parking spaces by the summer of 2016, and then 250 more a year later. The 400 new spaces will help veterans who are often circling lots or end up having to park on dirt or grassy areas.

Dunfee has told 10 On Your Side in recent interviews that Hampton’s problems were never quality of care, but access to it, as reflected in the wait times. He points to two recent high marks and accreditations, from The Joint Commission and the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitative Facilities, as evidence that his hospital provides quality care.

The VA’s new secretary has brought a private-sector mindset to the department since he took over six months ago. Robert McDonald was CEO of Procter and Gamble before taking over an organization plagued by scandals and reports of veterans dying while waiting for care. McDonald told NBC’s Meet the Press Sunday he has already fired 900 people within the department.

Secretary Robert McDonald Bio

10 On Your Side asked Dunfee if he’s concerned about his own job security, should the wait times continue to be far longer than the national average.

Dunfee says he feels his position is “absolutely” safe.

“There’s no question (the wait times) are going to come down. We have all the resources in place.”