It is worse, leaving school officials to worry about implications for 2016 and possibly looking for a change in 2017.

The self-insured plan, done with the advice of consultant Sherrill Morgan & Associates, using a division of Aetna to handle the insurance claims, looks to be another $200,000 or so in the hole for 2015 not counting $1 million the school board voted to use to shore it up last year. The situation has the school board, superintendent and finance director frustrated and talking about changing consultants or going back to the Tennessee plan in January of 2017.

"It is extremely frustrating. We hire people to give us advice," Superintendent Lyle Ailshie said. "We can't continue this way."

The board went with a self-insured plan as a cost-cutting/increased-benefits measure on the recommendation of the Kingsport city government and used Sherrill Morgan, which the city government has used as a consultant for its self-insured health program. The school system can go back to the Tennessee health insurance plan in January of 2017 but also is talking with other consultants about staying in a self-insured plan.

The projection in October was that the plan would end the year with a $9,000 surplus not counting the $1 million the board used to shore up the program and a projection of $325,000 additional for 2015 and a like amount for 2016. Instead, however, the school system has a newly projected $203,626 deficit beyond the old projection, Chief Finance Officer David Frye told the Board of Education at its regular meeting Thursday night. The projected expenditures were $9.764 million compared to actual ones of $9,982,370.

Chief among the reasons for the worse-than-predicted performance was $286,278 more in claims than projected, which included $80,558 because of additional employees added over the year, $123,464 in "out of aggregate claims," made up of $96,741 in $4-per-prescription administration fees and $26,748 in other fees; and an adjustment in previously paid claims of $82,256. Of those, Frye said about $77,000 came in November.

"I've never heard heard of this before," Board of Education member Todd Golden said of the "out of aggregate claims" and that Sherrill Morgan should have told the system about that expense that Frye said he and Jennifer Guthrie, chief human resources officer, found.

"I would really love for the consultants to be here," Golden said of the consultant's projections not including those claims."A shortfall of a quarter of a million dollars is not due diligence." Other board members also expressed displeasure, including President Carrie Upshaw, Vice President Susan Lodal and member Eric Hyche.

For 2016 to day, Frye said Kingsport City Schools is running about $225,000 a week in claims and in December had $1.5 million in claims.

"Ï don'’'t mean to be so caviler with dollars. I understand this is people's lives,'' Golden said of obviously high claims for the year. The system has about 845 participants, not including dependents and spouses, on its health insurance plan.

"I'm very concerned that we don't have accurate numbers for next year," Golden said, asking that the school system get City Attorney Mike Billingsley to investigate the indemnity clause in the contract with Sherrill Morgan for providing improper data. Still, Golden lauded Frye and others on staff for their work on the issue.

"Even if news is bad, you've got to know," Ailshie said.

To start off the meeting, Sophie Dawson and Libby Russum, sixth graders at Robinson Middle School, lead the board and audience members in the Pledge of Allegiance. Sophie is the daughter of Tony and Lori Dawson, and Libby is the daughter of Ryan and Marci Russum. Chief Administrative Officer Andy True interviewed them before the pledge. Below is a video: