Insurance coverage for Americans will remain in permanent turmoil because the Affordable Care Act requires all plans to fit within four cookie-cutter designs called "metallic tiers." (The tiers – bronze, silver, gold and platinum – refer to the percentage of medical expenses a particular plan pays.) The video also notes that families may have to change plans repeatedly because, as circumstances change, a plan that fits within a tier one year may not fit in any tier a later year.

[MORE: Cartoons on Obamacare]

Insurance expert Pat Paule and I compared this requirement to a school where students with grades between 78 and 82 get a B; those between 88 and 92 get an A; but those between 82 and 88 or above 92 get an F. The student with a 98 isn’t valedictorian – he has a failing grade and doesn’t graduate. Under the new health care law, the most generous insurance policies aren’t rewarded – they’re labeled “subpar” and cancelled.

Mercatus affiliated scholar Chris Conover has noted that there is no technical reason for Congress to have included this particular provision in the law and suggested the cookie-cutter requirement may have been based on the assumption that Americans can’t handle more than four plan designs when buying insurance.

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

These waves of cancellations will bring real hardship to Americans. At the least, many will have to dive back into the exchange Websites which, despite their absence from the headlines, are still largely nonfunctional. Worse, for some Americans, the cancellations will mean changing doctors, interrupting coverage and losing continuity of care.

For those whose policies are cancelled, 2014 may be an especially difficult year. Enrollment was supposed to have begun in October, but opening day for the rush into the exchanges has been delayed until Nov. 15. That leaves about 30 days to compare plans and prices and successfully navigate the website. Unfortunately, the bizarre bands system adds yet another layer of difficulty and confusion for Americans trying to achieve better health.