Berthoud dog with campaign to end puppy mills claims top spot in national contest

Dan Taylor holds his hero dog, Harley, in his living room on Wednesday in Berthoud. Harley is the 2015 Hero Dog, an honor bestowed upon him by the American Humane Association. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Harley Freight Train Taylor may look tiny, even smaller in person than he appears to his nearly 75,000-plus Facebook fans in the photos that accompany his page. But he's mighty.

The 6-pound, 14 ½ -year-old Chihuahua who lives in Berthoud beat out the big dogs to be named the American Humane Association's Hero Dog on Sept. 19.

First his online fans voted him the Emerging Hero Dog for his and his owners' efforts to educate people about puppy mills and his campaigns that have rescued more than 500 mill dogs and raised more than $500,000.

Then fans and a panel of judges selected him as the overall Hero Dog among eight categories of award-winning dogs.

Now he has a bigger conquest to pursue.

Harley will capitalize on his new fame with a trip to the nation's capitol. He and his owners, Dan and Rudi Taylor, will head to Washington, D.C., on Oct. 21. With the American Humane Association — which works to improve conditions for both children and animals — they will lobby Congress to shut down puppy mills in America. The AHA will propose a bill, and Harley will be there to show the legislators just what life in a puppy mill can do to a dog.

Puppy mills are businesses defined by the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals as "a large-scale commercial dog breeding operation that places profit over the well-being of its dogs — who are often severely neglected — and acts without regard to responsible breeding practices."

Advertisement

"Now is the time, really," Dan said Wednesday. Awareness about the conditions that dogs endure in puppy mills has been growing, he said, and there may be enough support now to get them shut down.

Scars of a decade

Harley had a hard life for his first 10 years, being used as a puppy mill breeding dog.

He has the scars to prove it.

He lost an eye, most likely because of a power washer. Dan said mills don't take the dogs out of the cages to wash them out, and often dogs are injured in the process.

2015 Hero Dog, Harley, poses for a portrait next to his awards from the American Humane Association on Wednesday in Berthoud. The 14 ½ -year-old Chihuahua is one of four rescued Chihuahuas owned by the Taylor family. (Trevor L Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

His legs are bowed, his tail broken and his spine fused as a result of spending all his time in a tiny cage.

U.S. Department of Agriculture regulations for puppy mills require dogs to have just 6 inches of space above their heads and to one side, and since they rarely get out, they don't get much chance to use their legs. Their nails never get clipped, and that too can hurt their ability to walk.

Harley has no teeth left. They began rotting away in part because dogs in the mills don't get regular veterinary care and because they don't have access to bowls of water to lap up to rinse their mouths. They get water from rabbit cage water bottles. With no teeth to help hold it in, his little pink tongue often peeks out of his mouth.

He also has a heart condition, pulmonary hypertension, that requires him to take sildenafil, better known as Viagra, to move his blood through his lungs, another drug to prevent blood clots and an oxygen tent in which he sometimes sleeps. A veterinary cardiologist and a team of other specialists treat him, and after a scare earlier this year, he's doing much better.

Harley, as Dan told the audience at the American Humane Association Top Dog awards ceremony in Hollywood, has an indomitable spirit.

"Harley survived in hell for 10 years, and there's only one thing that allows the spirit to do that, and that's to be indomitable," he said when Harley was named the overall winner of the Hero Dog award.

Harley needed that resilient spirit.

After 10 years in the puppy mill, when his heart was failing, he was no longer wanted. His bio on his Facebook page describes what happened next: "They considered tossing me in a bucket, as is, still breathing ... but I was lucky because a woman (who had a heart) and worked for the puppy mill, took me away and turned me over to a rescue."

His rescuer posted his photo on the Internet with a description of all his afflictions as an example of how badly dogs are treated in puppy mills.

Because he was expected to live only a few months, Harley's rescuer didn't expect to find him a new home.

But Rudi Taylor saw that posting and felt called to take in the little dog and make whatever time he had left comfortable and happy.

Dan Taylor talks while holding his rescue dogs, Olive, below, and Harley in his living room on Wednesday. (Trevor L Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

And Harley thrived with medical attention and love.

"It's amazing what some love and proper medical care will do," Dan said. Four and a half years later, the small dog seems to be enjoying life — with lots of love, attention and naps.

Despite 10 years of abuse and neglect, Harley loves people and the attention he gets at events to raise awareness for the cause, Dan said.

But Rudi said Harley did have to learn to trust after coming out of the puppy mill. "Watching his transformation was kind of neat," she said.

A family of rescues

The Taylors have three other rescued Chihuahuas and one bigger dog, an Anatolian shepherd.

Cricket, a female Chihuahua, was used for breeding and delivered her last two litters, with one puppy each, through Cesarian section, an operation sometimes done at puppy mills without anesthetic, which is what the Taylors suspect happened to her. She came to them very fearful.

"For one and a half years, she would scream and cry when she saw me without my wife," Dan recalled.

Their sole long-haired Chihuahua, Riley, also is timid.

The tiniest of the pack, Olive, is the most bold. Dan said she was intended to be a show dog but for some reason was rejected.

Like Harley and his "sisters," most puppy mill survivors can become loving pets when they get into good homes, he said.

The Taylors have worked with National Mill Dog Rescue in Colorado Springs, which makes runs to Midwest states to pick up dogs the mills no longer want, then finds them homes. They've also worked with Because of You Chihuahua Rescue, the group that saved Harley.

"We just want the dogs to live a good life," Dan said.

Some people are afraid to take in the survivor dogs, thinking they may be beyond recovery, but only rarely is one so damaged that it cannot learn to live and love like other dogs, he said. "They know that people have rescued them, and they really appreciate it."

Want to see more from Harley? Harley will be on the "Today" show the morning of Oct. 26. A program about the Hero Dog Awards will air the evening of Oct. 30 on the Hallmark Channel. The Hops and Harley benefit will return for a fourth year on June 25, 2016, in Berthoud. This summer's event drew 2,000 people. On the web: http://harleypuppymilldog.com/ On Facebook: www.facebook.com/harleyfreighttraintaylor?fref=ts On Twitter: https://twitter.com/Harley_Mill_Dog On Instagram: https://instagram.com/harleypuppymilldog/ On Pinterest: https://www.pinterest.com/harleymilldog// On YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/user/puppymilldog/videos Learn more about the American Humane Association at http://www.americanhumane.org Learn more about the American Hero Dog Awards at http://www.herodogawards.org/ Read the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals statement on puppy mills at http://www.aspca.org/fight-cruelty/puppy-mills

'There's a special bond'

The Taylors work to educate people about not buying puppy mill dogs, but rescuing dogs in need instead.

Rudi said if there were no more puppy mills, it's estimated humane societies and rescue groups would have 75 percent fewer dogs needing homes.

Dogs in pet stores usually have come from puppy mills, even if the store staff says otherwise, Dan said. The mills sell them to brokers who sell them to pet stores.

Now some puppy mills have turned to selling their dogs over the Internet. He estimated that 30 percent of dogs sold online come from puppy mills.

The USDA does attempt to regulate breeding operations, but with an estimated 10,000 puppy mills in America and just 90 inspectors, it's a nearly impossible task, he said.

Yet efforts to shut down puppy mills have faced opposition from the American Kennel Club (which on its website does not oppose mill-type breeding but calls for "scrupulous enforcement of the federal Animal Welfare Act, and state and local regulations governing the humane care of animals" and resources to allow USDA and other enforcement agencies to make sure that regulations are met). The AKC gets fees each time a purebred dog is registered, so it has a financial interest in large-scale breeding operations, Dan said.

Other groups that raise animals also oppose efforts to shut the mills down, perhaps afraid that if dog breeding could be shut down, cattle, pig, chicken or sheep breeding could be next, he noted.

Dan said sheep and cattle deserve to be treated humanely too, but dogs are different.

"There's a special bond between people and dogs," he said. Dogs bond with people, share their homes and even their beds sometimes. "They deserve better than to be imprisoned in a cage for their lives."

He said responsible breeding has a place, such as in a family that has a couple of dogs and wants to breed family pets, done for love of the dogs and to perpetuate a healthy bloodline.

Though he can feel some sympathy for the mill owners who might be put out of business if Congress can be persuaded to shut them down, "if what you're doing creates suffering, you're doing something wrong," he said.

'He gives people hope'

Chihuahuas can live 15 to 20 years, so the Taylors hope Harley has more years left and that in his lifetime there can be an end to puppy mills.

Rudi said they are able to keep Harley comfortable despite his numerous medical problems, but those problems might be too much for another dog. "Sometimes it's almost like there's a reason he still hangs in here," she said.

"We're hoping he's going to be around for quite a while yet," Dan said.

Harley gets letters and cards from people saying how much they enjoy following him; people who are ill or depressed write to the family about how much Harley inspires them to persevere. He got more than 1,000 cards last Christmas, containing $15,000 in donations for National Mill Dog Rescue.

"He gives people hope," Dan said.

And while the Taylors could look at puppy mills and be negative, the response to Harley has given them hope, too.

"There's a lot of good people, a lot of good people in this world, more than bad," Dan said.

Rudi echoed that comment. "I think he's probably taught me a lot of patience," she said. "He's taught me there's so many good people in the world, and that I can continue to have hope that we can put an end to puppy mills."

Jackie Hutchins: 970-635-3689, jhutchins@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/JackieHutchins1.