More Video...

Nebraska Congressman Adrian Smith sent a letter to Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell with questions about how the potential liquidation of CoOportunity Health will impact Nebraskans.

“Nearly 120,000 people, mostly Nebraskans, are facing coverage cancellations due to CoOportunity Health’s collapse,” said Congressman Smith. “This is an extremely unfortunate situation and one more example of how President Obama’s health care law is failing. Americans were falsely promised if they liked their insurance, they could keep it. Now, after complying with Obamacare’s mandates, many Nebraskans are being told they cannot even keep the insurance this law created.

“I am very concerned about this situation for consumers who purchased health coverage and for the taxpayers who have seen millions of dollars lost and millions more at risk. My letter asks Secretary Burwell to shed light on options available to those impacted by a liquidation and how further risks to taxpayers can be avoided.”

Some Nebraskans need to find new insurance after the Iowa Insurance Commissioner asked for an order of liquidation for a federally funded insurance company.

Iowa-based CoOportunity Health was one of 25 Co-ops created by the Affordable Care Act.

The company was made with lower costs to compete with the areas largest insurance company, Blue Cross Blue Shield.

But with too many members and not enough federal funding, the company is moving forward with liquidizing.

The President of Primark Insurance Agency in Grand Island, J.J. Green explained, "What happened is they only received about 5% of the federal funding for all the cooperatives in the country, but ended up with 21% of the enrollments. So when you have 21% of the enrollments but only 5% of the funding, quite frankly there wasn't enough money."

Compare those numbers to other states like Connecticut, which received 7.2% of the funding, and only had 1.1% of the enrollments. A chart of all 25 co-ops funding and enrollments is attached to this article.

On top of that, Congress decided to take away bailout money created for an incident like this.

"When the President signed the new budget reconciliation act for 2015, the Federal Government withdrew some of those reserve dollars that were promised in the beginning and so the state of Iowa Insurance Department took over the rehabilitation of CoOportunity Health," said Green.

But without more funding, Iowa couldn't save CoOportunity Health. So on March 1, the company is officially liquidized.

With the news their insurance will run out on February 28 individuals and companies like Roe Buick in Grand Island are looking for new coverage, knowing it will be more expensive than CoOperative Health.

"We got about 40 employees and everybody gets nervous," said Jason Roe, the President of Roe Buick. "It's not just them, it's their kids, it's their spouses, that are relying on it and us to make sure we're giving them the best coverage and bang for their buck too."

Roe officially changed coverage Friday with help from Primark Agency, which has been very busy since the news of liquidation was announced to customers on December 24.

"We're moving them as soon as we can and several of those went to a February 1 effective date," said Green. "The rest of them have not made that decision, definitely now, will need to move to a March 1 effective date and those applications should be turned in before February 15."

The problem for Central Nebraska is some of the hospitals are still in a dispute with one of the bigger insurance companies in the area.

"Blue Cross Blue Shield wasn't an option because they're not working well with CHI and then CoOportunity, we switched over to them and with 2-3 weeks we learned that they're not going to be there," said Roe.

"We've seen a lot of activity, of course, with United Healthcare, Coventry Aetna, Blue Cross Blue Shield, Assurant, I would say those are the 4 major ones," said Green of the other options since CoOportunity is liquidizing.

But if something happens and you lost your coverage, there is a backup plan.

"Nebraska and Iowa both have what they call a state guaranteed pool so as a result of the liquidation, if something just happened and a person didn't get covered or didn't get rolled over their claims would be covered by the state insurance pool," Green said.

But he said there are limits to the pool, so it's more important to make sure you have insurance before March 1.