Topics: Capitalism, Labor, Labor unions, the daily dot, Unions, Video, wage theft, Walmart, workforce, Business News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot . Enter the URL of the original Daily Dot story.

Loverboy may have told us that we’re “working for the weekend,” but that’s not the case with retail employees, who are on the clock seven days a week at all hours to accommodate demanding shoppers. This week, New York’s attorney general is looking into “on call” scheduling practices; meanwhile, across the nation in Alameda County, Calif., Walmart is facing wage theft charges. It’s not a fun time to be one of the roughly 4.6 million retail workers in the United States.

Fortunately, the Internet is starting to change that, as many smart awareness campaigns like the Retail Action Project and Fight for $15 have taken to the Web to lobby for support. Such organizations are taking advantage of the Internet’s capacity for pushing for social change to put pressure on retailers and generate awareness of the problems that plague the American workforce.

More from The Daily Dot: “Gamestop will soon start selling classic games”

Here are seven of the biggest issues currently facing America’s workers.

1) Low pay

In 2012, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported average wages of $10.29 per hour for retail workers. This above federal minimum wage but still below the minimum wages in some areas, like Seattle and San Francisco, both of which have approved $15 minimum wages; San Francisco is gradually escalating until it reaches $15 in 2018. However, this falls far below the so-called “living wage,” the amount of money workers need to survive comfortably in a given region.

Fast food workers have been heavily involved in the Fight For $15 campaign, but retail workers need living wages, too. Without fair pay, people are driven to work multiple jobs to support themselves. That means more stress and less time at home, especially when combined with issues like abusive scheduling practices and limited employee benefits. In particular, action campaigns related to pay have utilized Twitter to particular effect for organizing via hashtags to create mass in-person rallies across the U.S.

2) Part-time scheduling

The abuse of part-time employment and scheduling practices is a perennial problem in the retail industry. Hiring multiple part-time employees tends to be less costly than hiring full-timers, especially if a company offers benefits; keeping hours just below the part-time limit ensures that an employee isn’t entitled to health care subsidies, sick days, and other benefits options. In regions where municipalities haven’t moved to aggressively promote employee benefits—San Francisco’s mandatory health care for employees is an example—retail employees are often forced to spread themselves thin across several workplaces to make ends meet.

Employment in multiple locations adds considerable stress, and cuts into time at home and interpersonal relationships. A worker running between two or more jobs is less able to focus on tasks outside the workplace—including organizing for better working conditions. It’s hard to lobby for workers’ rights if you don’t have the time because you’re juggling three jobs.

3) Anti-organizing practices

Many major corporations are involved in union suppression and anti-organizing practices, such as misleading employees about what can happen under unionization and intimidating organizers. Walmart is one major offender, and the company is in the news not just because of the Alameda County suit, but because during the years Hillary Clinton sat on Walmart’s board, she said little on the subject of its anti-union activities. Instead, she watched the company suppress labor organizing. That could become a contentious issue in the election, as Democrats have historically relied on union support.

More from The Daily Dot: “The first ‘Batman v Superman’ trailer just leaked”

This is a particular acute problem in “right to work” states, which claim that unions pressure employees to join and pay dues if they want to remain employed. The issue has become particularly high profile in Wisconsin, where Republican contender Scott Walker has overseen a number of regressive employment reforms in recent years. Contrary to the name, “right to work” isn’t about the right to employment at all, but it does weaken labor unions, as Jim Zarroli reports at NPR. Such laws, Business Insider’s Rick Ungar notes , perpetuate the myth of the closed shop—a workplace where new hires “must become a member of the union within a stated period of time or lose their job.”

4) Wage theft

In Walmart’s case, the firm is avoid paying part-time workers by shifting additional work onto assistant managers, thus depriving part-timers of pay. Because these workers are paid on a salaried and not hourly basis, they accrue overtime without receiving overtime wages, representing a significant savings to the corporation. This is just one among many tactics used to squeeze unpaid hours out of workers, and as Steven Greenhouse reports at the New York Times, workers are fighting back. Critically, he noted, regulatory agencies “assert that more companies are violating wage laws than ever before, pointing to the record number of enforcement actions they have pursued.”