The Affordable Care Act now requires health insurance companies to cover routine costs for clinical trial participants, the American Society of Clinical Oncology reminded clinicians in educational materials about the provision it released Feb. 4.

The group is concerned, it said, because "the federal government has not yet issued regulations to guide implementation of the new law," and, at least so far, has characterized it as a "self-implementing" statute that insurers are "expected to implement ... using a good faith, reasonable interpretation of the law."

"While much of the statutory language is clear, in the absence of federal guidance, payers will likely vary on the legal interpretation of each element of the provision. It is likely that securing compliance with the law may require considerable negotiations with some insurers or health plans. There is no assurance that all parties will agree on the legal interpretation of each element of the provision," the group said.



Dr. Clifford Hudis

To help, the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) issued a detailed explanation of the measure, plus educational materials for patients and a form investigators can fill out to demonstrate that a trial and potential subject meet the law’s requirements.

"ASCO and other groups fought long and hard for this law requiring insurers nationwide to cover the routine costs of care for individuals participating in clinical trials," ASCO president Dr. Clifford Hudis noted in a statement.

The hope is to counter poor study enrollment, the main reason that about 20% of cancer trials are never completed, according to a study reported at the 2014 Genitourinary Cancers Symposium earlier this year. Sometimes patients simply can’t afford to participate, because "some health plans have denied coverage ... of routine costs that are offered as part of the clinical trial." The new law might help patients afford clinical trial participation, the group said.

The law applies to plans newly issued or renewed after Jan. 1, 2014. Routine costs include all items and services that an insurance company would cover for a patient not enrolled in a clinical trial. Plans cannot prohibit participation in clinical trials; deny or limit coverage of routine patient costs for items and services furnished in connection with participation in a trial; or discriminate against an individual because they are enrolled in a trial.

Continued...