A drug being billed as 10,000 times more potent than morphine has hit the United States, thanks to dealers from Canada seeking to expand their areas of sales, authorities said.

Scientists say the synthetic drug, W-18, is so powerful that even the smallest of doses could kill, Fox 6 reported.

The drug was invented 30 years ago at the University of Calgary, but was shelved, due to its too-powerful properties. But now, illegal users have pulled it from hiding with hope to turn big profits. And authorities are warning: Drug overdosing statistics are set to skyrocket.

VICE News reported China has been a big player in the W-18 business so far, and has inundated Canadian markets with a pill mix that includes fentanyl and W-18.

Get the hottest, most important news stories on the Internet – delivered FREE to your inbox as soon as they break! Take just 30 seconds and sign up for WND’s Email News Alerts!

“We believe W-18 would be coming from China,” one Calgary Police Service Drug Unit spokesperson said, Breitbart reported. “Certainly, organized crime is behind the importation of fentanyl and I would make the connection that W-18 would be the same.

More than 11,000 have died from heroin in 2014 in Canada and the United States. Fentanyl, meanwhile, 200 times more powerful than heroin, has been blamed from hundreds of overdoses and deaths in recent years, as well. VICE News reported between 2009 and 2014, about 655 died from fentanyl overdoses in Canada alone.

Here’s the help you’ll need to prepare your household for the realities of living under a centralized health-care system — order Dr. Lee Hieb’s “Surviving the Medical Meltdown: Your Guide to Living Through the Disaster of Obamacare”

The Independent reported W-18 was first found and seized in Canada in August of 2015, during a police raid in Calgary that brought them 110 pills. In the last year, more has been discovered in Canada and now, in the United States. The Sun Sentinel said that just a few weeks ago, in March, a Florida man was arrested in possession of two and a half pounds of W-18, along with fentanyl pills.

And the border battle is playing a big part in discussions tied to the war on drugs.

Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., said the weak U.S. border on both the north and south sides of the country have caused a rise in drug-related deaths and overdoses. In January, he said during one Senate hearing the increased supply of heroin in the United States is directly tied to a “lack of enforcement at the border,” Breitbart reported.

“[That] is a big part of this,” he said then.