Share

Tweet



Share

Send

Link



The results are in, and as predicted, the GOP has regained control of the Senate. This year’s midterms will go down as the most expensive in history, with both parties spending a combined total of $4 billion. The parties shelled out nearly $700 million on the 36 Senate races alone, most of which went toward ads that tapped into hot-button issues like health care, abortion or general anti-incumbent fervor.

Attack ads played an outsized role in some of the most hotly contested races. Some of them hit wildly below the belt, while others were simply bizarre or (unintentionally) hilarious. But the most pointed negative messages helped bury candidates, many of them Democrats. Here’s a look at the ads that helped sway several key Senate races.

What Rhymes With Alison Lundergan Grimes

When Alison Lundergan Grimes won the Democratic nomination in Kentucky this May, it seemed she might actually have a chance at dethroning Mitch McConnell. But Grimes came off as amateurish—despite her attempts to sell herself as a gun lover and fervent supporter of Big Coal—and in July McConnell hobbled her candidacy for good with one of the strangest attack ads in recent memory. It’s an earworm set to auto-tune, laid over stock footage and DIY graphics. The song’s chorus is “What rhymes with Alison Lundergan Grimes?” and the answers, in no particular order, are “not ready for prime time,” “sticks to party line” and “left-wing mime.”

McConnell painted her as a classic liberal attached to the policies of President Obama, who is especially unpopular in Kentucky. The ad was viewed more than 600,000 times, and this fall, when Grimes refused to say whether or not she voted for Obama in 2012, it only reaffirmed McConnell’s message.

Uploaded By: Mitch McConnell

Nice Guy

Heading into Election Day, Colorado Democrat Mark Udall was locked in a dead heat with his challenger, Representative Cory Gardner. But Gardner may have gained an edge in September with a genre-bending spot that exploited the state’s cowboy streak. Gardner calls Udall “a real nice guy” before stating, “He’s a nice guy who’ll never change the Senate. He is the Senate.” Ouch. Gardner goes even further, noting that Udall’s father “ran for president,” while his owner father sells tractors, “just like my granddad.”

A furious Udall complained to The Denver Post that his family should be off-limits, which only helped generate more attention for the spot. It became the most popular of Gardner’s campaign and was viewed online tens of thousands of times.

Uploaded By: Cory Gardner for Senate

Tell Kay Hagan Obamacare Hurts North Carolina

The Senate seat of North Carolina Democrat Kay Hagan was considered vulnerable almost a year before the midterm elections, and Republicans pounced early. Americans for Prosperity, a conservative nonprofit, released an emotional ad in January featuring a woman explaining how she lost her health insurance because of the Affordable Care Act. Hagan had echoed President Obama’s promise that if you liked your plan, you could keep it. The woman in the spot drives the contradiction home, saying that the senator had lied to her, and now she had to pay more for health coverage. The ad, which was viewed more than half a million times, had a long life span and followed Hagan to the polls, where she came up short.

Uploaded By: Americans For Prosperity

Force

New Hampshire Senator Jeanne Shaheene remained locked in a tight race last month with her Republican challenger, Scott Brown, a carpetbagger former senator from Massachusetts. That’s when she released an ad that tied Brown to the Republican’s “war on women.” Called “Force,” it revealed that Brown—who depicted himself as pro-choice—once supported a bill that would have required women to look at color photographs of developing fetuses before receiving an abortion.

Brown claimed the ad was false and demanded it be taken down, but PolitiFact, the fact-checking website, deemed it “mostly true.” Regardless, the in-your-face spot, which was viewed tens of thousands of times in the weeks before the election, crippled Brown’s campaign.