PERTH golden girl Jessica Marais has issued an apology to her former maths and science teachers at St Hilda’s Anglican School for Girls.

The star of Channel Nine’s new drama Love Child admits she wasn’t the best behaved pupil in some classes, but credits her acting career to her old school – recently named WA’s finest based on last year’s Year 12 results.

“I was naughty in every class I wasn’t interested in, ie. maths and science,” she told The Sunday Times.

“History, literature, drama, art, I was really quite (fine) but put me in maths and science and I’m so sorry.

“Donna Hughes, Trudy Dunn and Robyn Tourney were my drama school teachers and I believe that they’re the reason that I’m an actress now. I really wasn’t sure what I wanted to do – I was an artistic person but not necessarily focused on being an actress. And they were the people that instilled ‘Go do your auditions and see how you go’ in me.

“I have great respect for the school and great respect for the teachers and that’s great that it’s doing so well. I’m very proud of that.”

Marais, who has a daughter, Scout, who turns two in May, with her actor fiancé James Stewart, said she loved nothing more than showing her young family around her hometown last month.

And while the former Packed To The Rafters lovebirds are sharing the limelight in Brisbane in Louis Nowra’s iconic play Cosi, she has not ruled out a hometown return to the stage.

“Last time we were (in WA) for about two months, over Christmas and January,” Marais said.

“And we got to spend some really good quality time with grandparents and also enjoy just being in my home town. I loved showing Jimmy around Perth and saying, ‘This is where I did this and this is where I did that’. It’s exciting to show him where I come from.

“Every day Perth is growing as a town and the CBD is becoming more and more interesting. But outside of that also, we have an incredible landscape – we love driving down south to Cowaramup to visit beautiful friends of ours who live there.

“We’d love to live in Perth. We love Perth and we love Brisbane because they’re our hometowns. Sydney seems to be where it’s all happening a lot of the time. But Perth and Brisbane both have a very vibrant arts scene and we ultimately see ourselves as (having) no state or nationality, which is what gypsy actor folk have to do.

“The Heath Ledger Theatre is an incredible facility. Black Swan (Theatre Company) are fantastic as well as Perth Theatre Company. Melissa Cantwell is an incredible artistic director as is Kate Cherry. Both of them are people that I greatly admire and would love to work with in the future.”

Marais, who hopes to be a mother again, said she felt blessed that her partner had chosen to care for their daughter, turning down many projects – “none of which he has found have equalled having time with our child” – in the past year.

“Put it this way – we didn’t plan Scout so the next one will come when it comes,” she said.

“But we would like her to have a brother or a sister.”

Love Child premieres on Channel Nine, tomorrow at 8:40pm.

Twitter: @PhillipsYasmine