W ith the rise of online medical and diagnostic tools, mobile health apps and wearables, people are taking their health into their own hands, perhaps more than ever.

SoLaboratory Corp. of America ( LH ), a diagnostic giant, is reaching past the doctors' offices directly to the public. The company is letting consumers order tests, like one to measure their cholesterol from their blood drawn at a LabCorp center, and view their results online without first going to a doctor.

While LabCorp says it hasn't seen a huge surge for tests ordered directly by patients so far, it's counting on the future.Illumina ( ILMN ) thinks so much of the idea, it's partnered with LabCorp to interpret the data of consumer clients in a new $100 million venture called Helix, financed by Warburg Pincus, Sutter Hill Ventures and Illumina.

"After being (gene-)sequenced, individuals will be able to manage their data and explore an open marketplace of on-demand applications, provided by Helix's partners, to gain additional insights into the genomic data that has already been acquired," Illumina said last week.

Mayo Clinic's Center for Individualized Medicine will help Helix develop new apps.

"I think demand will definitely grow as the consumer becomes more interested in health care," LabCorp CEO David King told IBD. "We have a new generation of consumers that are much more engaged with their day-to-day health care activities."

Opening Access, State By State

In July, Arizona approved a law that lets patients ask for their own tests. Washington, D.C. and 27 other states have similar laws on the books, but Arizona's is the most expansive, opening up nearly the entire test menu to consumers.

"The general trend of consumers taking a more active approach to their health care is leading to the expansion of this kind of test offering," said Michael Cherny, a managing director at Evercore ISI. And competition in the area is increasing. Theranos offers take-home tests atWalgreens ( WBA ) for HIV, as well as other tests that provide sensitive results in private.

Some doctors worry that even with a slew of information on health available online, people can still misinterpret results or take abnormal results more seriously than they should.

LabCorp is making consumer information a top priority.

"The most important thing for us is to handle it in a way that's responsible so we make sure consumers understand the tests they are ordering and what else is necessary to reach a diagnosis," King said.

Looking To Diversify

The company already has had success with its consumer-driven patient portal that it rolled out two years ago. The portal allows patients to view, track and monitor their lab test results, instead of waiting for doctors or their staff to call.

ObamaCare has given patients the right to see their results.

"We are empowering the patient with health information," King said. "Over time we plan to build more functions into the patient portal, including making appointments and interpretations of the meaning of test results."

LabCorp is looking to diversify with new revenue streams as the industry moves beyond headwinds related to reimbursement cuts from the government, mostly related to Medicare, and from the rollout of ObamaCare.

In January, LabCorp closed its $6.1 billion cash-and-stock deal for Covance, a contract research organization and drug development service. The deal gives LabCorp access to the contract research organization (CRO) market, which will allow LabCorp to provide more data to more biotech pharmas and to improve clinical trials.

The last disclosed deal was the interpretation for Illumina unveiled last week.

On Monday, Illumina announced the availability to doctors and patients of VistaSeq Hereditary Cancer Panel, a new 27-gene panel to identify patients with increased risk of breast, ovarian, melanoma, pancreatic, colorectal, endometrial, gastric, prostate and other cancers. LabCorp said these diseases may result in some 900,000 cancer diagnoses and nearly 200,000 deaths yearly in the U.S.

William Blair analyst Amanda Murphy doesn't expect LabCorp to announce any more major deals in the near future.

"This year is ... about integrating and driving cost synergies" from the Covance deal, she said.

LabCorp's diversified business model makes it a strong candidate when compared head to head with its biggest rival,Quest Diagnostics ( DGX ), according to Cherny. But both companies strive to be low-cost providers, with large lab facilities and an array of tests.

Beating, Meeting The Street

In July, LabCorp reported a 14% jump in second-quarter adjusted earnings to $2.09 per share, above the $2.03 analysts polled by Thomson Reuters were expecting. Revenue jumped 46.3% to $2.218 billion, roughly in line with views for $2.22 billion.

Its Covance division reported weaker-than-expected results, but as Evercore's Cherny noted, the "underlying profit performance highlights the earnings potential of the business, even in the face of revenue challenges."

LabCorp's stock has earned a near-best IBD Composite Rating of 97 out of 99, with an EPS Rating of 78. The stock is trading near all-time highs and is settling near 120 after a four- to five-month cup-with-handle in a first-stage base, and at Friday's closing price was up 12.6% in the past 12 months.

LabCorp and Quest are part of IBD's Medical-Services industry group, which is ranked 18th strongest out of the 197 industry groups IBD tracks. Another major company in the group isExpress Scripts ( ESRX ), a pharmacy benefit manager.

Both Murphy and Cherny have buy ratings on LabCorp's stock.

"The space overall has been improving," said Murphy. "LabCorp is doing relatively well. The company is growing volumes better than the general market."

Sales and profit have grown by double-digit percentages in the past two quarters.

Absorbing Higher Risk

While much of LabCorp's headwinds are in the past, the CRO business is more volatile than its lab business, Murphy says. Covance also has a higher risk of foreign currency exposure than LabCorp has had. Murphy sees the industry tied to consumer confidence, noting that people didn't go to the doctor or request tests as much during the Great Recession, and notes that while reimbursement levels are currently stable, a government policy change could drive risks.

Follow Gillian Rich on Twitter: @IBD_GRich .