Few can say they have broken bread with the President of the United States. But five “young invincibles” did just that Friday, joined by President Barack Obama for an afternoon of food, fun and Obamacare.

President Obama headed to The Coupe, a restaurant in Washington, D.C.’s, Columbia Heights neighborhood, to meet with five “young invincibles” working to spread the word about the Affordable Care Act. As part of the White House’s “aggressive outreach effort” aimed at Millennials, the president dined with his guests for more than an hour, discussing their work with encouraging young people to enroll in Obamacare’s health insurance marketplaces.

According to the White House, “The President wanted to hear directly from young people about their experiences spreading the word about the importance of signing up for quality, affordable health insurance and thank them for their efforts.”



Those dining with President Obama included Anne Johnson of Generation Progress; David Dimock, a White House Youth Summit attendee and entrepreneur; Jasmine Hicks of Young Invincibles; Tommy McFly, host of The Tommy Show on 94.7 Fresh-FM; and Andres Cruz, an assister with DC Health Link.

Following the disastrous roll out of the Affordable Care Act, the White House has shifted its attention to educating Millennials about the benefits of the president’s signature law. Young people’s participation in Obamacare is crucial to its success, with experts warning of a “death spiral” should the estimated 2.7 million 18- to 35-year-olds needed to keep premium costs low fail to enroll.

White House Press Secretary Jay Carney told reporters Monday the administration did not have data regarding how many “young invincibles” have enrolled in Obamacare’s exchanges. However, he did say the “mix” of ages of Obamacare enrollees is more important than the actual number.

The Obama administration launched a campaign to encourage Millennials to #GetCovered in anticipation of the second half of the first open enrollment period. Since the campaign’s launch, the White House has hosted a Youth Summit — two of its attendees dined with the president Friday — and teamed up with a bevy of celebrities tasked with promoting the law.

Millennials can expect to see enrollment efforts expand to include grassroots organizers, elected officials, colleges and universities, celebrities, athletes and arts leaders, the White House said. The administration also plans to celebrate National Youth Enrollment Day on February 15.

Despite the White House’s efforts, young people still remain skeptical about the law. Comedy Central’s popular “The Daily Show” featured a panel of young people discussing Obamacare on Wednesday. The group agreed they still had many questions surrounding the law, including what coverage looks like and which doctors they have access to.

And the law is proving to have many unintended consequences aimed directly at Millennials. Students at Bowie State University covered under university health insurance plans are finding the cost of their premiums have skyrocketed, and student-employees at the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs worry their full-time positions may be eliminated as the law requires them to receive health insurance from university employers.

Obamacare’s open enrollment period officially ends March 31.