Most Wednesdays start the same for T.J. Ward — checking his locker to see if the league has left him a letter docking his pay. Ward plays full throttle, his relentless pursuit of tackles leaving him straddling between oohs and the NFL’s rules.

Over the past three weeks, the Broncos strong safety has been fined $33,150 for hitting a defenseless receiver, throwing a punch and daring to expose his abs with a short jersey.

Sunday night Ward faces the New England Patriots. He remains a villain among their fans after ending tight end Rob Gronkowski’s 2013 season with a hit on his right knee.

“I love playing Gronk. I love playing great competition, especially Gronk. He plays hard, tries to make plays. You have to respect that,” Ward said. “I think he knows that I wasn’t out there trying to hurt him. People think that. But, that’s not how I play.”

Watch Ward crumple a ballcarrier — the Bears’ Ka’Deem Carey and Martellus Bennett missed Thursday’s game against the Green Bay Packers after absorbing big hits from Ward last week — and it’s clear he’s a bad man. But is he a bad guy?

“I think the perception of me is misconstrued,” Ward said Thursday. “I am passionate. I think people think I am a bad person. It’s not like that.”

Ward recognizes professional football doesn’t reward timidity. He is 5-foot-11, 202 pounds — 15 lighter than last season — and inflicts pain. He is not trying to break rules. He’s trying to crush dreams, stop drives, prevent first downs.

If that leaves him in the league’s crosshairs, he can live with it.

“I know the rules and I am going to abide by them,” Ward said. “But I am not going to slow down or take anything off my game. If it’s a bang-bang play, it becomes a judgment call, and then (the officials and league) can judge me.”

Coach Gary Kubiak doesn’t want Ward to change, beyond the punch at the Chiefs’ Jeremy Maclin, which led to an ejection. Kubiak defended Ward’s strike on the Indianapolis Colts’ T.Y. Hilton, explaining, “He did what you teach. He got his head out of the play.”

Thursday, Kubiak praised Ward’s restraint on Bears running back Jeremy Langford’s crack-back block. It knocked Ward off his feet, and officials — to the amazement of Broncos’ defenders — picked up the flag after a conference.

“He took a shot that was pretty tough, and he kept his composure. We talked about him hanging on there and doing the right thing for the team,” Kubiak said. “T.J. is a great player. We need him making all those plays he’s been making.”

Proof Ward’s style fits the Broncos new 3-4 defense? He has earned the coaching staff’s defensive player of the game honors multiple times this season, including against the Bears.

Ward figures to play a central role this week, along with safeties Darian Stewart and David Bruton, in the coverage of Gronkowski. Defensive coordinator Wade Phillips promised that the Pro Bowler will see plenty of double teams.

“(Cornerback) Aqib (Talib) is top of the line, and Ward is an unbelievable player too,” Gronkowski said. “So it’s definitely going to be a challenge this week to go versus them.”

Ward spent large chunks of snaps last season at middle and weakside linebacker. Phillips’ creativity allows Ward to move throughout the defense, creating pause for receivers going across the middle, while also coming free on blitzes.

Ward plays with emotion. He delivers — 56 tackles, two sacks. And sometimes that leads to letters in his locker.

“I love the game. I know I have to be smart,” Ward said. “But I can’t change the way I play.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or @troyrenck

Safety dance

T.J. Ward’s ferocious style makes him popular among coaches and teammates, but has drawn the ire of the league. NFL reporter Troy E. Renck looks at his impact and the cost:

Tackles563rd on teamSacks26th on teamFines$33,1502nd on team