Sioux Falls, SD

We might be in the middle of winter, but an event going on this weekend in Sioux Falls is getting people ready to enjoy spring.

The Greater Sioux Falls Outdoor Show gives people a first-hand look at the latest in boating, campers, ATVs and more. Co-promoter Larry Johns says right now is a good time to come to a show because the 50 to 60 vendors are showing off the new technology for the New Year. It's the 27th year of the event, and Johns is happy to see the event become more female-friendly over the years.

“There's more gals than you would think, picking out items, looking at items, that are attending the seminars, wanting to learn about fishing and hunting, amazing,” Johns said.

If you missed it today you're still have a chance. The show is going on tomorrow from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. tomorrow at the Expo Building of the W.H. Lyons Fairgrounds.

News

Outdoors {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.