Photo

The pianist Geri Allen has been running an educational residency this week for female jazz musicians ages 14 to 25, administered by the New Jersey Performing Arts Center and housed at Montclair State University. Ms. Allen herself is the kind of musician that jazz produces only when its philosophies and systems are working. Her playing keeps getting bigger, showing no contradiction between tradition and risk; it teaches as it challenges.

But she’s hired excellent musicians as instructors, and to keep them busy at night, she’s booked them for a series of gigs at the Stone this week, through Sunday. Thursday night’s show was billed ahead of time as Ms. Allen and the flutist Nicole Mitchell, a pairing that deserves immediate attention as an idea: because of each musician’s power and depth as composer and improviser, because Ms. Mitchell has often singled out Ms. Allen as a hero; and because they’d never performed together before.

By Thursday’s first set, the show had become a trio, including the drummer Pheeroan akLaff, which sounded less streamlined and more like an ad hoc band. The gig was slightly planned and mostly open-ended, louder and looser than it might have been without a drummer. (The bassist Henry Grimes joined for the second set.) The performance became a placeholder for a future encounter. You were mostly hearing possibility.

They were playing songs by Ms. Allen going back to the late ’80s, including “Skin” and “Wood,” and Ms. Mitchell’s “If I Could Have You the Way I Want You”; they closed with a version of Eric Dolphy’s “Miss Ann,” with walking swing and a medium-tempo, analytical kind of feel. In general, they were taking apart the songs, pushing them to see how much they could be destabilized — Ms. Allen and Ms. Mitchell carefully, Mr. akLaff roughly but infectiously.

Beyond her ambitions as a composer, Ms. Mitchell generates an energized connection between musician and instrument, a discipline and excitement about song and tone and technique that don’t run dry and put the idea of virtuosity in its best light. (If you want a direct example, hear her solo record “Engraved in the Wind.”) She used circular breathing and sang over notes to create multiphonics, and altered her tone and vibrato constantly.

Ms. Allen, too, got into the songs as songs, making them rich with chords and then chopping them up with rhythmic and murmuring figures around the bottom and middle of the keyboard. It was all friendly, but with tension: Mr. akLaff’s strengths lay in his disruptions, and Ms. Allen and Ms. Mitchell were investing in forward motion.