"Overall our results are good," ETMC Administrator Raz Cook stated while presenting an overview on Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems Data (HCAHPS).

Mrs. Cook explained that hospitals are now required to provide input from patient surveys to HCAHPS as part of the Affordable Health Care Act.

The amount of funding for Medicare is tied into this new communication, and penalties are a given to hospitals who do not comply.

The data (most current available is 2012) is on the website:

www.medicare.gov/hospitalcompare.

Any individual can access the information on a hospital and compare it to as many as three other hospitals at one time.

Ms. Cook also reported that they were a bit behind on the budget, as viruses and flu outbreaks have been low this fall.

She indicated that the emergency room visits are steady, and clinic appointments are increasing

Fairfield Hospital Administrator, Tony Price, reminded trustees that $75,000 has not been collected from two years ago, due to pending court action by Big Brown.

Mr. Price indicated that a second $75,000 may also be at risk from the last year.

These funds are still in the budget; at some point, he feels these amounts should be extracted.

Mr. Price also thought some improvement in indigent care costs may be realized with the Affordable Care Act.

Ms. Cook expounded on this, stating two full time ETMC Fairfield employees are Certified Application Counselors for Affordable Health Care, and stand ready to assist in moving individuals from County indigent care rolls to Medicaid in the near future, when they qualify.

The Board voted to recognize Jim Sealy, PN FNP-BC, with a plaque recognizing his many years of service to ETMC Fairfield.

Mr. Sealy, who recently retired due to medical reasons, came to the clinic in 1998 from Parkland Hospital in Dallas, Texas.

Lora K. Brown, PA-C (center) was introduced to the Board. Ms. Brown is the newest ETMC Clinic Physicians Assistant. It is anticipated that she will be taking over the patients of Mr. Sealy. Lora K. Brown, PA-C (center) was introduced to the Board. Ms. Brown is the newest ETMC Clinic Physicians Assistant. It is anticipated that she will be taking over the patients of Mr. Sealy.

Ms. Brown said she has been very busy "getting her feet wet" learning computer systems.

"Dr. Orms has been great," she expounded.

Returning the compliment, Dr. Orms said, "Patients enjoy interacting with her."

"We have got a special district here. We want to attract and retain the best of the best," Board VP, Jeff Taylor stated upon hearing Mr. Price’s idea to assist local students, which are studying to be Physicians Assistants or Nurse Practitioners, with educational costs.

Two individuals would initially be selected to have up to 4 semesters of college paid. In return, the recipients would work an equal amount of time in any doctor’s facility in the Hospital District. The Hospital District encompasses, not only ETMC Fairfield Clinic and Hospital, but other doctors and medical facilities, such as EMS, in the Freestone area.

The Board wants a strict selection criteria established. Dr. Michael Orms will be assisting Mr. Price to develop this.