You pay twice for the uninsured because the Floirda Legislature won't expand Medicaid

Rep. Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, is Speaker of the House, which hasn’t budged on Medicaid. (Photo: AP)

It's bad enough that you pay for your own health insurance while also covering the unpaid hospital bills for the poor. In Florida, the pain is worse than that.

By rejecting an expansion of Medicaid, the House of Representatives is standing guard over a broken system that forces you to pay twice to care for the working poor:

• Your next hospital visit will cost $1,700-$2,300 more for you and your health insurer to cover the costs of treating the uninsured. Hospital companies call that "cost shifting." The Florida Chamber of Commerce calls it a "hidden tax" of 8 percent.

• Your federal taxes already pay to solve that problem under the Affordable Care Act by expanding Medicaid coverage for about 800,000 uninsured people in Florida. But because the Legislature has turned away $2.8 billion a year for that purpose, your tax dollars instead care for the poor in California, New York and other states — while the cost-shifting continues in the private sector here.

MORE VIEWS: Medicare expansion opinions from Florida media

This situation doesn't just deny scores of low-income Florida workers a chance to get preventative care or to visit doctors' offices and urgent-care clinics instead of waiting to go to high-cost emergency rooms.

Plain and simple, it is a rip-off for patients, taxpayers and employers.

We urge House leaders including Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, and Ritch Workman, R-Melbourne, to stop the gouging. With time running out in the Legislative session, they should at least open negotiations with the Senate on a plan it passed to accept Medicaid dollars and enroll the poor in privatized managed-care plans.

And if you are tired of paying twice, we urge you to call or email your state representative to say so.

It could get worse

Failure to act in Tallahassee could significantly worsen the shift of costs — from the uninsured, to hospitals, to you — as the feds phase-out an older $2 billion fund from Medicaid that pays for some indigent care. The expansion of Medicaid under Obamacare was meant to supplant it. Gov. Rick Scott has sued to try to keep the money, even as he condemns federal involvement in health care.

To be sure, we understand the reluctance by Crisafulli and other Republicans to enroll those 800,000 low-income people in traditional Medicaid. That program has been a nightmare of red tape, ballooning state costs and few choices for enrollees.

"It's not about the money, it's about the product," Crisafulli said at the start of the Legislative session.

But Florida isn't stuck with traditional Medicaid. It spent years developing a privatized and successful alternative that contained costs and curbed fraud. Now it's the heart of the Senate plan backed by Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, who represents north Brevard.

Under that pilot program — advanced by Gov. Jeb Bush for Broward, Duval and several rural counties —the state enrolled nearly 3 million patients in their choice of managed care plans, then used Medicaid dollars to pay their premiums instead of paying providers directly.

Per-patient spending stayed flat. State taxpayers saved $118 million per year. Patient health and satisfaction improved, surveys found. HMOs assumed responsibility for preventing fraud.

The conservative Heritage Foundation called it "one of the most comprehensive, innovative and significant Medicaid reforms of the past decade." Applied statewide, Florida could save $900 million per year, Heritage found.

Matt Reed: Why insuring the poor helps Republicans

Build on success

Now, the Legislature should expand its creation, for everyone's sake. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has blessed it. The Chamber of Commerce and powerful hospital lobby have pledged their support.

And its potential for cost containment should reassure fiscal conservatives who fear that a gradual, 10 percent reduction in federal funding will somehow leave Florida with a much bigger share of costs.

That could be a rip-off for the state budget, conservative lawmakers have said.

But their refusal to act on a Medicaid expansion has perpetuated another rip-off for patients, employers and federal taxpayers — and could soon make it worse.

Leadership contacts

House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island

850-717-5050

Steve.Crisafulli@myfloridahouse.gov

Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando

850-487-5013

Gardiner.Andy.web@flsenate.gov

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1G1NGDO