LANSING, MI -- The Internal Revenue Service is underfunded, short-staffed and will likely take longer processing tax returns this tax cycle, IRS Commissioner John Koskinen said today.

"Everybody's return will get processed," Koskinen told reporters on a teleconference. "But people have gotten very used to being able to file their return and quickly getting a refund. This year we may not have the resources, the people to provide refunds as quickly as we have in the past."

The IRS has been able to issue tax refunds for electronic returns within 21 days in recent years, but could be more delayed during this tax season. He declined to say how long delays would be.

It's one of several items he said would have to be scaled back after Congress slashed its budget by $346 million.

Koskinen also mentioned a freeze on hiring and an anticipated decline in enforcement. He said right now the IRS audits about 1.2 percent of individual returns and that number would drop below 1 percent.

"That means some people cutting corners on their taxes or not complying are going to get away with it," Koskinen said, though he cautioned those skirting the system would still be playing a round of roulette.

Also on Thursday, the IRS released new materials to help consumers choose tax preparers.

Potential tax implications related to 'Obamacare' could make taxes this year difficult, said Koskinen -- one reason he's releasing guidance on choosing a tax preparer.

The IRS has updated a webpage on tax professionals, and also established a new page that links to professional organizations and helps consumers choose a reputable preparer.

More than half of tax filers pay for other people to prepare their returns, according to the IRS.

Some tips for selecting a good preparer from the IRS include:

• Make sure your returns will come to you, not be deposited into the preparer's account.

• Avoid preparers who base their fee on a percentage of your refund or those who say they can get larger refunds than others can.

• Ask the tax preparer if they have a professional credential or belong to a professional organization.

• Never sign a blank return, or use a preparer who asks you to sign one.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Emily Lawler is a Capitol/Lansing business reporter for MLive. You can reach her at elawler@mlive.com, subscribe to her on Facebook or follow her on Twitter: @emilyjanelawler.