Health System Creates ICD-10 Coding Outsourcing Firm

By Christine Kern, contributing writer

Called HealthForce, the new division will help providers improve coding.

North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System of Great Neck, NY, one of the nation’s largest health systems, has created a new division called HealthForce to help other providers improve their coding prior to the ICD10 transition next year, according to Globe Newswire.

North Shore-LIJ officials said they created the unit to help other providers that may be struggling with contemporary coding guidelines. Effective Oct. 1, 2015, all providers and payers will have to use the ICD-10 coding system to bill claims. That deadline has already been pushed back several times.

However, by October 1, 2015, the Affordable Care Act requires that all healthcare systems in the United States transition to ICD-10 (International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition) medical documentation and coding procedures. This conversion from ICD-9 impacts the way medical services are documented, coded and billed as well as how healthcare providers are reimbursed for providing patient care. Failure to effectively adopt and use the new ICD-10 code set by the deadline will result in significant financial consequences for health systems.

Many hospital officials, physicians and coders have lamented the switch to ICD-10, arguing that changing the system requires major capital and manpower investment in a time when healthcare providers are already working on other technology projects such as meeting meaningful-use standards.

Cyndi Thomas has recently joined HealthForce as vice president of business development. HealthForce services are designed to ensure that healthcare providers have accurate coding and are fully prepared for the transition to the new ICD-10 system. Ms. Thomas has 18 years of experience staffing credentialed and experienced hospital coders. She has successfully built two contract coding enterprises at nationally respected staffing companies.

"HealthForce is committed to quality and compliance. Our medical records coders have all gone through quality checks," Ms. Thomas explained. "They are trained, supervised and mentored under the same strict standards operating at North Shore-LIJ. Our coders have a proven track record of success in seeing projects through from start to finish."

“With its vast expertise in medical coding, North Shore-LIJ brings enormous value in helping healthcare organizations understand the financial implications of this transition to ICD-10,” Frank Danza, North Shore-LIJ's chief revenue officer said in a release. “We are unique in the coding outsourcing business because we don't require clients to outsource their entire revenue cycle.”

Hospitals and health systems that contract with HealthForce will have access to more than 100 certified coders.