Finally a liberal comes up with a sensible compromise that can bring Republicans and Democrats together. The Dems will offer to cut benefits for the elderly and the Repubs will agree to high taxes and open borders.

What's not to like about this amazing Washington Post mediated compromise?

"What’s needed is a bargain in which Democrats trim retiree benefits (Social Security and Medicare) and, in exchange, Republicans deal forthrightly on immigration and taxes."

Come on guys, we'll help you push grandma off the cliff and you turn America into Mexico and raise taxes to pay for the glut of social services that our new Mexifornians will need.

How can you say no? Did you hear that liberals are throwing in dead grandmas into the bargain?

America is changing Robert Samuelson says.

In 1960, 85 percent of Americans were white and 10 percent were black. Now, 63 percent are white, 13 percent black, 17 percent Hispanic and 5 percent Asian. In 2050, those shares are projected to be 47 percent white, 13 percent black, 28 percent Hispanic and 8 percent Asian. Second, family breakdown. In 2011, unmarried women accounted for 41 percent of U.S. births, up from 5 percent in 1960. The trend affects all major groups. The rate is 29 percent for whites, 53 percent among Hispanics and 72 percent among African Americans.

Sure. 29 percent to 72 percent. That trend certainly affects everyone. Also the elderly will retire and that 72 percent is going to need a whole lot of spending that would go to Grandma and Grandpa Boomer, who unlike the 4,000 gangbangers from the ghetto and their baby mamas and their offspring actually paid into the system.

There’s no generational justice, argues Taylor: “The young today are paying taxes to support a level of benefits for the old that they themselves have no prospect of receiving when they become old.”

Who are we kidding here? The 53 percent in 2050 is going to be taking more out of the system than it's going to be putting back in.

Obviously I'm never going to see the money I'm paying into Social Security, but then again no one is because politicians have been raiding it all along to fund their latest social justice projects.

Now imagine a country in which Obama is the default and the candidates compete over how high to raise taxes, the middle class is composed entirely of government employees and no one has any money and the country has no credit rating or savings.

If I make it to 2050, non-existent Social Security will be the least of my problems or the country's problems.

Liberals won’t come to terms with aging. Believing that spending on the elderly and near-elderly constitutes the essence of progressivism — and ignoring the affluence of many elderly — some liberals even support raising these benefits. The paradoxical result is that the pro-government party has become an instrument of anti-government policies, because accommodating all the elderly’s benefits means quietly condoning deep cuts in most other programs. Conservatives have parallel hang-ups. They can’t adapt to the permanence of Big Government or the presence of so many immigrants, including an estimated 11 million who are here illegally. Even if unworthy government programs are cut, federal spending will easily exceed one-fifth of national income, which is more than today’s taxes will cover. Higher taxes, contrary to GOP dogma, will be needed. Similarly, illegal immigrants won’t conveniently vanish.

Fortunately for Bob, leftists have no hangups about killing grandma. That's part of what ObamaCare is for. Medicare Advantage cuts, medical device taxes and that will be followed by escalating payment modifications to make caring for the elderly about as unprofitable as possible. And the elderly will then be told that the only way to get care is to pressure their politicians to vote Single Payer.

And then the hammer will really come down.