Buy Photo “American Idol” Top 3 finalist Jax, of East Brunswick, hosted a meet-and-greet for her Jax Pack at Casa Guiseppe, in Iselin on Tuesday June 16, 2015. (Photo: Photo by Jeff Granit)Buy Photo

"American Idol" Top 3 finalist Jax of East Brunswick met with hundreds of her Jax Pack members Tuesday at Casa Guiseppe in the Iselin section of the township.

Despite the rain, and even some thunderstorms, the 19-year-old singer-songwriter and her fans had fun together under the large tent in front of the venue. Jax signed autographs, had long talks and laughs with Jax Pack members and took photos and selfies. There were even some tears from overwhelmed fans who in turn made Jax cry.

Buy Photo “American Idol” Top 3 finalist Jax, of East Brunswick, hosted a meet-and-greet for her Jax Pack at Casa Guiseppe, in Iselin on Tuesday June 16, 2015. Jax arrives with Dunkin Donuts for her fans. (Photo: Photo by Jeff Granit)

Near the end of the nearly four-hour session, Jax treated those present to a "Pizza Party." She had arrived to the event with Dunkin' Donut treats for her fans, who she refers to as "family."

"Even in the pouring rain, in 103 degrees, with our totally smudged X's," Jax said. "We are strong like a Forcefield. Love you, fam. X's up."

Buy Photo “American Idol” Top 3 finalist Jax, of East Brunswick, hosted a meet-and-greet for her Jax Pack at Casa Guiseppe, in Iselin on Tuesday June 16, 2015. (Photo: Photo by Jeff Granit)

A steady stream of fans of all ages came from throughout the tri-state area. One mom and her teen-age son took a taxi, bus and train from East Harlem, New York to reach their Central Jersey Jax destination.

Busy since Season XIV of "American Idol" ended, Jax has made time to meet with her beloved Jax Pack as much as possible. She leaves for "America Idol Live!" tour rehearsals in two weeks and hopes to meet many more Jax Pack members in person during the 37-city tour.

RELATED: Jax marks her spot on the way to the top

RELATED: Jax brings some musical joy to her Senior Jax Pack

RELATED: Jax and the JaxPack have each others' backs

RELATED: Jax plans to 'live mas' after 'American Idol'

ICYMI: Jax on 'American Idol': 'Showcase Week' begins tonight

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1LftGCq