While an HIV outbreak last week prompted Indiana Gov. Mike Pence (R) to override state law and implement a short-term syringe exchange program in order to curtail the high rate of disease transmission, a bill aimed at achieving the same effect in the country’s worst area of HIV infection has passed its first hurdle.

Miami-Dade County has one of the highest rates of intravenous drug use nationwide, with over 10,000 residents injecting drugs regularly. Considering that the average intravenous drug user injects about 1,000 times per year and 67 percent of injection drug users in Miami-Dade report having shared syringes, it’s essential that public officials find ways to reduce harm associated with risky behavior.

ADVERTISEMENT

Sharing needles is a cheap way for injection drug users to get their fix, but it comes at a high price: injection drug use accounts for one-fifth of all HIV infections and two-thirds of hepatitis C infections. Miami-Dade County is now home to the highest rate of HIV infection in the United States.

Regrettably, old legislation has perpetuated this crisis. All across the state municipalities have placed bans on clean syringes, prohibiting their sale to anyone without a prescription. The Florida Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention & Control Act goes a step further by making it a third degree felony for anyone without a prescription to possess a syringe. While well-intentioned, this legislation frustrates harm reduction initiatives and encourages dangerous behavior.

Fortunately, State Representative Katie Edwards has filed legislation which would create Florida’s first sterile syringe exchange program (SEP) and the bill has now passed its first Senate committee. The Infectious Disease Elimination Pilot Program (HB 475) is similar to the failed bills pushed through the state legislature in 2013 and 2014 and it would establish one regulated SEP in Miami where program staff and participants would not need to fear arrest.

The goal of the program is to allow intravenous drug users a place to safely dispose of their used syringes and to receive sterile syringes at no cost in order to enhance their welfare.

The idea behind SEPs is not a novel one; syringe exchange programs have been around since the late 1980s and now operate in 36 states. These programs also hold the support of medical groups such as the American Medical Association, the National Academy of Sciences, and the World Health Organization.

The reason for the strong support is that these programs have proven to work. Not only have SEPs significantly reduced needle-sharing among injection drug users, but in doing so, they have “substantially and cost-effectively” decreased the spread of diseases like HIV and Hepatitis. Some estimates conclude that SEPs contributed to an 80 percent reduction in HIV over the past decade.

Research has shown that SEPs do not increase rates of drug usage, nor do they escalate crime. In fact, such programs even make the lives of law enforcement officers safer. In Connecticut, police officers experienced two-thirds fewer needle stick injuries once SEPs were introduced.

Moreover, since the Miami pilot program would require participants to exchange used syringes in order to receive new ones, the incidence of publicly discarded syringes would plummet. A 2011 comparative study in Drug and Alcohol Dependence found that 95 percent of injection drug users in Miami disposed of syringes improperly, versus 13 percent in San Francisco, where a needle exchange program is in place. In fact, SEPs have encouraged over 80 percent of San Francisco drug users to discard syringes onsite, something which is not yet possible for Miami.

But the benefits of SEPs do not stop at cleaner, safer cities. By lowering disease transmission rates, SEPs substantially decrease the costs associated with drug use. One sterile syringe costs just $0.97, whereas economic studies have concluded that medical costs associated with treating a single person infected with HIV average at about $190,000, a cost often covered by taxpayer-funded Medicaid programs.

This type of harm reduction strategy is a simple, cost-effective way to reduce disease transmission rates. Intravenous drug users will continue to inject with contaminated syringes if an alternative solution is not implemented. The Infectious Disease Elimination Pilot Program will make Miami a much cleaner place and help keep thousands of Floridians safe. Their future rests in the hands of their representatives.

Gargano is an editorial assistant at Young Voices, a policy project of the international nonprofit Students For Liberty.