Photo

The wave of deal-making that has swept across the health care industry now appears poised to pull in health insurers, a development driven by the Obama administration’s insurance overhaul.

Humana, one of the country’s largest health insurers, is weighing a potential sale of itself after having been approached by several competitors, people briefed on the matter said on Friday.

These people, who were not authorized to speak publicly, cautioned that the company had made no decisions and might choose not to sell.

Still, the news that the insurer had hired Goldman Sachs to help it consider a deal captivated investors, who appeared eager for a round of consolidation. Shares of Humana surged to an all-time high on Friday, while the shares of rivals like Aetna and Cigna also rose sharply.

Underpinning the expectations of an increase in deal-making among insurers are two contrasting themes. Revenues have been on the rise, bolstered both by the federal health law’s requirement that individuals have health insurance and by rising enrollment in Medicare plans offered by private companies. But profit margins are being squeezed through continued declines in Medicare Advantage funding and increased transparency for consumers shopping for policies.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Because of the Affordable Care Act, the whole insurance market is shifting towards a lower margin model,” said Chris Rigg, an analyst with Susquehanna Financial Group. “Generally speaking, the bigger you are, the better.”

Analysts had been expecting a wave of industry mergers to begin sooner rather than later. The last wave occurred in 2011 and 2012, when Cigna acquired HealthSpring for $3.8 billion; and Aetna bought Coventry Health Care in a deal valued at $5.7 billion.

Based in Louisville, Ky., Humana is one of the smaller of the big five insurers by market capitalization. And it has struggled to meet analysts’ profit expectations for much of the past year, though its membership rolls and revenue rose in the first quarter.

But it is considered a particularly ripe prize because it gets the bulk of its revenues from its Medicare Advantage business, which has been growing rapidly as baby boomers age and choose to enroll in a plan operated by private companies rather than the traditional version of the federal program.

Photo

UnitedHealth is the largest purveyor of Medicare Advantage plans, with Humana a close second. That has led analysts to discount UnitedHealth as a potential buyer, since the size of the companies’ combined Medicare Advantage business could raise the ire of antitrust regulators.

Analysts and investors have instead focused on peers like Aetna, Cigna and Anthem, which generally have smaller Medicare Advantage operations, as potential suitors.

Some of those companies were among those that had expressed interest in Humana, according to a person briefed on the matter.

Any deal for Humana would be expensive: The insurer had a market value of about $27 billion before The Wall Street Journal reported on the company’s deliberations. Humana’s shares jumped 20 percent, closing on Friday at $214.65.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Other rivals are of similar size. Cigna had a market capitalization of about $35 billion as of Friday’s market close, while Aetna is valued at about $40 billion and Anthem at $43 billion.

The potential suitors, whether Aetna, Anthem or another company, are well aware that much of the organic growth opportunity that exists for health insurers today can be found in Medicare Advantage, said Todd Van Tol, a partner in the health and life sciences practice at the consulting firm Oliver Wyman. “These programs now have enough critical momentum to be politically protected, viable and stable, and Humana has proven to be exceptionally good at the program,” Mr. Van Tol said.

While analysts like Ana Gupte at the research firm Leerink Partners predict the five largest companies in health insurance could merge to become the three biggest, she and others think that any deal could also usher in a second wave of deals involving smaller companies.

Among the most likely targets in that category are companies that specialize in offering coverage in the public Medicaid programs, including Centene, WellCare and Molina Healthcare.

Those companies have also been active in offering plans for individuals now buying coverage through the exchanges set up under the Affordable Care Act.

The potential for increased profitability in a merger would come through consolidating and streamlining back office operations, including claims processing and call centers, analysts say.