Kent Haruf’s death last year was a loss not only to Colorado but to the entire literary world. He was Colorado’s finest novelist, the author of “Plainsong” and “Eventide” and three other works of fiction set in Holt, a town he created on Colorado’s Eastern Plains. His final work is this slim volume.

“Our Souls at Night” hasn’t the magnitude of Haruf’s previous novels. Instead it’s a lagniappe, a parting gift to readers, filled with strong characters and written in the author’s spare, evocative style. Although “Our Souls at Night” is perhaps half the length of Haruf’s other works, it still packs punch.

Addie, a widow of 70, approaches her widower neighbor, Louis, and asks if he’d like to spend nights with her. She’s not interested in marriage, nor even sex. She’ll sleep better with a man beside her, she tells him, someone to talk to in the dark, someone to wake up with. She hopes she hasn’t shocked Louis.

No, he says, she hasn’t. After thinking it over, Louis agrees. One night soon afterward, he showers and shaves, then sneaks down the alley, his pajamas in a paper bag, and the two spend the night in bed, talking, sleeping, but not touching. They continue, and when they are both comfortable with the “affair,” Addie tells Louis he might as well leave his pajamas at her house. It will save paper bags, he replies.

Holt, of course, is a small town, and the pair become a source of gossip. At the bakery, a man tells Louis he wishes he had his energy “to stay out all night and then still have enough left over to function the day after.”

“One of the things I always hear is how any story is safe with you,” Louis replies. “It goes right in your ears and out your mouth. I wouldn’t want to get the name of a liar and a prevaricator in a little town the size of this one. A reputation like that would just about follow you anywhere.”

The arrangement turns into a friendship, as the two unburden themselves in the dark, telling of their dreams and successes, their failures and unhappy incidents of the past. Louis had an affair that nearly destroyed his marriage. Addie already knows about it. She tells of the accidental death of her young daughter. The tragedy turned Addie’s husband into a cold and distant man. Louis is surprised, because Addie and her husband always seemed to be a happy couple. They kept up appearances, Addie says.

Just as they settle into their relationship, Addie’s 6-year-old grandson comes to stay with her. Her son’s wife has taken off, and the son is dealing with bankruptcy. The little boy is unhappy, depressed, and he cries in the night. Louis becomes a surrogate grandfather and buys the boy a baseball glove and a dog, and slowly the kid comes out of his shell.

Like Haruf’s other works, “Our Souls at Night” is a simple story, told in a spartan style. It is the characters who populate the Great Plains town of Holt who make the writing profound. Both Addie and Louis are strong, if flawed in little ways. And they see life’s ironies and humor. The book is filled with dry remarks, and Haruf himself adds a bit of humor by placing himself and his previous books in the story:

Addie and Louis talk about the coming season at the Denver Center for the Performing Arts.

“Did you see they’re going to do that last book about Holt County?” Addie asks. “The one with the old man dying and the preacher?”

He couldn’t imagine two old ranchers taking in a pregnant girl, Louis says.

“It’s his imagination. He took the physical details from Holt, the place names of the streets and what the country looks like and the location of things, but it’s not his town. And it’s not anybody in this town. It’s all made up.”

“Our Souls at Night” is a parting gift from the author, a reminder of how profoundly we will miss Holt and its people, and Kent Haruf’s extraordinary writing.

GREAT PLAINS FICTION: NOVEL

“Our Souls at Night”

by Kent Haruf (Knopf)