Sam Weaver, founder of Cool Energy, a maker of an engine aimed at recovering waste heat from sources such as biomass processing, geothermal and ship propulsion engines. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

Boulder-based Cool Energy developed a Stirling Engine that converts waste heat to electricity at lower temperatures — ranging from 100 degrees to 400 degrees Celsius — to create emissions-free power.

Two years after selling some of its 20-kilowatt SolarHeat Engine for pilot testing by Schneider Electric, Cool Energy landed a potentially significant agreement for its next-generation, 25-kilowatt engine.

Earlier this month, Cool Energy officials announced a supply and licensing agreement with Edisun Heliostats Inc., a Pasadena, California-based company specializing in concentrated solar power systems

Financial terms were not disclosed, but the partnership is "longer-term," said Sam Weaver, chief executive officer and co-founder of Cool Energy.

As part of the agreement, Cool Energy developed a custom, 25-kilowatt model for Edisun, which will have exclusive rights to deploy the technology in the solar thermal market globally.

The Cool Energy technology was designed to harvest heat from the concentrated solar power rock bed storage, using a closed-loop circulating system to produce energy officials said. The engine then converts the stored heat into electricity that could be sold to the local utility and added to the power grid or, in the case of developing countries with no power grid, the electricity would be used locally, Cool Energy officials said.

Advertisement

"It's a really exciting time here because this is going to be the most cost-effective type of machine we've ever made," said Weaver, who is also a member of the Boulder City Council. "I feel pretty excited about where we're going as a company."

Weaver spoke with the Daily Camera about the Edisun agreement and Cool Energy's approach for the future.

The following has been edited for clarity and space.

1.) How could this contract change Cool Energy?

If they are successful in deploying their technology, it could be extremely meaningful for us because it could lead to tens of thousands of units.

... They're moving forward on getting the permitting for (the solar field). We've agreed to target delivery to them in the October-November time frame. They would then integrate that with the solar field.

Hopefully next year, we'll see the initial solar power production using our technology.

2.) What kind of scaling does this require on the manufacturing side?

We're working with a contract manufacturer out of state and they have already started laying a plan to be able to ramp up as the plans (grow). We will start the assembly process here in Boulder.

3.) What type of sales performance has your company notched, and is Cool Energy in the black?

(As a privately held firm) we don't disclose sales. We're break-even right now. Last year we didn't turn a profit. Our goal going forward is to raise another round of investment (capital) and become uniformly profitable.

4.)What is the company's long-term approach?

In the broader look, we would definitely like to license our product worldwide. Our goal is to remain an engineering house and license our technology out to partners. We currently have an agent looking for partners for us in Dubai; going into the Asian market. We're looking for partners to go into Europe.

In five years, we would like to be licensing to partners who are (selling) to companies in the European and Asian markets.

Every generation of the machine that we have built so far has had more output than prior generations with a higher efficiency. We're going to continue on that arc.

5) In terms of the other hat you wear, that of a member of the Boulder City Council, how has your experience from building Cool Energy translated to that city governance role?

I bring the same kind of approach to business and the City Council, which is to try to look at all the aspects of the problem and try to look at what solutions to the problem would make the most sense to as many people as possible.

I've tried to bring some of the leadership skills from working at Cool Energy and being a former fire chief to the City Council.

— Alicia Wallace