Harry Potter star John Hurt, 75, has been diagnosed with and is undergoing treatment for pancreatic cancer. The good news is that Hurt’s cancer is in its early stage, which often means a higher success rate in its treatment. The actor remains, as he stated, “more than optimistic,” and he has no plans to stop working on projects and, in the near future, he will be recording a play that will air on BBC Radio 4. Hurt stated that “one of life’s small ironies” is that the play he will be soon recording for BBC radio 4 is called “Jeffrey Bernard Is Unwell.”

In the Harry Potter franchise, Hurt plays magic-wand shop-owner Garrick Ollivander. The British actor has been in many other films, like Nineteen Eighty-Four, V for Vendetta, Midnight Express, Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy, The Elephant Man, the TV movie, The Naked Civil Servant, and Alien, in which he played Kane, otherwise known as “dude whose chest burst open and alien came out of.” In 1981, he even played Jesus in the Mel Brooks comedy, History of the World: Part I. He was also the War Doctor in the 50th anniversary Dr. Who special.

Hurt is going to be in the upcoming movie, The History of Love, which is still being filmed, and he will also be in a new Tarzan movie, starring alongside Margot Robbie and Samuel L. Jackson. Monty Python‘s Terry Gilliam announced that the actor will be playing the title role in his movie project for Amazon, The Man Who Killed Don Quixote. Just a few months ago, in December 2014, Queen Elizabeth honored the veteran actor by awarding him a knighthood.

Not only is the Harry Potter star optimistic about there being “a satisfactory outcome” to his treatment for pancreatic cancer, he stated on Tuesday that “the medical team” is optimistic. He has always been open in the past about, as he puts it, “the way I conduct my life,” so he saw no reason to also not let the public in on the news that he has early stage pancreatic cancer and is undergoing treatment for it.

Hurt has been nominated twice for an Oscar during his career, but he has not won one yet. He was nominated for an Oscar the first time for his supporting role of Max in the 1978 movie, Midnight Express, and the second time for playing John Merrick in the 1980 film, The Elephant Man. In 2005, the actor married producer and casting director Anwen Rees-Myers. She is his fourth wife.

Though Hurt is perhaps best known to his younger fans as Ollivander, the owner of the magic-wand shop in the Harry Potter movies, he has had a long career in acting. In 1962, one of his first roles on TV was playing James Hogan in Z Cars. He has been acting fairly regularly ever since, even providing the voice of the animated character, Professor Trevor ‘Broom’ Bruttenholm, in the TV movie, Hellboy Animated: Blood and Iron.

Harry Potter star Hurt is undergoing treatment for early stage pancreatic cancer, but the actor has decided not to let that slow him down. He has had a long and successful acting career spanning several decades, and has had memorable roles in TV series, movies and onstage in plays. With the reportedly optimistic prognosis by Hurt’s medical team, there is little reason to believe that he will not continue on delivering memorable roles for years to come.

Written by Douglas Cobb

Edited by Jennifer Pfalz

Sources:

Fox News: John Hurt diagnosed with ‘early stage pancreatic cancer’

Los Angeles Times: John Hurt has early pancreatic cancer; actor

is ‘more than optimistic’

Entertainment Weekly (blog): John Hurt diagnosed with pancreatic cancer

Photo Courtesy of Sam’s Flickr Page – Creative Commons 2.0

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr