Orange-based Western Dental will stop accepting some new patients from Denti-Cal, a state-run dental program for low-income residents, because of insufficient reimbursement and a surge of new customers who have gained the coverage through the health care reform known as Obamacare.

Western Dental’s CEO, Simon Castellanos, said Thursday that on June 1 the company will no longer accept new Denti-Cal patients at 13 undisclosed California locations, including one of its seven Orange County clinics.

The company has 150 offices in the state and is the largest provider of dental care to patients insured by Denti-Cal. The program covers 7 million adults and 5 million children who are enrolled in Medi-Cal, the state’s version of Medicaid for low-income Americans.

“We have been serving underserved communities in the state for over 50 years. Unfortunately, given the situation with the Denti-Cal program, we’ve been forced to question our continued participation,” Castellanos said.

“The rates are very low. The rates have not been increased since 2001,” he said. “We had an additional rate cut in 2013. Salaries, rents, everything goes up every year.”

Last year, Western Dental provided care to 562,672 Medi-Cal recipients statewide, according to the state Department of Health Care Services.

“We are working to ensure that all impacted Medi-Cal members will have access to quality dental care,” department spokesman Tony Cava said in an email.

Earlier this month, Moody’s Investors Services downgraded Western Dental’s parent company, Premier Dental Services, noting “declining levels of government reimbursement” and the increase in adults with Denti-Cal because of Obamacare, which last year expanded the number of California adults eligible for Medi-Cal.

“In addition, the higher frequency of Denti-Cal patient visits is also displacing higher-paying, out-of pocket or commercial insurance customers, resulting in a lower average reimbursement rate for the company's services,” Moody’s wrote in the report.

Castellanos said Denti-Cal patients account for half of the company’s business.

“The concentration of Denti-Cal patients in our facilties is overwhelming,” he said.

The change could affect local nonprofit dental providers if Denti-Cal patients can’t find new dentists.

“I think you’ll see people having to go to the community clinics for that, because where else will they go?” said Pamela Austin, executive director of the Gary Center, a La Habra nonprofit that offers dental care.

“I don’t know what other commercial, for-profit companies would provide that. You’re losing money the minute they walk in the door, the reimbursement is so poor.”

Castellanos said he expects other Western Dental offices will be forced to turn away Denti-Cal patients as the company continues assessing its finances. To further cut costs, he said, two undisclosed clinics in California will close.

The company also announced last week that about 200 California employees will be laid off. Western Dental employs about 3,600 people statewide.

Castellanos said the company will continue accepting Medicaid patients in other states where it operates, because reimbursement rates there are higher.

Contact the writer: cperkes@ocregister.com 714-796-3686