According to Democrats in Washington, I am supposed to be one of those greatly appreciative under-26-year-olds who get to stay on their parents’ health insurance into their mid-twenties. Well, I’m not — because my family is losing its insurance.

We aren’t alone, though. We are among the millions of Americans told to believe that wonderful little “if you like your plan, you can keep it” lie the President fed us at least 36 times.

Nearly 5 million people have been dropped from their insurance coverage, compared to the 365,000 who have enrolled. That means for each person who has signed up for Obamacare, 13 have been dropped from their insurance. According to the American Enterprise Institute, that’s just the beginning — as nearly 100 million Americans could be dropped from their plans.

Bureaucrats in Washington like to shrug and say there’s a government subsidy waiting once one enrolls in a plan under Obamacare. Unfortunately, my family is considered a “winner” in society, which makes us a loser under Obamacare. According to the federal government, we make too much money, meaning we can easily take on the burden of increased insurance rates — whether they are 25 or 100 percent more than their original cost. To receive a subsidy for out-of-pocket cost, a family of four must make less than $58,564.

To understand my frustration, though, you need to know a bit about us before you brush us off as another well-to-do family complaining about taking on society’s ailments. We appear to be the winners, yes, but that came from years of hard work and playing by the rules.

My dad is a doctor, meaning Obamacare affects his entire life. Nothing was given to him — nothing. He came from a downriver Detroit working-class family. He worked throughout high school, college and even medical school so that he could pay for his education. He earned partial scholarships for college and medical school, and the rest he worked off. He started his career at 30 after completing his extended residency in his specialization.

He is the definition of the American Dream.

Through his success, he put his three children through high school and college. I am his first-born and in my first year of law school. That carries a hefty $150,000 price tag. I am the first female in my family to go to graduate school. And you know what? I feel guilty.

My parents help me through law school as best they can so I do not have to take out government loans with astronomical interest rates. Sadly, their extra resources are maxed out. They do not have cash lying around, thanks to my education. So when the letter came in the mail explaining they would no longer be covered by their insurance because their affordable plan was unacceptable under the ‘Affordable’ Care Act, it was not welcome news.

My family has been blessed to remain healthy and lucky enough not to need things like prescription drug or mental health coverage. If we want an insurance plan that does not cover these things, why are we not allowed the choice to keep it?

As most people are out shopping this holiday season, my family is shopping for an insurance plan. After calling our insurance provider, we learned our coverage would increase in price by 100 percent. That’s even after the President decided to keep his promise and allow us to keep our plan.

Is it really the responsibility of Washington bureaucrats to determine our health needs, instead of our doctors? It is easy to say it is for the greater good, but when it is your family unable to pay their bills because they are forced into purchasing something they do not want, it isn’t so good.

This is your responsibility, Mr. President. You do not get to blame website designers. Obamacare is your fault and your name is written all over it. Now fix it.