Though Hillary Clinton would finally win the Missouri presidential preference primary by just over 1,500 votes, or 0.2 percent, in unofficial results, the campaign closed down the local watch party before all election returns were in without celebrating victory on Super Tuesday.

But the crowd – which included, at various times, aldermanic President Lewis Reed, attorney general hopeful Jake Zimmerman and state Rep. Stacy Newman – had plenty to celebrate, as Clinton won a series of key states earlier in the night, including Ohio and Florida.

Late returns from St. Louis County and city – both favored Clinton by 55 percent to Bernie Sanders’ 44 percent – finally won Missouri for Clinton by a whisker.

Statewide, voter turnout set a new record for a presidential preference primary, with more than 1.5 million people (or 38.86 percent of registered Missouri voters) casting a vote. Since voter turnout was even higher in the city (42.17 percent) and county (46 percent), where the proportion of African Americans is higher than the statewide average, the black vote played a decisive role in Clinton’s narrow victory.

Black support – indeed, love – for the candidate was evident several days before the election, on Saturday, March 12, when – in the words of 21st Ward Alderman Antonio French, who served as Clinton’s deputy communications director for the Missouri primary – the campaign brought “Hillary to the ‘hood.”

Clinton was scheduled to speak that day in Affton – 94 percent white in the 2010 census – but French worked with the campaign to sneak her into the O’Fallon Park YMCA in his very black 21st Ward in a surprise visit just before.

The tone of the event was evident from the moment the candidate entered the small meeting room at the Y.

Reed, who was standing near the door, grabbed Clinton with a hug. State Senator Jamilah Nasheed, who was sitting near the door, jumped up and grabbed her for another hug. Then Clinton kept hugging. Next she hugged French’s aunt, Katherine Bennet, who was sitting in the front row. Then veteran North St. Louis political operator Rodney Hubbard Sr., who was sitting next to Bennet, got his hug.

After a 10-minute campaign speech – where she branded Donald Trump, the leader in the Republican primary, as a political arsonist and her Democrat rival as an angry but unrealistic dreamer – Clinton stepped into a selfie throng that outlasted her speech.

Anyone who wanted a selfie with the candidate got one. Clinton many times grabbed the phone from her admirer and took the picture herself before handing it back. Once she got going, she began to point out elder citizens or especially young children and ask for the picture herself.

Secret Service agents did their best to maintain a perimeter around the candidate, but it was hopeless. North St. Louis wanted to get their hands on Hillary Clinton and get their picture taken with her. And Clinton – often derided as cold by her opponents – seemed to want that intimacy just as much.

There was, of course, calculation behind the event. With Missouri’s presidential preference primary just three days away, the campaign was trying to energize the base to canvass and get people to the polls on election day.

“People who come to events like this, we vote,” French told the crowd before Clinton arrived. “But that’s not where our responsibility ends. We need you to go out there and knock on doors.”

The campaign continued with voter mobilization events in the days leading up to the primary.

U.S. Senator Cory Booker (D-New Jersey) visited in St. Louis on Sunday, March 13 to help kick off the St. Louis phone bank. He is that state’s first African American U.S. senator and the former mayor of Newark, New Jersey.

“On the issues that matter when I was a mayor working on urban issues, issues facing communities struggling with high violence, with high unemployment, with many people who are playing by the rules that are struggling to get ahead, but yet aren’t, she's clearly the best candidate for those communities. She has a better plan, and frankly she has the grit and the toughness to implement these things,” Booker said in an interview with The St. Louis American.

“So when it comes to struggling communities, the kind of changes that she can make are practical and may seem like incremental, but they make a big difference to those communities that are struggling to get into the middle class.”

Chelsea Clinton made several local campaign stops for her mother on Monday, March 14. At Urban Sprouts Child Development Center in Olivette, she pointed out that Hillary has been working to increase health coverage and drive down the costs of health care since Bill Clinton’s first presidency in the early 1990s. She did not mention Sanders or his proposal to push for a single-payer health plan that would undo the Affordable Care Act (ACA), President Obama’s health reform. But she said that Hillary will “protect the work of Barack Obama” on health care.

She pointed to the considerable improvements in American health care under the ACA, saying that in 2015 more American women received “the full complement” of prenatal medical services and delivered their children in medically approved environments than at any other time in history, thanks to the ACA.

Chelsea stressed that the next president will have to work with a Republican majority in one if not both houses of Congress, and Hillary has a better track record than her opponent of accomplishing things in that climate.

“We need a president who has a record of finding common cause,” Chelsea said. “Our children can’t wait for all the stars to align.”