Dorothy Dutiel, left, and May Kieu, right. A memorial was growing Saturday with heartfelt messages. (Source: KPHO/KTVK)

The bodies of Dorothy Dutiel, left, and May Kieu, right, were found Friday morning. Each suffered a single gunshot wound, police said. (Source: Facebook)

Scores of Independence High School students gathered for a candlelight vigil Saturday night in honor of the two teenage girls who died in a suspected murder-suicide.

Students left dozens of candles, balloons, flowers and notes for 15-year-old sophomores Dorothy Dutiel and May Kieu at a makeshift memorial before the event. One organizer estimated a few hundred students gathered for the vigil, which media was not permitted to attend.

"She was an amazing person that was always happy," said sophomore Kristy Nguyen of May. "She's a lovable person, and she didn't deserve this."

Glendale police said the two victims each suffered a single gunshot wound to the head. Their bodies were found Friday minutes before 8 a.m., prompting a lockdown of the campus that was nearly simultaneous with the start of school.

Investigators say one girl shot the other, and the turned the gun on herself. Detectives found a weapon and a note nearby.

[RELATED: Murder-suicide leaves 2 teenage girls dead at Independence HS]

Police have not officially released the names of the girls, but several friends have identified them on social media and to our reporters at the school.

Dutiel posted on Instagram that she first got a crush on Kieu in 5th grade and started a relationship in 8th grade. Friends said the two had been in a relationship for two years, but Kieu wanted to end it and Dutiel was having a hard time with the breakup.

School principal Rob Ambrose said Saturday night's vigil honored both girls' lives, memories, their contributions to the high school, and their family and friends.

"Thank you to our amazing students who are rallying together to support each other in this time of tragedy," he said.

Friends remembered the pair as smart, funny, and well-liked.

"She was really beautiful," said Stephanie Higera of May. "You would always see her with a smile."

[Slideshow: 2 teens shot dead at Independence High]

During the lockdown Friday, School Superintendent Brian Capistran said students were told not to use their cell phones, which parents said added to their panic about the safety of their children.

"The importance of not using phones in a situation like this typically is so there are not rumors on social media," he said.

[RELATED: The Glendale Union High School District issued a statement

Some people took that protocol to task on social media.

"Your heart breaks to hear this happening. I can’t imagine being a parent, waiting to hear from your child,” Sara Cornell said in a post to our Facebook page.

[Raw video: Glendale school shooting news conference Feb. 12, 2016]

The couple was very expressive on social media. They posted pictures and love notes and then in December, some posts turned dark.

Dutiel posted "I can't make her happy" and "who else is ready to shoot themselves?"

This week she posted she felt rejected and then a final post the night before the shooting read simply, "good-bye."

“She’s been wanting to break up with her girlfriend for a while,” said student Hope Martinez. “And then I guess once her girlfriend found out, she didn’t want to let her go.”

Another senseless gun tragedy has visited one of our nation’s schools. Praying for the Glendale community. https://t.co/NxhQQBE5MO — Gabrielle Giffords (@GabbyGiffords) February 12, 2016

A counselor said Friday teens post virtually everything online and their posts can be used as talking points for parents looking to check-in with their kids.

Counselors and social workers planned to meet with students until noon Saturday.

They'll also be back on Tuesday, when students return to class after the long holiday weekend.

Glendale Police Department victim assistance personnel are working to provide support at this time for the involved family members.

Glendale Police will provide assistance and support to Independence High School as they process and heal from this tragedy.

Additional officers will be on campus throughout the weekend and next week during school hours to provide support.

The Crisis Response Network set up a dedicated 24-hour crisis line at 1-800-203-CARE (2273) for those impacted.

The Teen Lifeline at 602-248-8337 is another good resource.

Students said they will hold a candlelight vigil at the school at seven o' clock Saturday evening.

Glendale Police Chief Debora Black tweeted the following statement:

My statement about the tragic incident at #IndependenceHighSchool pic.twitter.com/FQe915nS4g — Chief Black (@GlendalePDChief) February 13, 2016

Our Crisis Specialists are on the scene and standing by on our dedicated Tragedy Support Line 1-800-203-CARE (2273). — Crisis Network (@CrisisNetworkAZ) February 12, 2016

Monitoring shooting at Independence HS Glendale #Arizona - my prayers are w/ all those involved — John McCain (@SenJohnMcCain) February 12, 2016

Our hearts remain with the students, educators and families of Independence High School. FULL STATEMENT: https://t.co/xN1JrpJTYN — Doug Ducey (@dougducey) February 12, 2016

OFFICIAL STATEMENT regarding today's tragic death of two girls at Independence High School this morning: https://t.co/wIkVBh5BHP — Mayor Jerry Weiers (@MayorWeiers) February 12, 2016

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.