MOUNT BACHELOR — When skiers and coaches arrived at the Cliffhanger run at Mt. Bachelor ski area Saturday for the final race of the Oregon School Ski Association season, no one could say whether Bend or Summit would claim the combined team title.

After the first day of the OSSA final on Friday, the Lava Bears and Storm were locked at 154 points apiece, with the Bend girls and Summit boys each leading their respective season standings by 10 points.

“It’s kind of exciting, coming into the final day not knowing and having everything on the line going into the final race,” Summit coach Dave McKae said.

After two tightly contested slalom runs, the title picture was not much clearer. The final results — tabulated after everyone had packed up and driven down from Mount Bachelor — showed the Lava Bears girls easily won Saturday’s slalom with a combined time of 5 minutes, 57.56 seconds, extending their total lead to 12 points as they clinched their fourth straight OSSA title. Summit’s top three skiers finished in 6:09.59, good for second place on the day and for the season.

The Bend boys knew it would be difficult to catch Summit in the points standings, Bend coach Greg Timm said, but the Lava Bears smashed the competition Saturday as their top three skiers completed their two runs in a combined time of 5:31.25, more than 15 seconds faster than the Storm.

Although Summit still won the boys title, the Bend boys had narrowed the lead to eight points, clinching the overall combined boys and girls title for the Lava Bears.

“They were going at it, and they’ve gone at it all season,” Timm said. “My boys — and the girls — stepped up. They made a focused, concentrated effort to ski for each other as a team. There was some really solid team skiing today.”

Shelby Cutter, a senior at Bend, dominated the slalom in her last high school ski competition, completing her two runs in a time of 1 minute and 51.93 seconds, more than four seconds ahead of second-place finisher Paget Rathbun of Summit. Kiersten Rowles and Shannon Brennan, both of Bend, finished third and fourth.

“It was very warm, and that affected the snow,” Cutter said. “My first run definitely felt better, faster. The second run had way more turns and I was late a lot, but it was a good day.”

At the OSSA banquet, hosted at Bend High on Saturday evening, Cutter was named the overall girls champion, with 1,460 points from eight events contested during the season. She also won the individual slalom and giant slalom titles. Rowles was second overall with 808 points, while Rathbun was close behind with 780.

“It’s really nice, for four years I’ve been here, we’ve had awesome competition and the team has been so good,” Cutter said. “It’s been nice to have the girls win all four years, and it’s really nice to win the individual title.”

Summit’s Thomas Wimberly rebounded from a crash in Friday’s giant slalom to win Saturday’s slalom in a time of 1:46.21. Sam Nelson and Brody Swisher, both of Bend, finished second and third, respectively.

“I felt pretty iffy (today), but I kept it together,” Wimberly said. “By the time the girls went, the snow was pretty much down to a hard surface. The top (of the course) was definitely softer, which made it harder.”

Wimberly earned 200 points for posting the fastest time in both runs on Saturday, giving him 1,230 points for the season and the overall boys title. Swisher finished second with 1,010. Jonathan Wimberly, also of Summit, did not finish either run Saturday but still finished third in the season standings with 745 points.

Thomas Wimberly also finished atop the slalom and giant slalom standings.

— Reporter: 541-385-0305; vjacobsen@bendbulletin.com