As I wrote in our All Things Avalanche blog Friday, hours after learning of the tragic death of NCAA referee Oliver “Butch” Mousseau of Erie, I found it difficult to see my computer through tears. Raw, unsettling emotion blurred my vision.

This wasn’t just about losing a great man — perhaps the epitome of what a hockey official should be. It also was about unified first-stage bereavement from a very passionate sector of sport.

I was moved by the Colorado hockey community, its appreciation of my reporting and the wonderful stories I had the privilege of telling about Butch, who was loved by so many.

I was moved because I love the game, just like Butch, and I felt the entire community was feeling the same pain over the loss of a man who had no enemies.

“I always joked that he wanted to be a referee because he needed somebody not to like him,” Jay Stickney told me.

Stickney — unquestionably the funniest person I know — made me cry when talking about his University of Colorado fraternity brother from the early 1990s, and spending a couple of years post-graduation with Butch in Maui.

“He was everything I ever wanted in a friend,” Stickney said of the “Big Kahuna,” who was of American Indian descent and only looked Hawaiian.

Stickney is the radio guy for the University of Denver hockey team, and Mousseau worked countless Pioneers games since he broke in with the Western Collegiate Hockey Association in 2003.

Mousseau worked at every level, from Front Range beer leagues to Colorado Amateur Hockey Association events to the NHL. Yes, he worked at the highest level — which helps explain why every NHL official donned handwritten “BM” stickers on their helmets throughout North America on Saturday.

According to Dave Jackson, an NHL referee who lives in Colorado, the stickers will be on every official’s helmet all weekend. Jackson worked the Avalanche-Wild game Saturday at the Pepsi Center, and I visited with the four-man crew pregame. They all knew Butch and will forever respect his legacy.

Mousseau, who was 48 when he died Friday, has his NHL officials jersey and skates enshrined at the Hockey Hall of Fame in Toronto. He worked an NHL preseason game, becoming the first American Indian to do so, soon after 9/11 and with Canadian officials unable to cross the border.

But Butch’s bread and butter was the college game. And he was the best.

“Butch loved officiating and he had great respect for the student-athletes and coaches,” said former DU coach George Gwozdecky, who worked with Mousseau for most of Gwozdecky’s 19 years with the program. “No matter how difficult or intense a game might be, Butch always wore a big smile on his face.

“His smile had a tremendous calming effect on everyone. On the occasions where I would disagree with a call, his self- deprecating humor and warm personality would quickly diffuse an emotional situation. He was very well-liked by everyone and perhaps the most popular official in the WCHA. … He will be missed terribly by everyone who knew him.”

Butch died of a brain hemorrhage. He fell backward during warm-ups before a WCHA playoff game. He was not wearing a helmet, and his hands were in his pockets when he fell.

His death has taught us two things: Hockey lost a great human and ambassador of the sport. And never skate without knowing how to break your fall.

Mike Chambers: mchambers @denverpost.com or @mikechambers

Spotlight on …

Alex Ovechkin, LW, Capitals

When: Friday, 7 p.m., Pepsi Center.

What’s up: The Capitals, who are a lock to win the Presidents’ Trophy as the team with the best regular-season record, make their annual appearance in Denver.

Background: With 43 goals going into Saturday’s games, Ovechkin most likely will be trying to add to his league-leading total against his Russian Olympic and World Cup of Hockey teammate, Avs goalie Semyon Varlamov.

Terry Frei’s take: One of the memorable moments in the Avalanche’s 2013-14 season was Ovechkin’s eventful November game in Denver. Avalanche defenseman Jan Hejda’s stick got under Ovechkin, and he fell and slid into the boards headfirst as Hejda fell on him. Ovechkin stayed down as trainers rushed out, and Varlamov appeared concerned from his nearby crease. Ovechkin made it up and, when he arrived at the bench, unleashed a colorful verbal reaction to the play and no penalty call — well, you just knew it wasn’t a discussion of the weather — shown on the then-new scoreboard screens. He didn’t miss a shift, and the crowd, which had given him polite applause as he went to the bench, booed him the rest of the night, apparently thinking, among other things, that he had been imitating a thespian soccer player. It’s all part of the show, though, with the best player in the league … or at least its top goal-scorer. He’s still only 30 and could win the Hart Trophy for the fourth time, if it doesn’t go to Patrick Kane. Ovechkin had a goal and an assist in the Capitals’ 3-2 win in Denver last season.

Terry Frei, The Denver Post