OK, Scream Queens crossed a line. No, not the normal line of bisexual/lesbian sexual experimentation that ends in love then in tragedy as a caped marauder decapitates one of the experimenters in a bathtub. Oh no, that line has been crossed and re-crossed about 47 times in the two months that the show has been on the air.

The line that was crossed on Tuesday night, in an episode titled “Mommie Dearest,” is something different entirely. Watch what happens when Wallace University Dean Cathy Munsch (Jamie Lee Curtis) is attacked by two red-caped devils, and a certain masked Supreme you might recognize:

Munsch: Two on one? Doesn't seem fair, does it? Wait a minute, are... Are you supposed to be Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia? When I was a junior, I spent a year abroad. I had an affair with a beautiful Eurasian man named Chon Wi Ha. He was a grand champion in the illegal Hong Kong fighting pits. Blood sport, they called it. I taught him everything I knew about making love. And in return, he taught me how to fight. The homosexual lifestyle is not destructive to the fabric of American society! The Voting Rights Act should be authorized in every state! And the Affordable Care Act does not require people to eat broccoli!

Look, I’m not sensitive. I’m not going to wall myself off from the media and create a “safe space” like some wussified college student. Nor, am I given to the kind of rampant pearl-clutching so many are prone to whenever there is the slightest perceived affront.

But this is over the top. Put aside all the leftist mumbo-jumbo Jamie Lee is spouting as she bashes faux Scalia about the face repeatedly. Look, at the bigger problem: SHE’S BASHING HIM ABOUT THE FACE REPEATEDLY.

The obvious message and takeaway one is left with after watching that is the glorification and, in the mind of a wacko, perhaps even the justification of violence against conservatives. Extra freaky that this episode aired on the very day that Hillary Clinton cackled when a supporter said he wanted to strangle Carly Fiorina.

Bottom line, all the lib speak we would normally dissect for its bias, and bat-excrement crazy content, is rendered quaint by the fact that the left is actively seeking to normalize a world where disagreements over policies and ideas are settled by physical violence.

Oh sure, I’m overreacting and I should learn how to take a joke. Okay, well the joke would be a lot funnier if Hillary wasn’t laughing at Carly Fiorina’s hypothetical demise, fascist communications professors weren’t threatening journalists at Missouri, Ben Shapiro wasn’t getting threatened by a militant transgender, and liberals weren’t threatening violence against conservative voter watchdog groups.

So, forgive me if I just go back to sitting over here. Not laughing. At all.