Question: When it comes to aerial work platforms (AWPs), what’s the difference between “familiarization” and “training” and what should I be doing to reduce the likelihood I’ll get caught up in a lawsuit if an accident occurs?

For better or worse, as the foregoing requirements become more widely known, they can be expected to transition from mostly voluntary “recommendations” to mandatory “requirements,” as many ANSI standards already have done by being incorporated into OSHA regulations. As that happens, you can expect increasing numbers of plaintiffs to file “products liability” lawsuits against lessors, seeking to hold them “strictly liable” for “failure to warn” customers of potential dangers associated with using or misusing rented aerial equipment, such as failing to warn them of potential hazards associated with: (a) working at heights, and/or (b) failing to properly use fall protection devices. Consequently, one of the effects of the above requirements will likely be an increase in the number of lawsuits against rental operators.

Dealing effectively with these issues is now a legal imperative for lessors of aerial equipment. Consequently, rental operators are now routinely electing to “extract and emphasize” certain issues, such as the potential dangers associated with working at heights and the need to use fall protection equipment/devices, by having their customers sign written acknowledgments or “addenda” when they sign their rental contracts. Adding such emphasis with respect to critical issues like these helps overcome the inevitable argument made by plaintiffs’ lawyers that “the court shouldn’t allow the rental company to escape liability just because it included a waiver in fine print on the back of its rental contract.” Knowing this, we generally recommend the following two documents for our clients who rent aerial equipment to their customers:

Fall Protection Addendum: (a) Provides the necessary written warnings regarding the need to use fall protection equipment (“FPE”); and (b) Obtains the customer’s agreement to “assume the risk of” and “indemnify, defend and hold harmless” the lessor with respect to accidents and mishaps, as well as failure to use FPE.

(a) Provides the necessary written warnings regarding the need to use fall protection equipment (“FPE”); and (b) Obtains the customer’s agreement to “assume the risk of” and “indemnify, defend and hold harmless” the lessor with respect to accidents and mishaps, as well as failure to use FPE. Familiarization Addendum: (a) Reminds your delivery personnel of the familiarization steps to be taken; (b) Obtains the delivery person’s written confirmation that such familiarization was provided; and most importantly, (c) Obtains the customer’s written acknowledgment of his/her receipt of the required familiarization and of each step in the process.

Aerial equipment, though enormously valuable, can give rise to substantial liability. The best advice I can give any rental operator is to get out in front and out of the way of these issues while you have the opportunity; meaning before you rent aerial equipment.

James Waite, Esq. is a rental industry attorney with more than 20 years of experience in renting and leasing equipment. He authored the American Rental Association’s (ARA) book on rental contracts and represents equipment lessors throughout North America on a wide range of issues, including negotiating and drafting leases and rental contracts, as well as buying, selling and financing rental companies and their equipment. He can be reached at 866-582-2586 or email j.waite@wwlegal.net. His downloadable rental contract forms and addenda can be purchased online at equipmentrentalcontracts.com.