Wednesday is the day we get the verdict on just how well Gilead Sciences Inc.’s controversial Hepatitis C drug Sovaldi did.

After the close, Gilead /quotes/zigman/72849/delayed /quotes/nls/gild GILD is due to report second-quarter earnings, but Sovaldi’s results will be closely watched. Analysts have continued to raise their sales estimates on the drug, now putting sales of the blockbuster Hepatitis C drug at $2.87 billion for the quarter, or nearly half of all the company’s $5.85 billion in revenue.

To recap, Sovaldi is the first in a line of new Hepatitis C regimens to hit the market, offering promise to nearly 3 million patients in the U.S. But the drug has drawn fire for its price tag of $84,000 for three months of treatment, or roughly $1,000 a day. Insurers are calling on Gilead to bring down its price, which the company says is in line with past Hepatitis C drugs that were less effective.

Second-quarter sales estimates for Sovaldi keep rising, standing at $2.55 billion less than a month ago, and $1.16 billion in March. In turn, that’s driving up the overall projections for Gilead, with earnings now expected somewhere between $1.79 and $1.90 a share. In March, the thought was that earnings would be around 93 cents a share for this quarter. Sales had been projected at $4.1 billion four months ago.

But the market is waiting on pins and needles, and seems reluctant to move shares up even though Gilead announced it received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval to sell a new drug for three types of blood cancer. The new drug, called Zydelig, can now be used to treat certain types of leukemia and lymphoma.

Still, shares of Gilead were up marginally to $89.59 in recent action. The real fireworks, apparently, will come post-market.

Follow @russbrittmktw

Follow @MWHealthBlog

More must-read health coverage from MarketWatch:

Biogen’s lesson in how to boost an already pricey stock

Obamacare ruling nitpicking, or highlighting a viable glitch?

Average Obamacare hike is 76% without subsidies, study says