SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

The co-founder of Tea Party Patriots is warning against congressional passage of Trade Promotion Authority, which would grant President Obama fast-track authority to negotiate and pass international trade deals.

“Obama’s previous lawlessness on a range of issues should not be rewarded with expanded executive authority,” TPP co-founded Jenny Beth Martin said in a statement to Breitbart News, which was echoed in an op-ed posted Friday. “And there should always be public scrutiny of bills before they are voted upon.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“Conservative House members should oppose this fast-track legislation,” she added

In an op-ed in The Hill, the TPP co-founder describes the upcoming trade votes as the political elites’ “biggest fraud on the American people since Obamacare.”

“But unlike the fiasco that was consideration of Obamacare, this time the House Republican leadership is fully engaged as willing co-conspirators, scrambling this week to schedule a fast-track vote for the first part of a series of President Obama’s large-scale trade deals,” Martin wrote.

She argues that by going along with this top Obama trade priority in TPA, Republican leadership is ceding more power to Obama. Of particular concern is the fact that few have even seen the trade agreements — notably he Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) — that would be fast-tracked if TPA passes.

“While many details of the TPP are not known, it is clear this agreement would expand Obama’s executive authority,” Martin wrote. “Already willing to exercise powers in unconstitutional ways, this president — as a recent Breitbart report shows — will accrue even more power under this agreement, which even includes secret provisions to expand the White House’s authority over immigration.”

The Tea Party leader further recalled House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosis’ infamous comment on Obamacare — “we have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in” — comparing it to the trade bills that would be considered under fast track.

“But unlike what House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) said during consideration of Obamacare, we should not have to pass bills to find out what’s in them.

In all, Martin stresses that while she and her fellow Tea Partier are in support of trade and economic growth, House conservatives should be voting no on the the upcoming TPA legislation.

The House is slated to vote on the TPA Friday.