A UK man's sex toy mishap turned fatal after he refused to visit a doctor over his embarrassment. After getting a vibrator stuck “in too deep,” 50-year-old Nigel Willis avoided a trip to the emergency room for around a week due to the humiliation he felt over where his sexual adventures had taken him. When Willis was finally able to muster up the courage to visit University Hospital Lewisham it was too late.

"Mr. Willis was brought in by ambulance at 16:03 on the 30 December 2013,” hospital consultant, Dr. Adebowale Adesina, said during Southwark Coroners' Court hearing. “The history was that his friend or carer called an ambulance because he complained of dizziness, weakness, and was unable to move from the sofa for five days.”

Willis reportedly got the vibrator stuck in his body and was unable to remove it before spending the next five days on his sofa due to the excruciating pain he was experiencing. The incident that occurred in December 2013 went untreated until he sought medical attention on New Year’s Eve. Soon after he was admitted to University Hospital Lewisham, doctors discovered a “foreign body” had perforated his anus, and prepped him for emergency surgery.

Although surgeons were able to remove the sex toy, his body did not respond to the treatment after surgery, causing his condition to worsen. Willis, who suffered from diabetes, passed away two months after the vibrator was removed on Feb. 7, 2014, as a result of multi-organ failure, sepsis, and a perforated bowel.

“This is a sad case of a man who died at 50 years of age,” explained Sarah Ormand-Walshe, assistant coroner to inner-south London. “He appears to have had a foreign object which has become stuck in the lower part of his bowel and had been there for a number of days when he was encouraged to go to hospital by his friends on 30 December 2013. That night it was discovered that it looked like he had a perforated bowel.”

A similar incident was reported last month in Scotland where doctors discovered a 5-inch sex toy in the vagina of a 38-year-old woman who was being treated for weight loss. Upon questioning the woman on how the object stayed in her body without her knowing, doctors learned it had been there for 10 years. The women was suffering from urinary blockage and she was diagnosed with a condition that caused urine to flow into the vagina known as vesicovaginal fistula. Luckily, she made a full recovery.