Cages will be replaced with pebbles to reflect square's 'mineral aesthetics'

Move sparked fury with critics calling it 'sickening' and '

It may well be the season of goodwill to all men.

But that did not stop a mayor in south-west France installing metal cages over public benches to banish homeless people from the city.

Xavier Bonnefont, Angouleme's 34-year-old Right-wing mayor, has been criticised for his lack of empathy and Christmas spirit.

The mayor put up the cages on Christmas Eve in an effort to prevent 'drunk people' snoozing on the benches.

Scroll down for video

Cages were installed around public benches to prevent homeless people sleeping on it during Christmas

The cages were inserted in Angouleme, in south-west France, to try and banish homeless people from the city

Joel Guitton, deputy mayor in charge of security, defended the move, saying the benches were 'almost exclusively used by people who consume alcohol on a regular basis'.

The decision was taken 'in concert with local traders' who had complained to authorities that the drunken tramps' threatening behaviour was bad for business, he added.

Regional daily newspaper Sud Ouest alleged the Champ de Mars square housing the benches had become the scene of fights between homeless people, often provoked by drugs and involving dogs.

But the move sparked a wave of criticism, with people calling the measure 'abominable' and 'sickening'.

'What a shame, this is not France,' declared Guillaume Garot, a former Socialist MP and Bonnefont's political opponent.

One commentator on Twitter even suggested the mayor will go one step further next year and 'electrify' the cages.

Alexandre Chemetoff, the urban architect who designed the square, described the move as 'scandalous and inappropriate', telling Libération newspaper it was proof of 'political failure' as it suggested the 'only safe places left are private ones'.

The decision to insert the cages was taken 'in concert with local traders' who had complained to authorities

In the wake of growing criticism, the mayor 'temporarily' removed the cages on Boxing Day saying they will return soon filled with pebbles to reflect the square's 'mineral aesthetics'.

Earlier this year, anti-homeless measures were also seen in south London, where 19 metal spike studs were inserted outside a luxury development in Southwark near the entrance.

The anti-tramp spikes were removed after images of them spread through social media, prompting the Mayor of London Boris Johnson to intervene.

He tweeted: 'Spikes outside Southwark housing development to deter rough sleeping are ugly, self defeating & stupid. Developer should remove them ASAP.

'We've spent £34m on the likes of 'no 2nd night out, reaching 3/4s of rough sleepers, but must do more. Spikes are simply not the answer.'

A row of one-inch spikes were also removed from outside a Tesco Metro supermarket on Regent Street in central London after activists protested against them.

The move was reminiscent of the metal spikes that were installed outside a luxury apartment in Southwark

Away from the capital, Cardiff University came under fire for building a cage around a set of hot air vents to prevent homeless people sleeping on its campus.

The move prompted complaints from students - but university insisted the cages were a health and safety measure to stop the homeless breathing in harmful boiler fumes including carbon monoxide.