Children in Orange County and across California increasingly seek emergency room treatment for asthma, despite millions of dollars spent on programs to control the disease.



In Orange County, between 2005 and 2012 the rates of ER visits for asthma symptoms swelled by about 14 percent for children ages 5 to 17 and by 6 percent for children under 5. Statewide, the rate for young children was higher, rising by 18 percent, and on par with Orange County for children ages 5 to 17, according to a Kaiser Health News analysis of the latest available rates by county.



All told, 4,088 children in Orange County and more than 68,000 elsewhere in California visited the ER for asthma treatment in 2012.



“There’s clearly more work to be done if this many kids are going to the emergency department,” said Anne Kelsey Lamb, director of the Regional Asthma Management and Prevention program of the Oakland-based Public Health Institute. “We know a lot about what works. We absolutely should be able to reduce the rates we’re seeing.”



The reasons for the increase in ER visits are complex, experts say. They include parents not properly administering medications, poverty and inadequate insurance coverage, persistently high levels of indoor and outdoor pollution in some regions and the limited reach of programs that seek to manage symptoms or prevent them.



Dr. Amy Harrison, a pediatric pulmonologist at Children’s Hospital of Orange County, suggested that the recession had driven some families to her hospital’s ER, because they had lost their insurance or had high-deductible insurance that led them to forego prescriptions and regular doctor visits.



Because the state data doesn’t extend beyond 2012, it remains unclear how expanded coverage offered since last year under the Affordable Care Act and California’s Medicaid program will affect emergency room visits. But experts hope to see more funding for programs that manage or prevent asthma symptoms through the Affordable Care Act’s Prevention and Public Health Fund.



Although ER visits declined in some counties, including Alameda, San Mateo and Marin, the overall rise in California has frustrated public health experts who have spent millions of dollars and countless hours to improve and expand asthma prevention programs. The state and federal governments spend $1.54 million annually on such projects in California, including grants to schools to improve indoor air quality and training community health workers.



Across California, local and regional asthma programs aim to educate families and doctors to help keep kids out of the hospital. At the county level, including in Orange and Los Angeles counties, medically equipped vans called “Breathmobiles” provide comprehensive care in community settings with a goal of making sure children don’t end up repeatedly in the ER.



Beginning in March, the Breathmobile began stopping at the Orange County Health Care Agency in Santa Ana once a month.



The Breathmobile worked for Daniel Lee, 5, of Buena Park, who was still experiencing severe asthma symptoms after five trips to the ER last year. It turned out the doctors at the hospital had mixed his medications incorrectly – a common mistake when kids are treated in emergency rooms rather than by asthma-trained pediatricians, said Dr. Olga Guijon, associate medical director of the Breathmobile for CHOC.



“All he wants to do is play soccer,” said his mother, Young Lee, during a recent visit to the Breathmobile in Anaheim. “But every time he’s running around on the field, he says: ‘I feel weird.’ So he has to stop.”



Daniel has improved drastically after being treated at the Breathmobile and having his medication adjusted, his mother said.



Though often effective, these community programs are expensive and can’t serve enough children to make a real difference statewide, said John Capitman, a California State Fresno public health professor and executive director of the Central Valley Health Policy Institute.



And health outreach workers have found it difficult to get reimbursed by insurers, including Medi-Cal, for proven strategies including home visits to minimize risks, Capitman said.



Some families seek treatment in the ER for symptoms that easily could be dealt with in a clinic because they can’t get a timely doctor’s appointment or don’t have a regular doctor – especially those without health insurance.



Sometimes, a bad cold and flu season can aggravate asthma that otherwise is well-controlled.



But some families simply don’t know how to manage their child’s condition at home, or know when to seek medical care before an ER visit becomes necessary, said Dr. Rami Keisari, medical director of the Pediatric Asthma Disease Management Program at the county-run Santa Clara Valley Medical Center in San Jose.



“One of the biggest challenges we have is getting parents to use the medications every day,” Keisari said. “We have a really hard time convincing parents that this is a chronic condition.”



The rising rates don’t seem to reflect an actual increase in the respiratory disease – about 15 percent of California children have been diagnosed with asthma, a number that has remained fairly steady since 2001.



The rates of ER visits vary widely by county, from a high of 300 visits per 10,000 children under age 5 (Madera County) to a low of 32 visits (Sutter County) in 2012. Younger children visit the ER at higher rates because they are more likely to have undiagnosed asthma and because their lung function is more difficult to measure, complicating the task of finding the right combination of medicines, Kelsey Lamb said.



The rate of ER visits for children 5 and older more than doubled in rural Madera County and nearly doubled in Merced.



In Sacramento County, they rose by 48 percent and in Los Angeles, the largest county in the nation, by 17 percent.



Affected children often live in homes with dust, mold or pets, which trigger asthma symptoms. They may need two inhalers – one for school and one for home – but insurance sometimes pays only for one.



While particulate matter and ozone air pollution levels are declining somewhat in the region, they still can be high enough to trigger asthma attacks, said Capitman.



Staff writer Jenna Chandler and Kaiser Health News reporter Heidi de Marco contributed to this story.



Kaiser Health News is an editorially independent program of the Kaiser Family Foundation.