sioux falls, sd

Street construction crews will be working on a number of projects across Sioux Falls in the coming days. A couple of those projects could impact your travel around the city.

On Monday morning, northbound traffic will be reduced to one lane on North Sycamore Avenue between East 10th Street and East Taylor Street while contractors replace the retaining wall on the east side of the road. A lane will also be closed on East 18th Street near Sycamore Avenue, so the city is warning the area could be congested for drivers in that area. The work is expected to be done by July 15.

Also on Monday morning, work will resume on Westport Avenue from Sencore Drive through the Benson Road intersection. Westport Avenue will be closed so traffic will be detoured north on I-29 to 60th Street North and south on I-29 to Russell Street. You will be able to get to businesses near the Sanford Sports Complex off of 60th Street North, south on Westport Avenue to 51st Street. Crews expect to be done on this project by the end of June.

Here are other projects getting underway this week:

53rd Street Construction: Jandl Drive to West Mesa Pass

Beginning on Tuesday, June 16, 2015, 53rd Street from Jandl Drive to West Mesa Pass will be closed to allow construction crews to install new water main and perform street surfacing. Traffic in this area should use Plains Drive or 54th Street as an alternate route. Work is anticipated to be completed by late July.

Six Mile Road Construction

Beginning on Tuesday, June 16, 2015, Six Mile Road will be closed at Willow Wood Street to allow construction crews to begin work on a water main connection in the intersection. Work will include installing a 12 inch water main across Six Mile Road. Six Mile Road will be closed at Willow Wood Street during daytime hours. The intersection will remain open overnight. This work is anticipated to be finished by the evening of June 17, 2015.

Sanitary Sewer Repairs

Beginning on Tuesday, June 16, 2015, construction crews will be working on sanitary sewer repairs on North St. Paul Avenue from East Fifth Street to East Sixth Street. Through traffic will be one lane only around the construction area, with no on street parking near the work zones. Work is expected to take three working days with favorable working conditions.

Business

Transportation {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.