Gov. Chris Christie has vetoed money for women's health and family planning centers five times, and every time, the excuse he gave us was a lie.



He told us this was strictly a financial issue, a phony cover story that has since been exposed. In fact, as he later admitted to national conservative groups, this was not about money, it was about his anti-abortion beliefs.



Yet even now, state Republicans are his willing accomplices. They know full well this isn't a budget issue. But even those who normally support abortion rights went along with the governor's anti-abortion agenda last week, voting against restoring the money in the budget.

Before we consider the fallout of their actions, and the governor's, a much-needed reality check: That money Christie slashed was for crucial preventative health care for low income women, including gynecological exams and cancer screenings — not abortions.

Even if you argue that the state's money could free up other funding for abortions, only 3 percent of the women who go to Planned Parenthood are seeking the procedure. And only two of the six family planning centers that were forced to close because of Christie's cut were even run by Planned Parenthood.



So this was a political charade from the start. Christie saw an opportunity to position himself against Planned Parenthood, an organization loathed by conservatives, and he jumped on it. To pacify New Jerseyans, he said it was a simple budget issue. But now he's out there, bragging to his party's base that he's the only governor in New Jersey history to eliminate state funding for Planned Parenthood.

He's playing us all for fools. And the governor doubled down on this cynical strategy on Friday, line-item vetoing the $7.5 million that state Democrats sought to restore for family planning services in next year's budget. Because the only Republicans who supported restoring the money were Senators Kip Bateman and Jennifer Beck and Assemblyman Chris A. Brown, the Legislature couldn't reach a veto-proof majority.

We know Christie is entirely focused on his presidential fantasies, but don't state Republicans care about the missed screenings and tests that could actually save women's lives? This is a political calculation that hurts people in New Jersey. So why did so many of them go along with it?

Some argued the money is no longer necessary, because the state's federally qualified health care centers now take care of the women once served by the six clinics that were forced to close. But we've seen no evidence of that. Many of the centers don't provide the same array of reproductive services, because they are more for general primary care.

And their recent uptick in patients is likely due to the expansion of insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act — not proof that the women once served by the clinics that were closed are now getting the same care elsewhere.



In fact, low income women in some counties might not end up going somewhere else, because they can't take off work, find child care, or figure out how to get a health center that's further away.



These clinics were closed because of a national conservative agenda. And why should New Jersey women forgo life-saving screenings again next year, because Christie's trying to steal a few evangelicals away from Rick Santorum?

Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @starledger. Find The Star-Ledger on Facebook.