MISSOULA, Mont. -

A new 10-state study finds racial inequality in health care enrollment under the Affordable Health Care Act.

Researchers for Breaking Barriers interviewed health care and policy professionals in Montana along with 115 low income residents. They report 71 percent of Native Americans said they go to the hospital or a health clinic for primary care. Compare that to 51 percent of whites. Half of the tribal members surveyed report an average wait of two weeks for care they think is needed right away.

Now, activists are using the study to lobby for more Affordable Care Act navigators -- people who help others enroll for coverage under the act. The issues go beyond simple solutions.

Director of the Missoula Urban Indian Center LeeAnn Johnson says Native Americans often don't understand the ins and outs of health care access.

"We don't really understand health insurance and how to use health insurance. The majority of us come from the reservation," said Johnson.

For most tribal members health care is free for those who live on reservations. It's a different story off the reservation. The Missoula Urban Indian Center is encouraging clients to get insured.

Some say the process is confusing, others don't even know where to begin.

Robin Gajefski knows how important it is. She doesn't qualify for tribal benefits but her story is proof of how much tribal members need insurance when they leave the reservation.

Gajefski was working part time and taking classes at Missoula College last summer.

"To try and get online and do it myself, I gave up and I said it's not worth the headache to go get insurance, I can go and pay for my own medication. You know, no big deal until there was an emergency and then it was a really big deal," said Gajefski.

She ended up in the emergency room and a month later in a surgical suite for a hysterectomy. The problem is she didn't have insurance. Gajefski racked up a $10,000 medical bill -- a financial burden she can't afford to pay.

"I make enough money to pay my rent, put food on the table go back and forth from school. I don't make any extra at all," said Gajefski.

Missoula Urban Health Center tells us Gajefski's problem is common among people who make too much money to qualify for Medicaid, but can't afford insurance premiums. The Missoula Urban Indian Center says that's what they're here for -- to help people explore insurance options.

The center wants to spark a conversation and let people know they have options.

A recommendation from the Breaking Barriers is to require plans to track health outcomes and invest in school-based health centers in medically undeserved communities. The report was presented by the Montana Organizing Project, Indian People's Action and the Alliance for a Just Society.