ADVERTISEMENT

NEW YORK (MainStreet) —Health insurance premiums are expected to rise modestly in 2016, even among employee-sponsored plans, increasing the burden for consumers who are already saddled with high deductibles.

Employer-sponsored health insurance plans rose an average of 4% in 2015 for both individuals and families after a decade of moderate growth, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation/Health Research & Educational Trust survey of nearly 2,000 small and large employers. The rate of increases has slackened in the past ten years at an average of 5% annually since 2005. Between the years of 1999 and 2005, the increases were much larger at 11% each year. The average annual premium for single coverage is $6,251 with workers paying an average of $1,071. The average family premium is $17,545 with workers on average contributing $4,955.

This rate of increase is seen across the U.S. with single premiums rising an average of 5.6% in 2014 and 6.2% this year, according to a survey of almost 10,000 employers, said Les McPhearson, CEO of United Benefit Advisors, the Indianapolis-based organization of independent benefits advisors. Many companies are giving their employees more choices in their plans, depending on their individual needs.



The increases remain “modest,” because larger employers can implement “negotiating power,” he said. “As premiums continue to increase at rates greater than inflation, the vast majority of employers have little choice but to pass on more and more costs to employees,” he added.



During the past five years, employees have been hit with a double whammy since both the share of workers with deductibles and the size of those deductibles rose sharply, according to Kaiser. The combination of these two factors resulted in a 67% increase in deductibles since 2010, much faster than the rise in single premiums of 24% and about seven times the rise in workers’ wages of 10% and general inflation of 9%.

“With deductibles rising so much faster than premiums and wages, it’s no surprise that consumers have not felt the slowdown in health spending,” Kaiser's President and CEO Drew Altman said.