Strong rent stabilization laws would aid working-class families, young professionals and other middle-class New Yorkers who can't break into a high-priced housing market.

Buy Photo State Sen. Andrea Stewart-Cousins, D-Yonkers, the Democratic Conference leader, speaks during a June 5 news conference in Yonkers calling for the renewal and revision of expiring rent regulations. (Photo: Tania Savayan/The Journal News)Buy Photo

The clock's ticking on the renewal of New York's rent regulations, which expire June 15. Negotiations continue on the tax abatement system called "421-a," which offers developers a big tax break for adding some affordable units in new fancy developments.

But housing regulations now up for renewal address more than some future housing stock. The state needs to make smart changes to rent regulations, under the Emergency Tenant Protection Act, to preserve housing stock that already exists for working families.

The way the laws work now, it's easy to shift apartments out of the rent stabilization system, and so precious affordable housing in our region is dwindling in New York City, Yonkers, Mount Vernon and other Westchester and Rockland communities. Rent stabilization laws ensure options for working-class and middle-class families.

"New York has always been a State where people from all walks of life can set down roots and build strong, stable, and diverse communities and that fact has helped make New York the Empire State," Democratic Conference Leader Sen. Andrea Stewart-Cousins of Yonkers said in her recent call for smart changes in rent regulations.

Buy Photo From left, tenant representative Genevieve Roche and Mount Vernon United Tenants Executive Director Dennis Hanratty meet with The Journal News’ Editorial Board. (Photo: Brian Howard/The Journal News)

Big jumps

Under the state's current rent stabilization rules, a landlord can take vacant units out of the regulation system if the rents hit $2,500. This "vacancy decontrol" provision has cut the affordable housing stock by some 300,000 in the past decade, housing and homeless advocates say. In Mount Vernon alone, tens of thousands of units have lost rent stabilization status over the past decade, according to Dennis Hanratty, executive director of Mount Vernon United Tenants, which actively advocates for stronger rent and eviction laws.

How do rents go up so quickly? Under the program, landlords automatically add 20 percent to the rent on vacant apartments. That double-digit increase, between tenants, can come without a building owner or manager investing one iota into the property.

The regulations also allow landlords to recoup "major capital improvements." But tenants can end up paying in perpetuity; tenant activists and lawmakers are pushing for such costs to be paid back through a "surcharge" that ends when the improvements costs are paid off.

As well, more oversight is needed for "Individual Apartment Improvements" reimbursements. A landlord should be able to recoup renovation costs for things like a new kitchen or bathroom for a unit; but tenants should know the actual costs, so a landlord can't just add to the base rent and push the property off the rent-stabilized rolls.

Buy Photo Assemblywoman Shelley Mayer, D-Yonkers, speaks at a June 5 news conference in Yonkers with tenants and advocates to call for the renewal of expiring rent regulations. (Photo: Tania Savayan/The Journal News)

Impact here

More than a million New York families rely on rent-regulated housing, with 25,000 rent stabilized units in Westchester and hundreds in Rockland. Wilbur Aldridge, a member of the Rockland County Rent Stabilization Board and the NAACP's Mid-Hudson/Westchester regional director, says seniors are significant beneficiaries of the system. Young families, though, struggle to find suitable rent stabilized housing, and end up leaving the county.

Rent stabilization aids working-class families, young professionals and other middle-class New Yorkers who can't break into a high-priced housing market. People who work in the region should be able to afford a place to live here, too. Rent stabilization laws need to protect access to housing for all New Yorkers.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1MdouMp