President Obama will use his State of the Union to taunt Republicans in Congress. Following two weeks of veto threats, he will lay out a tax-and-spend agenda that he knows has no chance of passing either the House or the Senate. His goal? Cast Republicans as obstructionists heading into the last two years of his presidency.

Congress should respond by putting forward a middle class-focused policy platform. Legislation rooted in the principle of economic liberty will do much to spur real economic growth for more Americans—and it will make Obama the one who has to fight the obstructionist label.

ADVERTISEMENT

That’s because most Americans are still waiting for an economic recovery. Recent GDP and stock growth haven’t had a noticeable impact on the vast majority of working families. Additionally, most of the policies enacted by Obama—to say nothing of the ones he’s going to propose in Tuesday’s speech—have been a boom for Washington special interests and a bust for the middle-class. Ironically, Obama has long decried “income inequality” while presiding over an economic cycle defined by falling middle-class wages . Voters used the 2014 midterm elections to indicate that they’re ready for a change.

The GOP thus has an opportunity to send principled and practical economic solutions to the president’s desk. And if the president obstructs, he will only hurt his Party heading into the next presidential election.

So Congress must use this year to draw clear distinctions between pro-growth and pro-government policies. If Republicans squander this opportunity and abandon small government principles, they won’t be successful in 2016.

Our organization, Freedom Partners Chamber of Commerce, is now highlighting some of the policies which Congress should send to the president’s desk this year. The specifics are available at http://planforeconomicgrowth.org/. These are simple steps which Congress should take to spur robust economic growth and individual opportunity. Furthermore, we will hold lawmakers accountable if they continue to arrest the American Dream.

To start, Congress should tackle the policies that have an immediate impact on jobs—specifically regulations and taxes. On the former issue, Obama’s record of regulatory overreach is holding back jobs. Approving the Keystone Pipeline is a good start, but much more is needed. Congress needs to use every tool to stop looming EPA power plant regulations that increase energy costs and reduce employment. It should also pass a strong Congressional regulatory review process to examine the economic impact of future regulations. House Republicans pursued these measures last Congress, so these should be easy pickings.

Addressing America’s broken tax code is a more daunting challenge. But both sides have acknowledged the need to act. The case for tax reform has been bolstered in recent weeks by Congress’ Joint Committee on Taxation, which declared that reform will create 1.8 million jobs. Republicans should relish the opportunity to make the first move on a plan to lower both corporate and individual taxes.

On Obamacare, the GOP should set its sights on repealing the individual mandate tax, which goes into effect this year and is wildly unpopular. By tackling this issue, Republicans could even force Democrats to rehash more substantial parts of the health care law, which continues to suffer from less than 40 percent public approval.

Republicans can also pursue policies that prove that they can govern. They can start by rolling up their sleeves to repair broken federal programs that are hindering opportunity. Republicans should send the president legislation to use federal K-12 dollars to expand parental choice. Meanwhile, they can increase higher education opportunities by allowing states to make accreditation decisions.

On infrastructure spending, Congress must craft reforms that empower state and local governments—not bureaucrats in Washington—to make decisions. Republicans should also show their commitment to fiscal responsibility by paying for infrastructure spending with cuts elsewhere, rather than sticking Americans with a gas tax hike.

The GOP can also demonstrate a commitment to the most vulnerable Americans by fixing failing assistance programs. It should reform broken welfare programs that encourage dependence and stop financially punishing those who seek work. Congress can also help the disabled and retirees by ending entitlement fraud—a pressing issue considering Social Security’s disability trust fund goes bankrupt next year. The Obama administration has proposed taking Social Security’s retirement funds to cover the imbalance—Republicans should be happy to have that debate.

While reforming failed programs will demonstrate good governance, the most important thing Congress can do for long-term growth is cutting government spending and debt. That starts with new budget rules that require fair accounting and reforms baseline budgeting. Next, legislators must enact a budget that addresses entitlements and balances itself in ten years—without tax increases.

Republicans must also retain the spending caps outlined in the Budget Control Act or replace spending hikes with cuts elsewhere. Republicans should use every opportunity available to slow the growth of debt. That means tying a debt ceiling increase to reasonable spending cuts and doing so well before the limit is reached.

Congress can also cut spending—and strike a blow for basic fairness—by fighting against corporate welfare. Lawmakers can show their commitment to fiscal responsibility and fairness by taking a strong stand against corporate welfare programs, subsidies, credits, and loan-guarantees, from the Export-Import Bank to renewable energy subsidies, among others.

The good news for Congress is that most policies identified in this Plan for Economic Growth enjoy widespread public support. Support will grow if the Republicans in Congress actually send the president a positive and pragmatic economic agenda. We urge the 114th Congress to pass specific legislation actions to address these key areas. Even if the president vetoes every single bill, the Republican Party will have nonetheless sent a powerful message that it is serious about putting the country on the road to a real and lasting economic recovery.

Davis is the executive vice president of communications and Koenig is the budget and spending project director at Freedom Partners Chamber of Commerce, a nonprofit free-market advocacy group with over 200 members, including Charles and David Koch. More details about the Plan for Economic Growth can be found at http://planforeconomicgrowth.org/