Nearly $400,000 is being reimbursed to members of Emblem Health Inc. after the health provider agreed to expand its healthcare plans to include free anesthesiology services for in-network preventive colonoscopy services, Attorney General Eric Schneiderman said today.

The agreement was made as part of a settlement with his office's Health Care Bureau, which ensures that health providers are complying with the Affordable Care Act. The federal measure requires healthcare providers to provide preventative healthcare services free of charge, including anesthesia for colonoscopies, Gannett's Denise Nickerson reports.

“Preventative screening procedures are critical to improving the health of New Yorkers, and today’s agreement will help ensure that more people are getting important life-saving care,” Schneiderman said in a statement obtained by Gannett's Albany Bureau.

Schneiderman said that because every colonoscopy requires the use of anesthesia, they should be covered under the member’s plan, except in the event that the member decides for anesthesia to be provided by an out-of-network provider.

Schneiderman added that while in the past Emblem’s plans acknowledged this, certain plans still failed to remove anesthesia service fees.

Under the settlement, Emblem agreed to cover in full, all claims for anesthesiology services. As a result, Emblem has agreed to send refund checks to members of certain Emblem plan holders who have paid copayments, coinsurance, or deductibles for anesthesiology services connected with colonoscopy exams.

There was no immediate comment from the Manhattan-based company, which also has offices in Albany, Buffalo and Syracuse. Its website said it has about 3.4 million customers.

Schneiderman’s office received several complaints from members, regarding the fees that they were charged from Emblem, including one member who received a bill from an anesthesiologist for $1,320 for a preventive colonoscopy procedure. Since the member’s anesthesiologist did not participate with Emblem’s network provider, the member was responsible for paying a $396 coinsurance to Emblem.

Consumers who believe they may have been treated unfairly by a health care provider can call the Attorney General’s Health Care Helpline at 800-428-9071.

Joseph Spector Albany bureau chief: Joseph Spector is Gannett's Albany Bureau chief and has covered New York politics and government since 2002. He was the political reporter for the Democrat and Chronicle in Rochester and in 2007 joined Gannett’s Albany Bureau, covering state government for seven news organizations and USA Today.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1C2I3VL