Hotel executive Leona Helmsley's former 40-acre estate in Greenwich, Conn., is going back on the market for $65 million after a top-to-bottom renovation, according to the listing agent. Steve Rossi …

Originally built in 1918, the Elizabethan-style brick house on Round Hill Road will be listed with Jane Howard Basham of David Ogilvy & Associates, an affiliate of Christie's International Real Estate. The current owners spent about three years renovating the house, which has a new staircase, new kitchen with a La Cornue stove and butler's pantry and new mechanical systems. Steve Rossi …

… The gated property was last sold by the Helmsley estate to an undisclosed buyer in 2010 for $35 million, Ms. Basham said. At the time, it was among the priciest deals ever in the affluent town, although it sold for far less than its initial $125 million price tag. Mrs. Helmsley, who died in 2007, was married to real-estate mogul Harry Helmsley. ( See related article ) Steve Rossi

The Wooldon Manor estate in New York's Southampton, which Scott A. Bommer bought for $75 million last year from fashion designer Vince Camuto, has sold again in two separate transactions totaling more than $80 million. The 14.5-acre parcel overlooking Lake Agawam had been listed for $98 million by the Corcoran Group's Tim Davis, and Harald Grant and Ed Petrie of Sotheby's International Realty. Chris Foster …

In a transaction that closed July 15, a buyer purchased about half the property—the roughly 10,000-square-foot oceanfront home and an adjoining 2-acre parcel—for $50 million, said Mr. Davis. Another buyer—a developer—is in contract to purchase the remainder of the property, which consists of three building lots, with plans to construct homes there. Chris Foster …

… An English Tudor-style house, Wooldon Manor was extensively renovated by Mr. Camuto. With nine bedrooms and 12½ bathrooms, the estate has a pool, a pool house, a tennis court, a greenhouse and terraces overlooking the ocean. ( See related article ) Chris Foster

An English island said to be the site where the Magna Carta was sealed in 1215 will list for £3.95 million—about $6.77 million—its owner said. The 3.725-acre island, in the Thames near London, could be the spot where King John met with his rebellious barons to place his seal on the historic document, according to Nicholas Vincent, professor of Medieval History at the University of East Anglia. Sotheby's Realty UK …

In 1967, the family of owner Graham Cooper bought the island, which now contains a seven-bedroom, two-bathroom private home. The house has a Magna Carta memorial room, shown, containing a stone upon which King John is said to have sealed the document. The room, with stained glass windows, has walls hung with the crests of King John and 25 barons. Sotheby's Realty UK …

… When Mr. Cooper's father, a banker who worked in London, bought the house, it hadn't been lived in for some time and 'was in a very sorry state,' he said. The family restored and renovated the house, putting on a new roof and installing an outdoor swimming pool. There are expansive lawns with flower beds and an apple orchard. A small bridge connects the island to the mainland. ( See related article ) Sotheby's Realty UK

An estate in Saint-Tropez, France has been listed for €35 million, or $47.4 million, said listing agent Xavier Attal of Paris-based Immo Best International. The property overlooks the Mediterranean Sea. The three-story main house has a gym, three terraces facing the sea, and a master suite with a spa. The 1,280-square-foot guest house has four bedrooms with en suite bathrooms. Another house, which can be used as a guesthouse or staff quarters, has a kitchen, two bedrooms and a bathroom. Immo Best International …

… The house has two swimming pools. One is by the beach; a larger pool is partially outdoors and partially inside the pool house, so it can be used year-round. The property, planted with palm, cypress and olive trees, has a rose garden, vegetable garden, greenhouse and two fountains. The home also has a helipad and parking for up to 10 cars, Mr. Attal said. ( See related article ) Immo Best International

A Montana cattle ranch co-owned by billionaire Whitney MacMillan has been listed for $18 million. Mr. MacMillan is the former CEO and a member of the founding family of the agribusiness giant Cargill Inc. He owns the roughly 40,000-acre PN Ranch near Winifred, Mont., with partner Matt Pierson of Highland Livestock. There is a 3,136-square-foot, two-story house, built in the 1880s, on the property, along with a number of other historic buildings. Kenton Rowe …

The property is being listed by Tim Murphy and Dave Johnson of Hall and Hall. Kenton Rowe …

The ranch is being sold with all its cattle and equipment included, said Mr. Pierson, whose family purchased the ranch in the 1990s, with Mr. MacMillan becoming a partner several years later. Currently there are roughly 800 mother cows on the property as well as wildlife including bighorn sheep. Kenton Rowe …