ROCKVILLE, Maryland, January 12, 2015 /PRNewswire/ --

Infosys Public Services, a U.S.-based subsidiary of Infosys, today announced that it has successfully implemented a premium billing and payments solution for L.A. Care Health Plan, the largest publicly operated health plan in the U.S. serving more than 1.6 million members. This solution will help improve access to health benefits for 24,000 members on its L.A. Care Covered™ plan offered through the Covered California health insurance marketplace.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130122/589162 )



Infosys Public Services implemented Benaissance® ExchangePoint[SM] financial management platform to simplify the user experience. It also integrated the new system with L.A. Care's existing TriZetto® QNXT[TM] application to enable smooth data exchange. The solution modernizes L.A. Care's billing and payment processes to better serve members in the Los Angeles community. It ensures easier access to subsidized health benefits that are offered through Covered California, under the Affordable Care Act.

Highlights:

As part of the project, Infosys Public Services implemented key business functions including Invoicing, Member Effectuation, Payment Collections, Member Outreach, Grace Period Handling for Advanced Premium Tax Credit (APTC) and non-APTC members

The solution was implemented in a stringent 12-week timeframe. Infosys Public Services pooled its state marketplace experience, premium billing and payment functions expertise, and its knowledge on Benaissance® ExchangePoint [ SM ] and TriZetto® QNXT [ TM ] platforms to achieve these results. The accelerated rollout enabled L.A. Care to comply with the California state timeline for member renewals and open enrollment for 2015

and TriZetto® QNXT platforms to achieve these results. The accelerated rollout enabled L.A. Care to comply with the state timeline for member renewals and open enrollment for 2015 By employing an iterative data migration approach for go-live, Infosys Public Services helped L.A. Care avoid business discontinuity and disruption due to the system switchover

Quotes:

Howard A. Kahn, Chief Executive Officer, L.A. Care:

"Covered California allows us to serve the entire community in Los Angeles. With the solution implemented by Infosys Public Services, our updated billing and payment processes and systems will help us improve and simplify access to healthcare to better serve our L.A. Care Covered members."

Eric Paternoster, President and Chief Executive Officer, Infosys Public Services:

"Our healthcare industry experience, coupled with a deep understanding of both health insurance marketplaces and health plan businesses, provides us a unique opportunity to help L.A. Care's members to fully leverage the benefits offered through marketplaces such as Covered California and the Affordable Care Act."

Additional Resources:

About L.A. Care

L.A. Care Health Plan (Local Initiative Health Authority of Los Angeles County) is a public entity and community-accountable health plan serving residents of Los Angeles County through a variety of health coverage programs including L.A. Care Covered™, Medi-Cal, L.A. Care Cal MediConnect Plan, L.A. Care's Healthy Kids, L.A. Care Health Plan Medicare Advantage HMO and PASC-SEIU Homecare Workers Health Care Plan. L.A. Care is a leader in developing new programs through innovative partnerships designed to provide health coverage to vulnerable populations and to support the safety net. With more than 1.6 million members, L.A. Care is the nation's largest publicly operated health plan.

About Infosys Public Services

Infosys Public Services, a U.S. based subsidiary of Infosys (NYSE: INFY), is a leader in business consulting and technology solutions. We partner with healthcare and public sector organizations to help them stay ahead of the innovation curve. Our solutions, combined with execution excellence and proven best practices, allow clients to optimize their operations today while building tomorrow's enterprise. Visit http://www.infosyspublicservices.com to learn more.

About Infosys

Infosys is a global leader in consulting, technology, outsourcing and next-generation services. We enable clients, in more than 50 countries, to stay a step ahead of emerging business trends and outperform the competition. We help them transform and thrive in a changing world by co-creating breakthrough solutions that combine strategic insights and execution excellence.

Visit http://www.infosys.com to see how Infosys (NYSE: INFY), with US$8.25 B in annual revenues and 165,000+ employees, is helping enterprises renew themselves while also creating new avenues to generate value.

Safe Harbor

Certain statements in this release concerning our future growth prospects are forward-looking statements regarding our future business expectations intended to qualify for the 'safe harbor' under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, which involve a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in such forward-looking statements. The risks and uncertainties relating to these statements include, but are not limited to, risks and uncertainties regarding fluctuations in earnings, fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, our ability to manage growth, intense competition in IT services including those factors which may affect our cost advantage, wage increases in India, our ability to attract and retain highly skilled professionals, time and cost overruns on fixed-price, fixed-time frame contracts, client concentration, restrictions on immigration, industry segment concentration, our ability to manage our international operations, reduced demand for technology in our key focus areas, disruptions in telecommunication networks or system failures, our ability to successfully complete and integrate potential acquisitions, liability for damages on our service contracts, the success of the companies in which Infosys has made strategic investments, withdrawal or expiration of governmental fiscal incentives, political instability and regional conflicts, legal restrictions on raising capital or acquiring companies outside India, and unauthorized use of our intellectual property and general economic conditions affecting our industry. Additional risks that could affect our future operating results are more fully described in our United States Securities and Exchange Commission filings including our Annual Report on Form 20-F for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2014 and on Form 6-K for the quarter ended September 30, 2014. These filings are available at http://www.sec.gov. Infosys may, from time to time, make additional written and oral forward-looking statements, including statements contained in the company's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission and our reports to shareholders. In addition, please note that the date of this press release is mentioned at the beginning of the release, and any forward-looking statements contained herein are based on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable as of this date. The company does not undertake to update any forward-looking statements that may be made from time to time by or on behalf of the company unless it is required by law.

SOURCE Infosys