Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

UNIVERSITY PLACE, Wash. (AP) — For the students at the nearby high school, it was simply known as the “Sand Pit,” the landmark two miles down the road where they would run as part of gym class.

For the passengers on the train between Seattle and Portland, Oregon, it was a moment to look out the other windows of the train car and take in the waters of Puget Sound. Looking the opposite direction meant staring into the teeth of the ugly old gravel and sand quarry hugging the shoreline.

A decade ago, that was the property now known as Chambers Bay. It was sand, and gravel and old concrete pilings. An eyesore. That’s when the metamorphosis began, and it transformed from a sandy blemish into a swath of greenery cut through man-made mounds and dunes unique to American golf and, specifically, the Pacific Northwest.

Now the close-up for Chambers Bay has arrived: The 2015 U.S. Open, a rare occasion where the golf course is getting more attention than the players.

“It will be everything I know about the game being realized,” course designer Robert Trent Jones Jr. said. “These were dreams and very, very hard work to craft the great green stage upon which the dream will be fulfilled. That’s the reality. It’s no longer a dream.”

Chambers Bay is a reclamation project for the land on which it sits and for golf in the Pacific Northwest, a segment of the United States that is infrequently visited by championship golf.

Looking for green, lush, tree-lined fairways the width of a hallway with emerald foliage? Head up the road about an hour to Sahalee Country Club, the host of the 1998 PGA Championship. This is the antithesis of the stereotype for a golf course in this corner of the country.

Chambers Bay was built as the opposite of traditional, from the way it was constructed, to the funding behind the project, to the type of grass used on every fairway and green. The course was a risk of political and financial capital. It’s about to have its biggest payoff, with a worldwide audience tuning in to see the fescue grass fairways and greens, the undulating, rolling putting surfaces and the brown-hued sand dunes all with the backdrop of Puget Sound water, the Olympic Mountains and bald eagles flying overhead.

When the first group tees off Thursday morning, Chambers Bay will become the youngest golf course to host the U.S. Open since Hazeltine — constructed by Jones’ father — in 1970.

The creation of Chambers Bay was championed by then Pierce County Executive John Ladenburg, who decided the former gravel and sand quarry should be purchased by the county and use $21 million for its construction. From the beginning, Ladenburg demanded a golf course that was unique. Part of the reason Jones and his firm was chosen was their ambition, including the tag “Chambers Creek, home of the 2030 U.S. Open,” in their presentations to the county.