Astute shoppers know that Black Friday no longer is just the Friday after Thanksgiving.

Retailers have extended the popular shopping day to last several days. For some, it started last week. Others declared the whole month “Black November.”

The extended sale frenzy, however, has made scoring that one-time deal more elusive then ever.

An editor at DealNews questioned whether early Black Friday sales are true deals. In a comparison, the site found that the best deals came even later in November.

“We urge you once again to hold off on buying, as these deals still don’t compare to the great offers that are just a few weeks away,” wrote features editor Benjamin Glaser in October.

When WalletHub, a personal finance site, compared current prices and expected Black Friday prices this year, it found not everything is a good deal on the day after Thanksgiving.

Jewelry prices averaged a measly 4 percent discount, while furniture was 8 percent off pre-Black Friday prices.

“Jewelry is the least discounted item on Black Friday, mostly because it’s discounted at a rate of 50 percent to 60 percent throughout the year since markups are so high to begin with,” analyst Jill Gonzalez said.

“Furniture has the second-worst discount because most of the retailers choose to apply steeper discounts around other holidays like Presidents Day, Memorial Day and Labor Day.”

WalletHub’s research showed the best discounts on Black Friday are books (28 percent off), software (22 percent) and toys (22 percent).

Be informed

The best way to shop online or offline is to be prepared with the information you need to make a decision.

Denver-based PlaceWise Media, which manages and provides digital tools for 750 shopping malls nationwide, recommends using your local mall’s app. PlaceWise works with more than 500 retailers to schedule limited and local deals, such as a 30 percent coupon from 9 a.m. to noon.

“Ninety percent of people who interact with (our mall clients’ apps or sites) are going into the mall. They’re not looking. They’re inside the mall,” said John Dee, PlaceWise’s president. “They’re getting the answers to make sure they’re getting the right information.”

His research shows that shoppers don’t use their mobile devices to “showroom,” or see the product and buy it online later. They want to see more product details, read reviews and compare prices.

“As a tip, I would say bring your phone to the mall because everyone else is, too,” Dee said, adding that the most crowded time to visit a mall on Black Friday is from noon to 4 p.m.

Digital shopping tools

Several shopping apps are available, including some longtime favorites like eBay-owned RedLaser, ShopSavvy and RetailMeNot. These apps are comprehensive in price comparisons and can quickly link you to a good deal using your phone.

Other online tools to help shoppers see the historic price of a product and decide whether today is the best time to buy it — or last week, when it was half the price.

The Camelizer, at camelcamelcamel.com, tracks prices on Amazon and will send you price-watch alerts on Twitter.

Some stores have tools to convince shoppers they’re getting the lowest price — or will. Last year, Walmart rolled out Savings Catcher, a mobile app that refunds the price difference if something you just bought from Walmart happens to be on sale elsewhere. It is a mostly automated refund via gift card, as long as you scan in your Walmart receipt.

The Slice app provides a haggle-free mobile form to request a refund if it finds a price dropped on an item you just purchased. Merchant partners include Best Buy, The Home Depot and Zappos. The app also tracks recalls and deliveries.

Tamara Chuang: tchuang@denverpost.com or visit dpo.st/tamara