After several false starts during the past five years, Premier Community HealthCare Group is preparing its Hudson clinic to see its first patients on Aug. 31.

Premier officials provided a tour last week of the clinic inside the Mike Fasano Regional Hurricane Shelter, at 11611 Denton Ave.

CEO Joseph Resnick, Hudson office manager Larette Cappiello and business development director Cheryl Pollock spoke about the continuing need for a safety net for many people still uninsured in the Hudson area.

The site will be Premier’s eighth clinic in Pasco, which includes a Trinity-area facility at 2114 Seven Springs Blvd. After the “soft” opening Aug. 31, a grand-opening event probably will come in September.

Residents can learn more about the Hudson clinic during a free luncheon Friday at Regional Medical Center Bayonet Point. The event starts at 11:30 a.m. with the presentation beginning at noon in the hospital conference center at 14100 Yosemite Drive. Reservations are required; call (727) 869-5498 or (888) 741-5119.

The clinic was supposed to open shortly after the December 2009 dedication of the shelter. The shelter’s namesake, Pasco Tax Collector Mike Fasano, then a state senator, arranged some $1.1 million in funding for startup costs.

Several postponements developed, however. Gov. Rick Scott vetoed any funds remaining after June 2011, Fasano recalled. He was delighted the new clinic is now about to open.

“This is a great thing for Pasco,” Fasano, who did not attend Friday’s tour, later said in an interview. “This is a great opportunity for those who don’t have access to health care.”

It also could reduce the number of people who wind up in hospital emergency rooms as a last resort, Fasano said.

“You can’t blame anyone who has nowhere else to go,” but ER care is expensive and can end up costing taxpayers, he said.

“We want to be a safety net,” Pollock said in a Thursday interview. Census data indicates about 170,000 Pasco residents fall at or below 200 percent of the poverty level, she noted.

Last year, about 36 percent of Premier patients had no medical insurance, while 42 percent fell under Medicaid coverage, Pollock recalled. Premier also accepts people with private insurance or Medicare.

“There are a lot of people that are still uninsured,” Pollock emphasized, even after the federal Affordable Care Act passed.

A “Medicaid gap” developed after Florida lawmakers did not expand Medicaid here and refused additional federal funding. Some people who earn about $16,000 annually, or 100 percent of the poverty level, still don’t qualify for help through ACA.

Even with ACA, the number of uninsured seeking help at Premier has fallen from 42 percent of all patients at Premier clinics to 36 percent now, Pollock said.

“We just knew this was a commitment we needed to fill,” Pollock said about the long-delayed Hudson clinic.

Last fall, Premier won a federal New Access Point grant for $382,000 toward opening the new clinic. “We’re held to high standards,” Pollock said to earn annual renewals of the federal grant.

The Premier clinic in New Port Richey served 2,589 patients its first year, records show. Premier and Pasco health department officials plan to coordinate efforts. The public health agency operates its Women, Infants and Children program at the Fasano shelter. “Back in January, we transitioned our prenatal (maternity) services to them,” health department spokeswoman Deanna Krautner wrote in a Friday email reply.

“Access to care combined with a strong message regarding healthy behaviors, such as reducing rates of obesity and tobacco use, will move Pasco toward better health outcomes and improve our quality of life,” Health Department Administrator Mike Napier wrote in an email