Lawmakers in Florida’s House of Representatives saved critical state programs that serve the state’s most vulnerable citizens from a costly expansion of Medicaid under ObamaCare that would’ve perversely prioritized benefits for able-bodied, working-age adults ahead of the elderly and disabled during a floor vote today.

Florida was heavily targeted by the Obama Administration, who had initially threatened to withhold $2.2 billion worth of unrelated funding for the Low Income Pool if the state didn’t expand Medicaid. The feds eventually backed down after being sued by Gov. Rick Scott over the matter.

Expanding ObamaCare in Florida would’ve been especially disastrous given the scale of the population, as the costs and enrollment projections are universally unreliable and unpredictable. Every expansion state reviewed in a recent Foundation for Government Accountability study showed their enrollment numbers had exploded way beyond all original projections, massively driving up the costs of the programs

“Today is a victory for Florida’s neediest, who are currently covered by fragile programs that have already had to face massive cuts thanks to ObamaCare,” said Tarren Bragdon, FGA CEO.

“Medicaid expansion would’ve been nothing short of a disaster for Florida’s patients, healthcare providers, and taxpayers. Fortunately Florida’s Representatives didn’t succumb to the talking points of big hospitals and the myth that there is a conservative way to adopt more ObamaCare.”

Some Republicans had pushed for a modified-ObamaCare expansion called the Florida Health Insurance Affordability Exchange Program, based in part off of Arkansas failed Private Option which has cost that state millions in cost overruns. In Florida, the cost overruns would have to come out of other vital programs, or be compensated for raised taxes.

“While we do want to see all people have access to quality health care, threatening the programs that cover our neighbors, children, and grandparents is the wrong path,” said Bragdon.

“Now that ObamaCare’s expansion is defeated, the legislature can focus on cultivating sound economic policies that will encourage growth and provide real opportunities to all Floridians. Instead of placing able-bodied adults into an expensive welfare program, we can drive job growth and wages so they can control the health care they receive.”

The House vote came during a special session that began on Monday focused on ObamaCare’s Medicaid expansion. The expansion bill faced an uphill battle as the House had already passed an anti-expansion resolution and Gov. Scott had threatened to veto the bill if it made it to his desk.