Day 3 of the Toronto International Film Festival continued with more premieres, more red carpets, and more celebrities — and the first sighting of Benedict Cumberbatch, who stars as Alan Turing in The Imitation Game. There will be plenty more Cumber-photos in the coming days, but for now just know that he is at TIFF. (Fun fact: Fans of the Sherlock actor call themselves “Cumberbitches.”)

Here’s a collection of Cumberbatch and non-Cumberbatch photos from Saturday’s red carpets at TIFF.

Benedict Cumberbatch attends the Hollywood Foreign Press Association and InStyle party at the Windsor Arms Hotel, wearing an unfortunate hat. Does it matter though? No. No it doesn’t. Benedict Cumberbatch is perfect.

Jon Stewart, just finished a shift at the auto repair shop, attends the Hollywood Foreign Press Association and InStyle party. His film Rosewater depicts the 2009 imprisonment of Iranian-Canadian journalist Maziar Bahari in Iran after he was interviewed by The Daily Show.

Daniel Brühl arrivës at the prëmiere för the film The Face of an Angel at the Törontö Internätional Fïlm Festiväl on Saturday Sept. 6, 2014.

Actress Kate Beckinsale, with her tail flapping gently in the breeze, arrives at the premiere for the film “The Face of an Angel” at the Toronto International Film Festival in Toronto on Saturday Sept. 6, 2014.

“What’s that in the distance? Is it Benedict Cumberbatch? I sure hope so. My life will have no meaning if I don’t get to meet him.”

Kevin Costner speaks onstage at Black And White Press Conference during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival.

Local Taliban warlord Kevin Costner poses for photos with actress Jillian Estell, actress Octavia Spencer, actor Anthony Mackie, director Mike Binder and actor Mpho Koaho poses at Black And White Press Conference during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at TIFF Bell Lightbox on September 7, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actress Octavia Spencer.

Actor Eddie Redmayne, standing on his tiny actor feet, attends Entertainment Weekly’s Toronto Must List Party during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at the Thompson Hotel on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Ben Stiller on the way to the While We’re Young premiere after learning that in Toronto, it’s almost always faster to walk than to wait for the streetcar.

Naomi Watts attends the While We’re Young premiere during the Toronto International Film Festival on Saturday, Sept. 6, 2014, in Toronto.

“I hope I’m not too late to see Benedict Cumberbatch,” Naomi Watts thinks to herself.

Actor Bill Nighy, British.

Jim Moriarty, a.k.a. Andrew Scott attends the Toronto International Film Festival screening and after party for Pride at The Elgin on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actor Ben Stiller attends the While We’re Young premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Princess of Wales Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actor Ben Stiller attends the While We’re Young premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Princess of Wales Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Kate Beckinsale and Daniel Brühl at the Variety Studio, where they showed each other their favourite Sherlock clips. “Benedict Cumberbatch is truly the greatest actor of our generation,” Brühl says.

Actress Amanda Seyfried attends the “While We’re Young” premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Princess of Wales Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actress Greta Gerwig attends the While We’re Young premiere at TIFF.

Writer/Director Noah Baumbach gently rubs Adam Driver’s back at the While We’re Young premiere.

Actors Channing Tatum and Mark Ruffalo take a photo with their high school science teacher — Oh, that’s Steve Carell. At the Sony Pictures Classics TIFF celebration dinner during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Creme Brasserie on September 5, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

James Franco delivers a two-hour speech about the subversive act of wearing a toque to a film screening. “I went to Yale,” he reminds his audience. (At the Ryserson Theatre to introduce his film The Sound and the Fury.)

“I’m so sorry about Evan Almighty.”

Musician/director Roger Waters, holding actress Laurie Durning a little too close for comfort at the Roger Waters The Wall premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at The Elgin on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

What’s going on here? Is Kevin Costner signing someone’s vacuum cleaner? At the “Black And White” after party presented by Nespresso at West Bar during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actor Bill Burr and producer Todd Lewis slowly try to join the conversation between a group of women at the “Black And White” after party presented by Nespresso at West Bar during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

“Look at how much fun we’re having with all our female friends!”

Actor Bill Burr (L) and Producer Todd Lewis (R) attend the “Black And White” after party presented by Nespresso at West Bar during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Street performer Rosario Dawson asks for an audience volunteer.

“Who wants to see me juggle?”

Singer Jully Black attends the Top Five premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Princess of Wales Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Comedian/Actor Russell Peters attends the Top Five premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Princess of Wales Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actress Karlie Redd attends the “Top Five” premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Princess of Wales Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Chris Rock being Chris Rock, at the Top Five premiere.

Actress Lana Parrilla attends the “Top Five” premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Princess of Wales Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

“I’m so glad I won’t be the worst-dressed person here,” Robert Downey Jr. and Noomi Rapace both think to themselves at the Warner Bros. Pictures and Dolce & Gabbana TIFF cocktail party.

Robert Downey Jr. trying to shake off a clingy fan.

Actors Robert Downey Jr. (L) and Al Pacino attend the Warner Bros. Pictures and Dolce & Gabbana TIFF cocktail party during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Momofuku Daisho on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actor JB Smoove attends the Top Five premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Princess of Wales Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

“Wow, those must be the Robert Duvall nudes I keep hearing about.” Actor Jay Pharoah attends the Top Five premiere.

Actress Chloe Grace Moretz, looking very inimpressed, at the Warner Bros. Pictures and Dolce & Gabbana TIFF cocktail party during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Momofuku Daisho on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actor Hill Harper attends the Warner Bros. Pictures and Dolce & Gabbana TIFF cocktail party.

“Please don’t send me any more nudes, Robert.” Actors Hill Harper and Robert Duvall at the Warner Bros. Pictures and Dolce & Gabbana TIFF cocktail party.

Justin Theroux, whose acting credits include “Evil DJ” in Zoolander.

Actor Ben Schwartz attends the Warner Bros. Pictures and Dolce & Gabbana TIFF cocktail party.

Al Pacino screams silently at the Manglehorn Premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Winter Garden Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Some guy in a suit you probably don’t know, left, with actress Janet Jones at The Sound And The Fury Premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Ryerson Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada

Director Philippe Falardeau— wait, director? This man is way too handsome to be behind the camera.

James Franco just… I don’t know. At The Sound And The Fury Premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Ryerson Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actress Jessica Chastain attends HFPA & InStyle’s 2014 TIFF celebration during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Windsor Arms Hotel on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actor Simon Pegg attends HFPA & InStyle’s 2014 TIFF celebration during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Windsor Arms Hotel on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Channing Tatum about to beat you up at the HFPA & InStyle’s 2014 TIFF celebration during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Windsor Arms Hotel on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

OK, we’ve had a lot of non-Cumberbatches in this gallery. Time for a Cumber-break. Here’s Benedict Cumberbatch.

Benedict Cumberbatch at the HFPA & InStyle’s 2014 TIFF celebration Sept. 6. Swoon.

Actress Salma Hayek attends HFPA & InStyle’s 2014 TIFF celebration during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Windsor Arms Hotel on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actress Kaitlyn Dever at the Gala Screening of Men, Women & Children during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Ryerson Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada

J.K. Simmons attend the Gala Screening of Men, Women & Children.

Actress Lacey Chabert, making fetch happen at the HFPA & InStyle’s 2014 TIFF celebration during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Windsor Arms Hotel on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actress Jennifer Garner attend the Gala Screening of Men, Women & Children during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Ryerson Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Adam Sandler wakes up in his car and stumbles out into the world. At the screening for Men, Women & Children.

“Where am I? The last 15 years have been a complete blur. Did I really make a movie called You Don’t Mess with the Zohan? Oh my god.”

Actors Rosemarie DeWitt and Jennifer Garner, writer Erin Cressida Wilson, producer Helen Estabrook, director/co-writer/producerJason Reitman hold an intervention for Adam Sandler. “We’re worried about you, Adam. The Hague is considering charges of crimes against humanity for Jack and Jill.”

At the Gala Screening of Paramount Pictures’ Men, Women & Children film introduction at Ryerson Theatre during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actor and comedian Nick Kroll attends HFPA & InStyle’s 2014 TIFF celebration during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Windsor Arms Hotel on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Montreal Canadiens defenceman P.K. Subban attends HFPA & InStyle’s 2014 TIFF celebration, becoming a worse hockey player just by proximity to the Toronto Maple Leafs.

Actress Rachel Skarsten attends HFPA & InStyle’s 2014 TIFF celebration during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Windsor Arms Hotel on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Corey Stoll, manipulated by Kevin Spacey to attend the Entertainment Weekly Toronto Must List Party, Sept. 6.

Actresses Rosemarie DeWitt (L) and Jennifer Garner, who braided their hair together for the Gala Screening Men, Women & Children during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Ryerson Theatre on September 6, 2014.

Actor William Peltz, wearing as many layers as possible, with actress Nicola Peltz, who went for the opposite. At the Gala Screening of Men, Women & Children during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Ryerson Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actress Felicity Jones. I have no idea who most of these people are, to be quite honest. I think Jones was the big truck in Transformers or something. Nice dress though!

Producer & NBA player Amar’e Stoudemire attends the “Beyond The Lights” Premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at The Elgin on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Haley Joel Osment, apparently. At the Tusk premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Ryerson Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Director Kevin Smith attends the Tusk Premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Ryerson Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actor Jason Mewes, sporting either lilac or lavender nail polish, at the Tusk Premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Ryerson Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Actress Elena Kampouris, shedding her old skin at the Gala Screening of Paramount Pictures’ Men, Women & Children during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival.

“I can’t believe someone actually wants a photo with me!” actor Justin Long thinks to himself at the Tusk Premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Ryerson Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Still beaming from that interaction with his fan.

Tristan Gretzky, actress Janet Jones and Ty Gretzky attend the The Sound And The Fury Premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Ryerson Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Kate Beckinsale with director Michael Winterbottom, who somehow manages to work in Hollywood without changing his name to something less silly. At the The Face Of An Angel premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Winter Garden Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Author Jonathan Tropper, actors Jason Bateman and Tina Fey, director Shawn Levy and Entertainment Weekly editor Matt Bean attend Entertainment Weekly’s Toronto Must List Party during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at the Thompson Hotel on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

Jake Gyllenhaal refusing to smile.

Just kind of standing there like a brute. Huh.

Actresses Kate Beckinsale and Cara Delevingne attend The Face Of An Angel premiere during the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival at Winter Garden Theatre on September 6, 2014 in Toronto, Canada.

“I hope Cara Delevingne doesn’t do anything crazy tonight. She has a temper.”

“I will kill again.”