WASHINGTON– With Sen. Rand Paul ending his presidential bid Wednesday, Sen. Ted Cruz has moved in on his libertarian supporters.

Paul finished fifth in Monday’s Iowa caucus, with 4.5 percent of the Republican vote. He campaign had $5.63 million cash on hand.

“He and I have been side by side in a great many fights in the U.S. Senate, standing for liberty,” Cruz told reporters in New Hampshire Thursday. “They worked very, very hard.”

Cruz was already courting libertarians, calling himself the heir to the legacy and supporters of Paul’s father, three-time presidential candidate Ron Paul. At the Jan. 28 GOP debate Paul rejected the claim.

“What’s interesting about where that liberty vote goes that my father brought to the Republican Party is, I don’t think they’re necessarily going to go for Ted,” Paul said.

Cruz has already picked up support from several Paul backers in Texas. State Sen. Don Huffines, R-Dallas, endorsed Cruz Wednesday. Huffines was Paul’s Texas chairman and a major Texas booster for the campaign.

Huffines said he was “thrilled by the momentum Senator Cruz is gaining.”

“Ted Cruz will secure the border and fight daily to restore liberty and freedom, which is what our nation needs most at this critical juncture in our history,” he said in a statement.

State Rep. Johnathan Stickland, R-Bedford, also threw his support behind Cruz Wednesday.

“Ted Cruz has championed liberty in the U.S. Senate and I’m proud to endorse him to be the next president of the United States,” Stickland said in a statement to The Texas Tribune. “We need a principled conservative leader to stand up against the Washington cartel and Ted Cruz is that man.”

Republican megadonor Scott Banister, a Silicon Valley heavy weight, plegded his support to Cruz. Bannister, a major backer of pro-Paul super PACs, has not donated to PACs supporting Cruz.

“I’ve interviewed Ted, and while we don’t agree on every issue, I believe he’s one of us,” Banister told CNN. “Libertarians will discover that.”

Cruz has already shifted the focus of his message in advance of the New Hampshire primary Feb. 9 from evangelicals to libertarians. Paul’s exit will be an added boost.

“Part of the reason we are more competitive in New Hampshire than the typical conservative is, we’ve got enough support on the libertarian side that it backfills,” Cruz told reporters Tuesday, before Paul’s announcement. “That’s fairly unusual.”

Cruz’s New Hampshire staff immediately increased their efforts to court libertarians, although recent polls show only 2.7 percent of New Hampshire voters support Paul. Donald Trump has a major lead in New Hampshire with the support of 32.8 percent of voters, followed by Sen. Marco Rubio at 11.8 percent. Cruz is currently polling in third place at 11.3 percent.

“There’s an openness to moving over Sen. Cruz. I think they recognize that if they’re looking for a constitutional conservative, there’s one remaining in the race,” Bill O’Brien, Cruz’s New Hampshire co-chairman told Politico.