It is not often the sound of applause is heard in a courtroom whenever a defendant is called to stand before the judge. And normally judges don’t reward people standing before them by letting them take a bag of chips from a snack basket for their good deeds.

But Denver is doing things differently in a special Recovery Court designed to rehabilitate the city’s most troubled offenders.

It is a brilliant idea with a goal of targeting the most frequent offenders in Denver’s criminal justice system, those who are in and out of jail dozens of times a year for mostly low-level public-nuisance offenses.

By combing through data from the city’s jail and hospital and marrying that information with wrap-around social services, the city is setting up a smart way to try to rehabilitate some of the Denver’s usual suspects.

City officials used arrest records and court appearances to identify the top 300 offenders — the chronically homeless who averaged 36 court cases over a seven-year period. An analysis found this group costs the city about $11 million a year to arrest, jail, adjudicate and treat at Denver Health.

Through a pilot project, the city’s Crime Prevention & Control Commission is trying to find a better way to deal with these offenders and possibly rehabilitate them.

The program, run through Denver County Court , pulls people out of jail, gets them into court-supervised probation, puts them into temporary housing, offers them help with their addictions and provides them with daily supervision from a crack team of caseworkers from the Mental Health Center of Denver. Among the caseworkers is former Denver Broncos safety Tyrone Braxton.

The offenders must want the help, be willing to enter drug and alcohol treatment, have no other resources, and basically be at the end of their ropes.

Officials say the program could save the city millions spent on jail time, court costs and hospitalizations.

“The numbers look really good,” said Denver County Judge James Breese, who runs the court. “Way fewer missed court days, fewer jail bed days. And there are a number of people who are really on track to pull out of this. Some never will, but I think a third can become normal citizens.”

Currently, 40 people are in the four-step program. So far, no one has graduated past Phase II. But some are close.

One, a 30-year-old former drug-addicted prostitute, had been piling up arrests through her adult life. (Her name is being withheld out of privacy concerns.) No program had been able to help — until now.

At a recent court hearing, the woman looked presentable with neatly combed hair and wearing business attire.

She has been clean and sober for months. She is doing regular volunteer work, gets regular drug and alcohol counseling, and is taking culinary arts classes through the Mental Health Center of Denver. She must still attend weekly Recovery Court dates. On a recent Wednesday, the woman sat with the other participants on wooden courtroom benches in the downtown Denver jail. They waited their turn to speak to Judge Breese about their progress.

When a caseworker calls a name to approach the judge, everyone applauds.

If they have done well, Breese praises them and lets them grab chips or bottled water from the basket.

If they had troubles, there is a different response. Some have had a hot UA (urinalysis) or missed counseling sessions. The punishment could range from withholding a visit to the basket to being remanded back to jail.

When the 30-year-old woman appeared before Breese, he beamed. “You look great,” Breese said.

She has passed the program’s first phase and is thriving in the second phase — proving she can maintain a sober lifestyle.

She told the judge her children are showing more respect. She is enjoying her cooking classes and clearly seems on the rebound. She then walked with purpose from the courtroom to the applause of her peers, head held high and a bag of chips in her hand.

Shouldn’t this be what the criminal justice system is about? Punish people who deserve it and rehabilitate those who need the help. In less than a year, the program has shown success — fewer arrests, fewer days in jail and fewer hospital visits.

Recovery Court costs the city about $1,045 per person every month — an expense being paid through grants and general funds. Compare that to the $3,300 per person the top 300 cost the city every month to arrest, jail, adjudicate and provide health care.

“This is a high-needs population,” said Regina Huerter, director of the Crime Prevention and Control Commission. “We are going to pay one way or another. So why not be smart about how we pay for them?”

In the six months before starting the recovery program, the 40 participants had been booked into jail a total of 95 times. After six months in the program, the same 40 had been booked 49 times, usually when Judge Breese remanded them. There have been successes and failures. Some participants have prospered, while others have returned to jail.

“One-third have never gone back (to jail), knock on wood,” said Cindy Laub, management analyst with the Crime Prevention & Control Commission “Probably a third have gone back once or twice for a short stay. And we have others who are so highly needing more intense services than the case managers can provide.”

The program has also reduced hospital visits. Six months before entering the program, 36 of the participants accounted for 347 visits to Denver Health’s detox facility. After six months in the program, the same 36 had logged just 100 visits. All participants have signed up for the Affordable Care Act, and are now registered for other federal benefits.

In the past, the city would jail them and then send them out on the streets, where they would have the same problems and get re-arrested.

“We weren’t addressing the underlying issues,” Huerter said. “We are now trying to identify what they need and remove those barriers and get them to the right services.”

Toward the end of a busy day in Recovery Court, a caseworker called out a new name. The 65-year-old man was still in custody, wearing a prisoner-issued jumpsuit. He was a candidate for the program — one of the 300 who are constantly being arrested.

A look at his crime record shows a man deeply in trouble, with arrests since the early 1970s: robberies, assaults, drug possession, DUIs, trespassing. If he accepts the challenge of Recovery Court, he would be interviewed by a University of Denver student to assess his needs, released from jail, given a motel room, provided a caseworker and scheduled for drug and alcohol counseling.

“If you agree to this, it means going to classes, meeting with your counselor,” Breese said. “We will monitor you to make sure you aren’t doing drugs and alcohol. We will try to give you treatment,” he said. “But we’re going to give you a chance.”

The man said he was down and out and ready to drop out and wanted to change.

“Welcome aboard,” said Judge Breese as the courtroom broke into applause.

E-mail Jeremy Meyer at jpmeyer@denverpost.com. Follow him on Twitter: @jpmeyerdpost

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.