Tiny squiggles of plastic likely are floating in the juices, sports drinks, sodas and bottled water you drink. Microplastics already have been shown to kill marine life.

The tiny bits are turning up virtually everywhere plastics are made, used or discarded on land and in the water; they are being consumed just as widely. No one knows yet what the impact will be for humans.

Research at The Citadel, complemented by work at the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography in Savannah, is making new findings about just how pervasive and potentially dangerous a problem it is in the region.

More than 7 tons of plastic are estimated to be breaking down to microplastics in the tide and waves of Charleston Harbor at any given time, according to a study led by Citadel physiology professor John Weinstein. Sooner or later, a portion of that 7 tons of waste gets eaten by marine critters, such as shrimp, and works its way up the food chain.

On top of that, recent research has shown the plastics pick up toxins in the water before they are eaten.

Now Weinstein and his cadets are looking at just how much of the plastics you might be gulping down in orange juice, soft drinks, sports drinks and bottled water, while they study periwinkle snails to see if that marine-life food source is eating them, too.

Microbeads — tiny plastic beads used for years as smooth abrasives in faces washes, soaps and toothpastes — were federally banned earlier this month. Use of the beads is being phased out, and the ban is roundly conceded to be little more than a Band-Aid. The Citadel study determined the beads account for only about 1 percent of the plastics out there.

“Microbeads are not a major part of the problem. It’s the stuff these guys are studying,” Weinstein said, referring to his students.

Keying on a German study that found microplastics in 24 different brands of German beer, senior Emily Schwendinger, 22, of Bedford, Va., is testing various store-shelf juices and drinks to see how much might be floating around in them. Particles she finds will be analyzed to try to determine whether the plastics degraded from the container or are in the fluids themselves — picked up somewhere in the production process.

Meanwhile, sophomore Justin Kiel, 20, of Fort Worth, Texas, is following up on earlier research by Brittany Cocker, now graduated, that determined the 7 tons of plastics figure. She set test strips that microplastics adhere to, in intertidal waters at the harbor’s edges. When she returned to collect them she would find the snails grazing.

Now Kiel will test the snails to see if they are grazing on what’s growing on the plastics, or on the plastics themselves — much like sea turtles and other larger creatures will eat plastic bags, mistaking them for jellyfish, a mistake that can kill them.

“If the snails are attracted to microplastics and ingest them, the plastics could be transferred up through the food chain,” Kiel said.

The research is augmenting work at the College of Charleston and other local labs assessing the effects of “emerging contaminant” pollution in the estuaries, such as antibiotics and fibers. It brings home the impact of a global problem — the littered disposal of trash.

Just below the ocean’s surface offshore floats a huge patch of debris that is the remnants of discarded plastic bags, water bottles and bottle caps, fishing line, straws, balloons, beer cups, toothbrushes and other trash being broken down to crumbs by the sun and sea.

In spots, as many as a half-million pieces float per every square kilometer, about one-third of a square mile, researchers estimate. A mid-ocean eddy of the debris near Bermuda covers more than 2 million square miles. It’s one of a number of massive ocean eddies flecked with plastics; the “Great Pacific Garbage Patch” off the West Coast is maybe the best known.

Keying on The Citadel findings, Skidaway institute researchers are now studying the impact on marine life of larger plastic debris in Georgia coastal waters.

“We’re looking at the gut, anything that gets in their guts that’s a plastic, to see how big a problem it is in Georgia,” said marine biogeochemist Jay Brandes. On thing for certain, Weinstein, Brandes and other researchers agree.

“The vast majority of (what institute researchers are finding) does not look like anything you would attribute to microbeads,” Brandes said. “The microbeads ban is not going to eliminate the problem.”

Reach Bo Petersen at 843-937-5744, @bopete on twitter or Bo Petersen Reporting on Facebook.