Jared Bernstein, a former chief economist to Vice President Biden, is a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities and author of the new book 'The Reconnection Agenda: Reuniting Growth and Prosperity.'



Source: White House Council of Economic Advisers, my vertical line.

On Tuesday, the White House released the figure you see above, highlighting the recent decline in the share of people without health insurance coverage. I stuck the vertical line in there — more on that in a moment.

About 10 million people have gained coverage in 2014, and notably, that’s not just the finding from this data source but from various other coverage surveys as well.

Now, since trends in economic variables, including the share of those without health insurance coverage, by definition have some persistence, when you see a shift in a trend of this magnitude, your strong suspicion is that an “exogenous” change has occurred, i.e., something new entered the system that had a large impact on the variable in question.

Identifying such occurrences can be the work of “event analysis” isolating an event that plausibly explains the change. So, applying the advanced econometric techniques for which I’m known, I drew in that vertical line roughly at the beginning of 2014, when the health-care exchange subsidies and state Medicaid expansions went into effect.

I post this not only to show that at least by this metric, Obamacare is proving to be highly effective, but to try to bring some desperately needed perspective to this idea that the law can or should be repealed. It is a very big and positive deal to go from being uninsured to having coverage, with far-reaching positive impacts on your health, financial security, and even your longevity. So my guess is that not just for policy reasons, but for political reasons, any replacement will certainly have to meet this benchmark.

That is, any replacement that fails to sustain this trend, or worse, reverses it, should and probably will be unacceptable to the public. Which brings me to my three-sentence summary of the economic architecture of any health-care reform plan. To provide affordable coverage, there must be risk-pooling. Thus, there must be a mandate to avoid adverse selection (where only those who need coverage participate). Thus, there must be some form of subsidies for those who can’t afford coverage on their own.

That doesn’t mean there’s only one way to do it, of course. The advanced economies all have different health systems (and all spend far less than we do per capita with the same or better outcomes). But they also all have this general architecture, which is neither liberal nor conservative (see Romneycare). That’s just the reality behind all the posturing.

Nor do I mean to imply that Obamacare can’t be improved. But there is no magic formula that doesn’t involve some version of the same ingredients in the ACA, and after a bumpy start, the ACA appears to be working well. As my carefully crafted vertical line clearly reveals.

That line and the favorable trend it highlights represent not just a policy success, but hopefully, in my view, a political one as well, in the sense of insulating the program from ideologically-motivated destruction. You’ll know I’m right when you start hearing people yell, “Keep the government out of my Obamacare!”