In January, when a trio of Republican senators rolled out a sweeping proposal to overhaul Obamacare, one of the most noteworthy points about the reform package was an element of the Affordable Care Act that they opted not to change: the provision that allows “children” to stay on their parents' insurance plans until the age of 26.

It was an odd concession: A party ostensibly committed to self-sufficiency and individual responsibility salvaging a feature of Obamacare that cuts in precisely the opposite direction. Sure, there are pragmatic reasons one could offer for retaining the provision, namely the fact that young Americans are disproportionately out of work and – because of the country's misguided reliance on employer-provided health insurance – struggling to secure coverage.

There is, however, a simpler explanation available: The policy is incredibly popular. A poll taken last year by the Kaiser Family Foundation showed 76 percent of Americans (including 68 percent of Republicans) liked the provision. The American people, it seems, aren't disturbed by the notion of someone with a quarter-century of life under his belt still being dependent on his parents for such basic needs as health insurance.

As the millennial generation – those born from the early 1980s to the early 2000s – comes of age, they are emerging into a social landscape where such attitudes are increasingly commonplace. We've now reached a worst-of-both-worlds equilibrium when it comes to young Americans; one in which they feel entitled to more autonomy at progressively earlier ages while having responsibility deferred later and later in life.

Consider, for instance, higher education. As a generation steeped in customization (the most reliable index to any millennial's personality is the home screen on her smartphone), the choice of a college and a course of study can become little more than an exercise in self-expression, focused more on satisfying the student's wants than the job market's needs.

The result: a rude awakening upon hitting the job market. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the number of college graduates earning the minimum wage is 71 percent higher than it was a decade ago. In 2012, the underemployment rate for recent college graduates was 44 percent.

In addition to the problems besetting the wider economy, two factors seem to be hitting millennial college graduates especially hard: a deficit of skills and lack of a work ethic. It turns out that an art history major isn't of much use in the job market. A 2012 McKinsey & Co. study found that 45 percent of American employers cite a lack of skills as the reason they can't fill entry-level positions.

For that reason, a Bentley University survey in January showed that 65 percent of employers and recruiters wanted to hire college grads with industry-specific skills rather than liberal arts graduates who required extensive training.

A 2011 poll by Workplace Options also called millennials' work ethic into question, with 68 percent of workers saying that, “millennials are less motivated to take on responsibility and produce quality work compared to their counterparts.”

At some level, this shouldn't come as a surprise. Millennials were raised in an era when the validation of a child's self-esteem was given enormous importance. We are now experiencing the consequences of that trend's excesses. With school, home life, and university campuses all calibrated to fit the contours of a child's personality, it can be disorienting to enter the job market and realize that your value resides in how well you serve your employer's needs rather than vice versa.

In any survey of millennials' views on desirable workplace qualities you'll discover an avalanche of boutique concerns more appropriate for midcareer professionals: flexibility, “work-life balance,” and the desire to work for “socially responsible” companies. There's rarely any sense that these are the kind of luxuries one can't reasonably demand until having established some value on the job market.

The intersection of the millennials' outsized expectations and the broader economy's lack of opportunities is a pretty miserable place. A Pew Research Center analysis of census data released in February found that 36 percent of Americans ages 18-31 were living with their parents in 2012, the highest such numbers in 40 years. While the numbers are somewhat skewed by including kids in college dorms, 16 percent of 25-to-31-year-olds were also crashing at home.

This is a generation stuck – partially because of their own impulses and partially because of widespread economic anemia – treading water.

The net result of millennials' arrested development: a de facto delay of adulthood. According to the Department of Education, less than 40 percent of students entering college graduate within four years (less than 60 percent graduate within six years). That can be a sign of responsibility – students trying to keep their debts manageable, for instance, by working while in school.

Still, the trend goes deeper than just education. A Brookings Institution report released last year showed that the average age for a first marriage has increased to 27 for women and 29 for men, both historic highs.

A similar pattern is at work in homeownership. Americans ages of 30-34 (which includes those just outside of the standard definition of millennials) have the lowest homeownership rate on record for their age group.

So widespread is this delayed adulthood that NBC recently referred to U.S. Olympic skier David Wise – married and a father at 23 – as having an “alternative lifestyle.”

To be sure, these developments shouldn't be reckoned as unambiguous disasters. Delaying homeownership can make sense if you're saddled with college debt, unsure of your economic prospects or afraid of becoming overleveraged. Similarly, waiting to find the right person to marry is surely preferable to a narrow focus on being wed by any given age. At the generational level, all we can do is generalize, and there will be, by necessity, plenty of members of any given cohort to whom the generalities do not apply.

Even with that consideration in mind, there still is good reason for regarding the millennial generation with anxiety. Theirs is a demographic sufficiently privileged that they have a tendency to make the perfect the enemy of the good: going into heavy debt for the elite university instead of the more affordable state school; holding out for a job that has “meaning”; waiting for the dream house over the starter home. That instinct can become inadvertently self-destructive in the best of times. In an economy as lean as ours, it's a surefire recipe for disappointment.

Too many millennials have succumbed to the great lie of the culture in which they were marinated: You can have it all. In the real world, however, everything is a trade-off. Want the big house? It likely means working long hours and sacrificing that precious “work-life” balance. Want the elite education? You may end up saddled with the bill through middle age.

Is that an inspiring message? No. But it's an accurate one. As millennials are increasingly learning, the exigencies of adulthood stubbornly refuse to conform to their emotional needs.