Sarah Palin appeared on Fox News Tuesday night to discuss her call for President Obama’s impeachment that she voiced in an exclusive op-ed for Breitbart earlier in the day.

The former Governor of Alaska told Sean Hannity that now is the “time” for Congress to take advantage of its power to impeach Obama.

“A great awakening is due in this country and this is the message that will be sent to our president, that he is not an imperial president and lawlessness will not be accepted by the American people,” Palin explained.

She even knocked back at Republican lawmakers who she said are “ignoring” their power to impeach the president and as a result causing frustration for the American people.

“Somebody needs to look out for the working class Americans,” Palin asserted. “And the tipping point in this drive towards impeachment, for me, has been the illegal immigration issue, the crisis created by Obama, where nobody is looking out for the working class of Americans including good, hardworking, wonderful legal immigrants.”

In addition to ignoring immigration laws, changing Obamacare and similar offenses, Palin accused Obama of “lying to the American people.”

“He has allowed fraud,” she stated. “His subordinates and himself defraud the American people on these programs, these policies that he has promised will work or will not impact debt or deficit. These have been lies by our president.”

“I really want Congress to do its job,” continued Palin. “The constitutional power that they have to halt an imperial presidency, to halt this fundamental transformation of America that is making us an unrecognizable mess of a nation at this time.”

She called the need to impeach Obama a “bipartisan issue” that Congress and the American people should support. When Hannity questioned whether or not Congress has the “political backbone” to invoke the constitutional power to impeach, Palin argued that our lawmakers should have the “cojones” to do so. “Enough is enough,” she said.

A poll on Drudge Report asking Americans whether or not Republicans should impeach Obama has over 70% of respondents saying they agree with Palin.

Watch the Fox News video below.

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com