The Affordable Care Act is creating a brand new bloc of voters who will be a powerful voice in 2014 and probably beyond. They’re the people who were happy with their health insurance and their doctors and are now losing at least one of them. Now they’re mad as hell and they’re not going to take it anymore.

What’s happening right now is exhibited through the above 37-year-old film clip.

Peter Finch was posthumously awarded best actor at the Academy Awards, the Golden Globes and the British Academy of Film and Television Arts for his portrayal of somewhat-crazed TV news anchor Howard Beale in the 1976 movie, “Network.”

Above was the film’s most memorable scene, and probably what sealed the deal for Finch’s well-deserved accolades. It’s usually referred to as the “mad as hell” scene.

Forget about the HealthCare.gov website debacle. That’ll get ironed out sooner or later in the only way government knows — by throwing more money at it. It’s the dropping of the second shoe that’s going to have the lasting effects — loss of coverage and sticker shock on new policies.

What we’re seeing now began with the big lie: “If you like your plan, you can keep your plan — period,” followed by, “If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor — period.”

The New York Times tried to pawn those promises off as presidential misstatements, but as talk radio host and conservative pundit Dana Loesch asked in a tweet, “Can teleprompters misspeak?” To that, I would only add, can it misspeak at least 36 times?

This isn’t a little lie about a dalliance with an addle-brained White House intern. This is a great big lie.

This is a lie that concerns a government take-over of one-sixth of the U.S. economy. This is a lie about millions of Americans losing health plans that they’ve been happy with, and physicians they trust and rely on.

After their disbelief is replaced by acceptance and the newly-booted policyholders start shopping around on the HealthCare.gov exchange, the sticker shock will set in.

What happened to the “affordable” in the Affordable Care Act?

Economist and author Thomas Sowell answered that question in a Townhall column.

“It is amazing that people who think we cannot afford to pay for doctors, hospitals, and medication somehow think that we can afford to pay for doctors, hospitals, medication and a government bureaucracy to administer it,” he said.

The Manhattan Institute released its findings that premiums under Obamacare will increase by an average of 41 percent in its 49-state analysis, as reported by Forbes.

Meanwhile, consumers are being hit at the worst of times. In the five-year economic doldrums, real household income is down, while inflation marches on and taxes have risen.

These elements are now coming together to create the perfect storm of political change. Syndicated columnist Charles Krauthammer predicted that if Obamacare fails, it could set liberalism back a decade. And it’s failing — big time.

Back to that “Network” film clip: Think of the people shouting out of their windows as the newly-booted policyholders.

President Obama set out to fundamentally transform the United States of America. Instead, it’s possible he singlehandedly created a whole new bloc of voters that are mad as hell, and not going to take it anymore.

[poll id=”135″]