A handful of specially picked Rhode Islanders are preparing to head to Washington to watch President Barack Obama deliver his final State of the Union address.

The parents of a fallen Green Beret, the president of the local chapter of the NAACP and the CEO of a local IT firm are set to represent the Ocean State during Tuesday night's address.

Each congressman gets to invite one guest to the address. U.S. Rep. Jim Langevin invited Tim Hebert, the president and CEO of Atrion, an IT services firm in Warwick.

"Out of a million people in the state, he selected me, and I thought that was really remarkable," Hebert said.

Langevin invited Hebert to highlight the importance of cyber-security and job development in a changing world.

U.S. Rep. David Cicilline invited the parents of First Sgt. Peter Andrew McKenna. The Bristol man was killed this past summer fighting in Afghanistan. A congressman from Minnesota offered his ticket so both parents could attend.

U.S. Sen. Jack Reed's guest is Jim Vincent. He's the president of the NAACP Providence Chapter. Vincent said he wants the president to address the growing strife between communities and police here at home.

"I want to see what he wants us to do going forward to make sure we're maximizing everything we can do to in terms of excellent police, community relations," Vincent said.

Both of these men think the president has accomplished quite a bit, from Obamacare to improving unemployment numbers.

"You can go on and on. There's so many things that have happened, that I didn't think I would see in my lifetime," Hebert said.

NBC 10 political analyst Wendy Schiller said this address will be more reflective than we're used to.

"I do believe we'll see a much relaxed version of the president than we've seen in past addresses," Schiller said. "He's going to want to reassure everybody that the country is in fact much better than it's been and it's still the greatest nation on the planet."

The State of the Union address is scheduled to begin at 9 p.m. Tuesday. It will be carried live on NBC 10 and streaming on turnto10.com.