Two-thirds of American adults are overweight. The resulting health care challenges include osteoarthritis, diabetes and hypertension.

Against that backdrop, a literature analysis was undertaken describing proprietary weight loss programs, published recently by Dr. Kimberly A. Gudzune and co-authors in the journal Annals of Internal Medicine. The 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA, or “Obamacare”) contains provisions that allow clinicians to refer obese patients for treatment. Indeed, Americans spent $2.5 billion on weight loss services in 2014, and the expected rate of increase will top 3.2 percent annually in upcoming years.

Two-thirds of Americans report attempting to lose weight, and more than a quarter report currently attempting to do so. The lion’s share of weight loss dollars go to Weight Watchers (45 percent), Nutrisystem (14 percent), and Jenny Craig (13 percent), according to Gudzune and co-authors. The most common demographic for those attempting to lose weight is females between ages 37 and 57 years, but a broad range of clients seek these services.

Weight Watchers is the most economical program, weighing in at a modest $43 per month, sometimes covered in part by insurance. At the high end, one could spend close to $700 a month for low-calorie meal replacement programs by some companies. To be sure, the companies also argue that these plans provide meal packages, thus saving customers the expense of shopping for food.

How well do the different programs work?

Gudzune and colleagues reviewed 4,212 studies and concluded that perhaps one-in-five people drop out of weight loss programs, and others find it difficult to adhere to the requirements. Nonetheless, they seem to suggest that behavioral counseling may play a role in successful programs, whether provided by trained providers or psychologists. Among 13 programs studies, Weight Watchers emerged as achieving consistent and significant weight loss at 12 months, and was the most economical program. They also, however, indicated that Jenny Craig, although more expensive, was also effective. Lastly, Nutrisystem was described by this study as resulting in short-term weight loss, but had not been studied adequately to determine its long-term efficacy.

Self-directed programs, such as the Atkins diet and SlimFast, resulted in levels of weight loss that were difficult to quantify, though perhaps significant for short periods of time.

Indeed, the Gudzune review pointed out that their study was not definitive due to absence of certain types of studies, such as prospective trials that follow patients over longer time intervals. Moreover, scientific studies may be prone to “selection bias,” which tends to privilege the publication of studies that reveal positive results.

Some popular diet programs, such as the Ornish diet, are not geared exclusively toward weight control as a goal for participants. The Ornish diet, for example, is primarily aimed at improving cardiovascular health. Consequently, this analysis of the literature was replete with cautionary statements by the authors.

To be sure, the quantity of articles reviewed reflects the scientific interest in weight loss as a clinical challenge that will continue to confront researchers. Gudzune and co-authors conclude, “Clinicians might consider prioritizing referral only for those commercial programs that have a substantial body of evidence showing a consistent, long-term effect.”

My own opinions concerning weight loss have evolved over the years. My impression is that few people who are obese can ever achieve the “ideal” body weight. Modest amounts of weight loss, however, seem to confer significant health benefits in terms of lowering blood pressure and preventing diabetes. Moreover, physical exercise, when combined with healthy eating, tends to augment these beneficial outcomes.

Perhaps we should emphasize healthy lifestyle choices, rather than spending too much time staring at the numbers on our scales. Before embarking on any weight loss program, consult your physician. Every person’s health situation is unique.

Scott T. Anderson, MD, PhD, is a clinical professor at the University of California, Davis Medical School. This column is informational and does not constitute medical advice. Reach him [email protected]