Buy Photo - - Ford celebrated victory in the U.S. Senate race in November 1974. At the time he was Kentucky's governor.- -Text Wendell Ford victory celebration to election to Senate, 12/5/74 (Photo: Copyright 1999 The Courier-Journal;NO COURIER-JOURNAL)Buy Photo

It's fitting that Wendell Ford will say goodbye to Kentucky on Sunday in the rotunda of the state capitol, just two floors below where he started his political career in the Kentucky state Senate and just yards from the office where he served as governor.

Ford, who died at age 90 on Thursday after a battle with lung cancer, will lie in state at the Capitol on Sunday before going back to his beloved hometown of Owensboro for burial on Tuesday.

Despite four terms in Washington, where he rose to be the second highest ranking Democrat in the Senate, Ford never lost his feel for Kentucky nor did he ever really leave the governor's office, which he gave up after just three years to become a senator.

You've heard of politicians who have "gone Washington?" No one ever accused the "country boy from Yellow Creek" of that.

Mike Ruehling, who served as Ford's spokesman when he was both governor and senator, said until his death, people continued to call Ford "Guv." Somehow, it seemed more fitting.

In retirement, Ford's email address contained the letters "gov" despite the fact that he spent only three years as "Gov" and the next 24 years as "Sen."

Ford enjoyed both jobs but, as governor, he always felt he could do more for the people of Kentucky with a single stroke of a pen, rather than as one of 100 members of the Senate where one accomplished things by "wheeling and dealing. … Although he could do that, too," said Ruehling.

He was a Democratic governor of Kentucky at a time when a Democratic governor of Kentucky was close to being omnipotent.

Governors in those days chose the leaders of the state's House and Senate, which were both controlled by Democrats and had been for decades. And during the sixty days every two years when the legislature was in session, governors dictated to the General Assembly what issues they would take up.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Former C-J executive editor David Hawpe and reporter Joe Gerth remember former Sen. Wendell Ford who recently passed away.

When the legislature wasn't in session, the governors had nearly unfettered power to rule by executive order and controlled a statewide patronage system that allowed them to further exert control over the political process.

As governor, Ford wielded his power to reorganize the government putting in place a framework that still largely exists, he removed the sales tax on groceries, pushed for a coal severance levy to make the coal barons share the tax burden. He increased the gas tax to build new and better roads in the state.

He increased spending on education, particularly at the University of Louisville which had recently been brought into the state system. He built buildings and parks. And he called the state's legislature into special session to pass the Equal Rights Amendment in 1972.

Quite a list of accomplishments in three years.

But at the time, the state constitution prohibited governors from succeeding themselves and so in 1972, Ford left the Governor's Mansion a year early and headed to Washington, though he said he would have rather have stayed in Frankfort for a second term had the law allowed it.

As a senator, in many ways, he acted more like a governor, eschewing national political issues and focusing intently on the state's needs. When activist Ralph Nader and others criticized him, Ford was not apologetic.

"If they want to criticize me, that's fine," the Associated Press reported. "But Kentucky is beautiful women, fast horses, bourbon whiskey, cigarettes and coal. I represent Kentucky and that's what I represent."

Rest in peace, Governor.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1BXlkev