If no money can be found, the qualifications for TOPS would rise to a 28 on the ACT. (Photo by Brianna Paciorka, NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune) (Brianna Paciorka, NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune)

Students would need at least a 28 on the ACT to receive TOPS college scholarships next fall if Gov. John Bel Edwards and the Louisiana Legislature don't find a way to raise any more money for the program.

Edwards' current budget proposal for the next academic year only funds the TOPS program at 20 percent because of a $2 billion shortfall in the state's overall finances. In order for every student who qualifies for TOPS to receive it next year, Louisiana needs to find an additional $233 million to fund TOPS.

TOPS typically covers full tuition at any four-year public university or college for students who receive a 20 on the ACT and achieve a 2.8 grade point average in high school. Some students at private universities -- like Loyola and Tulane universities -- also receive TOPS, though it doesn't cover their full tuition bill.

But Louisiana's current budget crisis is threatening TOPS, one of Louisiana's most popular government programs, particularly with middle class families. A little under 52,800 people currently use the scholarship. Legislators are motivated to find funding for the program, making it unlikely that the 28 ACT score cut off will go into place.

Yet if the $233 million needed for TOPS next year does not materialize, students who don't reach 28 on the ACT will not qualify for the scholarship anymore. The change will mean approximately 37,574 people who would have qualified for TOPS under the current system won't receive it anymore.

Only 8,581 students would be expected to meet the new requirements, according to estimates provided by the Louisiana Office of Student Financial Assistance.

Some students from wealthier families who receive a 28 on the ACT would still miss out on TOPS. If the federal government has determined a student's family can afford to spend as much as $73,000 on college annually -- and they have a 28 ACT score -- they will still not qualify for the scholarship. However, a relatively small group of students is expected to fall into this category -- about 225 people.

Edwards has said to restore TOPS and several other government programs next year, the Louisiana Legislature will need to agree to raise taxes. He has put a package of $340 million to $350 million in immediate tax hikes on the table, plus he wants an additional look at tax credit rollbacks and other changes to incentive programs.

There was immediate concern from legislators sitting on the budget committees about what a 28 ACT score cut off would mean for TOPS.

"I doubt there are many people here who would get a 28," said Rep. Larry Bagley, R-Stonewall, who used to teach high school.

During a budget meeting Sunday (Feb. 14), Edwards' budget chief, Jay Dardenne, quipped he hadn't received a 28 on the ACT, leading to laughter from others in the room.

Legislators appeared anxious to find funding to make sure TOPS isn't cut -- and a 28-ACT-score cutoff doesn't go into place. Financial aid officials said they were also worried that students might start planning not to attend school next year, if they were relying on TOPS to make it affordable.