REUTERS The new Chevrolet Corvette Stingray ZO6 as it is unveiled during the press preview day of the North American International Auto Show in Detroit.

In the parody world of The Onion, an imagined version of Vice President Joe Biden keeps an immaculate 1981 Pontiac Trans Am in the White House driveway, occasionally washing it shirtless and admiring the firebird decal on the hood.

The Onion’s envisioned version of Biden, which has been fleshed out over dozens of articles, was even turned into an e-book. And during the promotion of that book, which included a Reddit question-and-answer session with The Onion’s imaginary Biden, the real vice president took to Twitter to clarify something important:

Q for @reddit AMA with my @TheOnion pal: A Trans-Am? Ever look under the hood of a Corvette? #imavetteguy –VP pic.twitter.com/xPGMBBYl — Office of VP Biden (@VP) January 18, 2013

He’s a ‘Vette guy.

And in case that was in any doubt, Mr. Biden made it even clearer in a speech at the Detroit auto show this week. “What a difference five years makes,” he told the audience, recalling the crisis that threatened to decimate the U.S. auto industry. “American cars and trucks are once again changing the game and I might add providing good, decent jobs.”

But he had a particular interest in one American car. Via the WSJ’s Jared A. Favole:

Mr. Biden was particularly impressed with the new Corvette Z06, a 625-plus horsepower sports car unveiled this week by GM. The vice president has a 1967 Corvette Sting Ray that his father bought him as a wedding gift. He lamented that the Secret Service doesn’t allow him to drive it anymore due to security reasons, but that hasn’t stopped him getting behind the wheel in his driveway at his home in Delaware. He said he told his Secret Service agent last year “either get in the passenger seat with me or shoot me, because I’m moving.” Mr. Biden said he did a 60-foot burnout—in his driveway, not on a public road. He added: “I just want you to know that that ’67 was zero to 60 in 5.5 seconds. I didn’t do that…but it was. But this new Corvette, Z06, is zero to 60, allegedly, in 3.4 seconds.”

Other cars Mr. Biden was keen to check out at the show: the new aluminium-bodied Ford F-150, and GM’s new Cadillac ATS. See the full story on Mr. Biden’s speech, over at Washington Wire.