U.S. Rep. Scott DesJarlais had the scariest year of his life in 2014. And it had nothing to do with his brutal re-election campaign.

The Republican, who represents the sprawling 4th Congressional District that includes much of Columbia, narrowly escaped the GOP primary. He defeated State Sen. Jim Tracy of Shelbyville by 38 votes, one of the closest primaries in Tennessee history.

The campaign was bruising for the South Pittsburg physician, 51, and his wife, Amy. It was harsh because of embarrassing ethical and moral issues related to his 2001 divorce from his ex-wife and an affair with a former patient.

But re-election controversies weren’t the toughest part.

In July, the Tea Party favorite was diagnosed with cancer in his neck. He started treatment three weeks before the primary election. He was unable to campaign actively against Democrat Lenda Sherrell in the November general election. He was unsure if he would live, let alone return to Congress.

“It really gives you a change of perspective about the big picture in life, when you’re diagnosed with cancer,” DesJarlais said Tuesday. “I have diagnosed and have helped treat patients with cancer, and it’s one of the most difficult moments in life.”

The three-term congressman said Tuesday he had a checkup with his oncologist in Chattanooga.

“I’m cancer free,” he said. “I was lucky. I was blessed to have my wife, Amy, of 13 years at my side. She’s a nurse. We focused on curing the cancer.

“We had good team in our campaign. They took all of the stress off of us related to the election.”

DesJarlais said his type of cancer has a 30 percent mortality rate over five years. It’s treatable but often unforgiving.

“Being a physician, I have diagnosed the same cancer on about dozen patients. I know what it can do. As a cancer patient and physician, I know I have to accept death as a possibility.

“Through radiation and chemotherapy, I was run down and exhausted. Luckily, I have had great support from the district. I receive lots of calls and letters of support.”

On election night in August 2014, DesJarlais was unsure if he would return to Washington. The cliffhanger was drama for the media and stressful for his supporters.

“The media crews were at our headquarters, and they kept asking how we were feeling,” DesJarlais said. “We were in the middle of cancer treatment, so we were so focused on my recovery.

“The election result wasn’t the most important thing at that moment. We were relaxed and accepting of whatever happened.”

DesJarlais won a one-sided victory over Sherrell in the general election. She tried to capitalize on DesJarlais’ past and never gained traction with voters as Tracy did.

“I’m surprised, frankly, people keep opposing me based on the past,” DesJarlais said. “If other candidates did opposition research, they would find out 92 percent of the people in my district have heard about my divorce. They also would have found out 82 percent do not care. My divorce started in the 1990s. It’s in the past.”

In the 2014 campaign, Tracy mailed a flyer one month before election day, rehashing DesJarlais’ indiscretions. It backfired. DesJarlais told voters he had changed and been forgiven.

“I know God has forgiven me. I simply ask my fellow Christians and constituents to consider doing the same for me,” he said then.

Voters gave him another chance, and DesJarlais hopes it puts the past to rest.

“My opponents are still attacking me on issues four out of five voters do not care about. “Voters want to know where we stand on the issues.”

Tracy has not said if he intends to challenge DesJarlais again. The congressman said he’s assuming Tracy will run for re-election to the state Senate.

A newcomer has announced his candidacy. Grant Starrett, a 27-year-old attorney from Murfreesboro, started campaigning last month.

“I’m running for Congress because the country I love is endangered by the people in power,” Starrett said on his Facebook page. “America is hurting because of the actions and inactions of those who control the federal government, chief among them President Obama. As a result, the United States faces three crises today: a moral crisis, an economic crisis, and a constitutional crisis.”

Starrett called DesJarlais one of the most liberal members of the Tennessee congressional delegation in comments last week.

“I don’t think anyone would call me liberal,” DesJarlais said.

In fact, DesJarlais said he will center his campaign in 2016 on smaller government and the end of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act.

“We are seeing continued frustration with Washington and big government,” DesJarlais said. “It is hitting all facets of life. Voters tell me we have to control overbearing federal government and campaign for better paying jobs in Tennessee. Health-care issue comes up quite a bit, too.”

If the Supreme Court strikes down Obamacare, DesJarlais said he will not cry for the millions who lose health care coverage. He estimated the number at six to seven million.

“The messaging is already starting: Millions will lose their subsidies,” he said. “First of all, Obamacare was a law that was thrust upon us. It’s not something we wanted. There’s a much high percentage of people paying higher insurance premiums and higher deductibles. Those are the people we should be worried about.

“Opponents are trying to demagogue and paint Republicans as being heartless. We will find a solution, but the solution is not Obamacare.”

Whatever political controversies remain on the horizon, DesJarlais plans to keep them in perspective, considering his personal battles with his life and critics.

“I am running on my record. I am proud of the way I voted and represented my district. I have done exactly what I said I would do,” he said.

James Bennett is editor of The Daily Herald. Contact him at jbennett@c-dh.net. Follow him on Twitter at JamesBennettCDH.