LANSING, MI — When the Michigan legislature wrapped up the session in December 1995, then-State Sen. Gary Peters left Lansing for a 15-day tour of the Persian Gulf.

Peters, a Ensign in the Navy, flew to Bahrain, two years into a nearly 15-year stint as a Navy reservist.

“I think about the training that I had as a Seabee — it’s very helpful for me in public service and the U.S. Senate,” Peters, currently a Democratic U.S. Representative, told a crowd earlier this month at American Legion Post 426 in Trenton.

This was the second stop on a two-day tour of Michigan in which Peters allowed a reporter to tag along as he talked to voters, and in this case, veterans.

"One of our missions was to build bridges," said Peters, who is from Bloomfield Hills. "I like to say: We learned how to build bridges while getting shot at. It’s kind of a metaphor for Washington: people are constantly taking shots but we've got to be able to build bridges, we got to bring people together...it's about being a practical problem solver."

And now, Peters wants to bring his six years of experience in the U.S. House to one of the highest elected offices: the U.S. Senate.

Peters has traveled across Michigan several times and made a tour focusing on veterans issues earlier this month. At stops in Metro Detroit, Jackson, Battle Creek, Flint and Grand Rapids, Peters spoke about several pieces of legislation he introduced, including bills to invest in suicide prevention and business funding mechanisms for veterans. He called the recent at the "unacceptable" situation at the VA.

Months before the general election, Peters is gearing up for one of the most watched races in the state. Neither Peters nor his Republican opponent, former Michigan Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land, have primary challengers, but both have been campaigning hard for the general election in November.

The candidates have raised and spent millions of dollars and outside interest groups have spent millions more. Several televisions ads are running at any time across the state.

Related: Mark Schauer taps Obama database, 'special sauce' in bid to beat Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder

Time in the Navy Reserves

Traveling on the bus between visits, Peters chatted with veterans who joined him. They shared experiences about boot camp and training, as well as had some fun with the rivalries between branches.

Peters first joined the U.S. Navy Reserve as a drilling reservist in 1993, just weeks before he turned 35, the age limit for enlisting.

“I felt like it was something I really needed to do,” Peters said. “It’s either now or never.”

Part of that desire to join the military comes from his family history: Peters’ father was a World War II veteran; his great-grandfather a Civil War soldier and an earlier forefather was in the Virgina militia in the Revolutionary war.

“It’s something my father instilled in me,” Peters said. “Military service is an important responsibility of citizenship.”

Peters had left the reserves to spend more time with his wife and three children. But after the Sept. 11 attacks, Peters re-joined.

“I went to my wife and said ‘I have to get back in the reserves,’” Peters said. “Here I am, I’m a fully trained officer in the U.S. Navy.”

Peters was a Seabee Combat specialist, which is an engineer responsible for various construction projects, including bridges, roads and airstrips for combat troops. He rose to the rank of Lt. Commander and was an expert marksman with a 9 mm pistol and M16 rifle. He was honorably discharged in 2008.

Peters said decisions Congress makes related to the military and foreign policy are some of its most important work.

“The most difficult decision a member of Congress can possibly make is to send men or women into harms way,” Peters said. “I take that to heart and remember the fine men and women I served with…I will always have that as a frame of reference.”

• Confused about the August primary? Check out MLive's voter guide.

On the tour that day was Andy Linko, who served under Peters in the reserves and is now running to be a state representative in the 23rd district.

"You never accept failure, you never blame anybody else,” Linko said of his time with Peters in the reserves. “If you didn't get your mission accomplished, you had to answer to somebody. If you didn't have the right answers, you were back out there doing it.”

Linko reconnected with his former commander in 2002 when Peters ran for Attorney General. Republican Mike Cox won by just one-tenth of a percentage point.

Linko says Peters' time in the service helps him in Congress.

“We gave 110 percent…I think the same thing goes for public service,” Linko said.

State of the race

National Republicans see the Peters/Land race as an opportunity to take control of the Senate. State Republicans see it as realistic chance to elect one of their own to the highest chamber for the first time since 2000, when Debbie Stabenow beat incumbent Spence Abraham. Democrats want to maintain the seat and elect a replacement to Levin.

Peters has led in recent polls. The Cook Political Report says the race is a toss up, Real Clear Politics and Rothenberg Political Report/Roll Call labels it leaning Democratic. This week, Sabato’s Crystal Ball moved it to Likely Democratic. Overall, Peters is leading by an average of 5.8 points, according to Real Clear Politics.

In fundraising, Land has raised a total of $8.55 million, more than Peters' $6.78 million. But Land has donated $2.9 million of her own money to the campaign. Peters has put none of his own money in the race.

Outside groups and political action committees have also spent large amount of money in the election. According to the Michigan Campaign Finance Network, independent organizations have spent $6.3 million on ads against Peters and $3.27 million attacking Land.

All of this makes for a hot election.

“This U.S. Senate race is the most interesting race in the state,” said TJ Bucholz, a longtime Lansing political consultant and founder of Vanguard Public Affairs.

“You have two diametrically opposite candidates,” Bucholz said. “You have Gary Peters, who is a traditional progressive, and Terri Lynn Land, who certainly Republicans are rallying behind but probably resonates more with the Tea Party wing of her party than the long-held establishment.”

The candidates are taking two different approaches to campaign infrastructure, Bucholz said: Peters is doing more on an “old school” campaign, traveling from county to county, visiting various organizations and participating in forums.

Land, on the other hand, is spending money on more digital media options and support for outside groups.

“It’s really a ground game versus an air game,” Bucholz said.

The Land campaign has attacked Peters on several fronts, including his 2010 vote for the Affordable Care Act as well as his time working in the financial industry.

“I think that everybody who is going to vote on Obamacare has already made up their minds and are already voting that way,” said Bernie Porn, a pollster at EPIC-MRA.

Recent polling numbers give an indication about what can happen in the race. If Peters continues to lead in the polls and, if after Labor Day takes a double digit lead, Porn said there could be drop off of outside money from Republicans.

A bipartisan issue

During each speech on the statewide veterans tour, Peters mentioned the importance of veterans issues and how it’s something both parties can get behind.

It could be considered a step to build those bridges.

And that was viable during the last stop of the day: American Legion Post 298 in Battle Creek. Brian Ellis, a Republican running against incumbent U.S. Rep. Justin Amash, was at the event. Also there was the Republican chair of the Calhoun County Republican Party and a GOP state representative candidate.

It’s not common to have members from one party show up for an event held by the other party.

Ellis said heard it was a veterans event and didn’t know it was a Peters event. The other two said they were aware it was a Democratic event.

“We knew it was a Peters thing,” said Art Kale, who is running in the Republican primary for state representative. “We have as much interest in the veterans as anyone else.”

Calhoun County Republican Party Chairman David Mead added: “When a guy puts on a uniform, it doesn’t have a 'D' or an 'R' on it.”

Correction July 26: a previous version of this story had the incorrect Navy rank that Peters had.

Editor's note: MLive spent a full day with the Peters campaign and has requested a similar experience with the Land campaign. We'll have detailed profiles of each candidate later this year in the run-up to the fall election.

Fritz Klug is a news buzz reporter for MLive. Contact him at fklug@mlive.com or 269-370-0584. Follow him on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.