GAMES Tomb Raider: Definitive Edition Skipping The Glorious PC Master Race 2 years ago comments By William Usher 2 years ago



While some members of the Glorious PC Master Race are rocking setups that can hit 2K resolutions at 60 smooth-as-a-baby's-bottom frames per second, you won't be able to use that setup to play Tomb Raider: Definitive Edition.



Definitive Edition of the game rolls out some rather unpleasant news.



As noted in the FAQ...

"Tomb Raider: Definitive Edition was designed and rebuilt from the ground up for next-generation consoles. At this time a PC update is not planned."

That's about as depressing as Stephen Baldwin's film career.



It's also noted that – as most people probably already figured out – the Definitive Edition won't be available for the old and decrepit last generation consoles as well. But let's be honest, how can you have a definitive version of a game on wrinkly old hardware when the original version was gimped to begin with? It's not like near-decade old hardware magically gets stronger to do things it couldn't do before. That Lamborghini you wanted when you were 15? Well you're 60 now and you still can't afford it. Same deal.





However, the Definitive Edition of the game skipping out on PC really does seem like a huge slap in the face to people looking to rock the latest graphics technology on their high-end rigs. I mean, the Definitive Edition and not the PC crowd? Really?



Well, using some voodoo from the backwoods and a little bit of optimization magic, Eidos managed to get Tomb Raider: Definitive Edition running at 1080p on both the Xbox One and PS4. But of course, it's a last-gen port, so it doesn't really mean anything. It's like sending in New York cops to deal with terrorists, but the terrorists are only 12.



Outside of graphics and performance boosts, as noted in Tomb Raider: Definitive Edition also rocks the inclusion of Dualshock 4, PS Vita and Kinect support. Additional DLC is tossed in for free (though PC games could get this free anyways from alternative methods). And no, those of you with last-gen copies won't receive a discount for upgrading to the Definitive Edition.



The Tomb Raider: Definitive Edition will be launching on January 28th at the end of this month for the PlaySttation 4 and Xbox One and not for the PC. The Glorious PC Master Race loses out yet again to the Prestigious Console Gaming Kings. Let the war rage on.





Tweet Subscribe To Topics You're Interested In Whenever we think about “definitive edition” we're always thinking about the best possible way to play the game: The most precise control method; the most replayable content; the best graphics; the highest resolution; the best sound. We're thinking about the works. Well, the so-called “Definitive Edition” of Tomb Raider won't be available for the “definitive” gaming platform.While some members of the Glorious PC Master Race are rocking setups that can hit 2K resolutions at 60 smooth-as-a-baby's-bottom frames per second, you won't be able to use that setup to play Blues News spotted a post from MCV where the FAQ for theof the game rolls out some rather unpleasant news.As noted in the FAQ...That's about as depressing as Stephen Baldwin's film career.It's also noted that – as most people probably already figured out – thewon't be available for the old and decrepit last generation consoles as well. But let's be honest, how can you have a definitive version of a game on wrinkly old hardware when the original version was gimped to begin with? It's not like near-decade old hardware magically gets stronger to do things it couldn't do before. That Lamborghini you wanted when you were 15? Well you're 60 now and you still can't afford it. Same deal.However, theof the game skipping out on PC really does seem like a huge slap in the face to people looking to rock the latest graphics technology on their high-end rigs. I mean, the Xbox 720p struggles with higher resolutions like MSNBC struggles to stay positive about Obamacare. Yet the 720p factory is getting theand not the PC crowd? Really?Well, using some voodoo from the backwoods and a little bit of optimization magic, Eidos managed to getrunning at 1080p on both the Xbox One and PS4. But of course, it's a last-gen port, so it doesn't really mean anything. It's like sending in New York cops to deal with terrorists, but the terrorists are only 12.Outside of graphics and performance boosts, as noted in the previous article also rocks the inclusion of Dualshock 4, PS Vita and Kinect support. Additional DLC is tossed in for free (though PC games could get this free anyways from alternative). And no, those of you with last-gen copies won't receive a discount for upgrading to theThewill be launching on January 28th at the end of this month for the PlaySttation 4 and Xbox One and not for the PC. The Glorious PC Master Race loses out yet again to the Prestigious Console Gaming Kings. Let the war rage on. Blended From Around The Web Comments Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. blog comments powered by Disqus Back to top