Check out five opinions trending online, from Medicare at 50 to Gronk’s partying ways.

Cosby’s accusers go public: Thirty-five women who have accused Bill Cosby of rape come forward to be photographed for the cover of New York Magazine. There’s a vacant chair, presumably for those yet to speak out. The magazine tweeted out the cover:

35 women speak about being assaulted by Bill Cosby, and the culture that wouldn't listen: http://t.co/H5dss5F2F4 pic.twitter.com/RCF0BWBrxA — New York Magazine (@NYMag) July 27, 2015

Advertisement

Medicare turns 50: Fifty years ago this week, President Johnson signed the bill into law that created Medicare and Medicaid — a momentous but tarnished triumph, Robert J. Samuelson writes for the Washington Post.

“The ultimate significance of what happened in 1965 is that it gave government the major role in overseeing the health-care system, now nearly a fifth of the economy. It has been an uneasy — and unsuccessful — stewardship. Health care is intensely personal, but all those personal decisions have enormous collective consequences for the nation. It has been hard for politicians (or most Americans) to grapple with both realities. Although everyone wants to control health spending, no one wants to deny care to any individual. The debate over the Affordable Care Act highlighted our difficulty in discussing health care.” Read more.

The female voice: Cultural critic Naomi Wolf wonders why young women undermine their power with vocal mannerisms like uptalk (a question mark at the end of every sentence), “vocal fry” (a guttural trailing off), and breathy run-on sentences? Here is an excerpt of her piece in the Guardian.

“What is heartbreaking about the current trend for undermining female voice is that this is the most transformational generation of young women ever. They have absorbed a feminist analysis, and are skilled at seeing intersectionality — the workings of race, class, and gender. Unlike previous generations, they aren’t starting from zero. They know that they did not ask to be raped, that they can Slutwalk and Take Back the Night, Kickstarter their business ventures and shoot their own indie films on their phones — and that they deserve equal pay and access.” Read more.

Syrian refugee cities: Syrian refugees have created small tent cities that have a touch of home, Hadeel Arja writes for the new HuffPost Arabi.

Advertisement

“They’ve condensed an entire homeland into a tent, the Syrians who fled the war at home for Lebanon, Turkey, Jordan, and other countries. They’ve set up camp and created new lives that in no way resemble their past.” Read more.

Good to be Gronk: Ben McGrath catches up with the New England Patriots’ partying tight end, Rob Gronkowski, for the New Yorker.

“It’s good to be Gronk, but it’s better to be Gronk in the afternoon, if not late at night. On a recent weekday morning, amid bookish obligations and signings, the goofy Gronkowski grin seemed in relatively scant evidence. ‘Yeah, we’re done,’ Gronkowski said, after sitting down at a conference table in the Starrett-Lehigh Building and taking large bites of an egg sandwich. ‘We’re crashing. We’ve been up since, like, 7.’ He was dressed in a black T-shirt and camouflage shorts, an outfit that looked suspiciously similar to what he’d worn to a party — held in his honor — the night before.” Read more.