Ken Goldfield Then Lieutenant Governor David A. Paterson (right) gets sworn in

Happy Labor Day. Here is the lead item from my "Albany Insider" column from Monday's editions:

Former Gov. David Paterson slammed a surging candidate running against Gov. Cuomo’s hand-picked choice for lieutenant governor, saying the insurgent liberal Democrat views the post “like it’s a joke instead of a real job.”

Columbia law professor Tim Wu is challenging Cuomo’s choice, former Buffalo-area Rep. Kathleen Hochul, in the Sept. 9 Democratic primary — and Wu is riding high after an endorsement by the New York Times last week.

But Wu has no executive or legislative experience — and recently said he would not work with Cuomo if elected. He said he views the state’s second-highest job as a type of state government public advocate.

That rankled Paterson, the lieutenant governor who famously became governor after Eliot Spitzer resigned amid a prostitution scandal in 2008.

"Mr. Wu needs a wakeup call," said Paterson, who was a longtime state senator from Harlem before becoming Spitzer’s backup.

Paterson used to joke his main job as lieutenant governor was to wake up, call the governor, and go back to bed if he answered.

But then he was promoted. Now Paterson said New York needs a lieutenant ready to step in at any moment to head one of the largest states in the country.

"Take it from me, this is not a job you can take lightly," said Paterson, who faced a major recession, battles with the legislature, and a number of scandals once ascending to governor. "New York needs a lieutenant governor who is actually qualified, ready to be governor and wants to help lead the state forward."

Paterson is Cuomo's hand-picked chairman of the state Democratic party.

Wu, who is running on a ticket topped by fellow academic Zephyr Teachout, has blasted Hochul for being too conservative, citing her strong support during her days in Congress from the National Rifle Association and her votes to block parts of Obamacare. She also opposed a move by Erie County clerk to give driver’s licenses to illegal immigrants.

Wu did not directly respond to Paterson’s comments.

"Kathy Hochul is losing this race," he said. "In her desperation she has sought another surrogate to help hide her Republican record. If she wants to discuss my experience there is an open invitation to debate on NY1 Tuesday evening. I hope she joins me."

Wu is still considered an underdog, though some political insiders give him a shot in a low turnout primary.

In hopes of slowing some of Wu's recent momentum, the Cuomo campaign this week will begin rolling out support from a litany of progressive leaders.

The powerful healthcare union, SEIU Local 1199, and the Hotel and Motel Trades Council, which both have strong get-out-the-vote operations, are expected to ramp up their efforts on behalf of Cuomo and Hochul.

Teachout and Wu have support of their own, including state government's second largest union and the state chapter of the National Organization for Women.