Plovers Todd Pover with Conserve Wildlife Foundation of NJ, displays the informational sign created with the students artwork. Ocean City Intermediate School fourth grade were working working with biologists from Conserve Wildlife Foundation of NJ, in designing artwork for signs on the nesting habits of piping plovers. The signs were installed on the beach at Commonwealth Ave in Strathmere, near piping plover nesting areas. Tuesday May 20, 2014. (Dale Gerhard/Press of Atlantic City)

Plovers Todd Pover (left) with Conserve Wildlife Foundation of NJ, talks to students about the piping plover nesting habits. Ocean City Intermediate School fourth grade were working working with biologists from Conserve Wildlife Foundation of NJ, in designing artwork for signs on the nesting habits of piping plovers. The signs were installed on the beach at Commonwealth Ave in Strathmere, near piping plover nesting areas. Tuesday May 20, 2014. (Dale Gerhard/Press of Atlantic City)

Plovers A piping plover roves around the dunes near Commonwealth Ave in Strathmere. Ocean City Intermediate School fourth grade were working working with biologists from Conserve Wildlife Foundation of NJ, in designing artwork for signs on the nesting habits of piping plovers. The signs were installed on the beach at Commonwealth Ave in Strathmere, near piping plover nesting areas. Tuesday May 20, 2014. (Dale Gerhard/Press of Atlantic City)

Plovers A piping plover roves around the dunes near Commonwealth Ave in Strathmere. Ocean City Intermediate School fourth grade were working working with biologists from Conserve Wildlife Foundation of NJ, in designing artwork for signs on the nesting habits of piping plovers. The signs were installed on the beach at Commonwealth Ave in Strathmere, near piping plover nesting areas. Tuesday May 20, 2014. (Dale Gerhard/Press of Atlantic City)

Plovers Student from Ocean City Intermediate School with help from Stephanie Egger (center) and Todd Pover (right) of Conserve Wildlife Foundation of NJ, install a piping plover nesting informational sigh on the beach at Commonwealth Ave in Strathmere. Ocean City Intermediate School fourth grade were working working with biologists from Conserve Wildlife Foundation of NJ, in designing artwork for signs on the nesting habits of piping plovers. The signs were installed on the beach at Commonwealth Ave in Strathmere, near piping plover nesting areas. Tuesday May 20, 2014. (Dale Gerhard/Press of Atlantic City)

Plovers Ocean City Intermediate School fourth grade were working working with biologists from Conserve Wildlife Foundation of NJ, in designing artwork for signs on the nesting habits of piping plovers. The signs were installed on the beach at Commonwealth Ave in Strathmere, near piping plover nesting areas. Students pose near the sign that was created using their artwork. Tuesday May 20, 2014. (Dale Gerhard/Press of Atlantic City)

Plovers Ocean City Intermediate School fourth grade were working working with biologists from Conserve Wildlife Foundation of NJ, in designing artwork for signs on the nesting habits of piping plovers. The signs were installed on the beach at Commonwealth Ave in Strathmere, near piping plover nesting areas. Students walk the beach near Commonwealth Ave. Tuesday May 20, 2014. (Dale Gerhard/Press of Atlantic City)