Oregon State forward Jarmal Reid was suspended at least four games by the school on Monday, a day after sticking out his leg and tripping a referee late in a loss to Utah.

Reid made eye contact with official Tommy Nunez before tripping him. The senior apologized when Oregon State announced the suspension, which was affirmed by the Pac-12 Conference.

“I’m well aware that my actions not only embarrassed my family, but also the university and the Oregon State basketball program,” Reid said in a statement. “I was not raised to act in that manner that was displayed on that play. I’m well aware that I made a mistake that has damaged my image. My actions are inexcusable and I am willing to accept any and all consequences that are to follow.”

Coach Wayne Tinkle said Reid’s conduct over the next two weeks will determine if additional discipline will be taken.

Reid sent Nunez tumbling to the court and was ejected with 2:56 remaining in Utah’s 59-53 win over Oregon State in Salt Lake City on Sunday night.

After stealing the ball from Utah’s Jakob Poeltl, who was driving to the basket, Reid tried dribbling up court. But Poeltl appeared to bump Reid and the Oregon State player slipped and fell to the floor.

Reid complained that there was no foul call, and while getting up seemed to make eye contact with Nunez. Then, he stuck his right leg out and Nunez fell.

Afterward, Tinkle said he didn’t see the play, but said Reid “swore he didn’t do anything.”

“We are obviously very disappointed and apologize to everyone involved,” Tinkle said in a statement Monday. “Our university and our program do not condone this type of conduct on or off the court. We acted swiftly and severely, but also fairly with the understanding that we are dealing with a 22-year-old young man that we need to help grow through this tough situation.”

The Pac-12 Conference reviewed and accepted Oregon State’s punishment.

“Regardless of Mr. Reid’s frustration and emotion, such behavior towards a game official is unacceptable and the conference supports Oregon State’s disciplinary actions,” Commissioner Larry Scott said in a statement. “The Conference will take no further disciplinary action.”

Utah coach Larry Krystkowiak said Tinkle texted him following the game.

“It’s a high-emotion, high-energy (environment), you know? And we’re still dealing with 18-, 20-, 21-year-old kids. And not everything always goes as planned. You know?’ Krystkowiak said. “So, it’s an unfortunate incident. It’s obviously a pretty slow news time because it’s garnered a lot of national attention. I feel sorry for the kid and I feel sorry for their team.”

Reid will be allowed to practice during the suspension, but he cannot be with the team on game days. The Beavers (11-5, 2-3) host UCLA on Wednesday night.