More and more women are choosing these methods

Buy Photo Nurse Megan Holderness holds a sample of the copper Paragard IUD Wednesday at the St. Cloud Medical Group. (Photo: Dave Schwarz, dschwarz@stcloudtimes.com)Buy Photo Story Highlights The failure rate of long-acting reversible methods with typical use is less than 1 percent

In the last decade, the use of long-acting reversible birth control grew by 380 percent

Women aged 25-34 use long-term contraceptives the most, about twice as much as their counterparts

While condoms and the birth control pill still corner the contraceptive market, women are finding some long-term methods more convenient.

More are choosing long-acting, reversible methods, such as the IUD and implant.

"They truly are ... the most effective form of birth control. Many people don't realize that," said Jen Aulwes, communications director for Planned Parenthood Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota.

The failure rate of long-acting reversible methods is less than 1 percent, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a which aims to provide reliable, balanced, nonpartisan information on sexual activity, contraception, abortion and childbearing.

The rate is low because it doesn't require user interaction, such as taking a pill daily or properly using a condom.

Typical use of birth control pills is effective 91 percent of the time, and the typical use of condoms is effective 82 percent of the time.

Condom use is still recommended because it is the only form of birth control that protects against sexually transmitted disease.

Put another way, fewer than one in 100 women using an IUD or an implant will become pregnant during the first year of typical use, which is in the same range as that for sterilization, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Over the long term, long-acting methods are 20 times more effective than birth control pills, the patch, or the ring.

In recent years, Planned Parenthood has seen a huge increase in the number of people requesting long-term methods, Aulwes said.

In the U.S. during the last decade, the use of long-acting reversible birth control grew by 380 percent, from 1.5 percent in 2002 to 7.2 percent in 2011-2013.

Use declined in the mid-80s and remained stable through 2002.

St. Cloud followed that trend.

Buy Photo Nurse Megan Holderness and Dr. Julie Anderson talk about the Nexplanon implant IUD device Thursday at St. Cloud Medical Group offices. (Photo: Dave Schwarz, dschwarz@stcloudtimes.com)

In 2011, patients at the St. Cloud Planned Parenthood used 75 implants and 73 IUDs. In 2014, patients used 158 implants and 101 IUDs. In total, that's a 75 percent increase during that time.

In the past, women were told that if you didn't have children or were a young person, IUDs weren't a good method.

"That's just not true. They're incredibly effective for young people," Aulwes said.

The passage of the Affordable Care Act removed one sizable hurdle from the use of long-acting contraception.

"The up-front cost could be a big barrier," Aulwes said, at $1,000 or more. Now many women can get these methods without having to pay their insurance deductible or a copay.

For people who can't afford it or are uninsured, Planned Parenthood and other communities can often help.

Of course, no one method is one-size fits all. It depends on a number of factors.

A common experience staff at Planned Parenthood hear is that women don't feel like they're given all their birth control options when visiting their regular obstetrician or general practitioner.

It's important for providers to sit down and talk with the woman about what would be the best for her.

"One method isn't going to work for everyone," she said.

And your preferences can change as life circumstances do.

"Definitely as your life changes, you may need or want different methods," she said. Age and health issues are among the factors that make a difference.

Nationally, women aged 25-34 use long-term contraceptives the most, about twice as much as their counterparts in the 15-24 and 35-44 age groups, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Women who have had at least one birth use long-term contraception at a higher rate compared with women with no previous births.

They are effective and safe and reversible. And they've changed with the times.

"It's not your mother's or your grandmother's IUD," said Dr. Julie Anderson, who works in family medicine at the St. Cloud Medical Group.

The newer options are more hormonally directed tools.

Many of the hormonal methods use lower doses than in decades past.

"The understanding of what the needs really are for contraception has really changed," she said.

"The majority of the medical community would consider these very safe," she said. There are risks and benefits with everything we do to our bodies, she says.

Risk of blood clot only occurs in products with estrogen. There is not much evidence either way with progesterone.

The hormones not only inhibit ovulation but also thicken mucus so sperm never gets a chance to get to the eggs. It also keeps the lining of the uterus thick, which makes it less likely a fertilized egg will attach. It does not interfere with implantation of a fertilized egg, she said.

Buy Photo A sample of several IUD options available. (Photo: Dave Schwarz, dschwarz@stcloudtimes.com)

Anderson said her patients are using long-acting methods for more than contraception. They can help with irregular cycles, heavy bleeding, headches and other issues.

Anderson says she's been putting more in place to help with perimenopausal bleeding.

"It's dramatically decreased the need for hysterectomies in women because of heavy bleeding problems," she said.

Those who choose hormonal implants in the arm are finding it done with a device that keeps people from injecting it too deeply into the muscle.

A lot of college-age women request the implant.

"Because it's easy. It takes literally 30 seconds to put in in the office, compared to the IUD, which is a little uncomfortable to place," she said.

And you don't notice it's there unless you feel for it. It's not visible and there's no way for it to move, Anderson said.

Regardless, long-acting reversible birth control could be a good option for many women.

Aulwes says patients should ask about methods, even if they've shied away from them in the past, as the methods and the cost may have changed.

What should you think about when choosing a birth control method?

Is your menstrual cycle an issue ?

Do you get heavy bleeding, lots of cramping or other issues that affect your life?

Do you plan to have a baby in the next month, three months, year, etc.?

How soon do you expect that to change?

Do you prefer to get your menstrual cycle every month?

Any complications with other health issues?

Source: Jen Aulwes, communications director for Planned Parenthood Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota; Dr. Julie Anderson of the St. Cloud Medical Group.

By the numbers ...

The CDC released a report earlier this year on the use of long-acting, reversible contraception methods among women in the U.S. It found that use of long-acting methods increased nearly fivefold in the last decade among women aged 15-44, from 1.5 percent in 2002 to 7.2 percent in 2011-2013.

Women's health providers are three and a half times more likely to use an IUD or implant than the general population, according to a Planned Parenthood study. That's 42 percent of women’s health care providers, compared to just 12 percent of women in the general population.

Since 2009, Planned Parenthood Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota clinics have seen a 182 percent increase in the use of IUDs and implants.

Those clinics saw IUD use increasing 87 percent and contraceptive implants growing 582 percent.

From 2013 to 2014, Planned Parenthood saw a 35 percent increase in patients with contraceptive implants and a 25 percent increase in patients with IUDs.

In 2011, patients at the St. Cloud Planned Parenthood used 75 implants and 73 IUDs. In 2014, patients used 158 implants and 101 IUDs. In total, that's a 75 percent increase during that time.

Long-acting, reversible birth control methods

An overview of long-acting reversible methods. Consult your medical provider for more detailed information.

IUDs

Hormonal IUDs

Includes brand names: Skyla, which lasts for three years, and Mirena, which lasts for five years. Both use levonorgestrel.

Other uses: Approved to treat heavy menstrual bleeding. Mirena can reduce bleeding up to 90 percent after six months.

Copper IUDs

Works like spermicide and prevents fertilization. No effects on the menstrual cycle.

​Approved for use up to 10 years.

Benefits:

Once it is in place, you do not have to do anything else to prevent pregnancy.

No one can tell that you are using birth control.

It does not interfere with sex or daily activities.

It can be inserted immediately after an abortion, a miscarriage, or childbirth and while breastfeeding.

Almost all women are able to use an IUD.

If you wish to become pregnant or if you want to stop using it, you can simply have the IUD removed.

The hormonal IUD helps decrease menstrual pain and heavy menstrual bleeding.

The copper IUD also is the most effective form of emergency contraception.

Side effects:

With the copper IUD, menstrual pain and bleeding may increase. Bleeding between periods may occur. Both effects are common in the first few months of use. Pain and heavy bleeding usually decrease within one year of use. Both hormonal IUDs may cause spotting and irregular bleeding in the first 3–6 months of use. The amount of menstrual bleeding and the length of the menstrual period usually decrease over time. Menstrual pain also usually decreases.

A few women also may have side effects related to the hormones in these IUDs. These side effects may include headaches, nausea, depression, and breast tenderness.

Risks:

The IUD may come out of the uterus. This happens in about 5 percent of users in the first year of using the IUD.

The IUD can pierce the wall of the uterus during insertion. It is rare and occurs in only about 1 out of every 1,000 insertions.

Pelvic inflammatory disease is an infection of the uterus and fallopian tubes. The disease may cause scarring in the reproductive organs, which may make it harder to become pregnant later. The risk of the disease is only slightly increased in the first 20 days after insertion of an IUD, but the overall risk still is low (fewer than 1 in 100 women).

Rarely, pregnancy may occur while a woman is using an IUD.

In the rare case that a pregnancy occurs with the IUD in place, there is a higher chance that it will be an ectopic pregnancy.

Implant

Flexible rods about the size of a match stick are inserted into your upper arm. They are small and flexible.

It releases progestin into the system stopping ovulation. It works for up to three years, thickens the mucus of the cervix and keeps the lining of the uterus thin.

Side effects:

The most common side effect of the implant is unpredictable bleeding. For some women, these bleeding patterns improve over time. Some women have less menstrual pain while using the implant. In some women, bleeding stops completely. Other common side effects include mood changes, headaches, acne, and depression. Some women have reported weight gain while using the implant, but it is not clear whether it is related to the implant.

Risks:

Possible risks include problems with insertion or removal of the implant. These problems occur in less than 2% of women. Although rare, if a woman becomes pregnant while the implant is inserted, there is a slightly increased risk that it will be an ectopic pregnancy.

The shot

Depo-Provera. It protects against pregnancy for three months as a time, using progestin.

Can cause bone-thinning.

Patch or ring:

Brand name: Nuva Ring, inserted into vagina. Leave in for three weeks, then take out.

Source: WebMD.

Follow Stephanie Dickrell on Twitter @SctimesSteph, call her at 255-8749 or find more stories at www.sctimes.com/sdickrell.

Read or Share this story: http://www.sctimes.com/story/life/wellness/2015/11/07/not-your-grandmothers-iud/74732582/