Sioux Falls, SD

The South Dakota Basketball Coaches Association/Sanford Pentagon All-Star Games Sunday included a quartet of double-figure scorers by the girls' winner and an overtime thriller in the boys' contest.

The girls' Blue team received double-digit points from Pierre Riggs' Sydney Palmer (19), DeSmet's Rylie Osthus (13), Clark-Willow Lake's McKenzie Huber (13) and McCook Central's Brianna Painter (10) en route to an 88-76 victory over the White squad.

Alexys Swedelund of St. Thomas More led the girls' White team with 14 points.

The boys' White team needed overtime to top the Blue unit 117-111. Sioux Falls O'Gorman's Braxton Elliot poured in a game-high 28 points for the White team, while Sturgis' Kellen Barden added 25.

Beau Brown led the boys' Blue team with 23 points. Nate Brown Bull of Little Wound and Davis Cowan of O'Gorman both finished with double-doubles. Brown Bull scored 10 points and grabbed 13 rebounds, and Cowan netted 13 points and had 11 rebounds.

Rosters were selected from nominations received from coaches throughout South Dakota, and players participated for free.

On Saturday night, the First Five Award Ceremony presented by Argus Leader Media and the Sanford Pentagon was held on Heritage Court.

Swedelund was named the girls' player of the year. Washington's Deng Geu was the boys' player of the year.



News

Non-Homepage {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Material may not be redistributed.