Native Nigerian only took up sport three years ago

Fast start After getting her feet wet during CU's opening three matches in the Omni Classic, freshman Naghede Abu has asserted herself as a force for the Buffs volleyball team. A look at her recent numbers: Date Opponent Kills Blocks 9/18 Weber State 10 4 9/18 Montana State 6 5 9/12 Rice 3 3 9/12 Louisiana-Lafayette 4 3 9/11 Sam Houston State 4 4 9/5 Illinois 3 2 9/4 Penn State 8 3

By all appearances, Naghede Abu is the very definition of a natural.

From the moment she first stepped on the floor this fall for the University of Colorado volleyball team, Abu's obvious talent and limitless potential have been on display. Standing 6-foot-4 and boasting pogo stick-like jumping skills, it is easy to see why head coach Liz Kritza made Abu an instantaneous addition to the CU rotation.

One might assume Abu has been dominating club volleyball matches for the better part of her childhood. Truth is, the native of Nigeria only took up the sport about three years ago — after being able to make little sense of the game upon her initial observation.

"Natural" hardly is the word Abu uses to describe those days.

Advertisement

"When I first started, not at all," said Abu, describing the early lack of aspirations for a collegiate career. "I was just doing it because I liked it. But then, after I started getting letters and coaches started approaching me, that's when I thought I could go somewhere with this.

"At first I just looked at these little girls in spandex jumping up and down wondering, 'What are they doing?' It just wasn't something I was interested in. Soccer was always the big thing where I grew up and I always assumed one day I would take it up. I never, ever envisioned myself playing volleyball."

Abu's family moved to the United States when she was 14 after her father, an architect, landed a job in Southern California. The family settled in Riverside, and when Abu, the middle of three children, finally tried her hand at an American sport it was basketball.

While competing at a tournament for her club team she caught the eye of Mike Gutierrez, one of the coaches for the nearby Rancho Valley Volleyball Club. He persuaded her to give his sport a shot.

"My club coach, I have to credit him," Abu said. "He was very encouraging. Every time I was ready to quit and be done with it, he would tell me 'No, you're good, you've got this.' After my first three months I realized I could actually do what he told me I could to do. He trusted me, so I had to trust myself."

A late bloomer who blossomed swiftly, Abu soon caught the eye of recruiters like CU assistant and recruiting coordinator Ryal Jagd. Despite Abu's lack of experience, Jagd immediately shared glowing reviews with Kritza regarding the initial lateral step boasted by Abu at the net, a skill critical for standout middle blockers.

Given her status as a relative newcomer to the game, Abu's ceiling of potential extends much further than the typical freshman.

"When I recruit, it doesn't matter if you're 6-foot-5 or 6-foot, it's just about the potential of growth. And that's her right now," Jagd said. "It's pretty scary where she can be in a year, year and a half."

While Abu admits the speed of the collegiate game remains an ongoing adjustment, she has at times made the transition look easy. Abu made her first career start in just her second game against then-No. 9 Florida State, sharing the team lead with five blocks in CU's first win of the season.

She registered a then-season-best eight kills against top-ranked, two-time defending national champion Penn State and has posted at least four kills and four blocks in four different games. Abu played with poise beyond her years as she helped CU rally from a late 24-21 first-set deficit Friday night in an eventual sweep against Weber State, a contest that saw her establish a season-high with 10 kills.

Abu will look to improve those totals when CU continues the Omni Invitational at home Sunday against George Mason (9 a.m.) and Air Force (7 p.m.).

"You have to have great athletic ability to be able to make great strides later in your development, and then you have to be incredibly disciplined and highly intelligent," Kritza said. "It's that combination of three things that she has that has made this work. I don't think people understand how relatively inexperienced she is. She's been in the U.S. less than five years. I think that's a wonderful part of bringing in a kid with such a different world view."

Pat Rooney: rooneyp@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/prooney07