A federal court has decided to allow a lawsuit to proceed from the developer of a proposed Alaskan mine who is challenging the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) attempts to block the project.

ADVERTISEMENT

The Pebble mine’s developer argues that the EPA’s interactions with groups opposed to Pebble should fall under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, which provides for certain transparency and accountability measures for panels that are responsible for advising federal agencies.

Pebble Mine is a massive gold and copper mine near Bristol Bay that the EPA is trying to block.

Judge Russel Holland of the federal District Court in Anchorage dismissed three other claims from Pebble, including a claim that the EPA improperly conspired with activists against the mine.

The Pebble case has taken on national traction as the EPA tries to protect the nation’s top salmon habitat from what developers say could be a major boon for Alaska.

The case only centers around the scientific assessment the EPA prepared last year to inform its decisions.

A case challenging the EPA’s proposed restrictions on the mine has been dismissed. But the same federal court has issued an injunction to prevent the EPA from making a final decision.

“Today’s decision is a significant victory for Pebble as it allows us to advance our case,” Tom Collier, Pebble’s chief executive, said in a statement. “The judge’s decision says that we have raised plausible claims that EPA improperly utilized input from anti-mining groups in the establishment of the Bristol Bay Watershed Assessment.”

The United Tribes of Bristol Bay, a coalition of native groups fighting the mine, said it was disappointed by Holland’s refusal to dismiss the case entirely.

“Although we are disappointed with the court’s ruling today, we remain confident that further proceedings will demonstrate that EPA has conducted a fair and transparent process in Bristol Bay,” Robert Heyano, the group’s president, said in a statement.

“The [EPA’s] actions to protect our fishery and way of life continues to have full support from our region. This case is simply another delay tactic from Pebble,” he said.

Nicole Navas, a spokeswoman for the Justice Department, which is representing the EPA, said lawyers are reviewing Holland’s decision and she would not comment further.