Sophomore tied for second in single-game touchdown passes with five

Colorado State quarterback Nick Stevens (7) eyes receivers down field against Savannah State on Saturday at Hughes Stadium in Fort Collins. Stevens threw for 289 yards and five touchdowns in his first-career start. ( Andy Cross / THE DENVER POST )

FORT COLLINS — Signs of pressure started cracking through.

To the untrained eye, somebody might not have noticed. But Mike Bobo's observation of quarterbacks spies everything.

Colorado State's first-year head coach picked up on the red flags immediately. Bobo's been coaching the position for the last 13 years dating back to his time at Georgia, where he also starred as a player in the late 90s. He knows when his guys are right and when they're in a funk.

Sophomore Nick Stevens was in a funk.

"He kind of had a couple shaky practices the last week and a half. I thought he was pressing too much," Bobo said.

So the coach gave his young player a pep talk, something he does often. Whatever Bobo said, it worked. By the end of Stevens' first-career start Saturday against Savannah State, the sophomore barely made a mistake and put his name among some of the best in program history, including his predecessor.

"I talk to Nick a lot about believin' in himself, about believin' in your ability," Bobo said after Saturday's 65-13 win. "He says 'I feel good about my teammates being there for me, they got my back,' and I say 'I want you to believe in you. I want you to go out there like you belong.' And I thought he did. (Today's) going to do nothing but build his confidence.

"He came out in warmups and was throwing the ball great, he was very decisive on his plays and when he cut it loose he had some mustard on the ball."

Stevens guided CSU's offense by completing 20 of 28 passes for 289 yards, while tossing five touchdown passes to five different receivers all before the third quarter had ended.

Only Mark Driscoll threw for more touchdowns in a single game for the Rams (six against Nevada in 1974), placing Stevens in a tie for second with Matt Newton (2000) and his friend Garrett Grayson.

The first went to tight end Kivon Cartwright early in the first quarter, a play that stood out to Bobo because the offensive line made a mistake in pass protection, which forced Stevens to work the pocket and deliver a strike.

"He does a great job of finding throwing angles and finding lanes," wide receiver Joe Hansley said. "That's what makes him a good quarterback is he's smart, he anticipates the throw. ... He goes out and anticipates throws and throws it where the receiver is going to be. We have a lot of confidence that the ball is going to be there."

Stevens followed up the opening TD pass with a trio of others in the first half, a 12-yard fade to Rashard Higgins, a perfectly placed ball that sophomore wideout Xavier Williams high-pointed 34 yards down field for a score and a 4-yard dump off over the middle to running back Jasen Oden Jr.

Colorado State wide receiver Xavier Williams lunges forward into the end zone Saturday at Hughes Stadium. Williams was one of six Rams to score a touchdown through the air, five coming from the arm of quarterback Nick Stevens. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Hansley would haul in Stevens' 28th and final throw of the day for a 12-yard touchdown over the middle.

"I just wanted to come out and do what I could, and I think that it went well for a first game," he said. "Obviously, I made some mistakes and I have some things to improve on for next week, but I think it went really well. I was happy with the performance today.

"I came into it a lot less nervous than I thought I'd be and I think we did a really good job of coming out fast, and that kind of took the nerves off of everybody."

The trait Hansley likes the most about his young quarterback is his presence in the huddle. Stevens commands the offense and everybody in it on a personal level. Some of that is personality, but much of it was gained with live experience last season as he spelled Grayson later in blowout games.

"I think that it helped a lot that I was able to get so much time last year just because it wasn't my first game-time experience," Stevens said. "It was my first start, but I'd been in that situation before and was able to play when it mattered. I think that played a huge part in my confidence today."

Now Stevens has a huge reason to feel confident moving forward. He did what Bobo asked. He played like he belonged, and knew it.

Cris Tiller: 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller