Kathy Mitchell and Marcy Sugar

Dear Annie: I lost my grandmother to suicide when I was 7. The day before Grandma died, she made comments to me about going away where I could not go with her and "going to be with her mother," who had died. I did not understand what she was saying.

Several weeks after the funeral, I told my mother what my grandmother said to me. For years after, it felt as though my mother blamed me for her mother's death. I grew up feeling this way.

Two years ago, I overheard my mother tell a friend on the phone that she did, in fact, blame me for my grandmother's death. I cannot tell you how much this hurt me. I am now in my 30s, and my mother and I have had other issues in the past, but never as hurtful as this. Since my grandmother's death, I have been in counseling for depression, my own suicide attempts and the unbearable guilt that I feel.

The therapists have told me that Grandma's death was not my fault, but how can I believe them when my own mother blames me? How do I explain to her that I was only 7 and didn't understand what Grandma was telling me? I have crying spells and am hurting inside. Please help. — Abandoned

Dear Abandoned: You know your grandmother's death was not your fault. You understand that at the age of 7, you could not possibly be held responsible for her suicide. Your mother wants to blame you because it is less painful than blaming herself for not noticing how unhappy her mother was. But frankly, there is no reason to blame anyone. The depression you suffer from (and that Grandma apparently suffered from) is likely a form of inherited mental illness. Please discuss this with your counselor, and ask about having your mother come with you. It sounds as though she never fully processed what happened. She could use some help, too.

Advertisement

Dear Annie: My wife can't stop interrupting me while I'm talking. She either finishes my thought for me, or she just moves on to the next thing she wants to say without waiting for me to finish speaking.

My wife is aware that there is a problem, and she feels bad when I point it out, but she evidently can't do anything about it. She doesn't even realize she's doing it unless I tell her, "You interrupted me again." There are times when I don't feel like talking to her because I know she's just going to cut me off. What can either of us do? — Cut Short

Dear Cut: If your wife truly wants to stop and you are willing to make the effort, you can train each other. First check your own speech habits. Do you drone on and on? Do you restate the obvious? Do you repeat yourself? Work on shorter sentences, and then help your wife learn to wait until you are finished before speaking. This will require that she make a genuine effort, and you will need to remind her, gently, each time she interrupts.

Dear Annie: I am moved to respond to "Unhappy Mother of a Son." I have been living that life. After getting professional help, I finally came to realize the fault is not mine. My daughter-in-law quite simply does not, for whatever reason, want to share my son's life with me. And I have to recognize that my son has no appreciation for me or is too lacking in character to stand up for me.

If there are grandchildren, I would suggest "Unhappy" cultivate a relationship with them in whatever way possible. They have the right to make their own judgments. The hurt never goes away, but life is more than being a mother. — Sad but Wiser

Annie's Mailbox is written by Kathy Mitchell and Marcy Sugar, longtime editors of the Ann Landers column. Please email your questions to anniesmailbox@comcast.net, or write to: Annie's Mailbox, c/o Creators Syndicate, 737 3rd Street, Hermosa Beach, CA 90254.