House Speaker John Boehner lobbed a social media stink bomb this weekend that distilled Republican attacks on the Affordable Care Act to their cynical, knee-jerk essence.

“Sick kids denied specialty care due to #Obamacare,” his Twitter feed proclaimed on Saturday, linking to a conservative blog post based on a TV news report out of Seattle. His Facebook page weighed in on the same story, calling it “heartbreaking” and vowing that House Republicans “will continue working to scrap this broken law.”

There’s just one problem: The shocking claim — that the President’s health reforms resulted in sick children being denied care — was flat-out false. Which Boehner’s staff must have known, assuming they actually read the material they were helping to spread across the Internet.

In fact, all of the children in question did get care, as was perfectly clear in the Jan. 30 press release from Seattle Children’s Hospital that got this snowball started.

It said so right in the headline: “Children’s Hospital Treats 125 Patients in January Who Lost Contracted Access Through Washington’s Health Benefit Exchange.”

People versed in health-industry jargon will spot what’s really going on here: a dispute over out-of-network coverage.

To control costs, some of the insurance companies pitching plans on Washington’s health exchange chose to leave Seattle Children’s out of their coverage networks. (The hospital is suing the state insurance commissioner for allowing them to do this.)

Now, families who enrolled in those plans — many unaware of the restriction — are showing up at Seattle Children’s with their kids, some of them seriously ill.

Instead of transferring them to another provider, the hospital chose to go ahead and treat them, battle it out with the insurance companies and eat any losses. Of the 200 “exception requests” filed on behalf of 125 patients, 12 have been approved and eight denied. The rest are still pending.

So, again, no kid was heartbreakingly denied care. The hospital is being denied its usual reimbursement for some, but not all, of the out-of-network patients it knowingly and voluntarily served.

Seattle TV station King 5 carelessly framed this as “patients being denied specialty treatment.” The Weekly Standard, a conservative magazine, then further mangled the story in a blog post as “Sick kids denied specialty care due to Obamacare in Washington.” Which is what Boehner promulgate d to his 292,000 Twitter followers and 410,000 Facebook friends.

Like many of the Obamacare horror stories circulating in conservative cyberspace, it was too horrific to be true.

Beyond the inaccuracy is the gall it takes for Boehner to point his finger at Obama for denying care to anyone.

Had his House GOP gotten its way with one of their 40 votes to repeal Obamacare, millions of newly covered Americans would still be living without private insurance or reliable access to health care of any kind.

On top of that are the millions of low-income families — including plenty of children — being left in the cold because Boehner’s fellow Republicans in 25 states refused to expand Medicaid, even with Washington picking up 100% of the extra cost.

Plus, it’s head-spinningly hypocritical for Republicans to bemoan coverage limits in Obamacare while simultaneously attacking it for being too expensive.

The ACA does arguably encourage health plans to use limited networks as a cost-cutting strategy — since they’re now competing on price through the exchanges and no longer allowed to use such counterproductive tactics as denying coverage for preexisting conditions. The practice can be a hassle or worse for patients and providers alike.

But it’s been around since before Obama was a state senator from Illinois. And stopping it altogether would push America’s highest-in-the-world health costs further into the stratosphere. It would also require even more government intervention in the health insurance market, which I thought Republicans opposed.

But the House GOP has no interest in presenting a coherent critique of Obamacare, let alone a workable alternative. That would involve making polically dicey choices about costs and benefits.

Instead, making hay in an election year, they’re attacking Obamacare from any direction they think will score political points — from raising legitimate questions about the botched website, to blaming the President for health-care snafus that have nothing to do with his law, to working themselves up into fits of fake outrage over sick kids.

Never mind the facts. Forget logic. The House GOP is now channeling Groucho Marx: Whatever Obamacare is, they’re against it.

whammond@nydailynews.com