State Insurance Commissioner Thomas B. Leonardi, who led the department for nearly four years and traveled widely as an industry expert, is resigning to take a job with a New York investment firm.

Leonardi, 60, is taking a job at Evercore Partners Inc., a New York-based global investment banking advisory firm, as a senior adviser focusing on insurance.

Gov. Dannel P. Malloy said he would decide on a replacement in the coming weeks. Leonardi's last day will be Dec. 11.

Leonardi was appointed commissioner in February 2011 and quickly set about to give the office an international profile.

"I think I have been very effective … but the travel, and the work, and the energy that I gave to this job, it takes a toll," Leonardi said in a phone interview. "There's no question. And I felt, for me personally, this was the right time."

The Courant published an article on Sept. 28 based on an examination of documents submitted to the Office of State Ethics shows that from June 2011 to August 2014, Leonardi reported 64 trips, more than double the number reported by any other state employee. Those records show that Leonardi spent 17 of 20 days on the road in June of 2013. In 2012 and 2013, he also took trips to Amsterdam, Geneva, Frankfurt, Vienna and the Virgin Islands, among other destinations.

In many cases Leonardi was attending board meetings for two international insurance groups: the National Association of Insurance Commissioners and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, headquartered in Basel, Switzerland. In other cases, Leonardi was asked to speak at conferences.

Earlier this fall, Leonardi defended his frequent travel by saying it raised the profile of the state's insurance commission in a state known for the insurance business.

On Wednesday, Leonardi said that he hasn't had any criticism about his global travels and that it did not factor into his decision to take a new job.

"The governor has been very supportive of what we've been doing here," Leonardi said, adding that consumers and the insurance industry understand the importance of his role in international systemic risk designations.

Leonardi is the only U.S. insurance regulator to have concurrently sat on three committees of the International Association of Insurance Supervisors: the Executive, Technical and Financial Stability committees.

In announcing Leonardi's departure, Malloy praised the commissioner as one of the most vocal opponents of attempts by European Union policymakers to require the U.S. to submit to an "equivalency" evaluation to Europe's Solvency II, which pertains to capital requirements for insurance companies to reduce the risk of insolvency.

"There's just no question that the travel was extremely important," Leonardi said.

Malloy said, "Thanks to the diligence of Thomas Leonardi's work in my administration, Connecticut has reclaimed its reputation as the insurance capital of the world, and our international influence has never been higher."

Before the Nov. 4 election, rumors swirled about Leonardi's departure as people wondered aloud if would also mean the departure of his wife, Claire R. Leonardi, who is CEO of Connecticut Innovations, a state-funded venture capital fund and lender. "Claire hasn't told me she's going any place," Leonardi said Wednesday.

A spokeswoman for Connecticut Innovations said Claire Leonardi would be staying with the quasi-public agency.

Malloy spokesman Andrew Doba said before the election they knew nothing about Leonardi's leaving for a job in the private sector. Leonardi said he told Malloy about his new job two days after the election. Leonardi said he wanted to give the governor enough time to think about a replacement, but he didn't want the new job to be a distraction to his department. He also didn't want to be a "lame duck" commissioner, he said.

"I'm not sure when the [job] offer was made, but we've had several discussions," Leonardi said of Evercore's offer to him.

Leonardi doesn't plan to relocate for his new job. "I will have an office in New York, and will be working out of the New York and London offices," he said.

Sea Changes

Leonardi led the Insurance Capital's regulatory agency during major sea changes that roiled the insurance industry. The greatest of those were implementation of federal health care reform and post-recession pressure to tighten regulation on large financial institutions.

The Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare, introduced new requirements on health plans and ushered in sweeping changes to the health insurance market, including public health insurance exchanges.

The Insurance Department, during Leonardi's tenure, signed a detailed memorandum of understanding with the Connecticut Health Insurance Exchange, now called Access Health CT, to provide legal, actuarial and technical assistance to the exchange. Access Health CT has been praised as a model example of how a state health insurance exchange should operate.

Speaking about the Affordable Care Act, Leonardi said Wednesday: "I just can't even fathom how much more work it caused. If you think about it, it's a whole new structure of dealing with the companies, dealing with consumers. The amount of misinformation about what the health insurance law means to people was daunting. … I give our consumer affairs department A-pluses for what they did."

Malloy's office commended Leonardi for being a "leading voice among U.S. insurance regulators on international systemic risk designations."

After the financial crisis, there was greater scrutiny of large financial institutions and a call for greater oversight on the national and international level. Insurance in the U.S. is regulated by states, and each of the 50 states has different rules. Malloy and Leonardi have been advocates for protecting the state-based regulation system.

"The global capital standards and the systemic risk designations overseas … it is the number one issue for the industry because, if it goes the wrong way, it would have very damaging impacts for consumers, for our markets, for product availability, the cost of products. It would be terrible," Leonardi said.