A man wanted for a double murder in Ohio has been found in Arizona, after more than seven months on the run.

The U.S. Marshals Service says 26-year-old Charles Walker was taken into custody in the area of 27th and Van Buren streets Friday evening in Phoenix.

"Walker's arrest, while riding a bicycle in Central Phoenix, was the direct result of cooperation with our local law enforcement partners, both in Arizona and Ohio," said U.S. Marshal David Gonzales for the District of Arizona. "This cooperation and diligent police work resulted in removing a dangerous fugitive from our community."

Walker is accused of fatally shooting two 19-year-old men execution-style in Toledo in August 2015. Toledo police later found the victims in a parked car. Authorities say there was strong evidence linking Walker to the crime and he was facing two counts of homicide.

Earlier this month, the U.S. Marshals developed information that Walker had fled Ohio and was living in Arizona. Eventually they tracked him to an apartment complex near 32nd and Roosevelt streets in Phoenix.

"It's actually kind of horrifying, if you think about it that a guy living that close to you is out for murder," said Jeff Hudson, who lives at Coral Gardens Apartment Homes. Hudson didn't know Walker by name, but said he had seen the man around the complex the last month or two.

He said Walker seemed like a normal guy, and would say hello to him in passing. Other neighbors at the complex said they recognized Walker, and said he frequently rode a bicycle around the area.

After learning of Walker's possible whereabouts, members of the U.S. Marshals-led Arizona WANTED Violent Offender Task Force set up surveillance around the complex, and spotted the 26-year-old leaving the area on a bicycle a short time later. He was taken into custody without incident Friday evening.

Walker is being held in a Phoenix jail, awaiting extradition back to Ohio.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved. The Associated Press contributed to this report.