Drivers caught texting in Tennessee face fines up to $50, while those who use cellphones in classrooms or courtrooms may be forced to hand them over.

Texting during church service is generally a no-no and considered down-right rude while dining with friends.

So, is it proper for lawmakers to converse with one another, their family or constituents via text during a public meeting?

The answer appears to depend upon the message, open government proponents say, although getting to the message is quite another problem.

“This is a new one,” said Deborah Fisher, executive director at Tennessee Coalition for Open Government. “Public officials ought to be very, very, careful in texting or emailing each other during a public meeting, because it does seem to be basically taking what should be open discussion into some type of private discussion … a veiled discussion right there in the public meeting.”

A message or messages clearly involving a discussion about government business, such as sharing information or deliberating, would constitute a violation of Tennessee’s open meetings law, Fisher said. However, the law is not so clear about messages containing general comments.

Gaining access to those text messages may be a matter of filing an open records request. However, whether that law applies may depend upon if the cellphone is government-issued or when and where a private cellphone was used.

Maury County commissioners broached the topic in March during an Administration Committee meeting in which chairwoman June Beckum asked commissioners to stop texting members of the committee.

In a telephone interview later, Beckum said she finds texting during a meeting to be distracting and that is also appears to distract others commissioners.

“To me, I just need to try to give my full attention,” she said. “And when a question has been asked and answered and then a commissioner asked the same question again, you know they haven’t been paying attention.”

Beckum said texting during a public meetings is becoming an issue that needs to be addressed, especially since conversations during public meetings are supposed to be public. Although she said she understands sending or receiving text or email messages in case of an emergency, the commission needs to regulate unnecessary distractions, she said.

“I definitely think, as much as it can be stopped, we should do that,” she said. “I think we should go back and cover this in our rules.”

District 11 Commissioner Scott Cepicky, who was one of the commissioners texting during that March 6 meeting, said he must be available at all times for business and to respond to constituents.

“Some people from the audience and my work and stuff text me all the time,” he explained. “I can’t sit there and not text business.”

He said “most” of the texting with people in the audience involves questions about something they don’t understand and for which they need clarification. Although Cepicky said he supports open government, he said he does not believe the public has a right to know “when it comes to an individual conversation with a citizen.”

“Open Meetings law pertains to the commission and that’s it. It doesn’t pertain to the commission and the public,” he said.

The problem is, however, members of the public have no way of knowing whether the text messages concern private communications or information that should be public, Fisher said.

“Meetings are supposed to be accessible to the public and they’re suppose to be open to the public for them to come so they can hear the county commissioners deliberate on issues,” she said. “I think what needs to happen in public meetings is that all communications need to be done in the public. If commissioners are having side conversations via text messages, that goes against the spirit of the law and may even violate it.”

Cepicky said he recognizes that texting during a meeting has the potential for abuse of the open meeting law, but he contends communications violations could still happen in other ways.

“The public just has to trust that (commissioner) is not trying to coerce or influence or contrive a vote or an outcome (via text messaging),” he said.