Today the Susan B. Anthony List (SBA List) announced a multi-state billboard campaign exposing Senators Kay Hagan (D-NC), Mary Landrieu (D-LA) and Mark Pryor (D-AR) for supporting taxpayer funded abortion by voting for the Affordable Care Act.

The law, known as Obamacare, provides new federal tax subsidies that will finance elective abortion coverage for millions of women, expands state Medicaid program coverage of elective abortion for millions of women in dozens of states, and uses federal funds to finance elective abortion coverage for members of Congress and their staff.

The fact on the billboard is also at the heart of the U.S. Supreme Court case Susan B. Anthony List v. Steven Driehaus. The case concerns the SBA List’s First Amendment challenge to Ohio’s “false statement” law. In 2010, the SBA List attempted to erect billboards with the same message to educate Driehaus’ constituents about his vote in support of taxpayer-funded abortion but was prevented from doing so because of the Ohio law. The SBA List was also threatened with prosecution if it engaged in similar speech about Driehaus or other candidates in Ohio.

“Senators Hagan, Landrieu and Pryor betrayed the unborn and their pro-life constituents by voting for Obamacare, which uses tax dollars to fund elective abortion,” said Marjorie Dannenfelser, President of Susan B. Anthony List. “Research both from the Charlotte Lozier Institute and the Kaiser Foundation found that millions of women will gain elective abortion coverage under Obamacare through the Medicaid expansion and new federal premium subsidies.

“Since 2010, we have fought for our right to tell the truth about the abortion funding problems in Obamacare and expose the legislators who supported it. The U.S. Supreme Court will consider our right to do just that later this month. In the meantime, we cannot be silent. Our founders braved the threat of the gallows so that we would not have to fear speaking our true convictions.

Since its passage, at least six bills have been introduced in Congress to address different aspects of the abortion-funding problem in Obamacare.