Sen. Sherrod Brown visits veterans homeless shelter to outline new legislation to help

WASHINGTON -- When President George W. Bush proposed partially privatizing Social Security, Charles Blahaus III was there, serving as a top adviser and proponent of private-market solutions to government problems.

Bush never got his way. But President Barack Obama thought highly enough of Blahaus, an influential thinker at conservative think tanks, to nominate him as a Social Security trustee who provides analysis for Congress and the White House. Now Obama -- a Democrat -- wants to give Blahaus another four-year term.

Obama may have had limited choices; he was obligated to name a Republican, as we'll explain, and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, the top Republican, recommended Blahaus. But Democrats including Ohio U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown now are citing Blahaus's publicized opinions on Social Security cost-of-living raises and disability benefits, and saying enough's enough.

Blahaus, Brown said in an email to supporters Wednesday, "stands for every right-wing attempt to attack Social Security."

So Brown says he might block Blahaus's confirmation vote for this and other reasons. But Brown might oppose confirmation of a Democrat, too, in order to make a broader point.

Confused? We'll explain.

Who is Charles Blahaus?

Blahaus is an influential thinker and adviser on government spending and retirement issues who provided guidance as an aide to two Republican senators before becoming a Bush adviser. His day job now is as director of the Spending and Budget Initiative at the Mercatus Center, a market-oriented think tank at George Mason University. He has also been a fellow at the Hoover Institution and the Hudson Institute.

Blahous has a doctorate in computational quantum chemistry from the University of California at Berkeley, and a bachelor's degree from Princeton University.

What are some of his beliefs?

These are recent ones:

* Minimum wage laws are barriers to employment.

* Social Security has problems that politicians seem unwilling to face or fix. One of them is that current workers can get benefits three years earlier than in Franklin Roosevelt's time, when lifespans were shorter.

* Obamacare has "almost certainly" damaged the labor market and the federal fiscal outlook.

As for Social Security privatization, Blahaus has written that the phraseology is mistaken, because the ability to invest outside the government would have been optional and would still be administered by the government. He has said more recently that the time for considering this option may have passed.

He's obviously different from Brown -- and from Obama. Why did Obama appoint him?

Obama has to have a Republican -- or at least someone who is not a Democrat -- as a trustee. Under Social Security rules, the six-member board includes the president's secretaries of Treasury, Labor, and Heath and Human Services. The Social Security commissioner is also a trustee.

That leaves two other members -- the "public trustees." Serving four-year terms, they must be confirmed by the Senate, and they may not be from the same political party.

The Democratic trustee, for whom Obama is also seeking a second term, is Robert Reischauer, president emeritus of the Urban Institute and a former director of the Congressional Budget Office. We'll return to him in a moment.

Wait -- this is Blahaus's second appointment. Did Brown vote to confirm him the first time?

No, Brown's office says. Confirmation was handled through what's called a voice vote ("all in favor say 'aye'"). The ayes had it, and no individual votes were recorded.

OK, but what's Brown's problem with Reischauer?

Brown has a lot more in common with Reishauser politically. Reischauer has been, as one admiring group put it, "one of the most prominent voices for social insurance issues."

He's been an advocate and an author on the subject, generally on the side of Democrats. But that's the problem, Brown says: Social Security needs public trustees who are actuaries, economists or social scientists but have not made their livings researching, publishing or advocating for Social Security and Medicare policy. They should not be linked to partisan agendas.

What do Blahaus and Reischauer say about that?

At a Senate Finance Committee hearing Wedneday afternoon, Blahaus acknowledged giving opinions. He stood by his work for Bush.

But a Social Security trustee's job is to provide analysis and facts, he told Brown and others, maintaining that he successfully separated out opinion during his first term. "It's an analytical role and a reporting role," he said.

"I have not argued for private accounts during my time as a trustee," Blahaus added.

Reischauer agreed that as trustees, "we bend over backward" to provide analysis and facts that are "right on the level."

What's Brown intend to do, then?

That depends. A Los Angeles Times economics columnist and Blahaus critic wrote Tuesday that Brown might block Blahaus's confirmation with a "hold" -- a request, almost always honored by Senate leaders, to bottle up a confirmation vote until the requesting member gets his way or takes a new approach.

Why did President Obama appoint a fox to guard the Social Security henhouse? https://t.co/MrHdVBMHPL — Michael Hiltzik (@hiltzikm) May 11, 2016

Brown's office says it's premature to say what he'll do, since he can't seek a hold until the nomination is on the Senate floor. He hopes that won't happen with these nominees, and he and other Finance Committee Democrats noted that tradition used to limit such appointees to a single term.

"The Finance Committee has a 30-year tradition of not reappointing anyone to these positions," said Sen. Ron Wyden of Oregon, the panel's top Democrat.

The Finance Committee appears in no rush, at any rate, since Obama made the latest nominations in August. At the very least, Brown said he wanted to be sure the nominations would not be sent to the full Senate without a vote putting every committee member on record for how he or she feels. But his office suggested a hold is not out of the question.

Is this just Brown being a politician?

Brown's position on Social Security is well-known -- as is Blahaus's -- and they are hardly the first people to disagree heartily on policy issues. But other Democrats, including Sen. Debbie Stabenow of Michigan and Wyden, made similar points Wednesday about Blahaus's public opinions.

A political element is nevertheless undeniable. Brown doesn't face reelection for two more years, yet his email Wednesday morning was sent by his campaign. It asked supporters to "stand with me" and "tell extreme Republicans to oppose Blahaus and stop attacking Social Security."

The email said nothing about Reischauer or the above-mentioned principle.

It provided a link for those who agreed to "co-sign Sherrod's letter" on the matter. Those who filled out that form were taken to a different web page, this one for contributions to support Brown politically.

Contributions start at $5 and go as high as $2,700.

What about the White House? What's it's position on these ideas involving privatization or changes in benefits?

The White House said in an email Thursday morning:

* Any reforms should strengthen Social Security for future generations and restore long-term solvency.

* The Administration will oppose any measures that privatize or weaken the Social Security system.

* While all measures to strengthen solvency should be on the table, the Administration will not accept an approach that slashes benefits for future generations.

* Current beneficiaries should not see their basic benefits reduced.

* Reform should strengthen retirement security for the most vulnerable, including low-income older Americans.

* Reform should maintain robust disability and survivors' benefits.