The U.S. Coast Guard has suspended its search for missing Olympic sailor, Trevor Moore, after the boat he was driving was found Thursday afternoon without him.Saturday morning, a Coast Guard helicopter crew was launched for a 'first light search'. A tweet early Friday morning reveals crews covered almost 200 square miles of the Biscayne Bay.The Coast Guard and other agencies covered more than 510 square nautical miles and completed more than 29 search patterns before suspending the three-day search Saturday at sunset."Our thoughts and prayers go out to the loved ones affected," said Capt. Michael Long, Coast Guard Sector Miami deputy commander. "Despite the tireless search efforts by multiple agencies and good Samaritans, we were unable to find Mr. Moore."Moore was last seen taking to sea alone near Miami. Investigators found his boat south of the city, still in gear, with his life vest and some personal items.According to a spokesperson with Florida Fish and Wildlife Commission, a woman spotted Moore's boat floating unattended near Dinner Key around 5 p.m. Thursday. When authorities searched the boat, they found some of Moore's belongings but he was not on board.A posting on social media from Moore's fiancé Libby Patton read: "My fiancé and best friend, Trevor Moore, is missing after a boat ride in coconut grove this afternoon. His boat was found this evening--still in gear--by a small island close to shore. please pray for Trevor."FWC, the US Coast Guard and local agencies searched Biscayne Bay and used Moore's GPS log to try and track his movements while he was out on the water, we are told.Moore spent some of his childhood on Naples Bay. As a 7-year old Moore learned how to sail at Naples Community Sailing Center."Trevor was one of our first students I think '92 or '93, he was 8 years old," said George Koch who instructed Moore as a child.He moved to Naples as a child and attended Sea Crest Country Day School until he was about 16 until moving to Vermont. Though Moore lives in Miami now, his family still owns property in Port Royal."You know you're really optimistic but you got your fingers crossed, you're thinking 'Jesus little Trevor he's not going to make it' and they went out there and kicked butt I thought it was great," said Koch."He's legendary around these parts," said friend and fellow sailor Ian Pinholster.Moore made it to the 2012 Olympics in London as was part of the two man, 49er class.Moore was also named College Sailor of the Year in 2007 and was named an All-American. His impact in Naples was lasting according to Pinholster."Trevor's given back to this place you know, boats, sails, everything," Pinholster said.Although the U.S. Coast Guard has suspended its search, volunteers still continue to look for Moore. A gofundme account has raised more than $37,000 for rescue efforts.Pinholster said he was heading to the Miami area to help in the search effort. At this point, he says everyone is just hoping for the best."You never see him without a smile on his face, always upbeat full of energy," Pinholster said. "Just loves life and loves to be on the water."Several agencies and the sailors from Naples assisted in the search as well."Our head instructor Chip Page is over there and I know he's just devastated" said Koch. "Should have found him by now."