News outlets nationally and locally are preparing to cover the James Holmes theater shooting trial, now on a hastened schedule. The long-postponed trial is expected to begin next month, once again focusing national media attention on Colorado.

In advance of the biggest criminal trial here since the Timothy McVeigh Oklahoma City bombing trial in 1997 and the Kobe Bryant sexual assault case in 2004, newsrooms are confronting logistical challenges.

News consumers should prepare, too: the trial will be live-streamed.

Live streaming from inside the courtroom, not a factor in those earlier trials, will mean constant access, constant updates.

Live tweeting won’t be allowed inside the courtroom, but anyone monitoring the live feed (back in the newsroom, for instance) will be free to use social media. Observers won’t be allowed to bring phones or laptops into the courtroom.

Because of the number and randomness of the deaths in the theater massacre and the intense national interest, the case is expected to draw even more saturation coverage than those previous trials.

Expect a flood of retraumatizing graphic images.

Unlike major trials before, a fixed camera in the courtroom will offer an unblinking eye on the proceedings, although not as emotionally charged a vision as might have been provided, under a rejected request by an alliance of local media. There will be no zooming in on anguished faces, no shots of the jury, no panning to the action.

A few technical challenges:

The rules are different for TV versus digital coverage.

Reporters who have seen the setup say the position of the fixed camera in the courtroom won’t provide an unobstructed view of the defendant, James Holmes.

News outlets have already secured seats inside the courtroom for primary reporters and spaces for trailers with technical and support staff outside.

Local TV station staffs have been holding meetings for months to address the upcoming coverage.

Carl Bilek of KMGH-Channel 7 said the logistics are still being confirmed but, “we will have one guaranteed seat in the courtroom itself with access to an additional overflow room.”

“I’m not sure you can directly compare the trial of James Holmes to the trial of Timothy McVeigh,” he said by e-mail. “Regardless, the challenges of covering the trial are completely different. We live in an age of immediacy in which our viewers get their news on many different platforms, not just television. This is truly “real time” news.”

To that end, national networks, local stations and online competitors including The Denver Post are committed to providing constant updates on the Aurora theater shooting trial, across platforms.

“This means having the staff in place to monitor all testimony and to update key elements as they happen (on the Internet and social media rather than waiting for scheduled newscasts),” Bilek said.

Local stations are planning to live-stream the trial, and to interrupt regular programming on broadcast TV should the situation warrant.

The single static camera provided by the court won’t offer cutaways of the defendant or closeups of the evidence. “That makes it doubly important that our reporter in the courtroom be able to provide context to what the camera doesn’t show, such as the defendant’s reaction to testimony,” Bilek said.

Holly Gauntt, recently installed VP for news at KDVR-KWGN, acknowledged the trial will spark “a great deal of interest and coverage from media outlets across the nation and the world. I believe it’s our responsibility as local journalists to be respectful of the impact our coverage will have on the families and survivors. Sadly, I highly suspect we will see some over the top, sensationalized coverage by media outlets outside of our community. It’s unfortunate.”

While her stations will live-steam courtroom coverage on the web, “our goal will be to cover every aspect of the trial professionally and thoroughly while keeping in mind that many watching our coverage were traumatized by the events of that horrible day. As a whole, I believe the Denver media takes the high road and will again with this big story.”

Each station has legal experts on retainer, to be debriefed at the courthouse or on the set as anchors solicit reactions. CBS4 has longtime prosecutor Karen Steinhauser on hand; 9News will rely on Scott Robinson. 7News has retained Dan Recht, David Beller, and Rick Kornfeld of Recht and Kornfeld. Fox31 will use criminal defense attorney Chris Decker.

The networks plan to have on-air talent and staff present. CNN will have “a team there that will report across all of our networks and platforms,” according to a spokeswoman. CNN’s Ana Cabrera, based in Denver, will be the network’s lead correspondent. CBS will rely on correspondent Barry Peterson. ABC has yet to finalize plans.

On its website, CNN asked rhetorically whether the Holmes trial will garner more attention than the trials of Jodi Arias or the Boston bomber Dzhokhar Tsarnaev simply because it’s going to be televised? Just posing the question seems to answer it.

The electronic media’s request for a camera in the courtroom (operated remotely) was granted while the print media’s request for a still camera in the courtroom (operated by a photographer present in the room) was denied.

The camera is mounted to a pillar in the courtroom, angled toward the judge’s bench, the witness stand, the prosecution table and the defense table. It doe not have a view of the jury box. Holmes will be seated at the defense table, the farther of the two tables from the camera, and specifically on the far corner of that table, so his attorneys sitting next to him often partially block the camera’s view of him.

That rules out a Jodi Arias-type frequent, extended closeups of the defendant.

Besides the single fixed camera, no other video recording will be allowed in the courtroom, and no still photography. “White noise” will cover any bench conferences.

The court order acknowledged it’s not what the media requested but said it will have to do: “Any desire to make the broadcast more interesting or entertaining, while understandable, is not relevant to the Court’s determination.”

Colorado has traditionally recognized public access to criminal trials as healthy. In fact, Colorado became the first state to allow cameras in the courtroom in 1956 and remains one of the more open states in terms of expanded media coverage in courts.

Modern media technology presents new challenges. Might glimpses of the trial turn up as memes on Twitter, pollute the nation’s Facebook timelines or otherwise become fodder for social media entertainment, as opponents of expanded media coverage claimed? Perhaps. But the court found no reason that should limit the public’s right to see the judicial system in action.

Hashtags are a reality of the modern era but they pose no threat to the proceedings inside the courtroom, the ruling said. The intense and widespread publicity of this trial, the large number of victims and the expected length of the trial make expanded media coverage less likely to have an adverse effect than traditional media coverage, the judge concluded.

Viewers will be the judge of that.

Joanne Ostrow: 303-954-1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp