Michigan's new Medicaid regions could be costly for Henry Ford Health System HAP Midwest among those taking a hit

Michigan Medicaid HMO contracts by region Region 6 (Thumb) Counties: St Clair, Lapeer, Genesee, Shiawassee, Sanilac, Tuscola and Huron Health plans: HAP Midwest Health Plan, Blue Cross Complete of Michigan, McLaren Health Plan, Meridian Health Plan of Michigan, Molina Healthcare of Michigan and UnitedHealthcare Community Plan



Region 9 (greater Southeast Michigan) Counties: Livingston, Washtenaw, Monroe, Jackson, Hillsdale and Lenawee Health plans: Aetna Better Health of Michigan, Blue Cross Complete, McLaren Health Plan, Meridian Health Plan, Molina Healthcare and UnitedHealthcare



Region 10 (metropolitan Detroit) Counties: Wayne, Oakland and Macomb Health plans: Aetna Better Health, Blue Cross Complete, Harbor Health Plan, McLaren Health Plan, Meridian Health Plan, Molina Healthcare, Total Health Care and UnitedHealthcare



Source: Michigan Department of Health and Human Services, Medicaid program

The financial impact from the potential loss of Medicaid contract business in Michigan could be massive next year for Detroit-based Henry Ford Health System and its 100,000-member HAP Midwest Health Plan, which accounts for half of the five-hospital system's profits.



Lansing-based Sparrow Health System, which owns Sparrow PHP, a 20,000-member Medicaid HMO, also could take a hit, though much smaller than what's expected for Henry Ford, based on Medicaid contract recommendations issued last week by the state Department of Health and Human Services.



Unless the recommendations are overturned in November in a hearing before the State Administrative Board, Henry Ford Health and Sparrow will lose out as the state converts from a county-based Medicaid approach to a 10-region system.



At stake for all 11 of the state's Medicaid HMOs are six-year contracts worth a total of $42 billion for the 1.7 million Medicaid members.



Officials for HAP Midwest and Sparrow PHP, which have scored high marks in national quality ratings, declined to comment.



State Medicaid Director Chris Priest told Crain's the state will review decisions with Medicaid HMOs that have appealed, including HAP Midwest. But he said the recommendations were based on a comprehensive review.



However, a Medicaid HMO executive, who asked not to be identified, said DHHS' scoring process for awarding regional contracts contained several math errors, which could have led to mistakes in awarding some contracts.



Late last week, DHHS did acknowledge one math error. It said a calculation mistake was made for Region 7, which includes Ingham, Clinton and Eaton counties surrounding Lansing, with 65,000 Medicaid enrollees.



The fix for the mistake means Meridian Health Plan of Michigan, the state's largest Medicaid HMO with 450,000 members, is now among the providers awarded that region, and Molina Healthcare of Michigan was dropped, leaving it to serve seven other regions.



HAP Midwest, which posted net income of $19.1 million on revenue of $381.7 million in 2014, accounted for nearly half of Henry Ford's total net income in 2014 of $35.1 million, according to the Michigan Department of Financial and Insurance Services.





Related Links