A higher minimum wage is a recipe for lowering opportunities for young people, according to Republican presidential hopeful Carly Fiorina.

Speaking Monday at the Iowa State Fair, Fiorina gave two reasons for her opposition to hiking the federal minimum wage, which is now $7.25 an hour. First, she said, the minimum wage should be a state, not federal, decision. “It makes no sense to say that the minimum wage in New York City is the same as the minimum wage in Mason City, Iowa,” she said, according to National Journal. And second, she said people need to remember that a lot of minimum-wage jobs are where people start, and learn skills to move forward. “One of the consequences is that young people who are trapped in poor neighborhoods will have less opportunities to learn skills and move forward,” she said. That argument, writes National Journal, is an alluring one for Republican primary voters, but one that is very hard to bear out in research.

Trump on top: Donald Trump’s polling keeps getting better. A new CNN/ORC poll, released Tuesday morning, finds Trump has won the Republican Party’s trust on top issues more than any other GOP candidate. The survey finds Trump with the support of 24% of Republican registered voters. Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush is second with 13%, and retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson is in third with 9%.

Walker to blast Republican leaders: With anti-establishment Republicans gaining traction in polls, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker is also trying to establish himself as an outsider. Politico reports Walker will take on the GOP’s leaders in Congress in a speech he is set to deliver in Minnesota on Tuesday. “Republican leaders in Washington told us during the campaign last year that we needed a Republican Senate to repeal Obamacare,” Walker will say, according to excerpts of his remarks. “Well, Republicans have been in charge of both houses of Congress since January and there still isn’t a bill on the president’s desk to repeal Obamacare.”

Obama no socialist, says Sanders: Bernie Sanders gave the New York Times a flat “no” when asked if he thought President Barack Obama is a socialist. In a Q&A with the New York Times Magazine, Sanders, who is challenging Hillary Clinton for the Democratic presidential nomination, was also asked to give his “elevator pitch” for socialism. “My elevator pitch is that the United States has a grotesque level of income and wealth inequality where the top one-tenth of one percent owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent, where almost 20 percent of our children are living in poverty, 40 percent of African-American children are living in poverty,” said Sanders. He says it is imperative the U.S. develops a political movement “that says to the billionaire class they cannot have it all.”

Now on Yelp: Review the federal government: Have something to say about the federal government? Now you can share your opinion on Yelp. The Washington Post reports the government is officially encouraging the public to rate their experiences with things like renewing their passports and dealing with airport security screeners. The General Services Administration’s DigitalGov team launched the initiative last week.

More from MarketWatch