From guaranteed paid sick leave to tougher gun control laws, from a higher minimum wage to a comparably smooth rollout of the Affordable Care Act, few governors have embraced President Barack Obama's liberal policies with the zeal of Gov. Dannel P. Malloy.

Malloy's fealty to the president's agenda earned the Democratic governor a seat just to the right of first lady Michelle Obama at Tuesday night's State of the Union address.

"I was honored to be sitting one seat away from the first lady,'' Malloy said during a brief interview after leaving the House chamber following the speech. (The chair between them was left empty as a symbolic tribute to victims of gun violence.)

"To hear the president talk about so many things we've done was gratifying to me,'' Malloy said. "I appreciate the recognition he was giving to the state of Connecticut."

Obama did not spend significant time in his final State of the Union speech discussing those initiatives. Nor did he mention Connecticut or Malloy by name. But the first policy cited by Obama — overhauling America's criminal justice system — is also one of Malloy's chief priorities.

Malloy visited the White House before the speech and talked with Obama administration staffers about reforming the criminal justice system. The governor's Second Chance Society initiative, approved by the legislature last year, emphasizes treatment and redemption over punishment and incarceration for low-level drug offenders. It reduces the penalties for drug possession and overhauls the pardons and parole system.

"He and I have had the opportunity to talk about the Second Chance Society,'' Malloy said. The governor is planning a new set of proposals, including reforming the bail system and changing the way courts deal with offenders younger than 25.

Obama spent much of his speech focusing on big picture issues such as dealing with climate change, curing cancer and combating terrorism. Gun control was mentioned just once during the 58-minute address.

Still, advocates of stricter gun laws applauded Obama's message. "The president challenged Congress to take action on gun violence prevention legislation and to prevent opioid addiction,'' said Rep. Elizabeth Esty, a Democrat from Connecticut's 5th District. "I have repeatedly called on my colleagues to have this debate since the tragedy at Sandy Hook, as we have not had a single vote on the issue. Partisanship cannot be an excuse for inaction in Congress and it is time we answer the call to honor with action those we have lost due to senseless gun violence."

Esty was joined at the speech by two guests who are involved in gun violence prevention efforts: New Britain police Chief James Wardwell and former Rep. Gabrielle Giffords of Arizona, who was shot in Tucson in 2001.