BOSTON - Annie Lewis-O'Connor, founder and director of C.A.R.E. Clinic at Brigham and Women's Hospital, which treats women who have been victims of violence, recalled treating a college student who was sexually assaulted. The student had serious injuries, but wanted to be treated without telling her mother, who was undergoing chemotherapy.

Another patient with fractured ribs was told by her abusive husband that he would kill her if she told a doctor what happened.

In those cases and others, Lewis-O'Connor said she had to come up with workarounds so insurance companies would not send an explanation of benefits to the parent or husband who was the primary insurance subscriber.

Current law, which allows insurers to send medical information to the primary subscriber, is "definitely impeding access to health care" for patients who do not want to disclose information to family members, Lewis-O'Connor said.

A bill pending before the Massachusetts Legislature would prevent insurers from sharing confidential health information with anyone but the patient, in cases when multiple people are on one insurance plan. Supporters of the bill say this is necessary because insurers currently send explanation of benefits forms to the plan subscriber – which could be a patient's parent or spouse. These forms include the type of medical services received and their cost.

Alyssa Vangeli, senior health policy manager for the liberal-leaning health care advocacy group Health Care for All, said that creates a "significant confidentiality breach."

The bill, S. 557, was sponsored by Sen. Karen Spilka, D-Ashland, with a House companion bill sponsored by Rep. Kate Hogan, D-Stow, who chairs the Joint Committee on Public Health.

"Patient confidentiality is a foundational element of the patient provider relationship, and it's essential in helping patients feel comfortable accessing the true health care that they need," Spilka told the Joint Committee on Financial Services at a hearing on Tuesday. "Insurers' current billing and claims practices unintentionally but routinely violate basic confidentiality protections for anyone covered as a dependent on another person's policy."

The bill directs the state to come up with a common "summary of payments" form to be used by insurers. It would allow a patient who is not the primary insurance subscriber to choose the method of getting the form – by mailing it to the primary subscriber, or by mailing it to an alternate address or getting it electronically, if the insurer is able to do that. For example, a college student could request the statement be sent to his dormitory. The patient could also ask that a summary of payments not be sent.

The summary of payments would not include a description of sensitive health services, a category that includes treatment of substance abuse disorders, mental health problems, sexual or domestic abuse, reproductive or sexual health issues or infectious diseases.

Supporters the bill include organizations that deal with populations experiencing sensitive medical procedures – such as reproductive or sexual health care, AIDS treatment or mental illness. They also include general health-related organizations, including the division of Boston Children's Hospital dealing with young adult medicine, an association of college health administrators, the Massachusetts chapter of a national organization representing social workers, and Partners HealthCare System.

Supporters of the bill say without guaranteed confidentiality, young adults are more likely to forego medical care for sensitive issues, such as testing for sexually transmitted diseases, if they are worried their parents will find out. Victims of domestic abuse are less likely to seek treatment if they are worried their abuser will find out. The bill could also alleviate burdens on publicly funded community health centers, since currently some privately-insured individuals seek care there because they are worried that care covered by their insurance is not confidential.

Kim Daly, a nurse practitioner at Salem State University, said she saw one female college student who was forced to tell her parents about a sexual assault because an insurer sent home an explanation of benefits. A transgender student paid $1,600 out of pocket for a college health plan to avoid having his parents receive insurance statements. She has seen students reluctant to start medication for depression, anxiety or substance abuse.

While doctors are required to keep a patient visit confidential, "Once a patient leaves the room, we have no control over (explanation of benefit) practices," Daly said.

Daly said the problem has become worse under the Affordable Care Act, which allows young people to stay on their parents' health plans until age 26. So a graduate student seeking contraception might have that information sent home to their parents.

"There's no benefit to parents being aware of the sexual activities of their 25- or 26-year-old 'child,'" Daly said. "They're consenting adults."

Lora Pellegrini, president and CEO of the Massachusetts Association of Health Plans, said insurers that belong to the trade group already have procedures in place to address concerns about sensitive health information, including issuing the summary of payments to members, not the primary subscriber, and allowing members to request that summaries be sent to an alternative address. Some insurers use generic descriptions for all services and others do not include details for sensitive services.

Pellegrini said the association wants to reduce complex and unnecessary administrative costs, but also appreciates the confidentiality and privacy concerns. "We believe that we can work with the sponsors of the legislation to find common ground that meets the interests of our members while also ensuring that members can also understand in a transparent way the services, costs and cost sharing that may be associated with the medical care they received," Pellegrini said in a statement.

Massachusetts Attorney General Maura Healey supports the bill. Testifying before the legislative committee, she said it is important for survivors of sexual or domestic assault, young people seeking reproductive health care or mental health services and others.

"(Current practice) can dissuade young people from seeking or obtaining health care they need," Healey said. "I don't believe that's good for them or for the health and well being of our communities."

The bill has support from 75 lawmakers, including numerous lawmakers from Western Massachusetts: state Sens. Ben Downing, D-Pittsfield and Eric Lesser, D-Longmeadow, and state Reps. Stephen Kulik, D-Worthington, John Scibak, D-South Hadley, Ellen Story, D-Amherst, Gailanne Cariddi, D-North Adams, Jose Tosado, D-Springfield, Brian Ashe, D-Longmeadow, Smitty Pignatelli, D-Lenox, and Carlos Gonzalez, D-Springfield.