A new medical clinic at 113 Lockhart St. is open and accepting calls for appointments at (386) 316-2771. The clinic sees patients by appointment only, and only those who pass screening for age, income, employment and residency requirements. The clinic seeks only people who don't have health insurance, and provides free medical care.

DAYTONA BEACH — Dr. Gregory Favis worked as a physician for 36 years, with most of those years in the high-pressure world of treating cancer patients.

In August, Favis retired from the Oncology Center at Halifax Health Medical Center, but the 70-year-old Ormond Beach man isn't trading in his stethoscope for a fishing pole quite yet.

Favis is one of a few dozen doctors donating their time and services to a new medical clinic that's offering free care to patients who are working but can't afford insurance.

A new nonprofit organization, Volusia Volunteers in Medicine, opened the clinic east of Nova Road two weeks ago and has started taking patients. Jan Marini had an appointment with Favis the first day the clinic opened, and she could not be more grateful.

"I've been very frustrated trying to find a doctor who'd take me," said the 61-year-old Marini, who works part time as a caregiver to the elderly and hasn't had health insurance in years. "This clinic is such a blessing. I'll definitely go back. The level of care was excellent."

It took four years of planning to open the new medical center just off International Speedway Boulevard. Organizers say it'll be worth the effort to see thousands of people who fall into the gaps between health insurance, the Affordable Care Act and Medicaid land softly on the new safety net.

"There will be a culture of caring," said Jim Dixon, secretary of the new nonprofit's board.

PRIMARY CARE

So far, only Favis has seen patients. When the clinic gets up to full speed later this year, other doctors will also take appointments on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, and additional physicians throughout Volusia County will take referrals from the clinic for more involved care at their offices and provide service free of charge as well.

The new healthcare center on Lockhart Street will not provide emergency or urgent care, and it's not a walk-in clinic. Only patients with appointments will be seen, and to get those appointments, they'll have to call first to go through a screening process to determine if they qualify.

The main requirements are for patients to be 19-64 years old, Volusia County residents, employed or recently unemployed, and making a salary of about $11,770 to $23,540 for individuals or $25,250 to $48,500 for a family of four.

The clinic will handle primary care for things such as diabetes and sinus infections, and will refer patients who need testing and more specialized care to the other local doctors who've agreed to provide care free of charge. Those specialists include gynecologists, cardiologists, oncologists, ophthalmologists and podiatrists — and eventually, there will be referrals to dentists as well.

About 25 doctors and 20 nurses, some retired and some practicing, will help the clinic. The all-volunteer medical staff will work under state-provided sovereign immunity to protect them from lawsuits and free the clinic from the need to secure medical insurance, Dixon said.

No pain killers will be kept at the clinic, but it will house medications for things such as high cholesterol and high blood pressure.

COMMUNITY SUPPORT

The clinic has been made possible by an array of donations and fundraisers. The building it's located in, the Odessa Chambliss Center for Health Equity, is owned by Bethune-Cookman University and located on the edge of the school's campus.

Bethune-Cookman officials are allowing the clinic, which has three exam rooms, to take over half of the building rent-free and utility bill-free. The other half of the building will be used for the school's wellness programs that will also be offered to clinic patients.

The equipment in the clinic, everything from exam tables to blood pressure cuffs, has been donated by local hospitals and the Volusia County Health Department. The health department is also covering the salary of the only paid employee, who will work as the office manager. Cobb Cole attorney John Ferguson provided free legal help.

Dixon said the clinic will ultimately save the community money. An uninsured person with a sore throat or an achy knee who shows up at Halifax Health Medical Center's emergency room, which receives taxpayer support, can ring up a bill of about $2,400, according to Volusia Volunteers in Medicine figures.

If some of those visits that aren't appropriate for an emergency room can be shifted to the clinic, that will save many thousands of dollars every year, Dixon said. Board members hope the clinic will help about 2,500 patients per year, and they're confident the demand will be there.

In 2012, 63,000 working adults ages 19-65 in Volusia County didn't have health insurance, according to Congressional Budget Office figures. By late 2016, after full implementation of the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare, that number is projected to total 28,000.

To serve those uninsured residents, the clinic will need both donated labor from doctors and nurses as well as monetary donations from private individuals and corporations, Dixon said. The clinic will need about $45,000 every year to cover operating costs and things such as lab fees, he said.

The clinic has received its first large donation, which was pledged from Daytona International Auto Mall.

“It is rare that we are presented with such an opportunity to provide significant, immediate impact on the needs of our community," said Randy Dye, owner of Daytona Dodge Chrysler Jeep Ram.

Gary Yeomans of Gary Yeomans Ford said, “We are proud to give back locally and in a way that benefits people's lives. It's sad to think people right here in our community struggle to get the medical attention they need to live a better life.”

The amount of money the auto mall has promised to send each month for a year hasn't been revealed, but additional donations will be needed, clinic leaders say. With the help of the auto mall, they're holding a fund raising event Oct. 28 from 5:30 p.m. to 7 p.m. at Intracoastal Bank on LPGA Boulevard. A golf tournament is also planned for the spring to raise additional funds.

The new Daytona clinic will be the fourth of its kind in Volusia and Flagler counties. The others are the Jesus Clinic in Daytona Beach, the Good Samaritan clinic in DeLand and the Flagler County Free Clinic in Bunnell.