About 25 or so volunteers of the JEWISHcolorado Christmas Mitzvah Project reported Thursday morning to the Project Angel Heart headquarters and began preparing meals to deliver to people who are living with life-threatening illnesses.

“It feels so good to be able to volunteer and give back,” said Katie Clayman, as she helped decorate bags that will hold much-needed meals for the sick. “Even though we are Jewish, Christmas is the time of year people want to give, so this is how we give.”

Clayman was among about 300 volunteers who fanned out to 18 different sites throughout the area Thursday and Friday to relieve volunteers and others at local charities so they could celebrate the Christmas holiday with their families.

Doug Seserman, chief executive officer for JEWISHcolorado, said Jewish people in the area have been stepping in for volunteers for years, but this is the first year of the program under JEWISHcolorado.

“We thought this project was a nice fit with our work,” Seserman said. “It’s getting the energy of all these passionate members of the Jewish community to volunteer and help relieve our Christian friends.”

The volunteers made the rounds to places like the Holly Creek Retirement Community in Centennial, the Ronald McDonald House in Denver and Children’s Hospital Colorado in Aurora.

One of the lucky ones to receive Christmas Eve off was Kim Acuff, an assistant manager at the gift shop at Children’s Hospital Colorado. Acuff used her time to do some last-minute gift wrapping, grocery shopping and cooking for the holiday.

“I was so excited,” Acuff said. “It’s so busy in the gift shop, it’s nice to have that extra day off.”

Her replacement, volunteer Bonnie Merenstein, has been helping out at the gift shop for years.

“I love to volunteer wherever it is needed,” she said. “When people work on holidays, it makes their lives more difficult. I’m thrilled to do it.”

Some Jewish volunteers at the hospital helped kids in the lobby with arts and crafts, while others were dispatched to the play room on the eighth floor.

Over at Project Angel Heart, the moment was not lost on Eric Lenderman, who was volunteering in the program for the first time.

“We all take a lot of time to worry about our own lives and don’t take the time to worry about other people,” Lenderman said. “I think I’m guilty of that.”

And even though Jews do not celebrate Christmas, Seserman said this time of year is about giving to others, regardless of what faith you practice.

“It’s just a really nice effort on behalf of the community to help each other and help those in need at the same time,” he said. “It felt very Jewish.”

Carlos Illescas: 303-954-1175, cillescas@denverpost.com or @cillescasdp