Connecticut immigration activists like Lucas Codognolla believe President Obama’s plan to push ahead with reforms on his own is a “monumental win for the immigrant rights movement,” but one that remains incomplete.

“Obviously, it won’t be perfect because it leaves out millions of people,” Codognolla, a member of Connecticut Students for a DREAM, said Thursday.

That sentiment is being echoed by members of Connecticut’s congressional delegation.

“These actions [by President Obama] would only provide limited, temporary relief,” said Congresswoman Elizabeth Esty, D-5. She said Obama’s plan to indefinitely delay deportation for millions of undocumented immigrants "is limited in the scope that it covers.”

The reforms the president intends to detail tonight would only delay deportations for immigrants without major criminal violations on their records for five years. It would also reportedly not offer undocumented immigrants government subsidies for health care under the Affordable Care Act.

Obama’s planned actions could impact an estimated five million undocumented immigrants now in the U.S.

Esty and U.S. Rep. Joe Courtney, D-2, agree that the president’s plan to defer action on deportations for millions of immigrants “is well within the executive branch’s authority.”

Congressional Republican leaders are angry about Obama’s proposed actions, insisting they would exceed the president’s authority on immigration issues.

State Rep. Arthur O’Neill, a deputy Republican House leader from Southbury, is of the same opinion. “I think he really should wait for Congress,” O’Neill said. “The president has been saying for years he didn’t have the authority for what he now says he has authority to do.”

“When a legislative body decides not to do something the executive branch wants to do, that should be the end of it,” O’Neill said. Overriding the will of a legislature in such cases “is the way the Czar used to rule, or the Kaiser used to rule… That’s never been the system in this country.”

But Courtney said “previous administrations have repeatedly done” similar actions.

Courtney and Esty said President Obama’s unilateral actions needs to be followed up by congressional passage of far more comprehensive reform. Courtney said Obama’s executive order is expected to “leave unaddressed a number of issues.”

Connecticut’s congressional delegation has been pushing for U.S. House action on a bipartisan immigration reform plan approved by the Senate more than a year ago. House GOP leaders have refused to bring the bill up for a vote.

“It’s not a perfect bill,” said Esty, “but it’s much better than our badly broken immigration system.” She said the Senate measure would provide an “earned path to citizenship” for undocumented immigrants, offer a means to secure the U.S. borders, and would “keep families together.”

Codognolla was born in Brazil and came to the U.S. 14 years ago at age nine. He applied for and was granted protection from deportation in 2012 as one of Connecticut’s student “Dreamers.”

“It really changed my life,” Codognolla said, explaining he was able to continue his studies at the University of Connecticut. A Stamford resident, Codognolla graduated in December and now works as a para-legal at the office of an immigration lawyer.