Topics: 2016 Democratic primary, 2016 Elections, Bernie Sanders, Democratic debates, Democratic Leadership Council, Democratic Party, Editor's Picks, Foreign policy, Free Trade, Hillary Clinton, Jim Webb, Lincoln Chafee, Martin O'Malley, The Trans-Pacific Partnership, Elections News, News, Politics News

Without the spectacle of a Donald Trump, CNN’s Democratic presidential debate tomorrow evening won’t draw the record 23 million viewers who tuned into the network’s GOP slugfest last month. But as the only Democratic debate scheduled to air on a weeknight before the February 1 Iowa caucuses, Tuesday night’s face-off comes with high stakes for the five candidates slated to appear onstage at the Wynn Las Vegas.

Hillary Clinton, who retains a comfortable but diminished lead, hopes to assuage doubts about her candidacy, but she must avoid a repeat of the disastrous 2007 performance in which she took multiple stances on driver’s licenses for undocumented immigrants — in the space of one answer. Meanwhile, Bernie Sanders will seek to expand his appeal beyond the white progressive activists who have cheered his egalitarian message, and Martin O’Malley, Jim Webb, and Lincoln Chafee will compete to score break-out performances.

But while much of the post-debate analysis will focus on how well candidates met their own objectives — Did Clinton stanch the bleeding after a summer of tough headlines and declining polls? Does Sanders look like a viable nominee? Did Chafee manage to remind people he exists? — in a better world, we’d focus just as much on how well the debate informed voters about the candidates’ policy proposals, worldviews, and track records. So here’s a list of questions — Salon settled for one per candidate — that we hope to see moderators Don Lemon and Anderson Cooper ask the hopefuls. They’re designed to probe the candidates’ positions, illuminate what drives them, and get at the core rationale for their candidacies.

Without further ado:

Hillary Clinton

Madam Secretary, last week you announced your opposition to the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement, arguing that the pact failed to meet your taste of creating American jobs, boosting wages, and promoting American national security. Yet as Secretary of State in 2012, you championed TPP as “the gold standard in trade agreements,” specifically citing its protections for workers, wages, and American strategic interests.

During your tenure as Secretary, you also advocated for the U.S. free trade agreements with Colombia and South Korea, both of which you fiercely opposed during your 2008 campaign. In that race, you also, along with then-Sen. Obama, called for a renegotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement, although it emerged that your campaign, like Obama’s, met privately to tell Canadian officials that your campaign-stump skepticism of NAFTA should be taken “with a grain of salt.”

This came just eight years after you expressed concerns about NAFTA during your 2000 Senate campaign — only to praise the agreement in your 2003 memoir.

Given your record of saying one thing about free trade agreements while you’re campaigning and doing another while in office, why should Democratic voters trust your latest word on TPP?

Bernie Sanders

Sen. Sanders, you’ve attracted an impassioned following with your call for a “political revolution” against the “billionaire class,” a call which resonates deeply amid widespread anxiety over economic inequality and a growing sense that the deck is stacked against working and middle class families.

Leading that revolution has become the raison d’etre of your campaign, and you’ve also proposed massive investments in health, education, jobs, and infrastructure as a means of improving the economic lot of ordinary Americans.

But while domestic and economic issues are at the forefront of many voters’ minds, the next president will confront a host of international problems, from the long-brewing to the unforeseen. And though you have touted your opposition to the war in Iraq, foreign policy issues have received relatively short shrift during your campaign.