New rules so shameful, no lawmaker admits responsibility for them.

Boehner, Reid and McConnell on Dec. 10, 2014. (Photo: Drew Angerer, Getty Images)

As if there weren't enough mega donors pumping multimillions into politics already, Congress opened yet another avenue for influence Saturday night, when, conveniently for senators, almost no voters were watching.

The change — which would allow an individual to give more than $776,000 a year to political parties, eight times the current statutory limit — was sneaked onto page 1,599 of the controversial $1.1 trillion spending bill that averted a government shutdown. Most lawmakers didn't know a thing about it until it appeared last week in the House version of the bill.

REINCE PRIEBUS: Fundraising now more transparent

The provision might have been defeated standing on its own and open to public scrutiny. But by tucking it inside the must-pass spending bill, congressional leaders left lawmakers a choice between swallowing it (and other detestable last-minute items) or voting against the entire bill and closing down the government.

Some choice. Which is precisely what supporters counted on.

The new rules are so shameful that no member of Congress admits responsibility for them. According to news accounts, it was the brainchild of Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, who was worried about financing his party's convention in 2016. Senate Majority Harry Reid, D-Nev., quietly negotiated the deal to ensure the Democrats got theirs. Yet, Boehner aides declined to defend it, and Reid's spokesman didn't respond to questions about the senator's role.

While packaged as a way to pay for the national party conventions, along with the needs of the six party committees, it opens yet another way for rich donors to influence senators and House members.

You don't need to go far to see the power of money in politics. Another measure sneaked into the same spending bill weakened a restriction on risky derivatives trading that was part of legislation four years ago aimed at curbing Wall Street practices that caused the 2008 financial collapse. Commercial banks, which gave more than $25 million to House and Senate candidates in the 2014 election cycle, have been trying to gut that legislation ever since. On Saturday, they got one slice of what they wanted.

For the public, meanwhile, the prospects for trimming back the corrosive power of money seem to be growing more distant.

The Supreme Court opened the spigot four years ago by declaring political spending to be a form of free speech, leaving few tools for slowing it down, and those that remain available appear unlikely to be used, at least in the short term.

Public financing, which was making some headway in the states, has lost ground, as North Carolina last year became the latest to retreat from it. And hopes that spending could at least be made more transparent appeared to be dashed when Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., previously a supporter of the idea, blocked an important disclosure measure in 2012. Next month, Republicans, likely led by McConnell, will take control of the Senate.

Until candidates begin tapping the deep well of public resentment such practices provoke, not much is likely to change. But, of course, those would be the very same candidates who depend on the money they'd be restricting.

Not a pretty picture.

USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Dyb0Ln