Has been home to icons such as Charles Dickens and William Blake

Five bedroom home in North London on the market for £3.65million

The upmarket district of Hampstead in North London is associated more with the chattering classes than affordable housing. Some of the priciest properties in Britain are found in this magnet for the rich and famous.

So it will surprise some to learn that Hampstead Garden Suburb, a swathe of low-density early 20th Century housing that stretches as far as Golders Green, was built specifically to cater for people from all social classes and economic backgrounds. It occupies 243 acres bought from Eton College in 1906.

Today, One Direction’s Harry Styles and TV hosts Jonathan Ross, Richard Madeley and Judy Finnigan are among celebrity residents.

Heath and home: The five-bedroom £3.65million Wyldes Farm feels rural yet is in the middle of London

Who knows what Raymond Unwin, the socialist architect who designed the suburb, would be thinking, particularly about the fact that Wyldes Farm, the Hampstead house where he lived, is on the market for £3.65 million – and that’s for just half of it.

The house has five bedrooms and two reception rooms, and its location – with Hampstead Heath on its doorstep – starts to explain its asking price.

It was built in the mid-1600s as a farmhouse. But by the end of the 18th Century Hampstead had become a fashionable place for artists and intellectuals, and home-owners began to let out rooms – including at Wyldes Farm.

Landscape painters John Constable and William Collins (whose son Wilkie, the novelist, used to play in the garden as a child) lived in the house, as did the Romantic poet William Blake. It is also believed to have been used as a meeting place for members of the Fabian Society in the late 19th Century.

But its most famous resident was Charles Dickens. In 1837, a distraught Dickens, then in his mid-20s, rented the property following the death of his sister-in-law Mary Hogarth.

Airy: The modern kitchen is in a house full of historic features

At the time of his stay, Dickens was writing his first two major novels, The Pickwick Papers and Oliver Twist. They were written in instalments, because they were serialised in literary magazines.

As he was working to tight deadlines, Dickens needed a secluded place to work, and he knew the area offered this because he had stayed there in his childhood when his father was trying to evade creditors.

The house, which has two staircases, has plenty of features to remind you how it would have looked when Dickens was writing – vaulted ceilings, panelled walls and exposed beams.

Famous residents: Charles Dickens and romantic painter John Constable lived in the house

But it has been updated sufficiently to provide a slick, modern environment. There’s a vast kitchen-dining area with an island workstation and a beautifully presented en suite bathroom and dressing room for the master bedroom.

Outside there are three sections of garden, each offering excellent entertainment space in the summer.

Wyldes’s current owner, Yamuna Sharma, is selling because she and her husband plan to live abroad. She says the artistic tradition of the house has lived on.

‘Painters, musicians, actors, designers have continued to stay,’ she says.

Indeed Sharma has recently rented out the house to a family with a strong connection to the arts.

Her tenants, businessman Scott Finlay, 54, and teacher wife Catherine, 53, have seen their 21-year-old daughter, a film-maker, and 23-year-old son, an artist, develop their careers while living there.

The three outbuildings have helped. The Finlays’ son has used one as a studio.

Architect and poet: Sir Raymond Urwin who designed the suburb and romantic writer William Blake

Meanwhile their daughter drew inspiration from the filming of the recent British film about slavery – Belle – up the road at Kenwood House.

Catherine says: ‘We have loved the house’s unique sense of history, and it’s magical living on the edge of the Heath.’

Gary Saunders, of estate agents Westways, says: ‘There’s been a great deal of interest. It is the first time the house has been on sale for 34 years, it has direct access to the Heath and is a gem of a property with a unique story.’