Libs hate the idea of black women Republicans so much that one of the best-known black Democrats in Congress is threatening to go to war with a black Democrat president over the prospect of a black woman being named a federal judge because she’s a Republican.

Which party is in a “war on women?”

U.S. Rep. John L. Lewis, the Georgia Democrat whose aides falsely claimed was spit on by conservatives opposing Obamacare back in 2010, is accusing the president of selling out his political base by naming Eleanor Ross as a federal judge. She is, literally, not politically correct enough.

Since most black women are Democrats, Lewis reasons, any black woman Obama appoints should be Democrat, too.

“Black women vote in a higher percentage than any other group in Georgia,” Lewis told USA Today columnist DeWayne Wickham for a column published Tuesday. “I think the president should do better by them.”

And Wickham, one of the most reliably inane lib pundits in a country rife with inane lib pundits – agrees.

“Lewis is right,” he writes. “This fight is about the long term, not the remaining years of Obama’s presidency,” he writes. “As important as it is to Democrats to get as many of Obama’s judicial nominations confirmed as possible, it’s even more important to put the right people on the bench.”

What’s interesting about the column is that Wickham describes opposition to five other nominees Obama put forward based on their record – one voted as a state representative to keep the Confederate battle flag on the Georgia state flag, another is an attorney who defended Georgia’s common-sense voter ID law.

Fair enough. Flawed but fair enough.

The opposition to Ross’s nomination, though, appears to be based entirely on her race, her sex and her politics – in that order.

There’s a beautiful irony in the confirmation fight that’s coming over Ross – and one that the libs will no doubt are miss completely.

The first black president names the first black woman to the federal bench in Georgia and “civil rights leaders” who’ve made skin color a primary way of judging people for decades are furious because she’s not their kind.

And Republicans are in a war on women?