Topics: 2014 elections, America, Democrats, Editor's Picks, Education, Education Reform, election, Election Day, Energy, fiscal policy, GOP, Jonathan Chait, Medicaid, Midterms, Privacy, privatization, States, The Left, The Right, Trade, voting, Voting Rights, Politics News

Most political junkies spend Election Day scanning social media for exit polls and turnout predictions, or comparing data analysts to find out who will win or lose. The consequences of the vote for the lives of ordinary Americans must wait.

This year, the horse race hasn’t just overshadowed the policy implications, it has overwhelmed them. A key media narrative of these elections, perhaps one that has cynically created the very voter apathy pundits deride, has been that they hold no meaning, that gridlock will continue in Washington regardless of who controls the Senate, that nothing will actually change.

But there’s an old expression: You may not be interested in politics, but it’s definitely interested in you. Contrary to the bleating of a bored media elite, there’s plenty at stake in the midterms. Here’s a guide, inevitably incomplete, to the concrete policy questions surrounding Election Day.

The states

Claims that the elections have no meaning rest on a category error. Congressional elections share the ballot with thousands of state and local races. That includes 146 initiatives where policy is literally on the ballot, from the minimum wage (Alaska, Arkansas, Nebraska and South Dakota) to the war on drugs (marijuana legalization in Alaska, Oregon and D.C., drug sentencing reform in California) to education funding (19 initiatives in 14 states) and much more.

But 36 gubernatorial seats are also up for grabs, and in one of the closest elections in modern history, as many as 12 are within the margin of error. Regardless of legislative control, who runs states as blue as Massachusetts and Connecticut, as red as Alaska and Kansas, and as purple as Michigan, Wisconsin, Florida, Colorado and Maine really matters, and here’s why.

Privatization: A recent report by the Center for Media and Democracy listed several incidents of Republican governors unilaterally outsourcing public functions, from healthcare and education to prisons and economic development agencies. In states like Illinois, Rhode Island and Massachusetts, candidates with significant ties to financial firms could gain control of state pension funds, and hand them over. So these elections will determine how much of the public sector will be eroded in the next four years.

Conservative fiscal policy: As my colleague Thomas Frank reports, since 2010 Kansas government has become an Arthur Laffer napkin scribble sprung to life, with fairly miserable results. Voters can render a verdict on tax cuts and austerity by tossing out Gov. Sam Brownback. To a similar extent, Scott Walker’s destruction of public employee unions and Rick Snyder’s transformation of Michigan into a right-to-work state have put targets on their backs. Send them all to reelection, and conservative chief executives will justifiably take the lesson that such “bold reforms” breed electoral success.

The Medicaid expansion: States with close gubernatorial races that still have not expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act include Alaska, Florida, Georgia, Kansas, Maine and Wisconsin. The Maine Legislature has twice approved expansion, only to see it vetoed by Gov. Paul LePage, so a change there would almost certainly get expansion through. Republican Asa Hutchinson, favored to win the governor’s race in Arkansas, could decline to maintain his state’s private insurance option for Medicaid, which he has called “a pilot project that can be ended if needed.” Plus, the potential for Democratic victories in North Carolina, another laboratory for conservative governance, has led Gov. Pat McCrory, who’s not even on the ballot this year, to consider expansion anyway. So the healthcare of potentially hundreds of thousands of poor Americans is on the line.

Education reform: The race for California superintendent of public instruction has become a referendum on the internal Democratic war over public education, pitting pro-labor Tom Torlakson against pro-charter school, anti-tenure Marshall Tuck. Setting the policy trajectory in the nation’s largest state will help determine the outcome of this fight.

Washington

Contra Jonathan Chait, just because stakes are high in the states doesn’t mean they’re meaningless in Congress. House Republicans and the president may want many different things, and neither has the votes to cancel the other out. But if, as expected, Republicans take over the Senate, there are discrete areas of alignment.