Canadian specialty-drug giant Valeant Pharmaceuticals International agreed to pay $1 billion for Sprout Pharmaceuticals Thursday, two days after Sprout’s much-debated female aphrodisiac Addyi received FDA approval.

The market seemed unimpressed by the move, as Valeant (VRX) stock fell 6.5% Thursday, to a six-week low of 229.06. A top-performing stock in recent years, Valeant shares touched a record high near 264 on Aug. 6.

Valeant agreed to pay $500 million upfront and another $500 million in the first quarter of next year, “plus a share of future profits based upon the achievement of certain milestones,” according to the company’s press release.

Valeant expects the deal to have no impact on 2015 earnings and be modestly accretive in 2016.

Addyi, also known by its generic name flibanserin, has often been compared with Pfizer‘s (PFE) blockbuster Viagra in the press. But whereas Viagra affects only the physics of impotence, Addyi treats hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD), or low libido.

Third Time’s A Charm

The FDA rejected the drug twice before finally approving it Tuesday with fairly heavy safety restrictions, as the drug can cause dizziness, nausea and fainting, especially when combined with alcohol. Physicians prescribing Addyi and pharmacies selling it must be certified under a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) program and counsel patients on the risks.

Nonetheless, Addyi is the first and only drug treating HSDD on the market, and the massive social-media campaign that backed its approval indicates a substantial demand for some kind of libido drug.

“Delivering a first-ever treatment for a commonly reported form of female sexual dysfunction gives us the perfect opportunity to establish a new portfolio of important medications that uniquely impact women,” Valeant CEO J. Michael Pearson said in a statement.

“We applaud the efforts of the Sprout team to address this important area of unmet need and look forward to working with them to bring the benefits of Addyi to additional markets around the world,” he said.

Women’s health hasn’t been a traditional focus for Valeant, whose largest product lines are in dermatology and opthalmology, including the giant Bausch & Lomb contact-lens brand.

But BMO Capital Markets analyst Alex Arfaei sees it as fitting in with “Valeant’s strategic focus on aesthetic-like markets with limited big-pharma competition.”

He wrote in a research note that although Valeant’s management expects to hire 150 to 200 sales reps for Addyi, which is expected to launch in mid-October, Valeant shouldn’t have to spend much compared to the possible income.

“Management believes female HSDD could be a very large market, potentially similar in size to the $5 billion male erectile dysfunction (ED) market,” Arfaei said in his note Thursday.

“Moreover, management believes that there is significant pent-up demand, so with a salesforce that could be up and running by the end of the year, sales could ramp up quickly.

“However, we believe that uptake will be significantly lower than in ED, given the safety issues with the product.”

Priced At $400 A Month

Another difference between Addyi and the ED drugs is that Addyi has to be taken constantly instead of before a specific sex act. The maintenance dose has been priced at $400 a month, which Sprout says is on par with ED drug spending.

Insurers, though, are still working out whether and how they will cover the product. Not all insurers cover sexual-performance treatments.

Anthem (ANTM) has put Addyi on its third tier, as it has put Viagra and Eli Lilly‘s (LLY) Cialis, offering some reimbursement but not as much as its preferred drugs.

Other insurers and pharmacy benefit managers have said that they’re still thinking about it.

“The high level of uncertainty around this product seems like an area (Valeant) management generally tries to avoid,” wrote Morningstar analyst Michael Waterhouse in a research note.

“Additionally, the likelihood of no insurance coverage could also suppress customer willingness to pay out-of-pocket,” he said, “but the drug’s avoidance of reimbursement does fit nicely with Valeant’s preference for cash-pay products.”