Junior part of a revamped rotation looking to lead Cougars to another state title

Resurrection Christian's Jake Tomcheck hurls a pitch during his team's win Saturday. Tomcheck has to wear the mask on the mound after shattering his cheekbone last month at practice. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Jake Tomcheck has been patiently waiting his turn.

Jake Lohr and Cory Wiggins were so dominant on the mound in Resurrection Christian's run to the 2A state title last year, there weren't many innings left over for any of their teammates.

The duo that combined for 14 of the team's 22 wins and 91 of the 148 innings pitched has graduated, leaving Tomcheck as part of a committee of arms expected to step up in the Cougars' rotation this spring.

However, his junior season nearly ended before it even started last month when he was beaned in the face by a teammate at practice.

"I thought I heard one of my coaches call my name, so I looked over there, and (my throwing partner) wasn't looking at me," Tomcheck explained. "So I looked back, and he had already thrown the ball back to me. Hit me square in the cheekbone and shattered it into about 80 pieces."

"It was pretty nuts. As soon as it hit me, I knew something was wrong."

Along with the shattered cheekbone, Tomcheck broke the orbital rim under his eye in eight pieces, requiring surgery in which three metal plates were inserted on the inside of his mouth in addition to receiving more than 50 stitches to hold everything together.

"It was quite the incident," he said. "The first thing I thought of was the season. With the season coming up, I didn't want to miss too much of it."

Tomcheck missed exactly zero games.

He was cleared to play just in time for the Cougars' season opener on Thursday. Then Saturday, he made his pitching debut, tossing four efficient innings in a 12-2 win over Liberty Common, the first half of a doubleheader sweep for RCS.

Advertisement

"He's got three titanium plates attached to his cheek. So for him to come out and throw the way he did, I'm pumped for that," coach Grant MacAlmon said.

Tomcheck is expected to make a full recovery in three weeks, but until then he'll have to wear a protective mask if he's either pitching or playing first base. It's definitely an adjustment, especially considering the mask jiggles during his delivery and can hide his target during his follow-through.

Resurrection Christian's Nathan Wiggins sprints away from home plate on his way around to third base after hitting a triple in the bottom of the third inning against Liberty Common on Saturday at RCS. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

He was also naturally a little skittish when he first returned to the diamond, which made Saturday's performance that much more impressive.

"I surpassed my expectations for myself on the mound and at the plate today," he said. "I didn't think I was going to perform to the level I did, and I had great defense behind me to back me up, so we were able to come out with a couple wins."

Tomcheck may have surprised himself more than his coach.

"The kid's a football player, so he knows what it's like to look through a facemask," MacAlmon said. "And he's tough as nails."

As is par for the course for a defending state champion, Rez came into the season as the top-ranked team in 2A.

Early returns indicate the Cougars are right on track to go back-to-back. After Saturday's sweep — with a 12-2 win in Game 1 and a 17-1 victory in Game 2 — the Cougars have now won their first three games by a combined score of 51-3.

Only time will tell, though, if Rez remains a bonafide contender when the postseason rolls around, especially considering the arms the Cougars are having to replace this spring.

Along with Tomcheck, the Cougars will be counting on Koby Bishop near the top of the revamped rotation. And like Tomcheck, Bishop's debut on the mound Saturday went pretty well, giving up just one unearned run in four innings to go along with four strikeouts and no walks.

"I'm really excited about that. Me and Tomcheck, and Luke Fick and Luke Mondt, I feel like we're ready for that," Bishop said. "We won the state championship (last year) so there was nothing to complain about. But it's kind of our time now that they're gone."

Sean Star: 970-669-5050, sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/seanvstar