A team of researchers has unveiled a bidirectional ICD-9 and ICD-10 mapping tool which it claims will enable healthcare organizations, providers, researchers, and other professionals to compare diseases during the upcoming ICD-10 transition.

Two kinds of tools emerged from the work of Boyd et al published in the Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. The first is a web portal tool for converting ICD-10-CM to ICD-9-CM. The second is a set of tables annotated with levels of translation complexity. “Examining the network graphs of individual ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes from the online tool can provide a quick view of the challenges facing administrators evaluating high-cost diagnoses,” the authors claim.

Boyd et al. used publicly available 2014 general equivalence mappings (GEMs) to create a bidirectional map of ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes. Next, the researchers identified 36 network patterns for translating ICD-10-CM to ICD-9-CM and place them into one of five categories of translation complexity: identify, class-to-subclass, subclass-to-class, convoluted, and no mapping.

Of all the codes analyzed, only 4127 ICD-10-CM codes had straightforward translations to ICD-9-CM:

Unsurprisingly, as ICD-10-CM is more comprehensive than ICD-9-CM, an additional 536 class-to-subclass relationships were found. Similarly, 7478 subclass-to-class translations were identified. Importantly, a substantial number of relationships were convoluted (57 013) or had no mapping to ICD-9-CM (669).

According to Boyd et al., the need for the tools is necessary for when stylistic differences in choosing appropriate ICD-10-CM codes become commonplace following the October 2015 transition to the next code set.

“While standards and guidelines are taught to professional medical coders9 who attempt to normalize the stylistic differences, many clinics and physicians create a punch sheet, or a list of codes, that will likely introduce biases in the use of ICD-10-CM codes,” the researchers maintain.

The stylistic differences are likely to become problematic as healthcare organizations and providers work with replacement coders or coding agencies. “The evolution of ICD-10-CM coding will occur as well as new individuals joining teams in the future will learn from their colleagues and predecessors,” claims Boyd et al.

Additionally, the team of researchers is calling on future studies to observe inconsistencies across and variations between healthcare organizations to determine how coding styles affect reimbursement and the usefulness of coding data for secondary and tertiary purposes.

Another impetus for the construction of a new bidirectional ICD-9 to ICD-10 conversion tool is the usefulness of single GEMs files for analyzing patient cohorts, posing potential challenges to the evaluation of residencies, fellowships, practices, and physicians because of what is missing.

“Due to the way the GEMs files are designed, a researcher or evaluator will miss 30% of the ICD-9-CM diagnosis codes and potentially miss patients, as well, if only the ICD-10-CM GEMs files are used,” the team of researchers observes.

Read the full study here.