More than a week after Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager, was shot and killed by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo., the unrest in the St. Louis suburb reached its worst level yet. Protesters took to the street again on Sunday to voice their outrage, using gunfire, hurling firebombs, rocks and even Molotov cocktails at police officers, who responded with tear gas, smoke bombs, rubber bullets, and a call for hundreds of more officers in riot gear to join the fight.

On Monday, after nine days of rioting, Gov. Jay Nixon announced that he would deploy the National Guard to the area in an effort to bring peace.

The clashes may be in Missouri, but they’ve affected nearly every town in the United States, leading to protests in various cities and making citizens question their own town’s law enforcement strategy as well as ongoing racial tensions around the country.

Acknowledging the added toll the violence has probably taken on local students, the St. Louis Rams, owned by Denver billionaire Stan Kroenke, reportedly provided tickets to high school players in the area to the Rams’ preseason game against the Packers this past Saturday.

Robert Klemko of MMQB.com was on the scene in Ferguson over the weekend, providing updates and talking to folks in the region. (Klemko was even temporarily arrested by police during the clashes.) On Monday, in his weekly “Monday Morning Quarterback,” Peter King shared Klemko’s latest bit of information from St. Louis:

Rams manager of fan development & alumni relations Kyle Eversgerd put in a call to coaches at McCluer High, McCluer North and McCluer South; there would be 75 free tickets awaiting each team if they chose to come to Saturday’s preseason game at the Edward Jones Dome. “In light of everything going on it just kind of hit me,” says Eversgerd, whose job includes outreach with local high schools. “I can’t imagine with all that stuff going on, how tough it must be to practice. We were able to get them away from it all.” So as hundreds of protesters faced off with police on the now-infamous West Florissant Avenue on Saturday night in Ferguson, leaving a man critically wounded by gunfire just yards from the homes of area children, the boys from three local teams were at their first NFL game, watching Aaron Rodgers and Sam Bradford from the 400 level. Said McCluer coach Mario MacDonald, “Our kids are focused on this season, but I worry about them out here, to be honest.” At McCluer, MacDonald estimates more than 75% of his roster comes from single-parent homes, and most would not have been able to otherwise afford tickets that average about $100. The game was a welcome distraction; many McCluer players are angry with police and inclined to protest after Michael Brown’s shooting death here a week ago. On the bus ride to the game, players saw protesters on Florissant and started chanting, “Hands Up! Don’t Shoot!” Then they focused on football.

On Saturday, Klemko wrote about Bears defensive lineman David Bass, who grew up in St. Louis County and encountered racial profiling — and still does.

“When I go home I get pulled over just because,” Bass told Klemko. “… When they don’t know who you are, all you are is black. They don’t know that I graduated from college, or that I’m in the NFL. But when they find that out, they want to stop and have a conversation.”

Check out Klemko’s full feature on Bass, as well as the latest news on the Rams’ response to the unrest in Ferguson.