Cornelia Schmidt became a Meals on Wheels volunteer shortly after moving with her husband from Germany to Lubbock in 2013. In the process, she said, she developed familial relationships not only with her MOW co-workers, but with clients to whom she delivers hot lunches twice a week.

This is not at all unusual, according to Lisa Gilliland, who worked as Meals on Wheels assistant director for 16 years before being promoted to executive director one year ago.

Quite often, noted Gilliland, volunteers delivering meals may be a client’s only human contact.

What many in the general public fail to realize, says Gilliland, is that Lubbock’s Meals on Wheels receives no funding whatsoever by United Way or any government agencies. Rather, MOW depends on individual and business donations and on fundraisers.

Lubbock’s Meals on Wheel debuted more than four decades ago, in 1971, with a small group of board members, staff and volunteers delivering weekday meals to 29 recipients.

Today, more than 1,200 volunteers help Lubbock’s Meals on Wheels serve more than 700 weekday meals on 53 routes. In addition, 180 weekend meals are delivered in advance to those who have no access via friends or family members.

Gilliland added that many studies show people fare better residing in their own homes rather than in hospitals or nursing facilities. Meals on Wheels, she said, focuses on helping “the homebound, elderly and disabled,” with recipients ranging in age from 21 to a person “who is 105 years old and living alone at home.”

Schmidt, who is better known to co-workers and clients as “Conny,” said, “When people in Lubbock were immediately so friendly in helping us get settled, I wanted to do something to give back to the community. We moved here two years ago, and 18 months ago I called Meals on Wheels and volunteered.”

Similar programs exist in Germany, said Schmidt, the difference being that sometimes volunteers are thought to have “too much time on their hands.”

She added, “Whereas here, when people see you are a volunteer, they say, ‘Wow, that’s great.’ You feel appreciated.”

She delivers meals on Mondays and Fridays. Gilliland and her assistant director, Mary Gerlach, added that Schmidt also helps prepare weekend meal sacks and volunteers for fundraisers.

“To just deliver the meals takes about an hour,” says the volunteer. “It takes me a little longer. I like to talk to the people a bit. Often, you are the only person they will see all day, and the smiles on their faces show you are bringing a great pleasure to them.”

Meals on Wheels is not just about the meat and two servings of fruit or vegetables. Schmidt loves delivering flowers that “brighten their weekends.”

One of her favorite things to do is deliver cakes on her clients’ birthdays. “Then I sing ‘Happy Birthday’ twice,” she says. “Once in English and once in German.”

Clients appear equally happy. Tuesday was Barbara Berry’s 55th birthday, and she said MOW treats her like family.

She left a nursing home and began dialysis on March 8, 2013. She already had lost her vision.

“I have always been very independent,” said Berry. “MOW made it that much easier for me. I could not have made it without them. And it’s not just the food. Spiritually, they make me smile. I like the flowers and inspirational quotes.”

She spends most of each day “listening to TV or talking on the phone,” and looks forward to each visit from MOW.

“Even if I have a bad dialysis day, they will say something positive and try to cheer me up.”

Berry and James Weideman, 61, said they had no trouble being accepted by MOW.

Weideman explained that he broke his neck in a fall, which “caused further back and mobility problems.”

Returning home made him more relaxed and reduced his stress, he said, adding that people convinced him to call MOW because his bachelor ways would not result in nutritious, balanced meals.

His food arrives within a 15-minute range each day, but Weideman added, “I suppose one of my great joys is someone taking the time to talk to me. I don’t have many visitors.”

Meals on Wheels also recognizes that pets are “valuable companions” and delivers pet food every two weeks for 165 dogs and 98 cats.

Everything from flowers and bakery items to pet food and reading material is donated.

Meanwhile, Schmidt concluded that volunteering for Meals on Wheels “is the best decision I ever made.”

william.kerns@lubbockonline.com

• 766-8712

Follow William on Twitter

@AJ_WilliamKerns