Paul McNamee as King of Moomba in 1987. Photo: John Lamb

Tennis identity Paul McNamee's new autobiography Game Changer covers plenty of incidents in the former player and administrator's life, but strangely – or perhaps not – there's no mention of his ill-fated 106-day stint as Melbourne FC chief executive back in 2008.

Still there's plenty of other interesting yarns in the tome to be launched this week, with a certain J.P. McEnroe writing the foreword and also featuring in an anecdote that may help to explain the combustible New Yorker's infamous disqualification from the 1990 Australian Open. Back then, McNamee was tournament director of the lead-in event, the Hopman Cup, but not yet the Australian Open, and it was as the all-powerful founder of the mixed teams friendly in Perth that a little rule-bending may have contributed to the grand slam incident that made global headlines two weeks later.

As McNamee explains it, a frustrated Johnny Mac was unhappy that Italian nobody Paolo Cane was taking a dead singles rubber way too seriously, and duly received a warning and then a point penalty for swearing. At that point, referee Peter Bellenger (also the AO ref) called McNamee aside and advised him of the tougher new code-of-conduct rules in place for 1990, under which a third behavioural infraction meant an automatic default. But, the pragmatic Bellenger then pointed out that, well, given that the 1990 Hopman Cup technically started in the dying days of 1989, well ... "I suppose we could say last year's rules apply."

Paul McNamee with Amelie Mauresmo after winning the 2006 Australian Open.

"I didn't let him finish," McNamee writes. Last year's rules? Bring 'em on. Or back. Or something. There was a crowd, sponsors, broadcasters, to please. McEnroe duly broke a racquet, and refused to play on – when it should not, as it happens, been his choice anyway – before eventually finishing the match.

Advertisement

So to Melbourne Park. The middle Sunday of the Open. The master gamesman McEnroe, typically, pushing his luck against the umpire, and Swede Mikail Pernfors. Two steps ... then a third. He was out. The first player shown the door in AO history. Newly married McNamee was on his way back from his and wife Lesley's mini-honeymoon at a rented house in Portsea, when the radio announced that Mac was in the process of being sensationally defaulted by supervisor Ken Farrar. "We were outside the Mordialloc Hotel, so I stopped the car and ran in to watch TV, muttering 'he doesn't know the rule, he doesn't know the rule'," McNamee writes. "I was numb. It was no surprise to me when John revealed in his post-match media conference that he thought he had one more 'life'.

He wasn't aware that the rule had changed. And he's just played a tournament over in Perth under the old system ..." McNamee concedes: "John, you got the short straw - it was not all your doing. I apologise for my role in it."

'We won't have that many closed sessions. We're going to try to invite our members in and just try to restore a bit of faith in us.' New Essendon coach Mark Thompson thinks his club has work to do on and off the field in 2014. Photo: Pat Scala

Flocking together

So what does John Mac think of Our Mac? "Paul McNamee is very intense, has loads of nervous energy, can be annoying and brilliant at almost the same time, is extremely competitive, and has an undeniable love and passion for the sport of tennis. Hey, that sounds a lot like me!" writes McEnroe in the foreword to Game Changer. The book's title is a play on the twin concepts of the unusual lengths McNamee went to mid-career by ditching his flawed one-handed backhand for a double-fisted version with the help of the great Harry Hopman.

It was a brave move and helped forge his – some would say self-stoked – reputation for innovation that helped to grow the Australian Open from what he calls the grand slam "weak link" into the colossus it became by the time of his unhappy 2006 departure after a power struggle with then Tennis Australia boss Steve Wood. McNamee has a a few digs at TA over ticket price hikes, which he says are "straining the egalitarianism of the event" and the state of Oz tennis – "dire" – while his old foe John Newcombe gets a few whacks especially over the treatment of Davis Cup outsider-turned-hero Mark Philippoussis. There's also an interesting hint of the "heated" locker-room exchange between Pat Cash and Tony Roche that followed the 1999 US Open final between Flip and the nation's golden boy, Pat Rafter. Justine Henin, he concedes, was wrong to have retired through illness from the 2006 final against Amelie Mauresmo (McNamee says he "winced" when Henin told him she was fine to last through the presentation formalities). "In a way I wish she'd said she was too ill to stick around," he said, and also offers a mea culpa over juiced-up court speed in 2000.

There's also this little snippet about a Hopman Cup teen. "He cruised around nonchalantly, he had funky hair with a tinge of artificial colour and, although only 17, he tried his luck getting into some nightclubs." Initials: RF.

And as the AFL continues to fend off attempts from its broadcast partner for a night grand final, McNamee's long crusade to turn the Australian Open's men's decider into an evening affair was unstinting. In 2005, when the Sunday night movie was still sacrosanct, McNamee's subtly determined campaign paid off with the Hewitt v Safin decider that remains the highest-rating Australian program ever.

Game Changer by Paul McNamee. Text Publishing, $32.99 RRP.





Numbers up

2nd Australian into the International Association of Athletics Federations Hall of Fame. In Monaco this week Marjorie Jackson joined Betty Cuthbert in gaining the honour. Jackson won the 100 and 200 metres sprint double at the 1952 Olympics.

74 runs off 118 balls, including 12 fours – Sachin Tendulkar may not be destined for a 52nd Test century after being caught by West Indian skipper Darren Sammy at slip off spinner Narsingh Deonarine on Friday.

2014 is set to mark the expansion of television replays during Major League Baseball games. Managers are likely to have one or two challenges per game with umpires on the field wired with headphones.

What they should do ...

... is not end Soccer matches in draws.

Over the years many options to correct this have been suggested. Shoot outs, extra time, coin toss, most shots, most fouls in favour, most horrendous penalty decisions and wrong offsides that cost Victory the game it deserved.

Darn linesman!

These are good but untried options. Ignored by the A-League and, to be fair, every other league in the world – of which there are many. Rather than dwell on the rejections, let's propose more options.

One, coin toss. Why not?

Two, long-range shoot out. From half-way because that seems hard.

Three, slam dunk contest. If we're shooting from half-way then slam dunks sound like the logical next step.

Four, the Worm. Just ask for a viewer result ... only if that viewer is Dennis Rodman.

LUKE MORRIS, Bendigo