Ron Johnson is one of the biggest targets for Democrats trying to re-take the Senate in 2016. Johnson was elected during the off-year GOP tsunami of 2010. Having never occupied public office, he did not have a record to defend for that campaign and seldom spoke in detail on the issues. However, the 2016 campaign will be very different. Wisconsin has had a chance to see just how extreme our senior Senator is, and we don't like it. Ron Johnson will not be re-elected to a second term. Here are several reasons why:

1. It will be a Presidential election year. During presidential years, voter turn-out in Wisconsin is very high (2012- 70.1%; 2008- 69.2%). In off-year elections, turn-out is much lower (2010- 49.7%; 2014- 54.8%). The additional presidential year voters tend to be younger and vote more Democratic. Wisconsin has not elected a Republican to the Senate in a Presidential year since Bob Kasten won during the Reagan rout of 1980.

2. Johnson's awful environmental record. Ron Johnson's voting record on environmental issues is so horrendous that he earned an abysmal Lifetime Score of 7% from the League of Conservation Voters. His rejection of Climate Science has earned him the derisive nickname "Senator Sunspot".

3. Johnson's letter to the Ayatollah. Johnson was one of the Senators who wrote a borderline-traitorous letter to the leaders of Iran, telling them to pay no heed to the President of the United States during delicate negotiations on Iran's nuclear program. That foolish act alone should disqualify him from further public office.

4. Russ Feingold is running for Johnson's seat. Although he has not formally announced, it is a poorly kept secret that Feingold will run to recapture his old Senate seat. Feingold was defeated by Johnson in 2010, but he is still very well-respected. In a March poll, his favorable/unfavorable numbers were 46-35%, making him the most popular Wisconsin politician. This same early poll showed Feingold leading Johnson 50-41% in a hypothetical 2016 Senate race.

5. Johnson's role in Congressional dysfunction . Ron Johnson plays a major role in the deep partisanship and dysfunction of Congress. According to the Kill Filibuster website, Johnson voted to sustain a Senate filibuster 195 out of his 249 chances, for an obscene obstruction rate of 78%. During the 16 day government shut-down of 2013, Johnson actually voted against the final compromise agreement that reopened the government.

6. Johnson wants to undo the Affordable Care Act. Ron Johnson has called the law that allows you to buy healthcare insurance despite a pre-existing condition the "greatest assault on our freedom in our lifetime". He wants to abolish tax credits for the 207,000 Wisconsin citizens who have bought insurance through the Federal exchange. He wants to return to a time when ever-increasing numbers of Americans did without life-saving health care.

7. Johnson's statements on the Postal System. Most people and businesses count on the US postal system as a basic infrastructure necessity. Johnson has repeatedly suggested that the USPS should undergo bankruptcy, allowing drastic changes in employee compensation, Saturday delivery, and small-town service. That will not play well in rural areas that rely on the Postal System.

8. Johnson's Tea Party affiliation. Ron Johnson decided to run for Senate after attending a Tea Party meeting. He has often been associated with the movement, saying, "I sprang out of the tea-party movement, no question. " However, RoJo was elected in 2010, when Tea Party approval was in the 30's. With recent polls showing Tea Party approval dropping to the low 20's, Johnson's identification with the radical wing of the GOP will prove problematic for his electability.

9. Johnson's statements on Social Security. Ron Johnson is certainly not to be trusted to strengthen and preserve your Social Security. During the 2010 campaign, he referred to your retirement plan is a "Ponzi scheme". In a 2013 speech, he compared it to candy "the left is giving away." He praised Paul Ryan's 2010 scheme to privatize Social Security. This does not play well with workers who have paid into the system their entire working lives.

These are just a few reasons that Ron Johnson will be a one-term Senator. There are many others, including his shameful record on veterans' issues, the rarity of his town-hall meetings, and unresolved questions over the self-funding of his last campaign.