We all know lightning is dangerous. Its erratic nature makes it unpredictable.

Tragically, people die every year due to lightning strikes, including 20 so far this year in the U.S. All of those lightning deaths had something in common: The victims were outside during the storm.

The national weather service tracks information on each case. The strikes happened while people were doing mainly typical, everyday activities. Walking the dog, riding a motorcycle, fishing, camping, hiking, playing volleyball, and the latest incident in South Dakota at a disc golf course in Spearfish Canyon.

Previous Story: Black Hills State Student Dies After Being Hit By Lightning

Getting inside and out of the elements may be a simple thing to do during a thunderstorm, but it substantially drops your risk of being killed by lightning.

There's a simple 30/30 lighting rule that's easy to remember when it comes to lightning safety.

If you see a flash of lightning and hear the rumble of thunder in 30 seconds or less, seek shelter. Once the storm passes, wait 30 minutes after the last rumble of thunder is heard to go back out. That's hard to do sometimes, but is the best way to stay out of harm's way with summer storms.

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.