Custom-built 2015 Chevrolet 15-passenger shuttle answers a need

A silhouette of a soldier kneeling at a cross adorns the door of American Legion Post 32 Honor Guard's new bus Thursday evening. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call) ( Lewis Geyer / TIMES-CALL )

The 1995 shuttle used to be the American Legion Post 32 Honor Guard's sole way to get around, but not anymore.

The honor guard presents the colors at military funerals, dedications and other events, especially around Veterans Day.

But to get there they were using a 1995 shuttle that, with more than 200,000 miles on it, had seen better days.

"She moans and groans pretty good," said Dick Kounovsky, also a U.S. Army veteran of the Korean War and a member of the honor guard. "It's kind of like an old man. It's slow and it'll get you there, but it might have to stop and rest a little."

Gene Hemmerle, a U.S. Army veteran of the Korean War and a retired member of the honor guard, agreed.

"If you were going far away, you would kind of cross your fingers," Hemmerle said.

In March, Hemmerle and Kounovsky took a trip with the Northern Colorado honor flight — a state chapter of a national organization that flies veterans to Washington D.C. to see various war memorials.

During the trip, they met a man they will refer only as "Mr. CEO", who they say is a CEO in Northern Colorado and had seen their honor guard perform at a friend's funeral.

Mr. CEO wanted to know what Post 32 needed, said Kounovsky.

"And I said, 'Hell, well how about a bus?'" Hemmerle said. Mr. CEO agreed, but as long as he was kept anonymous.

Five months, $91,184.46 (Kounovsky can recite the exact dollar amount from memory), countless trips and emails to Davey Coach Bus Sales in Sedalia later, they got a bus.

The guard's new bus is a custom-built 2015 Chevrolet 15-passenger shuttle, with newly-applied American Legion decals on the gleaming white exterior. Kounovsky knows every detail because he worked closely with Davey Coach to make sure it's exactly right. The new bus can fit two wheelchairs and the windows are the right amount of tinted, so when the honor guard marches in the Longmont Veterans Day parade Tuesday, disabled veterans can ride behind the marching guard in the new bus and see outside.

One thing Kounovsky didn't pick out? The upholstery. Kounovsky and Hemmerle's wives, Dee and Peggy, did that instead.

"Gene and I looked at each other and we said 'We'll let the women pick that one,'" Kounovsky said.

Hemmerle and Kounovsky unveiled the bus as a surprise to the Legion post veterans after an Oct. 5 picnic at Kounovsky's home.

The guard will use the bus to attend roughly 100 military funerals and 40 other events throughout the year as well as transporting disabled veterans to medical appointments, said Dennis Sindelir, the senior vice commander of the post and a Vietnam War veteran.

Sindelir said the bus meant a lot to the veterans and came just in time to break in for Veterans Day.

"Memorial Day is for remembering those that died. But Veterans Day is for those men that fought and survived," Sindelir said.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci