Lead, SD

It's no easy task, telling the life story of a friend. But with a friend like Dick Fort, it was almost an obligation for Michael Goodroad.

"I think to be able to share Dick with the world is a wonderful thing," the Rapid City radio executive says. "I think that more people can enjoy the things that he has created and helped preserve. And also as an example of what one person can do."

That sharing produced a documentary called "Fort: A Spearfish Canyon Rhapsody." It was a labor of love by Goodroad, former Black Hills newspaper reporter Bill Harlan and author and activist Andrew Harvey. It premiered in Rapid City in October and aired on public television in November. And there's more coming.

"We're looking forward to entering this in book festivals around the country and the world, and sharing not only Dick, but his art, and the beauties he's created, as well as the examples that he's set," Goodroad says

Fort isn't one to rave, but he's pleased with the movie.

"I like what's been done," he says. "That's goes without saying."

There's a lot to like about what's been done by Fort. At 92, he is surely the dean of Black Hills environmentalists. Soft-spoken but feisty, the Mitchell native taught art in Chicago for three decades before retiring to his home state and the Black Hills in 1984. He had already built his own home near Lead, during visits back to the hills, which he learned to love as a child.

After returning to the hills, it didn't take Fort long to get involved in the mining fight.

"Well, all you have to do is go up to the Terry Peak area and look at the site of the present, active mine, and see how ugly it is," Fort says. "And they brag about having reclaimed, It's still ugly. And it'll be ugly forever."

Fort shares the Native American believe in the sacred qualities of the Black Hills. And no place capture his heart quite like Spearfish Canyon.

" I think I'd take off from Frank Lloyd Wright, who was amazed and enchanted with Spearfish Canyon," Fort says. "He thought it was a very special place, and I agree with him."

Fort knows the whole Spearfish Creek watershed. He's hiked, fished, painted and skied it. He is also the central creator of a popular cross-country ski trail system called Eagle Cliff.

"The Eagle Cliff ski area is a fine example of the beauty of the Black Hills," Fort says. "And to preserve and enhance it, I think is an obligation we all have."

Fort's history of fulfilling that obligation led Andrew Harvey to label him as a sacred activist.

"As Andrew says in the movie, here's a man who has not only painted the scenes of and the beautes of the Black Hills, but he's fought to preserve that beauty," Goodroad says.

Fort has preserved it in a literal and an artistic sense. His diverse collection of art includes fetching images of Spearfish Canyon. Those in particular stand for Deadwood arts-advocate Christle Robinson in the book of Fort's art she has produced.

"I think his Spearfish Canyon ones far outdo all the others," she says. "But everybody has their favorites."

There's plenty to favor, including landscapes, abstracts, surrealism, caricatures, silk screens, portraits and sculptures.

"He doesn't sell his artwork, so he has the basically large body of it that we could photograph and do the book" Robinson says.

It worked out well for the book. Some day, however, that vast collection could pose interesting challenges for those close to Fort.

"That's a problem my friends and relatives are going to have to contend with, because I have a large body of work which is just stored," he says. "And it ought to be somewhere where people can enjoy, what I've done. I think I was good at what I did."

Good with a paint brush, and a lot more.

For ordering information or other inquiries about the documentary Fort: A Spearfish Canyon Rhapsody, write to Spearfish Canyon Films, 1909 Monte Vista Dr., Rapid City, S.D. 57702 or email at michaelgoodroad@hotmail.com For ordering or other information on the book Dick Fort: Visual Art Retrospective call 605-920-1084 or email crobinson@spe.midco.net