Good morning. Liking this short week?

Jason Rezaian's frustrating day in an Iranian court With the Washington Post reporter's espionage trial closed even to family, Mehr News is one of the few sources of information about the proceeding available. It's what Iran expert Hooman Majd describes to me as a semi-official agency close to the Hassan Rouhani regime, rather than to current hardliners. Its primary dispatch on the action so far inadvertently suggests the trial is rigged as the judge buys into conspiracy theories about Rezaian ties to the White House. (Mehr News) | The trial was adjourned Wednesday, and it's unclear when it will resume. (The Washington Post)

His neutrality doubted, Stephanopoulos returns to political inquisition On "World News Tonight," ABC's George Stephanopoulos interviewed Rick Santorum as the GOP former U.S. senator from Pennsylvania announced another candidacy for president (they saved snippets for "Good Morning America" today). After conceding he didn't tell his employer about $75,000 in donations to the Clinton Foundation, the former Bill Clinton aide dropped out of moderating a future GOP presidential debate. But Republicans are coming to his early rescue, with an earlier "exclusive" with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell preceding the meat-and-potatoes Santorum session. (ABC News)

Gawker Media workers to vote on unionizing The young, independent-minded staff at Gawker Media is exactly the sort with which the American labor movement fumbles. A younger generation tends to be pretty suspicious of large organizations and ignorant of the historic role of unions. Thus, it will be fascinating to see how their online vote, which is tentatively scheduled for next week, will go. For a stagnant union movement, a victory would be notable. (Capital New York)

Staking out Zurich hotel for the FIFA arrests It pays to be a high-quality news organization well-sourced in multiple areas because you actually cover them. The New York Times went into action in New York, Washington, D.C. and Europe before the big soccer indictments were announced. A Washington-based FBI reporter and a Paris-based correspondent got to the Zurich hotel at 4 a.m. and tweeted shots of Swiss authorities getting room numbers at the concierge desk before making arrests. Good work. (The Huffington Post)

Bob Schieffer exits, tries not to sound 'like an old goat' Sunday will be Bob Schieffer's final "Face the Nation" before John Dickerson takes over. He'll apparently leave the stage quietly, albeit with a melancholy sense of the capital being meaner politically and less collegial professionally. "I try not to sound like an old goat, but the fact is there will always be a need for reporters, whether they are doing it on television or a website or for a newspaper that is not on paper anymore." (The Associated Press)

Making small-scale digital news work Re/code's much-touted deal with Vox Media seemed to underscore challenges for even high-quality sites. But there are success stories, namely "websites and small publishing companies that make money and produce content that readers love" by selling subscriptions for real news. (Bloomberg)

Prose stylists, rejoice "Global warming" and "climate change" have been deemed interchangeable (can I say indistinguishable?) by the newly released edition of the AP Stylebook. "Other new or revised entries include Affordable Care Act; animal welfare activist; autism spectrum disorder; Ebola, execution-style; justify; obscenities, profanities and vulgarities; One World Trade Center; and privacy." Let us hereby praise those few remaining souls concerned with linguistic precision and reasonable flexibility. (The Associated Press)

'Hey, has our drone filed from Syria yet?' The UN Security Council passed a resolution of support for journalists in conflict zones, with U.S. Ambassador Samantha Power proving eloquent and specific about what must be done. (Poynter) | But as the sort-of debate went on all day, the Thailand representative urged that "technology" replace journalists in some dangerous areas. He didn't elaborate.

Front page of the day, curated by Kristen Hare Liberation (France) leads with a Godfather-esque allusion to the FIFA indictments. (Courtesy Kiosko)