Picking classes for the current semester at Colorado School of Mines, Brandon Tortorelli hoped to register for what he thought would be a fun course called International Spies and Propaganda. However, when he was shut out, he settled for something that sounded a bit less intriguing — Water, Energy and the West.

Looking at the syllabus on the first day — which explained how the class would combine, among other areas, engineering and literature — Tortorelli said he felt skeptical. And he wasn’t alone.

“People were looking around at each other going, ‘What is this?’ ” said the junior from Hoenhe, a small Colorado town in Las Animas County. “I just figured I’d be there once and then hopefully switch out if the other class became available.”

And indeed, a couple of days later Tortorelli had the opportunity to transfer out. But he rejected it because a funny thing happened — he was hooked by the quirky course that included an introduction to a book of essays called “The Land of Little Rain,” published in 1903 by Mary Hunter Austin.

“It’s asking us, when we go out into the world for our engineering jobs, to be conscious of the implications of what we’re doing on the world around us,” he said. “It’s just been awesome. It’s opening our minds to things a lot of us haven’t thought about before.”

Now, the course’s instructors, Kamini Singha and Sarah Hitt, chuckle and ask themselves how many closet writers and poets may be lurking around the engineering-heavy university. Singha is an associate professor in the school’s geological engineering department. Hitt is an assistant professor in Mines’ tiny liberal arts division. Both relatively new to the school, the pair met and hit it off to the point where they sought to find a way to work together.

“There just seemed like there was a place where we could meet,” Singha said. “And in some ways, being here in the West, with some of the things that have been going on, the fires and floods here in Colorado, and the droughts in California, made it a very easy class.”

One day students may work on an analysis of the properties of water molecules, the next they’re taking that work and explicating poems that discuss the same area, searching for the relationships the authors had with water and why they chose the words they used in their works.

Over the semester, the class has taken modern issues like global climate change, water law and fracking, and not only looked at them from today’s perspective but also matched them to engineering and the implications on society of environmental decisions that were made as far back as the 1100s.

“It’s not enough just to slap some science on something. We should know how the human self affects decisions,” Hitt said. “The school is so intensive in science and engineering — we’ve found that a lot of kids are thirsty to use their minds in a different way. That’s all they talk about, how refreshing it is to use the other parts of their brains.”

Later in the semester, the students will take part in what Singha and Hitt are calling “Choose Your Adventure.” It may be writing a poem, it could be a painting, perhaps a scholarly analysis.

One project that Tortorelli is considering is a modern-day court case over water rights taking place near his home just outside Trinidad in which the judge and attorneys are looking for guidance in laws written 300 years ago.

If he doesn’t do that, he’ll probably break out an interpretive dance in an ode to water.

“No one’s ever asked them to do these kinds of things,” Singha said. “When we started, my sense was that the non-engineering aspects of this would be completely foreign to them, really hard to grasp, but it’s amazing how good they are.”

Anthony Cotton: 303-954-1292, acotton@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ anthonycottondp