Buy Photo Family Health Services executive director Bill Wagner gives a tour of the second floor inside the new East Broadway Family Health Center that is planned to open in late February, or early March. The new space was renovated at the location of the former Antiques Mall and Old American Standard, Co. Jan. 6, 2015 (Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo Story Highlights The East Broadway health center renovation project was funded mainly with a $5 million federal grant

The project's cost rose because of requirements to raise the floor to comply with flood plain rules.

EMS will move to the fifth floor of the health center and to a former bank site across the street.

Family Health Centers community health-care agency is preparing to triple the space for its East Broadway center by moving it a block west to a massive five-story brick building at Broadway and Campbell Street that most recently housed an antique mall.

Louisville Metro EMS — which collaborates with the health agency — also plans to move its command center to the fifth floor of the health center building. Its operations headquarters and ambulance fleet also will move to a former Bank of Louisville complex across Campbell from the center — helping to create a health care "campus" on East Broadway that also will include Seven Counties Services social services agency.

A complicated renovation project at the new health center site, 834 E. Broadway, funded mostly with a $5 million grant provided through the federal Affordable Care Act, is wrapping up after beginning in late fall of 2013.

RELATED | Feds give $4.9M boost to Ky. health centers

The non-profit agency officials hope the current East Broadway center, 914 E. Broadway, will be in the new, leased site next month, and a grand opening event also is planned, perhaps in March. It shares the former Spencerian College building with Seven Counties, which will take over the whole building.

Another $1 million was raised by the agency for the renovation work at the new site, bringing the total cost of the project to about $6 million, said Bill Wagner, the agency's executive director.

Family Health Centers, which is affiliated with the Louisville Board of Health, also operates six other community health centers — which provide primary and preventative care to the public, regardless of ability to pay — including one at the agency's headquarters in Portland. The others are: Fairdale, Iroquois, Southwest, Americana on Southside Drive and Phoenix Health Care for the Homeless on East Muhammad Ali Boulevard.

The $5 million federal grant for the East Broadway center renovation was part of $11 billion federally allocated for expansion of community health care facilities throughout the country, in conjunction with provisions of the Affordable Care Act to help make insurance coverage more accessible, Wagner said.

RELATED | More than 100,000 enrolled in kynect plans

"It doesn't do any good just to give people insurance coverage" without also offering services and facilities to manage and keep down health care costs, he said.

The new East Broadway center will be able to serve about 10,000 more people annually, up from about 5,800 now, in a space that will increase in size from 8,400 to more than 30,000 square feet.

The New York Times has written four stories in the past two years that look at care at the Family Health Centers network, including one Dec. 29, after Kentucky expanded Medicaid, resulting in a drop in the uninsured rate that's among the sharpest in the nation, the Times said.

More than 90 photos will be displayed throughout the new East Broadway center, showing scenes and details of neighborhoods in the area — including Smoketown, Old Louisville and Phoenix Hill — shot by former Courier-Journal photographer Pam Spaulding.

"We wanted this effort to be a reflection of the neighborhoods we serve," Wagner said. Some old concrete ceiling beams and other features also are being retained to reflect the historic character of the building, which was constructed in about 1924.

This week, construction work was still going on at a new entrance to the building at the west front corner next to Broadway and in a community meeting and conference room area with a kitchen on the second floor, where cooking, yoga and other community classes also will be held, Melissa Mather, the health centers communications and planning coordinator said.

Adult primary care also will be on the second floor, and pediatrics and women's health services will be on the third floor. A radiology unit is planned later on the fourth floor, and a dental area will be on the third floor. A pharmacy will operate on the first floor, along with a small urgent care clinic, although same day care also will be provided in all departments, Mather said.

The cost of the project rose because of requirements for raising the floor on the first level anywhere from a few inches to several feet to comply with local MSD flood plain regulations. The site is in a flood plain because it is next to Beargrass Creek and a bridge over the creek that can cause water backups, Wagner said.

The renovation project was designed by architect Steve Wiser of JRA Architects, who said it was a "challenge in almost every design aspect."

For EMS, the new dual location on East Broadway is a "really good fit" that enables the service to consolidate its services at one general site, Kristen Miller, EMS's chief of staff, said. The operations and supplies headquarters could move to the bank site as soon as next month from 1805 S. Brook St., near University of Louisville.

The EMS command staff is expected to move a few months later to the health center building from West Liberty Street downtown, Miller said.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Irn1zm