TAMPA - The deadline to sign up for health care coverage through the Affordable Care Act is the end of January.

To help people who have not yet enrolled, USF is holding what they're calling a "Navigator Lab," an on-campus community outreach and enrollment event to help consumers learn more about their coverage options through the Federal Health Insurance Marketplace.

The event will be held from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. on Wednesday, Jan. 27, 2016 in the USF Marshall Student Center Atrium.

"Navigators" from USF Health, joined by those from "Florida CHAIN" will be able to assist visitors. Representatives from "Enroll America" and "USF Student Health Services" will offer education about the Marketplace, and navigators can help individuals and families sort out the coverage choices and guide those interested in enrolling through the application process.

University of South Florida was awarded a $5.5 million "navigator grant" this year; USF Health works with seven partners across the state to help those who want assistance shopping for and enrolling in private healthcare insurance available through the online marketplace.

The deadline this year to enroll for coverage under the Affordable Care Act is Jan. 31, 2016. Enrollments or changes between Jan. 16 and 31 take effect March 1, 2016.

"Nav-Lab" walk-ins are welcome, but registration is recommended because free parking for the event is limited. For more information or to register, please call (813) 803-0628.

Visitors parking on the USF-Tampa campus are required to purchase a daily parking permit. Parking pay station is located off USF Cedar Drive, Lot 5A. Daily parking for the Marshall Center is located within the Crescent Hill Parking Garage or Lot 3B and 3C off USF Holly Drive. There is also a sheltered Bull Runner Stop USF Cedar Circle, immediately in front of the Marshall Center.

USF Health is a partnership of the USF Health Morsani College of Medicine, the College of Nursing, the College of Public Health, the College of Pharmacy, the School of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Sciences, and the USF Physician's Group.

Find out more about USF Health at http://health.usf.edu/index.html.