Cord wraps around small plastic doughnut-like device, locks off buds on blade

To see The Loop in action Info: Visit ipocketloop.com

It won't make calls. It won't retrieve your email. It won't tweet your tweets. It has no moving parts and not a volt of electrical power runs through it.

But you may find yourself carrying it in your pocket as religiously as you do your smart phone.

It's called The Loop and it solves one of the more vexing problems of our modern era: earbuds wound into a hopeless ball of aural frustration.

"All earbuds in the world have a common problem," Boulder architect and The Loop inventor Scott Rodwin said. "You put them in your pocket and they come out in a tangled knot."

The Loop is designed to keep earbuds untangled, when not in use. (MARK LEFFINGWELL / Daily Camera)

Case in point: Rodwin was working out at the Colorado Athletic Club in Boulder when he pulled out a pair of knotted earbuds from his bag. Seconds later, another gym member did the same thing and exclaimed the words that set Rodwin to put his architectural skills — the ones behind the design of Japango and the remodel of the Brewers Association building — into resolving the infuriating cord conundrum.

"Why can't someone come up with a way to solve this?" he remembers the man sputtering.

Parts of the next two years were spent hunkered over his drafting table at Rodwin Architecture on the Pearl Street Mall trying to design the perfect "earbud anti-tangling device," as trumpeted by his company's slogan.

"I was able to design with all the architectural skills I had to solve this problem," Rodwin said. "I wanted to make a device that worked with any brand or any make of earbud that was so quick and intuitive to use that people would do it every day."

The Loop made its debut at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas earlier this month and Rodwin's booth was mobbed by thousands of conventioneers. He gave away 5,000 of the devices at CES.

"It exceeded my wildest expectations," he said.

Rodwin is now in talks with Amazon.com, large brick-and-mortar retailers and national and international distributors to carry The Loop, which comes in a rainbow of colors and sells for $6.

They can be purchased at the company's website, ipocketloop.com.

'The Goldilocks design'

While The Loop looks almost childlike in its simplicity, Rodwin said it's the product of hours of deliberation and tinkering. The 45-year-old architect went though seven prototypes before settling on the one he calls the "Goldilocks design."

"We got down to the 1/64th of an inch and designed it so the buds held on with no effort," he said. "We got very precise."

The result is a small doughnut-shaped piece of plastic with a grooved exterior and angled blades. Anchor the earbud jack into a small hole on the inside of The Loop, wind the cord in the exterior groove, and lock the buds off on a blade. To release, disengage the buds, pull and unwind.

Rodwin says the magic of the device is the speed with which the user can both stow their earbuds and release them. He's got it down to about three seconds on and one second off. And the learning curve to master The Loop is minimal, with instructions short and sweet.

"It is the fastest on and off of any product in this space," Rodwin said. "If there were any more directions than what could fit on the side of a toothpick box, it would be too complicated."

Kavika Vollmar, a neighbor of Rodwin and a software engineer at GNIP in Boulder, said to keep his earbuds from tangling he has tried stuffing them back into the pouch in which they originally came — to no avail. He said he could see The Loop becoming a ubiquitous device among the millions toting phones and iPods every day.

"From a design perspective, I found it perfect," Vollmar said. "It's a very clean and practical design, easy to use, virtually unbreakable and it's small — so it's perfect."

The Loop is made of a polycarbonate plastic by a manufacturer in Colorado Springs, while the packaging for the device is prepared in Denver. Rodwin said the fact that his product is designed, made and packaged entirely in Colorado has won it praise on that aspect alone.

Crowded marketplace

The Loop is not alone in the universe of earbud anti-tangling solutions. The Nest, a flexible rubber earbud case that uses the same winding principal as The Loop to keep the cord from knotting, is already on the market.

And more innovative concepts to tackle the problem are in development. A quick look at the Kickstarter entrepreneurial early investor website yields iCoil, a retractable earbud device that requires no winding, and Kordl 2, a tiny clip-on device that keeps the earbud cord in one tangle-free loop.

Rodwin acknowledges the competition but says what sets The Loop apart is its simplicity and effectiveness.

"The design of other devices is awkward, ugly, too expensive or they didn't work very well," he said. "This is so simple and elegant."

Boulder Chamber of Commerce President John Tayer said he started using The Loop a little more than a week ago, at the same time the company formed. He said it could be the "Holy Grail" of earbud holders.

"This is as elegant a solution as you get because of its simplicity," Tayer said. "You don't have moving parts, you don't have multiple parts — you have a simple piece of plastic that is intuitive to use."

It's possible, he said, that The Loop could become the next big consumer item conceived of and brought to market locally, like Crocs footwear.

"To me, it's so characteristic of the kind of innovation that happens in this community," he said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer John Aguilar at 303-473-1389 or aguilarj@dailycamera.com