The most important person you don’t know — Burwell to speak at the New America Foundation

With help from Jennifer Haberkorn

WHO IS ELIZABETH MACDONOUGH? — Chances are, you don’t know. But as the Senate parliamentarian, MacDonough is the person who would have final say on which pieces of Obamacare qualify to be repealed using the complicated budget process called reconciliation — as Republicans may attempt to do. Her job is a pretty quiet one, except when thorny decisions around reconciliation come up. Last time the post was in the news was 2010, when then-parliamentarian Alan Frumin allowed the budget fast-track tool to pass a small part of the ACA — to the ire of Republicans. Those who know MacDonough express confidence that her personality, smarts and experience on the Hill will equip her to make a fair call. While Obama would veto Obamacare repeal even if Republicans successfully pursue that through reconciliation, how MacDonough rules could shape what could be done if a Republican is in the White House in 2017. The Pro story: http://politico.pro/1zf4R48

Story Continued Below

Welcome to PULSE, where I’m encouraging you to put a plant on your desk. My mother gave me an amaryllis on Monday, and it’s already having an amazing effect on my mood. Some of my Pro colleagues have also reported positive effects. Check it out: http://bit.ly/1ye5H1b

“If I told you that a flower bloomed in a dark room, would you trust PULSE?”

BURWELL TO CONGRESS: LET’S TALK — HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell plans to extend a hand today to the new Republican-controlled Congress to work together on health care issues, sans Obamacare repeal. It’s an effort to move beyond the contentious politics of the Affordable Care Act and onto issues where the parties typically agree, such as improving health care quality, strengthening global health security and boosting research capabilities and innovation. “I count myself among those who do not believe that disagreements in some areas — even significant disagreements — should prevent us from moving forward on others,” Burwell plans to say in the speech at the New America Foundation, according to excerpts obtained by POLITICO. The POLITICO Pro story: http://politico.pro/1yfeQGS

ARE MORE LATINOS GETTING COVERED? — It’s not clear whether the extra money and effort that HHS and Obamacare advocacy groups are devoting to chipping away at Latinos' high uninsured rate is paying off, reports Pro’s Sarah Wheaton. HHS has spent a third of its paid advertising budget on Spanish-language media this enrollment season — up from 10 percent during the first enrollment period, Secretary Burwell said Wednesday during a media call attended by some of those groups. The administration has also focused on improving the federal exchange website for users on mobile devices, which is how many Latinos access the Spanish-language version of the site. But December’s enrollment report revealed relatively little improvement from last year — Latinos accounted for 8 percent of plan selections, compared to 7 percent during the first few months of the first enrollment period. The Pro story: http://politico.pro/1DGQxTN

GRASSLEY ASKS CMS ABOUT ROLE IN FAILING IOWA CO-OP — Sen. Chuck Grassley wants to know what’s going on between CMS and CoOportunity Health, an Obamacare co-op in Iowa and Nebraska that is failing financially after enrolling a surprisingly large number of members and charging premiums that proved to be too low. Iowa insurance regulators took over the co-op after CMS refused to meet its request for more funding in order to continue to offer coverage. New enrollments were stopped, and members were advised to find insurance elsewhere. “While CoOportunity was facing financial challenges, if CMS had informed it earlier that it would not receive additional funds it could have taken steps to potentially avoid failure,” Grassley wrote in a letter to CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner Wednesday. He wants CMS to explain how it decided to make loans to co-ops and for all communication between the agency and the co-op about how much funding would be available.

— CMS responded that the co-op’s last request for funding was greater than all of the resources CMS had available to loan to co-ops.

** A message from Healthcare Education Project: America’s hospitals are already reeling from billions of dollars in slashed funding. Now Congress may consider more hospital cuts in 2015. Tell Congress: No more hospital cuts. Visit http://bit.ly/1tTTpcH **

COMMONWEALTH: FEWER AMERICANS SKIPPING CARE OR STRUGGLING WITH ITS COSTS — A report released today gives Obamacare advocates some fodder for their cause. The Commonwealth Fund finds that 66 million Americans skipped health care because of cost in 2014 — down from 80 million in 2012. And fewer were struggling to pay their medical bills or pay off their medical debt — 64 million in 2014 compared to 75 million two years earlier. Sara Collins, the study’s lead author, says the findings suggest that the ACA is helping people afford the care they need. The report also found a decline in the uninsured ranks — from 37 million or 20 percent of Americans in 2010 to 29 million or 16 percent in 2014. The report: http://bit.ly/1ykNbB9

STUDY PEGS HIGHEST MEDICARE SPENDING TO 96-YEAR-OLDS — Getting old is expensive. And being 96 is the most expensive as far as Medicare spending, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation review published by Health Affairs on Wednesday. The review found that seniors who were 80 or older in 2011 made up just under a quarter of traditional Medicare enrollees but accounted for a third of the program's spending. Medicare spent 2½ times as much on 85-year-olds and three times as much on 95-year-olds than the $5,600 spent on the average 66-year-old. But 96-year-olds were the priciest, costing $16,145. Back in 2000, Medicare spent the most on 92-year-olds, indicating that the age of peak spending is on the rise. The review: http://bit.ly/1KLd0AS

SENIORS CLIMB THE HILL — A month to go before CMS releases its proposed rate notice for Medicare Advantage payments, and some spritely seniors climbed the Hill on Wednesday to share stories about why the program’s services are important to them. Paula Ercolini of Georgia told lawmakers how her MA plan helped her avoid a kidney transplant at a briefing hosted by the Coalition for Medicare Choices. A recap of the briefing from AHIP: http://bit.ly/1E1gnPv

HOW MUCH DO SPECIALTY DRUGS COST? — That’s a tough question, and the new benefit designs of Obamacare plans and the lack of clarity on HealthCare.gov is making it even tougher to answer, according to an analysis released by Avalere Health on Wednesday. HealthCare.gov reports formulary cost sharing in a four-tier structure — although, problematically, 35 percent of silver plans don’t use four-tier formularies. So what consumers see might not be what they actually get. More: http://bit.ly/1AgiGKX

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE TO WORK AGAINST OBAMACARE ELEMENTS — U.S. Chamber of Commerce President and CEO Thomas Donohue said Wednesday that the organization will work to redefine the full-time work week under Obamacare to 40 hours and repeal the medical device tax, Cadillac tax and health insurance tax. “You’re lucky if you work for a company that takes care of arranging your health insurance,” he said in his annual State of the American Business Address. “If you have to do it yourself, it is one of the scariest things you can ever imagine.”

JUDGE STRIKES HOME CARE OVERTIME RULE — U.S. District Judge Richard Leon has knocked another portion of a Labor Department rule expanding overtime and minimum wage protections to home health workers. On Wednesday, he eliminated a provision of the rule narrowing the definition of "companionship services" in a way that would have limited the number of workers that employers could exempt from minimum wage and overtime requirements. The opinion: http://politico.pro/1FYJ8Ba

— "I cannot help but conclude that Congress's intent in 1974 to exempt from minimum wage and overtime wage requirements domestic workers providing services, including care to the elderly and disabled, is still as clear today as it was forty years ago," Leon said. "Here, yet again, the Department is trying to do through regulation what must be done through legislation."

CHRIS DAWE JOINS EVOLENT HEALTH — Former White House health policy advisor Chris Dawe has joined Evolent Health, a company founded in 2011 by the Advisory Board and UPME Health Plan to help health systems move towards providing value-based care. Dawe will lead engagements with Evolent’s partner health systems while building the firm’s policy capability.

WHAT WE’RE READING, by Jennifer Haberkorn

Obamacare is struggling in several of the 2016 battleground states, National Journal reports. http://bit.ly/1xrEWPX

An electronic medical records pilot program for the military is about to get underway in the Pacific Northwest, the News Tribune reports. http://bit.ly/1wcTUsH

One person has died and more were sickened after receiving infusions of a faulty saline solution, the New York Times reports. http://nyti.ms/1wcSyy5

Florida is leading the way on enrollment among the 37 states using HealthCare.gov, the Miami Herald reports. http://hrld.us/1Bts0iL

Only a small number of the community groups receiving reimbursement to reduce hospital readmissions produced significant results, according to early results, Kaiser Health News and The Washington Post report. http://wapo.st/1xrFkOk

A Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center physician says that insurers are forced to cover pricey drugs, driving up prices for everyone. http://nyti.ms/1E1zTeS

** A message from Healthcare Education Project: When hospital funding gets cut, we all feel the pain. America’s hospitals are already reeling from billions of dollars in slashed funding. Now Congress may consider more hospital cuts in 2015. With Americans living longer than ever and a third of all doctors expected to retire in the next decade, the timing couldn’t be worse for hospitals — and the patients they serve. Tell Congress: No more hospital cuts. Visit http://bit.ly/1tTTpcH **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **