Buy Photo Anticipating another day of delays, NJ Transit said tickets and passes would be cross-honored at other locations. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)Buy Photo

Another onset of Amtrak power troubles threatens to disturb Monday travel for New Jersey Transit commuters.

NJ Transit announced that tickets and passes would be cross-honored by various transit systems, according to the corporation's Twitter account.

First, a tweet attributed expected delays to “Amtrak power issues/repairs.”

Then, a subsequent tweet, noted that heavy delays were “not expected” due to the power issue, but that commuters could see residual delays.

#NJTRail tix cross-honored by NJT/private bus; PATH 33rd, HOB & NwkPenn; NY Waterway in HOB on 7/27 due to Amtrak power issues/repairs — NJ TRANSIT (@NJTRANSIT) July 26, 2015

Heavy delays not expected tmrw due to power issue, may be residual delays. Cross honoring in effect to provide travel options for customers. — NJ TRANSIT (@NJTRANSIT) July 26, 2015

Those announcements sparked a flurry of angry tweets from frustrated commuters, some asking for refunds on their July monthly passes. Others asked whether the corporation meant “now expected” or were setting themselves up to be proven wrong come Monday.

“@NJTRANSIT: Heavy delays not expected tmrw due to power issue, may be residual delays. You mean NOW expected? — James (@jasbbr) July 26, 2015

@NJTRANSIT Hey who do I talk to about a refund for my July Monthly ticket? — Joey Pistone (@daguy666) July 26, 2015

The website says tickets and passes will be accepted by NJ Transit and private carrier buses, the PATH (at the 33rd Street, Hoboken Terminal and Newark Penn Station stops) and the New York Waterway at South Ferry in Hoboken “to give customers maximum flexibility when planning their commute.”

Representatives for NJ Transit, which pays Amtrak $100 million a year for upkeep of the Northeast Corridor, said after a series of service disruptions last week that they asked to know how the money was being spent.

Commuters faced at least four service disruptions that caused delays—all about a week after the NJ Transit board approved a $2.1 billion budget that would boost fares by 9 percent for rail customers to meet a $56 million shortfall.

The service disruptions prompted responses from Gov. Chris Christie and the NJ Department of Transportation. (NJ Transit took to its usually sparse Twitter feed to call out Amtrak and post updates.)

Christie called on the Obama administration and Congress to address infrastructure problems, particularly with Amtrak, and asked the New Jersey Attorney General to review the service disruptions.

“NJ Transit commuters were victimized by nearly an entire week of extreme delays and cancellations for one reason only: Amtrak’s indifference to New Jersey commuters and its abject neglect of the infrastructure that New Jersey and our entire region relies upon,” he said.

Jamie Fox, transportation commissioner, sent a letter to Amtrak Friday asking to meet with representatives to “discuss your corrective action plans,” saying the state “cannot afford further impairment of service to the Northeast Corridor and to NJ TRANSIT’s customers.”

Robert M. Lavell, NJ Transit vice president and general operations manager, sent a letter formally expressing dissatisfaction with the service.

So far, the New Jersey Coast Line’s trains appear to be running on time, according to njtransit.com and the Clever Commute app.

Steph Solis: 732-643-4043; ssolis@gannettnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1S7byit