Buy Photo Gateway Medical Center opened its Dunlop Lane hospital in June 2008. (Photo: The Leaf-Chronicle/Jimmy Settle)Buy Photo

CLARKSVILLE, Tenn. — Gateway Medical Center CEO Mark Marsh is a self-proclaimed perfectionist, and says he is 70 percent satisfied with the point-by-point progress that Clarksville’s regional hospital has made since his arrival here in 2013.

Gateway moved from its original home at the corner of Madison Street and Memorial Drive to its current site along Dunlop Lane in St. Bethlehem over seven years ago. The goal of a new and bigger facility was to help make Clarksville the destination of choice for hometown patients’ health care, and reduce the number of northern Middle Tennesseans who instead choose Nashville hospitals.

The second part of the equation — one that Marsh’s team has been centrally involved in — is all about improving the average patient’s Gateway experience, and their outcomes.

“No matter whether it’s a good or bad thing, the demand for health care in this community is continuing to grow in all areas, including babies, admissions, the emergency room ... and that’s only going to continue as we add the employment base at Hankook Tire, plus the other obvious factors such as Fort Campbell and overall housing demand.

“What we’re trying to do here at Gateway is continually find ways and areas where we can expand to meet these needs better,” Marsh said. “We’re striving to provide quality access to health care for the Clarksville-Montgomery County area in a patient-friendly environment.

“We want to beat the Nashville hospitals in patient experience,” he said.

Marsh readily admits that he closely monitors social media for public comments about Gateway, and those comments are often a mixed bag of praise and criticism. “We see from those comments that we have to focus on providing patient-centered care.

“For that reason, we have been working very hard to raise the bar on basic staff-to-patient communication and the overall patient experience here. We’re working through things like, for example, reducing the wait time for patients in our ER.

“One of the things I have seen in my two years here is our increased collaboration with the medical staff to improve patient care and outcomes, and our medical chief of staff, Dr. Chris Lucas, has been totally on board with that effort. I can’t say enough about the doctors and medical staff ... people who are working and wanting things to improve. We also have several committees established here at Gateway, including our Patient Experience Committee, which focuses exclusively on dealing with that topic, and it’s just exciting to see the enthusiasm in these various work areas,” he said.

Key emphases in Marsh’s administration include expanding both services and health care providers within the Gateway fold.

Some of the triumphs he cites include the fact that the Clarksville hospital has added a state and nationally renowned, and community-minded, cardiovascular surgeon in Dr. Andrew Poret.

“His patient outcomes are fabulous,” Marsh said, “and we’re very blessed to have him here.” Poret came to Clarksville from upper East Tennessee, where he previously practiced at Johnson City Medical Center.

Other new medical staff additions include Dr. Robert Bejnarowicz, a neurological surgeon; Dr. Juan Cabrera, in physical medicine and rehabilitation; general surgeon Dr. Daniel Pischl; Dr. Afreen Hyder, gastroenterologist; and three new primary care physicians, Dr. Amanda Cummins, Dr. Hunter Davis and Dr. Simon Spilkin.

“All of these are physicians who could go anywhere in the country to practice, and they chose to come here because they like this community,” Marsh said.

The physician recruitment trail is multipronged and today, more than ever, involves providing doctors, as well as nurses, with liveable communities, good schools and a quality of life that they and their spouses demand, Marsh said.

“Of course, they also want a well-equipped work environment where they can practice their skill set,” he said.

From there, Gateway also is honing, and adding to, its repertoire of distinctive specialties.

The primary care aspect of the regional medical institution is in growth mode, with a partial goal of reducing the number of ER visits for illnesses and injuries that could be better and more efficiently handled at the basic clinical level, hospital officials said.

“We need more primary care capability, especially with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act,” Marsh said.

Gateway has added a clinic at 331 Landrum Place, and it is practically book-ending Tiny Town Road in the rapidly growing northeast Montgomery County area with a clinic at 1492 Tiny Town, and another that is soon to open at 2485 Tiny Town.

The local hospital also has expanded its cardiothoracic surgery and neurological surgery departments.

The hospital is perhaps most proud of the latest strides it has made in the expansion of its Joint & Spine Center, with refinements covering all stages of care from preoperative to postoperative care and rehabilitation. Marsh said as part of that department’s routine, reunion luncheons have been instituted to carry patients and caregivers through and beyond the continuum of personalized care. “We have patients who have had, say, knee replacement surgeries at both our hospital and another hospital tell us that ours has been by far their best experience,” Marsh said.

“This gets to the core of what our industry has to be about in today’s environment. A lot of what we are doing in health care, in my opinion, is striving to build trust in our patients and showing them that we have a culture of compassionate care,” he said.

Among its most recent health care industry awards, Gateway has been named a top performer on key quality measures including heart attacks, heart failure, pneumonia and surgical care.

The Clarksville hospital also is an accredited chest pain center and has received accreditations in metabolic and bariatric surgery and mammography. Gateway has received recognition for diabetes education and from the American Association of Blood Banks.

Reach Business Editor Jimmy Settle at 931-245-0247 and on Twitter @settle_leaf.

Gateway Medical by the numbers

•Admissions last year: 9,800

•Babies delivered last year: 2,200

•ER patients last year: 63,000

•Surgeries (inpatient and outpatient): 9,800

Gateway economic impact

•Total employees: 1,200

•Salaries/wages, benefits: $67 million

•Capital funds reinvested: $4 million

•Property taxes paid: $2 million

•Total economic impact: Over $70 million

Read or Share this story: http://leafne.ws/1KDJvki