Not having any health insurance coverage could potentially bankrupt you. Open enrollment does not begin again until November 15 unless you are considered for a "qualifying life event" such as getting divorced, moving from one coverage area or changes in your salary.

"Many consumers don't understand the things that may trigger a qualifying life event," McLean said. "Work with a licensed agent like eHealth, which is especially valuable for people considering short-term insurance outside of the open enrollment period. A licensed agent can help you understand if major medical is an option for you, and, if not, which short-term products and other forms of coverage like dental and vision may be a good match to help tide you over to the next open enrollment period."

If you meet the standards for a "qualifying life event," consider a catastrophic plan which averages $134 a month, she said. These are plans intended primarily for younger adults under the age 30. They provide less coverage overall than bronze plans under the ACA but may be more affordable on a month-to-month basis. They'll meet your coverage requirements under the health care reform law but you can not use government subsidies to help pay for them.

"Catastrophic plans might be a good choice if you can't afford more robust coverage but want something to back you up in case of an emergency," she said.

If you qualify for a special enrollment period, it is highly recommended that you explore your major medical health insurance options and apply for tax subsidies before deciding on a catastrophic plan, said Colwell. Catastrophic health insurance plans provide coverage for worst-case scenarios and – unlike short-term coverage – they protect against the tax penalty.

Catastrophic plans cover three primary care visits per year and preventive services. Other than that, you'll be responsible for all other medical expenses until you've hit your deductible of $6,350, he said.

In order to qualify for a tax subsidy, your projected income for 2014 can be no more than 400% of the federal poverty level or about $46,000 for a single person, McLean said. Be aware that unexpectedly earning more this year could mean that you end up having to pay back some or all of your subsidy dollars.

"When you take tax subsidies into account, you may be able to find a major medical health insurance plan that is more affordable or comparable in price to a catastrophic plan," Colwell said. "Everyone's situation is different. While a catastrophic plan may make sense for one person, a short-term plan may be better for another."

Consumers can also look into purchasing supplemental forms of coverage like accident or critical illness insurance. The average accident insurance plan premium across 23 cities for a 29-year old was $26.46 per month while the average critical illness insurance plan premium across 22 cities for a 29-year old was $23.01 per month, according to a recent eHealth survey.

"These provide you with a cash payout if you experience a serious accident or get a bad diagnosis," McLean said. "You can use that money to help cover your deductible or other medical expenses. In fact, you can use it for whatever you like. The "Uninsured Options" tool on the ACA Resource Center is a helpful pricing tool designed to introduce consumers to some of the major medical and supplemental forms of coverage that may be available to them outside of an ACA open enrollment period, both with and without a qualifying life event."

A short-term insurance plan is a good bridge until a consumer can purchase a more permanent plan since a 25-year-old typically pays $80 to $90 a month while a 35- to 39-year-old pays an average of $125 a month and can still choose their doctors, said Mike Kosloske, CEO of Health Insurance Innovations, a Tampa, Fla. company which sells individual insurance online.

"If they wait until open enrollment they could have an emergency and go bankrupt," he said. "They can buy this until they can jump into an ACA plan. If you have coverage, you are not facing the risk that something catastrophic is going to happen."

It may be less expensive today to pay the penalty and "roll the dice," and pay cash for any medical needs that may arise, said Patty Sanders, operations director of Barney & Barney, a San Diego business insurance brokerage.

"One accident or medical issue could cause catastrophic financial failure and without insurance you are taking 100% of that risk," she said. "Although the 2014 penalty is relatively small, it will be increasing each year making the price for taking that risk less and less attractive."

--Written by Ellen Chang for MainStreet