Topeka City Councilman Jonathan Schumm’s constituents tell him about motorists who blast their car stereos so loudly the bass actually makes houses shake.

Schumm, who represents southeast Topeka’s District 4, said he is seeking to toughen city rules regulating people who do that.

A proposal he is sponsoring along those lines is among five measures the council plans to discuss Tuesday.

City manager Jim Colson had the items put on the agenda for discussion only at that 6 p.m. meeting after council members talked July 21 about what they can do to get proposals considered for action by the city’s governing body.

Colson responded that council members had put forth five items that were “in the queue” for being taken up by that body.

Without a vote, the city on July 21 put in place a process through which council members will bring any proposals they have to Colson, the city staff will research the matter and Colson will bring the proposal before the governing body — for discussion only — at the first meeting after two weeks.

Aly Van Dyke, the city’s media relations director, said the city manager’s office will track each request and work with the appropriate city departments to develop a “policy brief” for each proposal.

“The brief will include background information, a review of best practices/benchmarks, financial and operational impact analysis and additional information as appropriate,” she said.

At the meeting where the governing body discusses a proposal, members might decide whether they want to consider acting on it, and when, Colson said.

Copies aren’t yet publicly available for the five proposals to be taken up Tuesday.

Van Dyke said they are:

■ Schumm’s proposal to change the city ordinance regarding loud noise, specifically the issue of music being heard from vehicles as they drive through neighborhoods.” Schumm told The Topeka Capital-Journal the proposal would reduce the distance at which a stereo must be heard for an officer to be able to ticket the driver, and increase the penalty for second and third offenses while enabling the owner — by removing the stereo — to reduce the fine on the second or third offenses.

■ Schumm’s proposal to “prohibit panhandling.”

■ A proposal by Councilman Jeff Coen that would ban nudity in public places.

■ Councilwoman Elaine Schwartz’s proposal to revise the city’s smoking ban ordinance to also include electronic cigarettes.

■ Schwartz’s proposal to amend a city traffic ordinance to allow the city to impound vehicles for which the driver is unable to show evidence of liability insurance.

The council doesn’t plan Tuesday to consider a proposal regarding records fees, which was taken up March 17 by its policy and finance committee, Van Dyke said.

She said former Councilman Chad Manspeaker, then chairman of that committee, successfully asked that day that consideration of the proposal be postponed until new council members were elected last April and new members of the committee appointed.