Shyp

Shyp, which helps customers mail packages, on Wednesday became the latest startup to convert its workers from contractor status to part-time or full-time employees, wading into what has become a central concern in Silicon Valley.

The San Francisco on-demand company sends couriers to people’s homes or businesses to retrieve and package items they want to ship, typically charging a $5 fee and the cost of postage. Shyp makes revenue from the fee and by negotiating lower rates with the larger national shippers and taking the difference.

Shyp said it has hundreds of couriers in San Francisco, Los Angeles, Miami and New York, all of which it will convert to employee status early next year. When the company expands into Chicago this summer it will hire all of its couriers, making them eligible for benefits like health care and workers’ compensation. Shyp will also pay for drivers’ vehicle expenses.

Shyp’s move adds weight to a growing debate about the sustainability of dozens of startups that rely on a cheap, flexible workforce to deliver food, shuttle commuters and cart packages. Other startups have resisted converting their contractors’ status, fearing the higher costs could upset their business model.

With their legions of contracted drivers, car-hailing services Uber and Lyft have been touchstones in the debate over whether the demands of the job may require them to treat workers like part- or full-time employees. Those companies avoid paying certain insurance costs, as well as fuel and payroll taxes.

Last month, the California Labor Commission found Uber liable for costs, like back-pay, for one worker who it deemed should have been treated as an employee. And though the ruling may apply to just one worker, as Uber argues, it could provide an opening for other contractors to seek similar treatment.

The so-called on-demand economy, which includes fast-growing startups such as Postmates, Sprig and Handy, relies today on people who may work irregular hours to earn extra cash, generally paying an hourly rate with some upside for productivity. Some such laborers may work gigs for one company in the morning and another in the evening.

While it remains unclear if courts or regulators will ultimately compel on-demand companies to treat all their workers like employees, Shyp’s move would protect it from having to alter its business model down the road when it presumably would have more workers.

“This is an operational decision based on our interest in owning the entire, end-to-end Shyp experience,” said the company’s CEO Kevin Gibbon in a blog post. “It is not in response to recent lawsuits against other technology companies.”

CEO of Shyp Kevin Gibbons Getty Images

Instacart, a grocery delivery startup, recently said it planned to make some of its contractors into employees. The company’s workforce of embedded in-store shoppers, who trawl store aisles and bag groceries to hand to Instacart drivers, will be considered part-time employees, Instacart said.

There are some benefits for companies in converting contractors to employees. Among other things, they can give more extensive training, require them to work specific hours and ask them to wear company paraphernalia, such as branded shirts or hats. Moreover, these companies can know with more certainty how many workers they will have on the clock at any one time, helping with planning.

Other companies that use a workforce of on-demand employees, rather than contractors, include hot-food courier Munchery and gadget delivery service Enjoy.