Loveland resident Colton Laidig, 14, works on a "Super Moon" painting Sunday at Art in the Park. Focusing primarily on landscapes and planets, Colton has been creating spray paint pictures since November. ( Luke Whittaker / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Sweet melodies of live music hung in the air at North Lake Park on Sunday.

But there was something else wafting about in the breeze: the distinct smell of spray paint.

On the northwest corner of the Art in the Park show, around the Sky Scape tent, a crowd gathered to watch a masked boy with spray paint cans.

And while in different circumstances this might sound like mischief, this artistic youth's target demographic is far different than many other youngsters armed with spray paint.

"We were bored, basically, and we had some spray paint and my dad said, 'Why don't you try something with it,' " said Colton Laidig, 14, of Loveland.

Colton and his brother Jace, 12, have developed quite a skill for manipulating spray paint, rendering colorful landscapes and surreal scenes from outer space.

"I'm blown away by both of them," said their father Scott. "I think they're going to need bigger hats after their live demos here. (My wife and I) are very proud."

After shaking the can, Colton seemingly haphazardly unleashed onto the paper. But after a few strokes of a tool and the dabbing of newsprint or a sponge, the layers of paint created an always-unique piece.

"I mixed techniques with people who were making textures with cards and things. And I use my own techniques, like pushing (painted) water around with my hands," Colton said.

This was the young artists' first public show, and they were pleasantly surprised to find their art was a big hit with the international art enthusiasts gathered in Loveland for the art and sculpture shows, which took place not more than a few minutes from their home.

"This was our first show. We usually just do it in the garage," Jace said. While his older brother focuses on nature scenes, Jace said he prefers the cosmic portrayal of bright astral bodies floating through the darkness of space.

Colton began working with the artform in November, while Jace got into it a month or two after. Together, the brothers have created around 800 pieces of art.

"You have to be patient. If you don't get it at first, don't get frustrated. You'll see people doing things that you might be able to do, but you have to come up with your own stuff," Colton recommended to those interested in trying the artform out themselves, while Jace suggested starting small and working your way up in complexity.

"And wear a mask!"

The two sold their live demonstration pieces, along with multiple paintings brought from home. They don't do prints of their artwork, feeling it doesn't capture the natural and textural element of the originals, so instead they recreate certain scenes at peoples' request.

"These are amazing. And he's 14," said Annette Thomas of Montgomery, Ala., who purchased two of the boys' pieces.

Colton finished a live demonstration, capturing a jungle waterfall scene backdropped by a massive moon, taking around 15 minutes to complete.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer James Garcia at 970-635-3630 or garciaj@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at Twitter.com/JamesGarciaRH.