Anganette Young, CEO of MedNorth Health Clinic, hopes the block party MedNorth is throwing Saturday will help it overcome its status as the "best kept secret in Wilmington."

What: Annual community block party promoting health education for free screenings and more. It offers free health education and screening as well as live music, food and children's activities. When: 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Saturday, Aug. 8. Where: MedNorth Health Center, 925 N. Fourth St. More info: Call Carmen Escalante at 910-202-8642.

The facility formerly known as the New Hanover Community Health Center was established on the Northside in 1993 and moved to 925 N. Fourth St. in 1997.

Young, steering a knee walker after she broke her left heel on vacation, gamely showed me around the building. Its sections include family practice, pediatrics, behavioral health, dental, a lab and a pharmacy.

The health center is expanding in several areas to better serve people who have no insurance or are under-insured, she said.

Dental services are growing to include dentures, crowns and partials -- "part of the tooth is yours and part of it is mine," explained Gail Ezell, the chief dental officer.

The pharmacy is adding more space and a second window to serve clients.

Staffers work between departments to provide complete care for patients.

Evie Nicklas, the behavioral health program director, coordinates with the clinic's pediatric and obstetric doctors, as well as with community partners.

A obstetrician might detect depression and anxiety in a pregnant patient and refer to mom-to-be to behavioral health. Nicklas said her department might refer that patient to Smart Start of New Hanover County or to programs at the New Hanover County Health Department that can help.

Some of the children who come in are victims of chronic stress. It can arise from a divorce or separation from a parent, child abuse or neglect, or from witnessing domestic violence. These children are more susceptible to physical conditions such as heart disease, high blood pressure and diabetes.

So behavioral health works with pediatricians to treat the child's physical, mental and emotional problems, and might call in outside agencies as needed.

Young has been CEO at the clinic since 2012, after serving for nine years as CEO of another community health center in Houston. She moved here to be closer to her daughter's family in Savannah, Ga.

MedNorth charges clients a sliding fee based on a household's income. It's $4 million annual budget is bolstered by a $2.4 million annual grant from the federal Health Resources and Services Administration, Young said.

The Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, has increased the number of insured people, Young said, but high deductibles leave many people still needing help with costs.

MedNorth coordinates with other clinics and facilities serving low-income clients through Cape Fear HealthNet, which coordinates health care for the poor and uninsured in Brunswick and New Hanover counties.

A grant from the Cape Fear Memorial Foundation allowed MedNorth to buy a camera to detect diabetic retinopathy, an eye disorder. Patients are referred to MedNorth from a number of area clinics and facilities.

MedNorth's patients come from all over New Hanover, Brunswick and Pender counties. Signs throughout the clinic are in both English and Spanish, attesting to its reach.

For more information, visit www.MedNorth.org or call 910-343-0270.

Column idea? Contact Si Cantwell at 343-2364 or Si.Cantwell@StarNewsOnline.com.