As huge budget cuts are destroying public schools and colleges and kicking thousands of people out of life-giving medical care, Republicans in the Oklahoma Legislature and Governor’s office sigh, sympathize, and whine, “But there was nothing we could do about it. It’s those falling oil prices—the funds we have to work with are shrunk and smashed—It’s all because of those falling oil prices!”

Not true! Not true!

And State Senator for District 6, Josh Brecheen, hauls out the claim again in his March 22, 2016, Durant Daily Democrat column: “We’re facing tough choices this legislative session and possibly next session due to budgets greatly reduced by the oil and gas industry downturn.”

Not true!

Of course, the big drop in oil income has made things worse. Still, that is not the main story. Let’s be blunt about it: Falling oil prices have made an already terrible situation worse.

But that terrible situation did not start with falling oil prices.

Look at a few facts.

Republicans took over both Legislative chambers in 2008 and added the Governorship in 2010. From the git-go, they began screaming tax cuts and budget cuts.

By 2013, all state agencies had begun to feel the pain of cutbacks. On top of faulty economic theories, the Republicans were driven by stiff opposition to anything the Obama administration tried to do. Take just one example. Even before 2013, Governor Fallin had rejected Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act—“Obamacare.”

If Fallin had accepted the Medicaid expansion, even half of that money coming into our state would have bettered Oklahoma’s financial situation in these ways (according to an Oklahoma State University study): poured almost $30 million in revenue directly into state coffers, created 4,000 new health-care jobs, and added 5,000 indirectly related jobs with payrolls of $200 million.

And it would have brought healthcare to 200,000 Oklahomans who have no healthcare.

But the Republicans were just getting started. In 2013, with the state economy already in trouble, the Governor and Legislature crafted a tax-rate reduction from 5.25 % to 5.0%, a move that makes no sense with already shrunken income. At the same time, they did something that made a little sense and thought about a rollback of some business incentives and tax credits.

All these troubles were well under way by 2013.

However, the oil-price slump did not begin until 2014—late 2014—after Republican cut-crazy governance was already destroying state agencies with funding for many down more than 20% since 2009.

At the present time, however, here in 2016, they are wrangling over whether to follow through with their plans. So they have the state facing the desperate situation of the lower tax income along with the possibility after all of keeping at least some of the business incentives and credits they thought about eliminating—an unbelievable mess of cutting what’s coming in while spending wildly on what’s going out.

That’s like one of us ordinary folks having our income slashed by, say, one-third and, then, skipping nonchalantly down the sidewalk chanting, “Oh, I love my goodies from Walmart! So I’ll keep my goodies from Walmart! And maybe I’ll even buy some more goodies from Walmart!”

The list of examples of Republican tax-cutting/state-wrecking decisions could go on and on. The Republican Legislature and the Republican Governor have ruined our state of Oklahoma.

It is time to kick them out and elect some people who can try to rebuild Oklahoma!

Let’s not forget that the oil and gas slump didn’t ruin Oklahoma—Republicans did it!

Joe Littlejohn

Durant