As President Barack Obama approaches his last six months in office, he seems hell-bent on teaming up with his attorney general and staff to issue orders, rules and “guidance” that reach into every area of our lives and businesses—much like a dictator might behave.

Obama seems intent on driving his liberal, socialist agenda to the last day—and to hell with the Constitution or the rights of hundreds of millions of Americans. By issuing rules and executive orders, he will bypass Congress—which many argue is in some cases unconstitutional—to create “the America” he desires. And our “leader” even threatens his citizens to do as he says or he will punish us by withholding our very own tax dollars from our school children and hospitals.

Most notable was a directive from his education and justice departments instructing schools to allow transgender students to use the bathroom that matches their gender identity. A Wall Street Journal editorial said, “As the nation’s public schools learned Friday, this gives ‘guidance’ new meaning. That meaning is that the Obama Administration intends to obliterate what is left of federalism, the principle that states retain powers not delegated to the national government.”

“This is a historical example of how government grows and how, by redistributing our tax dollars and offering funding, it sinks its claws into the states, making them dependent, so the feds can call the shots—or else.”

I have heard many views expressed on the topic. One person pointed out that the federal government is attempting to reach into every area of our lives and tell us what we must do—even in the bathroom. He said it is ironic that liberals are the first ones to use “science” when arguing such issues as global warming, but want to ignore simple anatomy and physiology in the bathroom debate. Those same liberals also want to claim that using the bathroom of your choosing based on how you “feel” is a civil rights issue—but these hypocrites will deny a disadvantaged child the ability to choose a school based on where they “feel” safe or “feel” they can get the best education. What about those civil rights?

I found Obama’s comments in his recent commencement speech at Rutgers University amusing. He said, “Facts, evidence, reason, logic, an understanding of science—these are good things. These are qualities you want in people making policy.” Too bad our president is missing so many of those qualities in this situation.

We’ve all heard the joke, “I am with the federal government, and I’m here to help you.” Why do we laugh and react with such a cynical view—or even anger—toward our nation’s capital? Maybe it’s our history.

The U.S. Department of Education recounts its own history by stating “its origins go back to 1867, when President Andrew Johnson signed legislation creating the first Department of Education. Its main purpose was to collect information and statistics about the nation’s schools. However, due to concern that the department would exercise too much control over local schools, the new department was demoted to an Office of Education in 1868.” Then in 1979, President Jimmy Carter elevated the department to cabinet level. (Thanks, Jimmy.) The next president ought to eliminate the department and return the money and power to the states.

This is a historical example of how government grows and how, by redistributing our tax dollars and offering funding, it sinks its claws into the states, making them dependent, so the feds can call the shots—or else. The president and federal government want to dictate from Washington on matters that should be guided by states’ rights. This is the fear of Medicaid expansion. It also fueled much of the debate over Common Core, when the U.S. Department of Education got involved. Citizens know politicians love power and want control for their own agenda.

But it is not just the control of our public schools involved here. The same week the directive on bathrooms was sent, the Department of Health and Human Services issued a new rule regarding the implementation of nondiscrimination protections under the Affordable Care Act. It guarantees that transgender people cannot be denied health care by professionals who receive federal funding, and also that it is discriminatory to refuse them access to gender transition-related services. Refuse, and you can lose your funding.

And the rule does not include a complete religious exemption for faith-based providers who would prefer not to provide such services due to their beliefs. The rule could also strike down laws in states that ban Medicaid funds from being used in sex-reassignment procedures.

Roger Severino, director of the DeVos Center for Religion and Civil Society at The Heritage Foundation, told The Washington Times, “I think it’s another striking example of federal overreach and intrusion, not only into the operations of the states, but into the operations of individual hospitals, physicians, and insurers, who should have the ability to make their own decisions when it comes to controversial treatments.”

That’s right, the president wants to run the hospitals, doctor’s offices and businesses, too.

But Obama is not satisfied with just health care and bathrooms; he wants to tell you how to pay and treat your employees, too. We know of his push for an increase in the minimum wage, but now his Department of Labor just issued another new rule guaranteeing overtime rights and raising the threshold to salaried employees earning under $47,476 per year. But the outcome may not be what the liberals and the president expect.

David French, a senior vice president for the National Retail Federation, said, “These rules are a career killer. With the stroke of a pen, the Labor Department is demoting millions of workers.”

Some warn that workers could actually lose out as employers try to avoid the extra costs by converting salaried workers to hourly positions in order to more closely track their time. Others see an increased burden on small businesses having to handle more part-time employees, scheduling and paperwork. Some salaried workers could lose hours—or if they get new overtime pay, have their benefits or bonuses reduced to offset. And if costs do rise, some businesses may just raise prices and pass it on to consumers. So we all pay.

French said, “These regulations are full of false promises. Most of the people impacted by this change will not see any additional pay.”

In all of these situations, the federal government and President Obama are deciding what is best for our lives and how to run our schools and companies in a display of “absolute despotism.”

I believe the Declaration of Independence said we were “endowed by [our] Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness. That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed—that whenever any Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new Government, laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their Safety and Happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all experience hath shewn, that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same Object evinces a design to reduce them under absolute Despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such Government, and to provide new Guards for their future security.”

President Obama has been driving a “long train of abuses and usurpations” that has gone off the tracks, and many people now feel that duty calls to “throw off such Government, and to provide new Guards for their future security.”