As a very large kid from a very small town, Dalton Risner is well aware of the stereotype. But he doesn’t have to believe it or live it.

The senior is 6-foot-5 and 300 pounds, and from Wiggins, a town of 906 residents. But he will never big-time his roots.

After he played in the Offense-Defense All-American Bowl in Orlando, Fla., in January, Risner said, “It was exactly what I needed to prove how a small-town kid can set his goals for the sky and with hard work and passion how anything is possible.”

The center was voted a team captain and helped his team win 21-19.

He was still playing football Friday, this time in Arlington, Texas, for Team USA against Canada at AT&T Stadium, the home of the Dallas Cowboys. It was a couple of days after signing with Kansas State.

Not bad for a kid who played in Colorado’s Class 1A North Central League.

“It just added to the greatness of the moment,” Risner said.

Truth is, both experiences were necessary for Risner. He wanted a taste of what awaits him in the Big 12 Conference.

“These guys are good,” Risner said. “It went really good, the competition (in Arlington) was more stiff than in Orlando. It was the best of the best, guys going to Ohio State and Oregon … it was good for me to get a look.”

The plan is for Risner, an excellent student, to redshirt this fall and compete for a starting job as a sophomore. He’s OK with getting acclimated to the program, then watching and learning.

Another reason Risner, the No. 6 recruit by The Denver Post in Colorado’s Class of 2014, feels fortunate is that he missed the last five games last fall after a fracture in his right foot required surgery.

“It was an awful process,” he said, “but it healed up.”

Risner’s injury kept him from playing basketball for the Tigers, but he will be there in the spring to compete in the shot put and discus. He’s a small-town kid and his small-town high school needs him.

And he is living proof that athletes from the likes of Wiggins can compete with anyone.

“That’s one thing I’m really proud of. I was telling everybody that I was playing against guys from 5A and 6A Texas schools that have indoor facilities,” Risner said. “I’m from Wiggins. I got noticed and that was my goal. It has been a dream come true to be there and compete against those guys.”

Neil H. Devlin: ndevlin@denverpost.com or twitter.com/neildevlin