The Republican National Committee on Monday said it's launching robocalls against Sen. Jeff Merkley of Oregon and 10 other Democrats up for re-election, accusing them of lying about the new federal health care law.





Meanwhile, Portland attorney Tim Crawley became the sixth Republican candidate to announce for Merkley's Senate seat.





The robocalls accuse Merkley and the others of repeating President Barack Obama's claim that Americans could keep their health insurance if they wanted to under the new health care law.





"Call Sen. Merkley...and ask why he lied," urges the automated call directed at Oregon voters. Republicans have been piling on Obama as insurers have been canceling health care policies for many people in the individual market.





Democrats have responded that the vast majority of Americans who have insurance through work have been able to keep their plan and that people in the individual market have frequently faced cancellations. PolitiFact rated Obama's claim as "Half True" and noted that the new law could increase the number of cancellations. UPDATE: Merkley spokesman Matt McNally responded with a statement saying that the new law has already reduced the number of uninsured people in Oregon by 10 percent. "We have ended the terrible practice of kicking people off their insurance when they get sick and made it so that people with preexisting conditions can get covered," he said. "The RNC helped shutdown the government in order to prevent that from happening, it is no surprise that now they are trying to play politics with people’s healthcare." Crawley, 31, grew up in Oregon but had been out of state for several years for schooling and work. He moved to Portland from the Bay Area a year ago and now works with a small law firm on personal injury, civil rights and small business issues.





Crawley previously worked for a Silicon Valley law firm on a number of tech industry issues and is a graduate of the University of California's Hastings College of Law in San Francisco.





In a statement, Crawley said:





Our campaign is being launched one year from the 2014 general election with the goal of helping restore self-determination in our communities. Party warfare in our governing bodies must be brought to an end in the interest of the common good. The increasing gross stratification of wealth must be checked and the ideals of a democratic financial system must be revived in practice. And we must return to a saner foreign policy, halting an intolerable drain of American blood and treasure abroad while adopting more effective strategies for peace.”









READING:





Gov. John Kitzhaber's decision on running again probably two or three weeks away.









-- Jeff Mapes

Other GOP candidates include: state Rep. Jason Conger of Bend; Portland pediatric surgeon Monica Wehby; Bend businessman Sam Carpenter; Jo Rae Perkins, a former Linn County GOP chair; and Salem information technology consultant Mark Callahan.