Congress is back, and there's gonna be trouble -- Hey-na, hey-na, Congress is back! -- and much bloviating and gobshitery will now ensue over Syria, and the debt ceiling, and Obamacare, and whatever other bats are flying around Darrell Issa's crowded belfry these days. However, two stories popped over the weekend that shed a bright light on the nature of the country these people purport to help lead, and on what they -- and we -- have made of it.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

The first one came from Arkansas where, confronted with a likely demented 107-year old man isolated in an apartment and taking potshots through the door, the local cops thought massive retaliation to be their only option. The predictable denouement followed.

Police say that when they approached the bedroom where Isadore was hiding and announced their presence, he shot at them. Backup was called in, as well as a SWAT team, and further negotiations failed to get Isadore to turn himself in, according to police. A small camera determined Isadore was armed with a handgun inside the bedroom. Then, the police statement claims: "S.W.A.T. inserted gas into the room, after it was evident negotiations were unsuccessful, in hopes Isadore would surrender peacefully. When the gas was inserted into the room, Isadore fired rounds at the S.W.A.T. officers that had inserted the gas from outside a bedroom window.

Most Popular

A long time ago, when I was working on a book about Alzheimer's, I spoke with a woman named Lisa Gwyther who worked on community outreach for the Alzheimer's center at Duke University Medical Center. Now, a lot of people dealing with the disease will tell you that one of the hardest things they have to do is to pry the car keys away from an Alzheimer's patient. They are a statement of the patient's identity that the patient will cling to because so much of the patient's identity is being lost. Gwyther sent her teams out into the mountains of western North Carolina and came back with a different result. "The shotguns," she told me. "They won't give up the shotguns."

"Shortly afterwards, a S.W.A.T. entry team, inside the residence, breached the door to the bedroom and threw a distraction device into the bedroom. Isadore then began to fire on the entry team and the entry team engaged Isadore, killing him."

So the local cops in Arkansas surround a building in which a 107-year old man is holed up. He's not going anywhere and, sooner or later, he's got to run out of ammunition. There is nothing to be lost by staying out of range and waiting this guy out. But that would not demonstrate authority. Instead, they try to negotiate with someone who likely is demented, gas him, toss in a flash-bang, and then blow him away. This heavily militarized response to a guy who was born when Teddy Freaking Roosevelt was president supposedly makes sense. The country is now thick with local cops who think they're in the Army, and who have been outfitted with military hardware -- much of it U.S. Army surplus -- and who are all hopped up to use it. This is one of the casual cruelties we are training ourselves to overlook.

The other story was a longish series in The Washington Post concerning the activities of some people who, in a sane and just world, would be flogged until they bled water through the public streets.

Coleman, struggling with dementia, was among those who lost a home. His debt had snowballed to $4,999 - 37 times the original tax bill. Not only did he lose his $197,000 house, but he also was stripped of the equity because tax lien purchasers are entitled to everything, trumping even mortgage companies. "This is destroying lives," said Christopher Leinberger, a distinguished scholar and research professor of urban real estate at George Washington University. Officials at the D.C. Office of Tax and Revenue said that without tax sales, property owners wouldn't feel compelled to pay their bills. "The tax sale is the last resort. It's also the first resort - it's the only way in the statute to collect debt," said deputy chief financial officer Stephen Cordi. But the District, a hotbed for the tax lien industry, has done little to shield its most vulnerable homeowners from unscrupulous operators.

(By the way, Happy Alzheimer's Awareness Month!)

For several decades now, we have celebrated sharp practices and gunslinger business-school schemes by which ordinary people get robbed of their jobs, their pensions, their homes, and their livelihoods, or just generally get ground up in schemes concocted by people they don't even know. We based our entire national economy on the law of the jungle, and then we rigged the jungle. This country is now thick with victims who don't know what happened to them, and how, and it is also thick with clever dicks who have made their fortunes in the grinding up of people whom they do not know. The only thing the country is not thick with is conscence. This is another one of the casual cruelties we are training ourselves to overlook.

Ultimately, it is cruelty that is the real New Normal. We accept it every time we accept that cops can stop teenagers for "furtive movements," or when they respond to every unusual situation as though it were taking place atop Mount Suribachi. We accept it every time we accept that "the economy" is some faceless force over which we have no control, and that the plight of its victims are somehow the natural result of immutable natural laws, instead of the natural result of thousands of individual decisions, many of which were made down the marble halls not 10 feet from this keyboard, where the Congress is back to discuss, seriously, how a distant government could do such horrible things to its own citizens.