Court Street in Prestonsburg, Ky. The Appalachian region has been hit hard by a downturn in the coal industry. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

PRESTONSBURG, Ky. — These hardscrabble Appalachian hills so rife with need and illness have been a national testing ground for Obamacare over the past two years and may soon test something more fundamental — the age-old struggle to balance personal responsibility and the obligation to care for the very poor.

The Affordable Care Act gave thousands of residents in Eastern Kentucky, one of the nation’s most vulnerable communities, unprecedented new access to health care. It came mostly through the expansion of taxpayer-funded Medicaid, and it helped make Kentucky a national model.

But it also raised fears about yet another burden on a fragile state budget and skepticism among conservatives who saw it as out of step with their political ideology. Newly elected Republican Gov. Matt Bevin alluded to both concerns when he announced plans to remake Kentucky’s Medicaid expansion to look more like nearby Indiana’s, a more limited version that calls for patients to share more costs so they have a bigger stake in their care. Bevin is already moving forward with plans to dismantle the state’s popular “kynect” health insurance exchange, where residents sign up for both Medicaid and private coverage.

If the governor succeeds and changes to Medicaid begin next year, Kentucky would join six other states with specially designed Medicaid expansion programs approved by the federal government — and would be one of the first states to replace the traditional Medicaid expansion envisioned by the ACA with one that includes premiums and higher co-pays.

“We’re obviously watching this very closely,” says Judith Solomon, a vice president at the non-partisan Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, which focuses on poverty and inequality. When it comes to making poor people pay more for their care, “there are some real serious questions that (federal agencies), the Obama administration and future administrations will have to address,” especially since self-styled Medicaid expansions are part of “the next wave” in the ACA’s evolution.

Here in Floyd County, where USA TODAY and The (Louisville) Courier-Journal have chronicled the ACA's rollout, Medicaid patients and their doctors fret — and often disagree — about what all this change could mean for them.

Unemployed father Zachary Ryan Dye, 19, says “it ain’t possible” for people in his position to pay even a little more for health care, so he’d have to give up the insurance or skip appointments. Things have been so tight lately he’s had to rely on a church food pantry to help with food for him and his 1-year-old.

Colon cancer survivor Pamela Hereford, 57, says she could probably pay a few dollars more for Medicaid but worries the poor families she works with as mental health services manager at the local Head Start would have to do without.

Pamela Hereford is a survivor of colon cancer and a resident of eastern Kentucky. She currently is on Medicaid through the state's Kynect system. Gov. Matt Bevin has announced he will eliminate the program and is looking at having Medicaid members pay a portion of their coverage. Jan. 11, 2016. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

And Joanna Santiesteban, a Prestonsburg obstetrician/gynecologist and chief of staff at Highlands Regional Medical Center, fears premiums will be impossible for patients who scrape by on minimum wage, but hopes across-the-board co-pays could make people more invested in the care she provides.

Floyd County leaders wonder what a Medicaid overhaul would mean for the overall health of their community, especially as coal jobs continue to disappear, taking livelihoods with them. Some here argue concerns about coal trumped Obamacare and helped lead most of Appalachian Kentucky to vote for Bevin over Democrat Jack Conway — despite Bevin’s vow to pull back or change Medicaid that had helped so many area residents.

“We’re taking a major hit right now with the loss of coal jobs and all those jobs tied to the coal industry,” Floyd Judge-Executive Ben Hale says. “We’d hate to have another hardship put on us for the people qualified for Medicaid, who are struggling as it is.”

Obstetrician/gynecologist Joanna Santiesteban, medical director at Harper OB/GYN in Prestonsburg, poses with her husband, Brent Graden, general manager of the practice. (Photo: Laura Ungar/USA TODAY)

States seek more from patients

Bevin’s plan would be a new turn in a rollout that has gained national attention.

Kentucky became the first Southern state to fully embrace the ACA under Democratic governor Steve Beshear, and more than half a million residents signed up for insurance, including nearly 425,000 for expanded Medicaid covering those earning up to 138% of the poverty level, or about $16,000 for one person. Nearly 5,700 residents got expanded Medicaid in Floyd County, a community of 38,000 that the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation ranks as second worst in Kentucky on health indicators.

Floyd’s uninsured rate was cut in half to less than 8%, estimates show, while the state’s rate dropped from more than 20% to less than 9%.

But Bevin has said the current Medicaid program, which covers more than a quarter of Kentuckians, is not sustainable. The federal government pays 70% of costs of about 875,000 people in traditional services and by 2020 will pay 90% of costs for those added through the expansion.

He’s looking to Indiana, which after initially joining other Republican-dominated states in refusing to expand Medicaid, last year won federal approval for a more limited version that requires premiums and co-pays and offers different tiers of coverage.

Participants are required to make monthly contributions ranging from $1 to $27. Those who don’t pay can be dis-enrolled, and anyone below the poverty level who fails to make payments is put into a "basic" plan that has fewer benefits and requires co-pays for care. It also includes financial disincentives to repeated use of hospital emergency rooms, among other provisions.

Currently in Appalachian Kentucky, at least one Medicaid managed care company charges small co-pays, doctors say, but federal law generally prohibits states from charging premiums for Medicaid recipients earning less than 150% of the federal poverty level.

Micheal Richardson is a resident at the Layne House, a drug and alcohol treatment center in Prestonsburg, Ky. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Self-styled plans in several states with Medicaid “waivers” from the federal government do include premiums and other cost-sharing, however. Arizona, which like Kentucky has a “traditional” ACA Medicaid expansion, is seeking to join these states with a pending waiver application that would impose more costs on patients. But compared with other states, Solomon says Indiana’s plan calls for “the maximum available cost-sharing.”

Studies are underway to assess the impact of Indiana’s plan, but the jury is still out on whether the approach saves money, promotes more responsible behaviors or adds barriers to accessing care, Indiana University health researcher Kosali Simon says.

Bloomington, Ind.-based ACA “navigator” David Meyer, who helped people enroll in Indiana’s plan, says many of the poor struggle to navigate a complicated Medicaid system and pay monthly bills.

Their cost-sharing “may sound like Starbucks money to you and me, but it can be the difference between getting a prescription drug and not getting it,” he says, adding that Kentucky Medicaid recipients could fall off the rolls if the state switches them to a new and more complex system.

Studies back up his concerns. Research shows "any financial barriers you put in place for Kentucky’s lowest-income people can affect access to care,” says Emily Beauregard, executive director of Kentucky Voices for Health.

At the same time, experts say small co-pays and premiums typically don’t add up to meaningful revenue in state coffers — and may not even offset the cost of collecting them — with any savings likely coming from deferred care or fewer signing up for Medicaid.

Still, recent research led by Benjamin Sommers, an assistant professor at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, shows that any Medicaid expansion is better than none. His study this month in the journal Health Affairs compared Kentucky with Texas, which didn’t expand Medicaid, and Arkansas, which has a waiver plan that includes health savings accounts to which certain recipients make monthly contributions of $5 to $25 a month for co-pays and co-insurance.

Compared with Texas, the study found, both Arkansas and Kentucky saw improved coverage and access to care.

Mixed opinions on cost-sharing

In the restaurants, barber shops and medical clinics tucked into the winding roads and mountainsides of Floyd County, there's disagreement about the potential impact of Medicaid changes.

Some share Bevin’s view that paying premiums gives people “a vested interest” in their care. “Having skin in the game is a big, big differentiator between whether or not the person has the dignity that goes with making decisions for themselves," he has said.

Left, Ralph Little and barber David Calhoun at Wright's Barber Shop in Prestonsburg, Ky. On the right is Henry Lewis and barber Gary Wright. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Darrell Patton, a Prestonsburg insurance agent for nearly four decades, believes “skin in the game” is a good idea. While some of Patton's clients couldn’t afford even small premiums, he says, too many work for cash and qualify for Medicaid while driving $40,000 trucks,

“If you don’t have any kind of responsibility, sometimes you’ll seek the most convenient care — which is in a lot of cases the most expensive care,” such as the ER, he says.

Others say it’s not right to impose more costs on the neediest residents in a county where nearly one in three live in poverty. At a Floyd County drug treatment facility of bare rooms in an old roadside motel, 25-year-old Medicaid recipient and recovering addict Mike Richardson argued, “It shouldn’t cost money to save a life.”

Dye, the young single father, says premiums might prevent him from having insurance, and co-pays would limit his access to doctors or the anxiety medications he needs.

“I hate to see anybody pay to go get seen,” says Dye, who is looking for a job but currently lives with his mother and has no car. “I think they should just keep (Medicaid) the way it is.”

Zachary Dye contemplates what his life would be like if Gov. Matt Bevin makes planned changes to Medicaid. Dye, from Martin, Ky. is unemployed and the father of a baby girl. He is seen in a restaurant in Prestonsburg, where he hoped to find a job. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Health care providers, meanwhile, wonder what Medicaid changes could mean for their practices.

Santiesteban, the obstetrician/gynecologist, says the Medicaid expansion has really helped previously uninsured patients forced to delay care. But it’s been tough on her business, and she doesn’t expect that to change unless Bevin’s proposal includes higher reimbursements for doctors. As it stands, she says, she’s seen a flood of new Medicaid patients, many with complicated, time-consuming medical problems, which has meant “I do a lot more with less pay.”

“It’s almost to the point where you’re paying to see the patient,” adds local podiatrist Robert Miller.

Robert Miller, a podiatrist in Prestonsburg, Ky., listens to Sarah Beth Blankenship describe a problem she had with her foot on Jan 12, 2016. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

More co-pays would only mean more challenges, Miller says, based on his experience with the one Medicaid plan he takes that charges them. Doctors must document that they tried to collect, and the cost of sending out letters to those who can’t afford a $2 co-pay can be $5 or more.

Thursa Sloan, Floyd's public health director, says with all that’s at stake, many in her community are anxiously waiting for Bevin to make a more concrete proposal by summer.

Meantime, she says, “it means more uncertainty for us.”

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1V5U9Uo