MOOSIC - Vice President Joe Biden stopped by Terry's Diner to talk about the Affordable Care Act and an upcoming deadline.

Biden met with seven people trying to enroll the uninsured for health coverage before the March 31 deadline. After the open enrollment period under the federal law ends March 31, people without insurance are subject to federal tax penalties.

"Hey Dianna," Biden said to Dianna Ashford, a certified application counselor with the Rural Health Corporation of Northeast Pennsylvania, shaking her hand.

"Thanks for taking to time to do this," Biden said, sitting down at the table with the seven participants. "So far, things are moving pretty well after getting off to a slow start with the website."

More than 4.2 million Americans have enrolled in health insurance plans through the federal and state exchanges since Oct. 1, Biden said, adding there is "a shot here at kind of rolling these numbers up a little more" before the March 31 deadline.

Biden said he wanted to talk about "what it is that has worked and hasn't worked" and "what you think we should be doing." He added the cost of health insurance for most young adults is probably less than what they pay for cell phone service.

The news media was allowed to hear about three minutes of the discussion. But it lasted about an hour, said Kristina Zimmerman, a third year medical student at The Commonwealth Medical College in Scranton.

"He said it's the biggest thing since Social Security," Zimmerman said, adding the vice president didn't use the expletive he said when President Obama signed the law known as Obamacare in 2010.

Dr. John Szarek, a professor and director of clinical pharmacology at The Commonwealth Medical College, and Danae DiRocco, a second-year student at the medical college, were also at the diner with Biden. They have helped enroll about 50 people for health insurance, Zimmerman said.

"I am going to be a primary-care doctor, and I believe it's vital for everybody to have easy access to health care," Zimmerman said. "It will prevent illness and reduce costs in the long run. It's a good step forward."

Zimmerman said they didn't know they would meet with Biden until "he was actually there." But they suspected they would meet with him because the White House asked them on Friday to be available Monday and they knew Biden was visiting the region Monday, she said.

From 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. this Saturday, an enrollment fair for Obamacare will be at The Commonwealth Medical College, 525 Pine St., Scranton, Zimmerman said.

The others at the diner with Biden were: Laura Long, a certified application counselor with Wayne Memorial Community Health Centers; Belinda Opeil, a certified application counselor with Scranton Primary Health Care Center Inc.; and Tom McHugh, a navigator with The Advocacy Alliance.

Before the discussion on Obamacare, Biden entered the diner's front door and greeted customers at the front of the dinner. He then worked his way to the back room, shaking hands and posing for photographs.

mbuffer@citizensvoice.com

570-821-2073, @cvmikebuffer