The Yavapai County Sheriff's Office has released more information following a reported kidnapping at a Cottonwood home on Friday.

YCSO detectives arrested Charles Fitzpatrick, 29, and Virginia "Samantha" Reyes, 35, both of Clarkdale.

The incident apparently started during a dispute with Reyes and a 36-year-old female resident on Village Drive in Cottonwood Friday morning.

Sheriff's spokesman Dwight D'Evelyn said the resident had rented a 2016 Dodge Charger from a Prescott-area business. The vehicle was also used by Reyes. Reyes claimed the woman owed her money for the car based on a prior agreement and they got into a confrontation.

D'Evelyn said Reyes claimed she became concerned for her safety due to threats from the woman and called Fitzpatrick for help. He arrived at the home in a Dodge Neon around 6 a.m. with Reyes' 14-year-old son and another man.

The situation escalated and Fitzpatrick took the Dodge Charger from the resident. He reportedly pushed Reyes into the car and started to drive away.

[READ: Kidnapped mother and son found safe; stolen car found floating in river]

D'Evelyn said the resident attempted to prevent Fitzpatrick from leaving by striking the driver's window with a pipe, smashing the glass. Fitzpatrick continued driving and struck a man standing nearby who had come outside after hearing the commotion. The man fell to the ground with a leg injury.

D'Evelyn said the resident then called 911 to report that Reyes, whom officials initially said had a possible first name of Samantha, had been kidnapped and her rental car stolen. There also were indications that Reyes' son had been forced into the Dodge Neon before it drove away, but these allegations have been determined to be unfounded.

Reyes later contacted authorities after hearing news reports that she had been kidnapped. Detectives located her at a home in Clarkdale. They said she denied the kidnapping allegation but eventually admitted Fitzpatrick had "pushed" her into the Charger before fleeing. Her son was also found at the home and the Neon was parked nearby.

Reyes initially claimed no knowledge as to where the Charger was located and Fitzpatrick told detectives he parked the car near the Tuzigoot National Monument area. The vehicle was soon found floating in the Verde River a few miles from the home. D'Evelyn said after the car was removed, investigators found that a rock had been placed over the gas pedal to aid in acceleration.

Detectives said Fitzpatrick admitted dumping the car in the river, hoping it would not be found.

Fitzpatrick was booked on felony charges including vehicle theft, damage to property and endangerment. Reyes was booked on charges including vehicle theft and hindering prosecution.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.