Message to firms with healthy habits: Lead the way

Rod Reasen, CEO of Healthiest Employers LLC, shook up the audience at Crain's fifth annual Health Care Leadership Summit last month when he said he had some disturbing news: Companies have spent $2 billion on corporate wellness programs, only to get 5 million workers to sign up for at least one program.



"We as an industry know we need to do more," Reasen said. "There are new ideas popping up all the time, really good things out there" to encourage participation in wellness programs.



But on top of the U.S. facing twin epidemics of diabetes and obesity, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Reasen said a Rand Corp. study concluded that half of Americans have at least one of nine serious chronic conditions. Wellness programs, he said, need to do a better job of reaching more of the sickest workers.



"We are spending $2 billion to affect 5 million people, and we are not changing things," Reasen said. "Health care costs are not going down. What are we doing? Pundits from the outside are asking us (wellness professionals), 'Does wellness work?' "



Reasen said the answer is for companies with stellar wellness programs — like the Southeast Michigan companies that won first-place awards in the Priority Health-sponsored Michigan's Healthiest Employers — to lead by example because not enough employers and employees are participating in the effort to slow health care costs.



In 2013, the region's healthiest employers are Beaumont Health System, Oakland County, XMCO Inc., Expert-Metal Inc. and Asset Health Inc.



"Innovations are happening from employers like you," Reasen said. "From Zumba to Frisbee, you are doing some really cool things" to engage employees in wellness.



But, he said, on the whole, Michigan is not doing as well as national averages.



In 2013, Michigan dropped to 53.82 in the Healthiest Employers index, compared with the national average of 55.42, Reasen said. Numbers are based on values from 1 to 100, with the higher numbers representing more success. The survey represents more than 4,000 employers in 44 metropolitan areas.



"Frankly, in Michigan, you are challenged. ... You are below the average," Reasen said. "We don't look at this as a negative. We look at this as an opportunity. You as employers are the healthiest of the employers. You can be a catalyst for other employers to encourage them to change."



Jay Holden, senior vice president and chief human resources officer at Royal Oak-based Beaumont, said Michigan's low numbers may be due to the high rates of chronic diseases in Southeast Michigan.



"I have seen studies to show that Michigan has a higher obesity rate" than most metropolitan areas, Holden said. "It is near the bottom. Michigan's economy also has been slower to recover."



Don Whitford, vice president of the east region of Priority Health in Farmington Hills, said the decline in wellness programs could be due to employers not investing in wellness because of uncertainty surrounding the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.



"I believe there is pent-up demand out there," Whitford said. "I am not sure employers have seen the right opportunity to partner with the right player."



Whitford said wellness programs take at least three years to generate a positive return on investment.



"A lot of times, people look for a quick return on investment," he said. "We stress this really isn't a one-year investment. It's long-term. The winners (of Michigan's Healthiest Employers) have been at it 10 to 12 years and are seeing the fruits of their labor."



For the past 12 years, Beaumont has developed its corporate wellness program into one of the best in Southeast Michigan. But it didn't happen overnight.



"We have tremendous leadership support that is behind all our initiatives," Holden said. "As a health care system, we need to create an environment healthy for employees because it is best for our patients."



Another approach that has proved successful to Beaumont is its holistic program strategy.



"We give employees discounts for fitness centers. We look at nutrition and make sure employees have healthy options on menus and vending machines," Holden said.



Beaumont's move several years ago to create a smoke-free environment led to a bolder step last year: New employees must be nonsmokers, he said.



"We make sure the wellness of individuals extends to employee assistance programs and through health plans that allow them to address personal health issues," Holden said.





Related Links