BARTOW | If the current trend of over-politicizing health care issues continues, Elaine Thompson told the Tiger Bay Club of Polk County, quality hospitals in Florida will be nonexistent.

Thompson, president and CEO of Lakeland Regional Health Medical Center, spoke to the club during its monthly meeting Wednesday at the Bartow Civic Center.

"We're getting health care very political, and we have to get back to solving the issues," Thompson said. "If that continues to be the way it's being done, there literally will be no good hospitals in Florida."

The primary area of Thompson's discussion Wednesday was how the ongoing legislative battle over Low Income Pool funding — which reimburses hospitals for care they give to the uninsured — and Medicaid Expansion affect LRHMC.

Florida legislators are still meeting in a special session convened after the House adjourned the regular session three days early in April. Speaker of the House Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, adjourned the session early because, he said, the House and Senate's inability to reach a compromise on accepting federal dollars for Medicaid Expansion stalled budget negotiations.

Senate and House ­Democrats and Senate Republicans have sought to accept federal funding from the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, to provide care for low-income Floridians. House Republicans and Gov. Rick Scott, also a Republican, have rejected any funding associated with President Barack Obama's health care law.

The Florida legislature's one constitutional responsibility is to pass a budget by June 30.

Last week, the Senate overwhelmingly approved its Florida Health Insurance Affordability Exchange Program (FHIX), but the Republican-led house voted the program down in a vote that ran almost perfectly down party lines.

House Republicans said LIP was too similar to Medicaid expansion, although the FHIX plan includes work requirements for those enrolling in the program.

"A majority of House members will continue to view this as an expansion of Medicaid/Obamacare with a new coat of paint," State Rep. Neil Combee, R-Auburndale, said recently.

Thompson said she is a provider, not a politician, and her priority is getting the best care to the most people at the lowest cost.

LIP funding, she said, is practicing reactive medicine, and providing low-cost health insurance would be preventive medicine.

Thompson said about 30 percent of the people who go to LRHMC's emergency room do so because they don't have access to primary care providers. Although LIP funding would reimburse the hospital for the care it gives to those people, she said, giving them access to affordable health care options could prevent them from needing an emergency room in the first place.

Providing access to affordable care is especially important in Polk County, Thompson said. Polk County has the seventh-highest poverty rate among the nation's 100 largest metro areas, according to a study by staffers from the Washington, D.C.-based Brookings Institution think tank.

Thompson said providing low-income Floridians with affordable health care options gives them access to primary care offices and wellness maintenance, which reduces the need for hospital visits and brings the cost of health care down for everyone.

"The Senate (FHIX) plan – only give it to people who have jobs but are working so hard they still can't get insurance; expand it that way," Thompson said. "That seems like a real common sense plan to me."

Thompson also said another piece of legislation in the House, one that would eliminate the "certificate of need" process — which requires state review and approval of building new hospitals, particularly within certain proximity of existing hospitals — could be disastrous for nonprofit hospitals like LRHMC.

"The elimination of the certificate of need process could have devastating effects," Thompson said. "Not-for-profit hospitals really don't have the wealth to compete in an unrestricted CON space."

Removing the CON process gives for-profit hospitals the ability to pull services from non-profit hospitals that could drive them out of business, Thompson said.

Not-for-profit hospitals offer "safety-net" services that are not lucrative enough for for-profit hospitals, but are essential to providing quality health care, Thompson said.

Keeping three well-trained neurosurgeons from the University of South Florida in Lakeland is one of the many "safety net" services Thompson said LRHMC provides.

Removing the CON process also can create too much of a free market in health care, Thompson said. Supporters of the House bill to eliminate CON, including Scott, have said a free market for hospitals can lead to a multitude of hospital improvements.

Sen. Denise Grimsley, R-Sebring, is a registered nurse and administrator at Florida Hospital Wauchula. She said Wednesday a free market in hospitals could never happen.

"As long as you have government payers, Medicare and Medicaid, it impedes the free market process," Grimsley said. "Even if you repeal CON, you'll never have a free market in health care."

Thompson said creating a free market in hospitals is dangerous because it makes health care more about the profits than the patients.

Grimsley agreed.