GLENDALE, Ariz. — As a Hall of Fame goaltender — maybe the best there ever was — Avalanche coach Patrick Roy doesn’t like to offer on-ice instruction to his netminders.

Roy doesn’t want to intimidate and relies on specialized defensive coaches Andre Tourigny and Francois Allaire to work with the guys between the pipes.

So perhaps it was a bad sign Tuesday morning when Roy was working one-on-one with goalie Reto Berra, who was set to start against the Arizona Coyotes with a .895 save percentage. Roy was at times on his knees, showing Berra the basics of the butterfly and glove position.

Berra flopped again, albeit with an inadvertent redirection “own” goal by Avs defenseman Nick Holden and another change-up tally by Coyotes center Antoine Vermette. The third goal allowed was soft, and Berra was pulled for 22-year-old rookie Calvin Pickard for the second straight game with Colorado in deep trouble, this time trailing 3-0.

This has become a point-producing formula for the Avs, who rallied in front of Pickard behind young standouts Gabe Landeskog (two goals) and Matt Duchene (goal) and a lucky overtime bounce off the stick of Daniel Briere in winning 4-3 in overtime and collecting points for the fourth time in their past five games.

“It’s a tough stretch right now for Reto, and unfortunately for him,” Roy said. “Good for us that Calvin is playing well.”

Briere’s centering pass with 1:44 remaining in OT caromed in off Coyotes forward Martin Hanzal. Briere said the bad bounces the Avs had in the first period evened out at the end.

Said Roy: “All we wanted was to win the second period and see where we were, and I thought the guys competed hard in the third. We put pucks on net, battled hard in front of their net and found ways to score goals.”

Roy singled out Landeskog. “He’s such a warrior, really battled hard,” Roy said of the captain.

Pickard got the win in the Avs’ previous game, a 4-3 triumph over Carolina on Saturday after the Hurricanes chased Berra and led 3-1. He was again stellar against Arizona and figures to be the new No. 1 goalie until Semyon Varlamov returns from a groin injury.

“It was pretty much a replica of last game. We got down early and once I got in our team pretty much took over the game,” said Pickard, who had his father, Dan, and former billet family from juniors in attendance. “Being down 3-0 on the road is not easy, but they kept with it, had a ton of chances, and it was nice to win that in overtime.”

Holden entered Tuesday at minus-14, among the league’s worst, and his troubles continued. Midway through the game he had Berra behind him, but nevertheless tried to make a glove save on Michael Stone’s shot from the point. Holden’s glove wasn’t as big as what goalie Berra had, and the change in direction off Holden’s mitt steered the Avs into a 2-0 deficit.

Tobias Rieder scored off a long snap shot to chase Berra before the Avs came alive. Landeskog roofed a backhander early in the second period and went five-hole on goalie Mike Smith early in the third before Duchene tied it with a fortunate bounce off the stick of a Coyotes defenseman.

The Avs departed for Denver immediately after the game and will play the Chicago Blackhawks on Wednesday night at the Pepsi Center. The Blackhawks will be fresh.

Colorado’s charter out of Denver International Airport on Monday was leaving for Phoenix as the Blackhawks’ plane was arriving.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers

CHICAGO AT COLORADO



7 p.m. Wednesday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Kris Versteeg: The Blackhawks reacquired Versteeg — who helped them win the Stanley Cup in 2010 — a year ago for two bright, young prospects, and he is again one of the most underrated players on a star-studded team. In 17 games, Versteeg has seven goals, 14 points and a plus-6 rating, second highest on the team. He has four 20-goal seasons, including his two full seasons with Chicago before stints in Toronto, Philadelphia and Florida.