Once you’re dead — stay dead. People don’t like shooting zombies 10 times only to see them continue walking, paint-covered, toward their trailer. It’s disappointing.

So staying down until the trailer carries on to its next stop is a rule Aj Herren plans to enforce this year at Millers Thrillers Zombie Paintball Hayride.

The Spring Hill resident started working at the family-themed haunted woods last year — the first for zombie paintball — and could hear the exasperated comments from shooters in the trailers that drove the grounds.

“Dying is the funnest part of being a zombie,” Herren said. “When you’re running full speed at the trailers and you get shot in the head, people get so excited.”

Herren and Gavin Blackhurst, who has worked at Millers Thrillers for four years, led a group of interested employees and volunteers through the paintball section Saturday afternoon as part of the attraction’s auditions.

More than 40 people showed up to hear about the haunted woods and zombie hayride and consider applying for a role in the events. The group, consisting mostly of teens, wasn’t aware the auditions began when they stepped foot on the property.

During the day, five managers in the crowd watched the group to see how individuals acted, especially with other people, said Michael Oakley, who’s worked at Millers Thrillers for four years, helping plan the entertainment aspects of the events.

“We’re looking at how they interact with each other,” he said. “We’re more a family than we are a business.”

Oakley, Blackhurst and David Miller, the attraction’s creator, led small groups through sections of the haunted woods and hayride Saturday to allow people to see where they could work or volunteer.

As Miller showed the beginning of the haunted woods, he frequently disappeared through hidden passageways and behind curtains, popping up unexpectedly at the front of the group.

A participant of the tour said the passageways allowed managers to travel the grounds quickly if needed.

At one stop, Miller showed the group where one person would stand behind a fence, rattling it to scare people.

“We’ll put a chain on the fence so they’ll think it’s the chain, but really it’s just jingle bells,” Miller said, pointing to a line of white bells. “Ahh, jingle bells.”

Millers Thrillers needs at least 80 people to pull off the attractions held during 15 days between September and November, Miller said.

Some of the jobs sounded intriguing — you can be a dummy on the bridge, a party room tree stalker or a graveyard statue — while others seemed questionable.

Making loud noises and swinging dummies at terrified guests could be a blast, sure. But why would anyone volunteer to be shot at with paintballs?

Ashley Netterville of Spring Hill said being a zombie in the hayride allowed her to get out of her own body and become a completely new person — even if it was a dead one. She worked in the paintball fields last year in “the pit” and said she had fun.

The pit is a ditch that zombies crawl out of toward the 20 guests shooting paintballs at them from a paused trailer. Netterville said she tripped numerous times as she attempted to get out of the ditch, but she could pretend she had died, so it was fine.

“I decided, if it works, it works,” she said.

Chris Pittenger, 18, of Thompson’s Station, said he wants to participate in the paintball hayride this year. He’s seen every zombie movie — yes, all of them — and shot at the zombies from the ride last year. Now, he wants to see the action from the other side.

“To be a zombie would be a dream come true,” he said.