LOS ANGELES, March 2, 2014 — Now that the Sochi Olympics are over, Russian president Vladimir Putin can finally get down to the business of killing anybody who stands in the way of a revitalized Mother Russia. The West will not stop him. The will does not exist.

President Obama’s foreign policy in dealing with Putin can best be described as Chicken Kiev. Obama speaks briefly and hides from the media while Putin acts forcefully. Putin wants to swallow up the Ukraine, and he will because he can. Obama promised to unite people in all the states into one nation. Who knew he meant the U.S.S.R.?

Obama is the leader of the free world, but he has shown over the course of his presidency that his words carry zero weight. His red line on Syria meant absolutely nothing. Bashar Assad continues to kill with impunity, knowing that Putin has his back. Putin holds Obama in contempt, and Obama supporters revel in the delight that cowboy warmonger George W. Bush is no longer around. Now America can be nicer, which by itself works spectacularly everywhere except in the real world.

The reset button Hillary Clinton pressed was the beginning of the end of American influence over Russia. Now with Secretary of State John Kerry hell-bent on forcing a Palestinian State on Israel, Putin is free to control the Eastern hemisphere.

Obama and Kerry have proven to be everything that retired Democratic Georgia Governor Zell Miller warned America about at the 2004 Republican Convention. Miller pointed out that no group was “more weak” and “more wobbly” on national security than modern liberal Democrats. Told Democrats would defend us, Miller asked, “With what? Spitballs?”

Obama desperately wanted to project a Rambo image as the guy who got Osama bin Laden, but Obama is a dove to his core. Putin knows this. Obama’s most recent speech was even weak by his own low bar.

Normally Obama gives a speech where the words “accountable,” “responsible,” and “unacceptable” are followed by absolutely nothing. Now even that meaningless language is too tough for Obama.

He “urged” Russia to think about what it is doing. He “encouraged” Putin to think about his actions.

He said “we’ve made clear” there will be consequences, but never defined who the “we” or what the “consequences” are.

Obama is “deeply concerned,” as if anybody, anywhere cares.

Obama’s remarks made as much sense as a bus stop vagrant high on hallucinogens screaming about the hair of the eye of the dog.

He insisted that a United Ukraine would be “good for Russia’s interests.”

Somebody forgot to tell him he is not president of Russia. Obama loves to tell everybody what is best for them despite consistently being wrong.

He said that Putin waging war on Ukraine would be “deeply destabilizing.”

That is the entire point, which everybody except Obama liberals understands.

Such an action would “not be in the interest of Russia,” which again comes from a man who cannot figure out what is best for his own nation that he has run into the ground, much less somewhere else.

It would be a “violation of Russia’s commitment.”

Someone should remind Obama that KGB agents do not care about commitments to the West. Trained assassins do not get bogged down in paperwork.

Russia would earn the “condemnation of nations around the world.”

Russia is not Israel. Putin does not spend every waking minute trying to be liked. He knows college students will not lead protests against his country. Leftist professors do not criticize leftist governments. Syria earned condemnation, which apparently did not impress Assad. Putin is Assad on steroids.

Obama claimed that “the United States supports his (Ukraine’s) government’s efforts,” which again did not move Putin.

After offering a bunch of hollow phrases, what was Obama’s plan of action?

He would “coordinate closer with European allies.”

That’s it everybody. A bunch of impotent European plutocrats will meet in New York City at expensive restaurants to coordinate joint expressions of concern. Meanwhile, Putin will do whatever he pleases.

The Obama Chicken Kiev policy will get more people killed, just as his tough inaction on Syria led to over 100,000 innocent civilian casualties.

America may be war-weary, but wars do not end when one side refuses to fight. That is called surrender. Babbling about consequences means nothing unless those consequences actually exist.

Obama will go back to partying with celebrities and enjoying the Academy Awards. He will go back to giving speeches on investing in education.

What he will not do is stop a single foreign leader from carrying out plans that harm America’s interests. That would be culturally insensitive of an arrogant American nation that needs to be more humble in the face of the world burning.

Russia has three years to run wild, and Putin will enjoy every moment of it. If all Ukraine has is the Obama-led West to count on, then Ukraine is already finished.

[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=idqnFKQNHdc[/youtube]

Brooklyn born, Long Island raised and now living in Los Angeles, Eric Golub is a politically conservative columnist, blogger, author, public speaker, satirist and comedian. Read more from Eric at his TYGRRRR EXPRESS blog. Eric is the author of the book trilogy “Ideological Bigotry, “Ideological Violence,” and “Ideological Idiocy.” Eric is 100% alcohol, tobacco, drug, and liberalism free.