Long Branch High School STEM students visited the construction site of a new bridge on West Front Ave in Red Bank on December 5. (Photo: Russ DeSantis)

Some 17,000 drivers today are cruising between Middletown and Red Bank, basking in the glow of a happy Christmas and Hanukkah or excitedly preparing their New Year’s Eve plans.

Expect delays in Middletown as West Front Bridge project nears

But starting Jan. 5, those same motorists will face a veritable vehicular aggravation — a traffic hangover, if you will — as the bridge that carries West Front Street over the Swimming River closes until May.

The backup is expected to be so bad that Monmouth County officials intentionally designed the project to minimize the bridge closure. And now that it’s here, those same officials are more-than-gently nudging drivers to try to avoid that route if at all possible.

But once the work is done, pegged for May 17, the new bridge will bring a much improved route for motorists as well as a safe pathway for pedestrians and bicyclists.

“It will be an inconvenience and we would be naive to say it’s not going to be an inconvenience,” said Freeholder Tom Arnone, who is the liaison to the county’s Department of Public Works and Engineering.

“But everyone who drives over that bridge, who listens to the crickety-cracks knows that this was inevitable, the replacement of this bridge. There is a time that inconvenience does get outweighed by safety.”

Traffic has largely remained open on the bridge, known locally as Hubbard’s Bridge, since the federally-funded, $21.9 million replacement project began in August 2013.

The new bridge is being built to the north of Hubbard’s Bridge, which now needs to close so the new span can be connected to the road.

The plan is to move traffic onto the new bridge ahead of the tourism season that kicks off Memorial Day weekend.

The contractor, Agate Construction of Ocean View, will then remove the old bridge, which was first constructed in 1921.

There will be a detour in place: From Red Bank, motorists would take West Front Street to Rector Place to Route 35 across Coopers Bridge, then onto Navesink River Road to Hubbard Avenue.

Traffic from West Front Street in Middletown would use the same detour in reverse.

But motorists should drive a different way if they have one, Monmouth County spokeswoman Laura Kirkpatrick said.

“If people have another way to get to the (Garden State) Parkway or get to western Monmouth, we are suggesting they plan an alternative route. It may be more challenging for people who need to get into Red Bank for work or for school,” she said.

“It is going to be a very good improvement for the area. Unfortunately, this is the pain we have to live through to get to that.”

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1B6VvEp