Some support using the free market to take on climate change through policies such as a revenue-neutral carbon tax. How should the movement respond to these proposals?

FRANCES: Well, the free market won’t take on climate change. That’s the lesson of our experience with the escalation of free-market propaganda under neoliberalism.

CHRISTIAN: The more we talk about a carbon tax, the less we talk about all the regulatory tools that already exist. These people calling for a carbon tax, revenue-neutral solutions etc. don’t want people to understand the power of the EPA. They want us to concentrate on some possible future legislation that will never happen.

ANANDA: Most of the market-based solutions currently on the table are efforts to maintain the corporate status quo. Sadly, even regulatory processes like the EPA’s Clean Power Plan have been so weakened by corporate loopholes and subsidies that our grassroots movements have to develop strategies to force the EPA to stand with people and not polluters.

Do calls for state action on climate change open up the possibility for strengthening the public sphere in other ways?

MAY: Yes. For example, the Affordable Care Act (ACA) allows each state to define its health outcomes. So, a state could choose to have health outcomes around toxicity and environmental damage, and turn the ACA into a mechanism to value the true cost of pollution.

FRANCES: The problem is not government. The problem is the corruption of government. American public opinion is not what is driving our policies to the right. It’s organized interests and economic elites. We need government, but we need democratic government. That’s the problem—not just for the climate change movement, but for all of us.

CHRISTIAN: Yes, I could imagine a climate change movement that articulates the need for popular control over government. The use of government power to contain and control the worst excesses of capital will have indirect positive effects in other realms of politics. To legitimize government action in the realms of climate implicitly legitimizes its role in redistributing wealth to the exploited and unemployed.