Michael Moore has spent the week in a New York hospital, where he was treated for pneumonia.

He was admitted to the intensive care unit on Sunday night as things 'didn't look good,' he said in a Facebook post.

The filmmaker, who blamed the illness on his 'exhausting schedule', is recovering and expected to be discharged on Friday.

'Thanks to a combination of good doctors, decent hospital food and 2nd-term Obamacare, I'm doing much better,' he wrote on Facebook.

Scroll down for video

Michael Moore spent the week in a New York hospital after being admitted to the ICU with pneumonia on Sunday night. He blamed the illness on his 'exhausting schedule'

Moore had to cancel all of his appearances promoting his upcoming movie, Where To Invade next, for the rest of the week, as he needs to go home and next.

He blamed his illness on an exhausting schedule promoting the film, supporting Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders and trying to draw attention to the poisoned water scandal in his hometown of Flint, Michigan.

He had to cancel all appearances promoting his next movie, Where To Invade Next, set to open in a week

'I read somewhere you can't burn it at both ends, and if you do, it's best not to do so in the winter nor anywhere near a place full of toxic water!' he wrote on Facebook.

Moore held a rally in Flint mid-January, claiming Governor Rick Snyder knew that the city's water was contaminated.

The city was under state management when its water supply was switched to the Flint River in April 2014 because it was cheaper.

The water turned out to be more corrosive, and without adequate treatment, leached lead from the pipes, reaching toxic levels of contamination.

Moore has now enlisted his fans to help promote Where to Invade Next, set to open Friday, by sharing trailers and forwarding reviews to their friends and family.

'I can't fly, I have to recover, and in one week this great movie I've put so much of my life into is going to open in theaters -- with little or no assistance from me,' he wrote.

'So, would it be OK to enlist your help in a sort of quickly cobbled-together "army" of grassroots foot soldiers, wherein you could pitch in where you live (and on social media) to let people know about my movie?'

In Where to Invade Next, Moore places himself as a pseudo conqueror who plants the American flag wherever he goes, baffling onlookers.

But the movie actually delves little into US military misadventures abroad.