So much of the Obamacare debate has focused on the by now well known health insurance exchanges, and the insurance that can be purchased there. These exchanges are, in many ways, the defining feature of the law and the focal point of many of the law’s controversial provisions.

But really, Medicaid expansion, despite not reaching every state, may be the law’s, and President Obama’s, biggest success story.

Medicaid expansion was a relatively simple idea. Since even with generous subsidies, some people would be unable to afford health insurance, Medicaid, which prior to the law was often quite limited in terms of who it could cover, was expanded to cover all individuals making under 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

Under Obamacare, the federal government pays for the vast majority of the cost of expanding coverage. Nevertheless, many states (most of those with Republican governors) have refused to expand Medicaid.

A recent working paper from the National Bureau of Economic Research shows one of the unexpected ways in which Medicaid expansion seems to be benefitting low-income people in those states that chose to adopt it. It’s keeping them out of debt.

The researchers found that in 2014 individuals who benefitted from Medicaid expansion saw a reduction in their overall debt burden by about $600 to $1000.

To get this estimate, the researchers examined data on the rates at which debt was passed along to third-party debt collation agencies, which served as a proxy for measuring unpaid debts. They compared the data from counties from the lowest quarter of the income share, both in states with and without expansion, and found that poor people in the states that expanded Medicaid were on average more financially secure.

This means that some of the financial benefit is going to hospitals and doctors, and other people who would have held this debt. This on its own isn’t that much to celebrate, but those who don’t end up deeply indebted or defaulting on payment plans will almost certainly enjoy the benefits of more orderly finances.

One of the biggest problems with being poor, after all, is that being poor is expensive. Debt takes a longer time to pay off when you don’t have much money. The interest that accrues in the meantime and the hit you take to your credit rating can be really damaging in the long term.

And medical expenses can be both especially unexpected and extremely exorbitant, which is why they’re the leading cause of bankruptcy in the the United States.

Though people often think of Obamacare, and of similar proposals that aim to expand health coverage, as being primarily about improving health outcomes, they’re really about protecting people from the financial burden of health care.

In the end, whatever health care system we have, people will generally get the health care they need when they’re in dire straits. But those who are uninsured can be left with the massive, and sometimes devastating, bill.

While there’s some reason to believe that expanding health insurance can improve health overall, and Obamacare itself did have some very important provisions regarding health outcomes, at the end of the day expanding health insurance is really about insurance. And insurance is about money.

And in this sense, expanding Medicaid in particular seems to be providing substantial financial benefits to economically vulnerable Americans. In light of this, we should be doubly happy that Medicaid expansion, despite the fact that it hasn’t reached every state, is now actually covering more people than had been predicted (even though the costs of the health care law overall are less than had been expected).