Advocates of mandatory union dues in Missouri and across the country have a deep-pocketed friend in Richard Trumka, president of labor coalition AFL-CIO.

AFL-CIO’s Washington, D.C., headquarters collected $78.8 million in membership payments from its affiliated unions and spent $44.8 million on political activities and lobbying during the 2015 fiscal year ending in June.

While Missouri unions and their left-wing allies fought right-to-work last year, AFL-CIO sent $88,073 to the Missouri AFL-CIO, $40,000 to activist group Progress Missouri and $10,000 to union front Missouri Jobs With Justice.

Right-to-work laws let workers choose whether to pay AFL-CIO affiliates and other labor unions — giving workers the ability to opt out of a cycle in which unions funnel money into causes that increase government spending and help unions take more money from workers.

The two largest AFL-CIO affiliates are public employee unions whose income is taken from government workers. Trumka, who berates private corporations for paying executives more than entry-level workers, was paid $304,121 last year.

Other Missouri expenditures in AFL-CIO’s 2015 annual report included $30,000 in state legislative consulting payments to a firm run by Ryan Burke, “one of the rising stars in the field of Democratic operatives” according to The Missouri Times.

RELATED: Missouri workers lose against labor union Goliath

AFL-CIO spending reported to the U.S. Department of Labor confirms Trumka’s political interests extend beyond blocking right-to-work, and they aren’t restricted to any particular state.

Fight for Florida, a “diverse coalition of labor, faith and community organizations” campaigning for minimum wage hikes and other union priorities out of the Florida AFL-CIO’s Tallahassee office, received $70,006 from AFL-CIO headquarters.

The Remington Road Group — led by Aaron Pickrell, a veteran of President Obama’s 2012 and 2008 campaigns — was paid a total of $120,000 by AFL-CIO headquarters for state legislative consulting in Ohio.

California-based Partnership for Working Families, a network of “social justice” advocacy groups, received $124,000 from AFL-CIO to help with a minimum wage hike campaign.

AFL-CIO sent $30,000 to Action for the Common Good and $60,000 to Center for Popular Democracy to support minimum wage hike efforts in New York, and it paid Pennsylvania-based Lemmon Tree Consulting $35,000 for help fighting right-to-work.

Many of AFL-CIO’s expenditures meant to influence state policy went to consulting firms in the nation’s capital, making it difficult to determine where huge swaths of the union coalition’s spending were targeted.

The Pivot Group received $1.1 million from AFL-CIO for state legislative advocacy work; AFL-CIO paid Greenberg Quinlan Rosner Research $505,200 and Hart Research Associates $309,000 for state issue polling.

Mack-Sumner Communications in Alexandria, Virginia received payments from AFL-CIO totaling $873,636 for state issue fliers.

State Innovation Exchange, a “progressive” effort to mirror the American Legislative Exchange Council, received $50,000 from AFL-CIO. AFL-CIO gave $210,000 to secretive leftist donor network Democracy Alliance, plus $25,000 to DA’s Committee on States project.

AFL-CIO paid $888,565 to NGP VAN and $564,750 to Catalist, a pair of left-wing consulting firms accused of illegal coordination with Democratic campaign committees.

A total of $4.1 million in AFL-CIO political expenditures went to Working America, AFL-CIO’s in-house community organizing operation. Another $3 million went to the political action committee AFL-CIO uses to distribute campaign contributions.

Economic Policy Institute, a union think tank whose board of directors is chaired by Trumka, received $125,000 from AFL-CIO last year.

Terry Bowman, a United Auto Workers member and president of Union Conservatives, told Watchdog members of AFL-CIO unions in right-to-work states should seriously consider exercising their right to opt out.

“AFL-CIO executives see the world through a very narrow lens,” Bowman said in an email. “They surround themselves with workers and politicians who sing their praises, and separate themselves from the majority of workers who disagree with their political agenda.”

“Spending workers’ money on a far-left, progressive political agenda rewards those union officials with perks and prestige,” Bowman added. “The only way to stop their gravy train is for workers to stand up and exercise their Right to Work freedoms and protections.”

In contrast to the $44.8 million AFL-CIO spent on political activities and lobbying last year, AFL-CIO spent $29.6 million on “Representational Activities” — of the $29.6 million, $4.5 million went to Working America.

AFL-CIO headquarters did not respond to questions about the spending disclosed in the union coalition’s 2015 report to the Dept. of Labor.