President Obama shook hands with Vice President Biden after speaking about the Supreme Court’s decision upholding subsidies that comprise the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, in June.

If you’re a Democrat, here’s a stat that might make you want to offer some choice words for the current resident of the White House.

Since President Obama took office in 2009, Democrats have lost 900+ state legislature seats, 12 governors, 69 House seats, and 13 Senate seats, according to GOP strategist Rory Cooper in a tweet that is getting a great deal of attention.

Advertisement

Oof.

That is certainly ugly. To be sure, these numbers are slightly misleading because they use as a starting point the election results of 2008, when Democrats dominated — and that came after another wave election for Democrats in 2006. So the party was always likely to see a decline in party control after those two ballots.

Still, it’s hard not to see Obama as an albatross for Democrats, particularly in Tuesday’s gubernatorial election in Kentucky. Tea Party darling Matt Bevin bested the state’s Democratic Attorney General, Jack Conway, in part because of ads that tied Conway directly to the president, who is deeply unpopular in Kentucky. There’s no question that antipathy toward the president has motivated Republicans voters, particularly in the wave elections of 2010 and 2014, which gave the GOP control of the House and Senate.

But looking at the decline in Democratic electoral fortunes misses a more important argument — what Democrats did when they had those outsized governing majorities.

I asked Michael Grunwald, senior writer at Politico and the guy who literally wrote the book (“The New, New Deal”) on the first piece of major legislation passed by Congress after Obama took office, the $800 billion stimulus package, to tell me the Democrats’ top three greatest hits under Obama. He named five:

Advertisement

■ Prevented a depression

■ Launched a clean-energy revolution (wind tripled, solar up 20x, new electric vehicle industry)

■ Massive state aid averted 300,000 teacher layoffs and huge Medicaid cut

■ Unprecedented one-time investment in medical, energy, and scientific research

■ Huge expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit, Pell Grants, food stamps, and other antipoverty programs

Then there is Obamacare, which has cut the number of uninsured Americans to its lowest level in 50 years. In all, approximately 15 million Americans have gained access to insurance coverage because of the law. It’s not an exaggeration to say that this is the most important and progressive piece of social policy since the Great Society of the 1960s.

There’s also financial reform, repealing don’t-ask, don’t-tell, passing the START treaty, reforming the student loan program, new pay equity laws that helped ensure women received the same pay as men, improved school nutrition programs and food safety, expanded broadband penetration, and the list goes on.

It would be an overstatement to suggest that the price of these accomplishments translated into the Democrats’ dismal results in state and local election — although it’s certainly true that the stimulus and Obamacare didn’t do much to help the party, particularly in red states.

But let’s say there is a direct connection between all these progressive laws and losing control of Congress. By any objective measure, it is a pretty small price to pay. Congressional majorities come and go — Obamacare is here to stay.

It’s not surprising that, in a horserace political environment, we overemphasize political results. And there are certainly negative consequences for Democrats of losing so much political ground, particularly in state legislatures. It will take years to claw those seats back, and Republicans still have the ability to repeal major elements of Obama’s legislative legacy. But ultimately, Democrats were likely going to lose many of those seats anyway — what matters most is not politics, but policy, and what Democrats did with their fleeting majorities.

Putting in place the kind of progressive reforms that Democrats have enacted in the past six- plus years is nominally the reason why the Democratic Party exists. If Democrats aren’t taking advantage of a small window of opportunity to, say, pass universal health coverage, then they might as well pack it up and call it a day. So ignore the numbers — check out the results.