Anytime aging specialists get together, the issue of caregiving rises to the top of the discussion like foam in a glass of beer -- something you have to get through, or at least acknowledge, before going deeper. And for a few years the most widely cited statistic has been from AARP's series of reports, "Valuing the Invaluable," which attempt to put a dollar figure on the amazing labors of love that go on unsung in so many households touched by dementia or frailty.

On Thursday AARP updated that assessment: "In 2013, about 40 million family caregivers in the United States provided an estimated 37 billion hours of care to an adult with limitations in daily activities. The estimated economic value of their unpaid contributions was approximately $470 billion in 2013, up from an estimated $450 billion in 2009."

When you talk numbers this large, especially when adding up small and near-invisible daily acts of devotion, the result can feel meaningless. But the folks at AARP at pretty good at supplying context. That $470 billion in unpaid labor (figuring a low-ball value of about $12.50 an hour) is more than all the Medicaid spending in 2013 ($449 billion), just about equal to Walmart's total sales that year ($476 billion) and -- if every single person living in the United States had to pony up for this caregiving out of our pockets -- about $1,500 per capita.

What are we supposed to do with this information? If you're an unpaid family caregiver, you should appreciate the contribution you're making to the economy as well as to the people you love. If you're in a family where this kind of care is going on and you're not doing it, you should really ask yourself what kind of contribution you can make. If you're just a regular citizen, grateful that you're not yet being required to pay $1,500 in taxes for this work that people are doing for free -- and trust me, it would cost more than that if the government had to underwrite all this care -- think about what we as a society can do to support family caregivers so they don't become so frustrated or exhausted that they quit or die.

One notion, which AARP has successfully helped become law in 13 states -- but not yet Florida -- is something called the CARE Act. That's an acronym, of course, for "caregiver advise, record, enable." The law simply requires hospitals to find out who a patient's family caregiver is, inform that caregiver of the discharge plan when the patient leaves the hospital, and provide some guidance about what the heck needs to be done at home so that the elder doesn't end up back in a hospital or nursing home.

At this week's White House Conference on Aging, the organizers trotted out one family caregiver, Britnee Fergins, who watches over her father while raising children and working full-time. Asked what would help her most, she simply answered, "I most wish I had convenience." She explained that when she called someone to get information she needed to coordinate her father's health care, she would love it if she could reach the person who had the answer, without having to make additional calls.

This seems little enough to hope for, doesn't it?

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.