Members of the Senate Judiciary Committee have created a caucus to protect whistleblowers.

Committee Chair Sen. Chuck Grassley Chuck GrassleyDefense bill renews fight over military sexual assault Reid knocks GOP over 'light' Senate schedule Overnight Tech: Facebook finds no bias but vows to change trending feature MORE (R-Iowa) and Vice-Chair Ron Wyden Ron WydenOvernight Finance: Puerto Rico bill clears panel | IRS chief vows to finish term | Bill would require nominees to release tax returns Top Dem: CIA officials thought spying on Senate ‘was flat out wrong’ The Trail 2016: Hell breaks loose MORE (D-Ore.) plan to announce the Whistleblower Protection Caucus with the additional founding members later today.

The caucus aims to raise awareness for the need to ensure adequate protections against the retaliation of whistleblowers. People like John Dodson, a special agent with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms & Explosives who was one of the first people to report allegations of gunwalking in Operation Fast and Furious and its connection to the death of Border Patrol Agent Brian Terry.

Members of the caucus include Ron Johnson Ron JohnsonPressure builds from GOP to delay internet domain transition Juan Williams: Electoral map looks grim for Trump The Trail 2016: Sanders who? MORE (R-Wis.), Mark Kirk Mark KirkGOP senators propose sending ISIS fighters to Gitmo VA chief 'deeply' regrets if Disney comment offended vets Senate GOP gears up for fight over Gitmo transfers MORE (R-Ill.), Deb Fischer Deb FischerSenate Republicans ask Trump to soften his tone Skittish GOP to Trump: Drop the insults Senate bill would require the administration to define 'cyber war' MORE (R-Neb.), Thom Tillis (R-N.C.), Barbara Boxer Barbara BoxerThe Hill's 12:30 Report Sen. Boxer fires back at Sanders aide: 'He wasn't there' Sanders aide questions Boxer's story about fearing for her safety MORE (D-Calif.), Claire McCaskill Claire McCaskillWasserman Schultz fights to keep her job The Hill's 12:30 Report Dem senator: Sexual assault case show 'troubling command culture' MORE (D-Mo.), Tammy Baldwin Tammy BaldwinDem introduces bill to block new government hacking powers The Trail 2016: The campaign that never sleeps Dem senator: 'I am a human being and a superdelegate’ MORE (D-Wis.) and Ed Markey Ed MarkeyHonor Frank Lautenberg by protecting our kids Sanders pans chemical safety reform deal Feds fault pipeline company in California oil spill MORE (D-Mass.).