MUSKEGON, MI – Just when a storied pair of politicians seemed set for a classic, competitive, Democrats-vs.-Republicans run for the Michigan House of Representatives, here comes a third candidate.

Alan Jager, a former Muskegon County Commissioner, announced on Friday, Jan. 17 he would be running as an independent for the state house’s 91st District seat. That seat is currently held by Collene Lamonte, D-Montague, who has been challenged by Holly Hughes, the Republican who Lamonte ousted in 2012.

Jager, 55, is married to Holton Township trustee Tammy Jager. He is a co-owner of Press's Demolition. Jager currently sits on the board of the Holton Community Center, he said. He ran as a Republican for the Muskegon Commission in 2010 and won, but lost the seat two years later to another sitting county commissioner, Democrat Jim Derezinski, when they were pitted against each other by redistricting.

“I’m in it to win it,” he said of his upcoming run for the House of Representatives. “Whether I win or not, I want to put my name out there.”

Jager said he has a goal of eventually running for governor. In that vein, he had been planning the run for the House of Representatives for at least a year and had previously considered running against Holly Hughes in the Republican Primary. His divergent opinions – for gay marriage, against the affordable health care act, for marijuana legalization, for gun rights – were ripe for a run as independent, though.

Michigan Republicans have been a turn-off, he said.

“I think Goeff Hansen’s vote on (Medicaid expansion) finished it off for me,” Jager said. “Dave Agema doesn’t help me, either, with his stance on gay marriage.”

His run as an independent won’t be looked on with much favor by Republican party leaders. An independent candidate who drew part of the Republican vote is part of the reason Hughes narrowly lost to Lamonte in the last race, Bill Ballenger of Inside Michigan Politics has said.

“I have friends that are not happy, there’s no doubt about that,” Jager said. “They see that Holly could possibly win it.”

He said his candidacy is not just about torpedoing the Republican candidate. He also thinks he can draw the votes of some Democrats, some of whom may want a leaner government.

“I think there’s a lot of them that are tired of the fees,” said Jager, who also is planning to push for gay marriage and legalization of marijuana.

Jager has put up a Facebook page for campaign work, and is now concentrating on getting enough signatures to put his name on the ballot next to Hughes and Lamonte.

“There’s no difference to me,” he said. “I don’t care which one’s in there.”

Stephen Kloosterman covers local government, employment and the outdoors for MLive Muskegon Chronicle. Email him at sklooste@mlive.com or follow him on Facebook, Twitter, and Google+.