The future of transit in Chatham County’s western suburbs should involve more than buses, a transportation researcher from the University of South Florida said Tuesday.

Rob Gregg, who’s with the college’s Center for Urban Transit Research, told the Chatham Area Transit board of directors that the most effective program CAT could start in western suburban areas such as Pooler would be a van pool to provide a shared ride to work for people who live and work near one another.

Gregg and a colleague are wrapping up a feasibility study that CAT requested earlier this year. He said they’ve consulted with staff and elected officials and conducted two public meetings with residents of the western communities about the transit center’s future.

Based on the feedback, Gregg recommended CAT officials consider starting a van pool program along with three new bus routes that could provide service to west Chatham.

Pooler would be a good candidate for the van pool program, he said, because of the number of major employers in the area who could have a shared interest.

It’s also an alternative to the buses that many citizens who attended the public meetings so adamantly opposed.

“This is a feasibility study, but I think it gives you a good sense of alternatives and costs,” Gregg said. “We looked at the entire mobility approach. ... You could be operating a number of van pools, which would be really appropriate for this suburban environment. Our recommendation would be to develop that program because there’s benefits all around.”

For Garden City, much of the proposal was for new bus routes.

Of the three routes Gregg offered as positive sources of revenue for CAT, two would begin at Garden City’s Towne Center.

The suggested “blue route” would begin at City Hall and would run from Dean Forest Road to U.S. 80 and end up at the intermodal center downtown.

The “green route” would be a loop that begins at Garden City City Hall, runs south on Dean Forest Road to Ogeechee Road, then north on Chatham Parkway back to U.S. 80 in Garden City where it ultimately would end up again on Dean Forest Road at Garden City City Hall.

The third proposed route would be the “brown route” from the Wal-Mart store on Ogeechee Road north to Quacco Road. From there it would follow Pooler Parkway to Pooler’s new Tanger Outlet Center.

Based on the researchers’ models, Gregg said, the “green route” loop would be a highly successful route that could likely garner as much revenue as the transit system’s Abercorn Express route.

CAT CEO Chad Reese said the transit system plans to bring the proposal to stakeholders in western Chatham before any other steps are taken to begin an expansion.

Based on the feedback the researchers received from officials in the area, they would have their work cut out for them.

Officials in Pooler were highly concerned about taxation and whether the service is even needed, Gregg said. In Garden City, there was more of a vagueness about the need, he added.

After these officials have weighed in, the CAT board will consider adopting a plan and incorporating it into CAT’s larger strategic plan.

At that point, Reese said, they would take a recommendation to the Chatham County Commission for a vote.

“This is an action plan,” he said after the meeting. “If we get the go-ahead (from the county commission), we’ll do it full steam ahead.”





In other business Tuesday:

The board:

• Adopted the budget and millage rate for fiscal year 2016. The board held its second reading of the budget for the next fiscal year, which is expected to climb by $1.5 million over this fiscal year to $21 million. The budget assumes a 1 percent increase to property tax digest, though finance director Terri Harrison reported the increase will likely be higher.

• Held a first public hearing on an adjusted fare policy. The rate changes would take place this October, marketing director Shalonda Rountree reported, and is aimed at moving riders away from paying with cash.

The proposed change would increase fares for paratransit and one-way trips and decrease rates for multi-day passes, student and youth passes and those for seniors, the disabled and medicare recipients.

It also would discontinue change cards and half-fare 20-ride passes. More hearings for the adjusted fare policy have been scheduled for next month.

• Approved an insurance renewal with Blue Cross Blue Shield that reflects a 4.5 percent increase related to requirements of the Affordable Care Act.

• Passed a resolution in support of the 10th annual Dump the Pump Day on June 18.