Center offers staff, patients more room for services

Connie Irish, staff pharmacist at the Loveland Community Health Center, fills a prescription Friday, March 20, at the low-cost medical clinic, which moved to 302 Third St. SE in February 2014. ( Shelley Widhalm / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Pharmacist Connie Irish likes that she has twice the room to work as she fills prescriptions and that she can spread out the medications.

Dental program manager Hope Gauna likes that the operatories — equipment, furnishings and cabinetry — are the same for all nine dental chairs.

And Dr. Marie Walsh likes how the medical area is designed to have a better work flow for staff and patients.

The three staff members of the Loveland Community Health Center can list other reasons they enjoy working at the building at 302 Third St. SE, more than a year after their move out of a smaller space at 450 N. Cleveland Ave. in mid-February 2014.

"We have twice as much room, which allows for a lot better organization and more space for each pharmacist to work. It's a way more efficient space," Irish said.

Reopening in a Larger Space

The Loveland Community Health Center, one of nine facilities operated by Sunrise Community Health in Larimer and Weld counties, reopened its low-cost medical clinic in 27,000 square feet of a 48,000-square-foot building with room to grow. Stepping Stones Adult Day Program, a service of McKee Medical Center that used to operate out of a Loveland church, occupies another 6,000 square feet.

The health center, which opened in 1997 and was in 15,000 square feet of space, provides affordable primary medical, dental and behavioral health services to Loveland area residents and has a laboratory, X-ray and pharmacy on site.

Advertisement

"We had no more space to build out and expand," said Melvina Romero, clinic manager of the health center, about the previous location, adding that there was a shortage of storage space and that the waiting room was too small for the number of patients coming in. "We were maxed out in that building."

After the move, the health center expanded from 15 medical exam rooms to 24 rooms, which are organized in two hallways, each with a reception desk and color-coded green or purple.

"What we basically created is two mini-clinics within the facility," Romero said.

Both Sides of the Medical Clinic

Both hallways have 12 exam rooms, a mini-lab with collections sent off to an outside reference lab, a procedural room for sutures and castings, a support staff work station, a consultation room and rooms for the enrollment specialist, or financial screener, and referral specialist for any needed referrals.

"The work flow is better because it's designed to fit our needs," Walsh said. "You're not going back and forth. When you're seeing so many people in a day, the flow really facilitates that."

Another addition is a dedicated parking lot, which the facility lacked when it was downtown, except for access to a three-hour lot behind the building and parking spaces in front and on one side.

The expansion also allowed the health center to hire 10 additional staff members, and it's continuing to recruit more. Currently, there are 79 positions, including current staff and a few openings.

"That will help us continue to see more patients," Romero said.

Once the health center is fully operational with an additional 12 medical exam rooms and nine more dental chairs, it will be able to serve 13,000 people each year.

The facility provided care for 6,910 unduplicated patients in 2013, increasing that number to 7,261 patients in 2014. The goal was to serve 7,000 patients.

What the Patients Like

The patients describe the new space as beautiful, bright and welcoming, said Mitzi Moran, president and chief executive officer of Sunrise Community Health.

They say that being in the space, they don't feel poor anymore, Moran said.

"That's exactly what we want. We want people to receive health care in a quality manner, in a dignified manner, in a way they feel valued," she said.

Patients say they love the new space, Romero said.

"They think the facility looks so nice," she said. "They can't believe how big it is."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm