Rep. Michele Bachmann (R-MN) is back with more hypocrisy. As she stands at the center of at least two federal criminal investigations, Bachmann is claiming that President Obama is a lawless president.

Audio:

In the same interview where she claimed that gay people are bullying America, Bachmann also said, “Why should they? They’ve used the courts so brilliantly over the years with activist judges. And now they’ve got a president that’s making, he’s a lawless president who’s violating the Constitution with every executive order. Was it just yesterday that he changed Obamacare again for the bajillionth time? And so if I am a businessman and I say to my lawyer, can you tell me how I am in compliance with Obamacare? If I’m the lawyer, I would think do I look at the statute book and, what the law says, or do I have to go and dig up all of Jay Carney’s comments, the president’s press secretary, or the president’s press releases, or the tweets that he does on Obamacare? Because what’s law? What is law? Is it a president’s speech, or is it the law?”

If Bachmann wants to talk about lawlessness, let’s talk about an elected official who is truly lawless. Let’s spend a moment discussing a member of Congress who is being investigated by both the FBI, and the Department of Justice.

Bachmann and her husband Marcus are currently being investigated by the FBI for possible money laundering, mail fraud, and wire fraud. The FBI also found information relating to potential illegal coordination between Bachmann’s 2012 presidential campaign and a super PAC. The FBI turned their information over to the Department of Justice, who launched a second federal investigation into the Bachmanns.

The President Of The United States has never been accused of committing a crime, much less investigated for any wrongdoing. Yet to Michele Bachmann, who is facing numerous criminal investigations, the president is a lawless criminal who is trampling the Constitution.

The investigations have already cost Bachmann her House seat by pushing her into “retirement,” and it takes a hypocrite of the highest degree to call the president lawless while facing potential criminal charges for breaking numerous laws during her presidential campaign.

Some people like to laugh at, or mock Michele Bachmann, but it is the hypocrisy and abuses of power that make her unfit to hold elective office again.

President Obama isn’t a danger to our democracy, but disgraced soon to be a former member of Congress Michele Bachmann definitely is.