People Moves of the Week: Thoma Bravo, MSD, Perella Weinberg

Thoma Bravo hires Jennifer James; Michael Dell's investment managers add private equity head; Perella Weinberg expands consumer group

Cole Schotz PC- The law firm hired Christopher Kula as a member in its New York office. Kula concentrates on corporate and securities matters for private investment funds, family offices and joint ventures in finance, technology, fashion, media and health care sectors. Kula was previously counsel with Phillips Nizer.

Duane Morris LLP- Scott Gluck has joined the law firm’s Washington, D.C. office as a special counsel where he will focus on compliance and corporate matters for private equity firms. Gluck serves as outside regulatory counsel for the Association for Corporate Growth (ACG), a leading trade association for the middle-market. He advises ACG's Private Equity Regulatory Task Force (PERT), which interacts with Congress, the Securities and Exchange Commission and other federal agencies on behalf of middle-market private equity firms. Gluck was previously a counsel at Venable LLP.

Edgewater Capital Partners- David Duke recently joined the Cleveland-based lower middle-market private equity firm as director of business development. He will be responsible for the firm’s marketing, deal sourcing and development efforts. Before Edgewater, Duke was the head of Cary Street Partners’ chemicals and materials practice. He was also the co-founder of FD Capital Partners, the investment banking affiliate of Frazier and Deeter.

Gibson Dunn & Crutcher LLP- Eric Sloan has joined the law firm’s New York office as a partner, focusing on taxation for private equity firms conducting mergers and acquisitions

Luminate Capital Partners- The middle-market software focused-private equity firm, based in San Francisco, hired Sanjay Palakshappa as a principal. He previously worked on software deals for Thoma Bravo and mergers and acquisitions at Harris Williams & Co.

O’Melveny & Myers LLP- Scott Elliott has joined the law firm’s San Francisco office as a partner and will be co-head of the firm’s life sciences group. Elliott will counsel life sciences and technology companies on all stages including incorporation, venture capital funding, a sale as well as IPOs.

MSD Capital LP- The New York private investment firm that manages Dell Inc. (Nasdaq:DELL) founder Michael Dell's personal capital, hired Douglas Londal as a partner and head of private equity. Londal was most recently the president and chief operating officer at alternative asset management firm New Mountain Capital LLC. Before New Mountain, Londal spent 14 years at Goldman Sachs & Co. (NYSE: GS).

Perella Weinberg Partners- Magnus Scaddan has joined the New York-based investment bank as a managing director in the consumer and retail group in London. Scaddan was most recently the head of consumer and retail corporate finance at Houlihan Lokey Inc. (NYSE: HLI), where he focused on the food and beverage, household and personal care sectors. He also used to be the co-head of consumer and retail investment banking at Lehman Brothers.

Pine Brook- The New York private equity firm promoted Nicholaos Krenteras to managing director. In addition, Pine Brook hired Bharath Srikrishnan hired as a managing director. They will both be focusing on financial services. Krenteras has been with Pine Brook since 2006 while Srikrishnan comes over from Five Mile Capital Partners where he was a managing director in the firm’s financial services group.

Schiff Hardin LLP- Jason DuVall has joined the law firm’s Dallas office as a partner in the finance group. He has experience working on corporate and commercial financial transactions for financial institutions, private equity funds, mezzanine funds and other institutional investors. Duvall was most recently a partner at Squire Patton Boggs. In addition, Schiff Hardin hired Mark Attar as a partner in the financial markets and products group. He is based in the firm’s Washington, D.C. office. Attar comes over from the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, where he was counsel in the office of broker-dealer finances.

Summit Partners- The Boston private equity firm adds Matthias Allgaier as a managing director in London. Before joining Summit, Allgaier was a managing director with HIG Capital Europe, where he focused on the technology and business service sectors.

Thoma Bravo- The technology-focused private equity firm, based in Chicago, hired Jennifer James as head of investor relations and marketing. In her new role, James will be in charge introducing Thoma Bravo to new investors and oversee the firm’s communications programs. James was previously a partner in investor relations and marketing at Sofinnova Ventures.

Twin Brook Capital Partners- The middle-market direct lending subsidiary of Angelo Gordon & Co. has added two vice presidents: Betsy Booth and Michael LaBelle, who will both focus underwriting loans for private equity-backed middle-market companies. Booth was most recently a senior associate at Ares Capital Management and Labelle comes over from National Express Corporation, where he was a director in corporate development.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: