Three-quarters of GPs say their dementia patients are forced to rely on family, friends, neighbours or other unpaid carers, because they get insufficient help from health and social care services.

A survey of 1,013 family doctors by the Alzheimer’s Society paints a worrying picture of a situation in which patients are often let down or left confused by the health and social care system.

According to the poll, a quarter of GPs are reluctant to refer people with suspected dementia if support services are not in place – potentially undermining a national drive to improve rates of diagnosis. A similar percentage said their ability to manage a patient with the condition was hampered by their own lack of training.

The Alzheimer’s Society chief executive, Jeremy Hughes, said: “Our survey gives a stark view from the doctor’s surgery of people with dementia left struggling in the aftermath of a diagnosis. GPs report an endemic and deeply worrying lack of support available from health and social services, with relatives left to pick up the pieces alone.



“People can need a lot of help to live well with dementia. Families and friends are a vital source of support but they mustn’t be relied on to do everything. As dementia takes hold, people with dementia and their carers look to statutory services to give them the backup they desperately need to cope.”

Dementia has been described as a ticking timebomb with the number of people in the UK expected to increase from 850,000 currently to over one million by 2021 and two million by 2051.

The Alzheimer’s Society survey also found that half of GPs think the NHS is doing too little to care for people with the condition and three in five believe a lack of cooperation between the NHS and social care acts as a barrier to patients getting support. Around three-quarters think that patients, families and carers are left confused by the health and social care system.

Dr Richard Vautrey, deputy chair of the BMA’s GP committee, said: “GPs are increasingly frustrated that due to excessive cuts to local authority funding, some of the most vulnerable people in our society are not receiving the level of care and support they deserve.

“The increasing emphasis on diagnosing dementia has not been matched with proper services for patients once they are diagnosed.”

The Alzheimer’s Society wants everyone diagnosed with the disease to have a dementia adviser and for there to be a single point of contact to help carers navigate the health and social care system. It also says that all hospitals, care homes and home care should be made “dementia-friendly”.

A Department of Health spokesman said: “Dementia training has already been given to 600,000 NHS and social care staff, and our diagnosis rates are now among the highest in the world.



“After a diagnosis, we are already expanding access to named clinicians and dementia advisers to help patients and their families, and giving the option of personal budgets – and we want to see these things being offered across the NHS.



“The prime minister has set out a further challenge for all NHS and social care staff to be trained in order to provide meaningful care and support for people with dementia, their carers and their families.”