Why are the Washington elites flocking to Donald Trump in preference to Ted Cruz? Trump, who has thus far been running as an outsider businessman who was going to upend the political order, even boasted about the phenomenon recently. Cruz may be an outsider who is interested in shaking things up, but at least he has been a Republican all of his adult life. Trump, not too long ago, was a liberal Democrat, who favored partial-birth abortion and high taxes.

Trump: The Political Chameleon

Trump’s status as a political chameleon is the reason the folks in what Cruz called the "Washington Cartel" are warming to him. He is a man with whom they can sit down and make deals. Besides, according to the latest polls, he is winning, unlike the preferred establishment candidates like Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio.

The inside the beltway boys know that when Ted Cruz says he is going to disrupt the way things work in Washington that he means it. They have already have had experience with him insisting on causing confrontations over Obamacare and illegal immigration that they would just as soon have avoided. Cruz also has an uncompromising style that lets people who disagree with him know that he is right, they are wrong, and he is smarter than they are. All of those are true, but it rubs United States senators, some of the most egotistical people on the planet, the wrong way.

Bob Domenech at The Federalist has hit upon another reason the Washington elites want to stop Cruz from becoming president at all costs. They think he would set a bad example for other freshmen senators who would see the Senate as just a stepping stone on the way toward becoming president. People like that tend to behave differently than people who see the Senate as a long-term career. The former tend not to respect the wisdom of the Senate leadership, the better to get plum committee assignments. People like Cruz could care less what Mitch McConnell thinks of them because they don’t plan to be around for very long. Better, in the estimation of the political elites, that Cruz be made an example of.

The irony is that the barn door of the freshman senator who makes a beeline to the White House has already been flung open. A freshman senator named Barack Obama did that in 2008. Obama is about to end his presidency, having effected real change, though most would argue not for the better. Cruz wants change too, but in the opposite direction. That fact and the hatred he has earned from the Washington elites are two arguments for his being elected president.