Stuck in the National League West basement with a 16-28 record and already 11 1/2 games out of first place, the Arizona Diamondbacks needed a shakeup.

They got it Saturday when they named Tony La Russa, the four-time manager of the year, as their new Chief Baseball Officer.

Rockies manager Walt Weiss said he had inkling that La Russa would get back into the daily business of baseball, he just wishes his good friend hadn’t picked the Diamondbacks.

“I can’t say I’m surprised, but I wish it wasn’t in our division with another club,” Weiss said Saturday afternoon before the Rockies hosted the Padres. “The Diamondbacks just got a heck of a lot better with him being there.

“I know Tony and how competitive he is. The toughest thing for him was not being involved on a daily bases with wins and losses on the line everyday. He’s been craving that, and it’s great to see him back in the game. The game will be better for it. But like I said, I’m not thrilled that he’s working in the NL West.”

Weiss and La Russa, who was Weiss’ first manager in Oakland, talk to each other frequently. Weiss kidded that that might have to stop.

“I would think so,” he said. “We can talk about family, but that’s where we draw the line.”

According to Diamondbacks CEO Derrick Hall, La Russa will oversee the team’s baseball operations. That makes him the boss of both general manager Kevin Towers and manager Kirk Gibson. La Russa has been given the green light to make big changes.

“The entire organization is obviously frustrated with the results on the field and we are looking to improve,” Hall said in a statement. “Tony brings us a wealth of knowledge, experience and success, and will work closely with Kevin (Towers) and Kirk (Gibson) in evaluating our current state to determine the future of our baseball operations. He is excited and enthusiastic about the challenge, and we are fortunate to have this Hall of Famer on board and a part of the team.”

La Russa, who will be inducted into the Hall of Fame this summer, also was reportedly eyeing the Seattle Mariners’ team president vacancy during the offseason.

Pregame notes of note:

* The Padres placed right-hander Andrew Cashner on the 15-day disabled list on Saturday with soreness in his right elbow. He was scheduled to start Sunday vs. the Rockies.

He’ll be replaced by right-hander Donn Roach, who’s been working as San Diego’s long reliever. Roach (1-0, 2.57 ERA) last pitched on May 15 and worked 4 1/3 innings in a relief outing earlier this season.

* If you think Jorge De La Rosa looks comfortable pitching at home, you’d be right. He notched his 38th career victory at Coors Field Friday night, a venue where he is now 38-12 with a 4.15 ERA. His 38 wins Coors are the most in franchise history