Senate Bill 405 could expand Medicaid to tens of thousands of Montanans Posted: Friday, March 20, 2015 8:00 PM EDT Updated: Monday, March 30, 2015 8:00 PM EDT Posted:Updated:

64th Legislative Session Graphic

HELENA -- A Republican bill that could expand Medicaid to tens of thousands of Montanans brought a crowd of supporters to the Capitol Thursday.



Seanator Ed Buttrey (R-Great Falls) introduced Senate Bill 405, the HELP (Montana Health and Economic Livelihood Partnership) Act, would expand Medicaid, but wouldn't cover as many people as Governor Steve Bullock's proposal earlier this year.



The bill could be a middle path that includes taking on some perceived shortcomings in Medicaid.



“The HELP Act is a solution that goes way beyond the simple notion that we only need to provide better access to health care for our poorest population,” Buttrey told the Senate Committee on Public Health, Safety, and Welfare. “The HELP Act addresses reform, it addresses rising health care costs. It addresses government and user accountability. And, it plans for a pathway for independence from the federal government for both the users and the state of Montana.”



A key point in the bill is the idea that coverage reduces costs in the long run.



“Think of this way. You want to see the doctor for your high blood pressure, before you see the ER for your stroke,” Buttrey said.



The bill includes malpractice reform, although Al Smith of the Montana Trial Lawyers Association doubted that that would actually reduce costs.



It also calls on participants to enter a Labor Department program that would assess them and try to improve their job situation.



And all recipients would have to pay premiums as well as other costs such as co-payments.



Max Naethe of Kalispell saw his health and finances suffer after a workplace injury a decade ago.



Now he's in the so-called Medicaid gap — making too much money for Medicaid and not enough for a subsidy under the Affordable Care Act to make a heath plan affordable — which Buttrey's bill and House Bill 249, the likely-dead Democratic Medicaid proposal, aim to address.



“And so here I sit, in need of a heart transplant, which is the only thing that is capable of saving my life,” he said before the hearing. “But I can't eve get on a list for a heart transplant without any sort of health care. And so this bill if it would cover that gap, in the Obamacare/Medicaid area, would basically save my life.”



The bill, like HB 249, is pitched as a lifeline to rural hospitals.



“Forty-two percent of the patients that walk through our door have no insurance,” said Louie King, administrator of Teton Medical Center in Choteau. “It's hard to run a business that way.”



Only four people spoke against the bill, with three raising concerns about taking federal money, which SB 405 would do.



“All you're doing here is accepting a piece of bait and the rules and regulations that come with it,” said Terry Bannon of Bozeman.



The House meanwhile on Thursday rejected three bills in a Republican package pitched as an alternative to fuller expansion, leaving Buttrey's bill the one Medicaid measure with the healthiest vital signs.



The committee did not immediately act on the measure.