DAVENPORT, Iowa (KWQC) – Ahead of a big health care vote expected this week, Hillary Clinton is campaigning in Iowa and attacking Congressional Republicans for their plan to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

“I will fight for you. I will work for you… And together, we will continue to make progress to create the kind of future that we want for ourselves and our families,” said Hillary Clinton.

A standing-room only crowd packed the Starlite Ballroom in Davenport Monday to hear Clinton speak only four weeks before the Iowa Caucus.

“We want to make sure that everybody will come out and caucus on February 1st,” said Clinton.

“Yes, I do plan to caucus,” said Samantha Rottinghaus of Davenport.

“We haven’t missed one. So certainly, we’re going to caucus,” said James Woods, a Clinton supporter.

Clinton praised President Barack Obama on gun control measures announced Monday which include expanding background checks. She also condemned Republicans on economic issues, climate change, and health care.

“They’ve promised to tear up the Affordable Care Act, to repeal it,” said Clinton. “They’re willing to turn their backs on 19-million Americans.”

Monday’s stop was Clinton’s trip to the Quad Cities in two weeks, giving supporters and undecided voters another chance to hear her stance on the issues.

“I thought she was good because she offers plans instead of slogans,” said Woods.

“This was the first time I’ve heard her speak and I really enjoyed her message of working together,” said Rottinghaus.

“All of the issues she spoke about were issues I could relate to as being important,” said Martha Schermer, who attended Clinton’s rally.

Clinton is maintaining her lead in Iowa according to recent polls. She says a win in the Hawkeye State could help launch her campaign in New Hampshire where she trails in the polls to fellow Democrat, Bernie Sanders.

“We’ll get a great start to move toward the nomination and and eventually make sure Iowa turns blue,” said Clinton.

Clinton has two more campaign stops planned in Iowa on Tuesday.