Patient First will open two of its urgent care centers in the Lehigh Valley this month, including one this week in Wilson Borough.

The openings will bring to 11 the number of Patient First centers in Pennsylvania, said corporate spokesman Ian Slinkman.

Patient Firsts are walk-in urgent care medical practices that provide on-site X-rays, labs and prescription drugs. They're open from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. every day of the year, don't take appointments and accept all major insurance plans, Slinkman said.

The first will open Wednesday at 25th and Butler streets in Wilson Borough, at the site of the former Renae Mendall and Co. salon.

The other Patient First will open Feb. 26 at 2310 Schoenersville Road in Hanover Township, Northampton County, across from Westgate Mall.

Slinkman said the Richmond, Va.-based Patient First openings are a natural extension of the corporate business model. Both have been under construction since last spring.

Even though the previously uninsured began entering the health care market under "Obamacare" in January, Slinkman said the Patient First openings are coincidental.

"The Affordable Care Act has not had an effect on our growth strategy," he said. "The basis of what we do is offer health care that's convenient and cost-effective and that's a model that tends to resonate with people."

The 32-year-old company has 52 urgent care centers nationwide, Slinkman said. The only other Lehigh Valley location up to now had been in Allentown.

Patient First expects the Wilson location to draw patients from the Easton, Nazareth and Phillipsburg areas. Dr. Gary Wright, who had been at the Allentown location, will serve as medical director, Patient First said. Registered nurse Camille Hamilton is director of medical support.

Dr. Jeffrey Zlotnick will be medical director at the Hanover Township center and registered nurse Josephine Laudenslager will be director of medical support. In Hanover Township, Patient First expects to draw from the Bethlehem, Hanover Township, Catasauqua, Coopersburg and Bath areas, the company said.

While Patient First doesn't take appointments, customers can see which doctors are working at locations from the company's online schedules, Slinkman said.

"Some patients may use us for primary care but most patients will use Patient First on an urgent care basis," he said.