NEWPORT BEACH, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Alliant Insurance Services (www.alliant.com), the nation’s largest specialty insurance brokerage firm, has announced that veteran underwriter Barbara Sinclair has joined Alliant Healthcare Solutions as Senior Vice President. The 30-year industry specialist will employ her deep technical expertise to provide customized insurance programs that address the evolving exposures of modern healthcare organizations.

Sinclair brings extensive experience in underwriting and brokerage, specializing in medical professional and excess coverages and alternative risk financing agreements.

“The insurance needs of today’s healthcare organizations are changing as a result of ongoing industry consolidation and the continued roll-out of the Affordable Care Act,” said Todd Hagemeier, Managing Director of Alliant Healthcare Solutions. “Barbara’s breadth of industry expertise will enable us to deliver innovative products and services that address the shifting landscape of risk and safeguard our clients’ future.”

Prior to joining Alliant, Sinclair served as Senior Vice President and Product Manager with a national insurance underwriter, where she was responsible for the design and delivery of products and coverage solutions for the firm’s medical and professional liability team. An expert in healthcare reform, Sinclair led a strategic initiative evaluating changing liability and coverage needs resulting from the Affordable Care Act.

Sinclair studied medical technology and business administration at Central Connecticut State College and holds an Associate in Risk Management (ARM) certification. The noted industry expert has delivered speeches on healthcare at numerous high-profile industry conferences, including the Professional Liability Underwriting Society (PLUS) and the American Society for Healthcare Risk Management (ASHRM) New England.

She will be based in the Houston office of Alliant.

About Alliant Insurance Services

Headquartered in Newport Beach, CA, Alliant Insurance Services, Inc. is one of the largest insurance brokerage firms in the United States and has a history dating back to 1925. Alliant provides property and casualty, workers’ compensation, employee benefits, surety, and financial products and services to more than 26,000 clients nationwide, including public entities, tribal nations, healthcare, energy, law firms, real estate, construction, and other industry groups. More information is available on the company’s web site at: www.alliant.com.