All-America tight end earns degree 14 years after final game

Daniel Graham, at the State Capitol on Friday, completed his final class in criminology this summer and earned his University of Colorado degree, 14 years after playing his final game as an All-America tight end for the Buffs. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

It has been 14 years since Daniel Graham played his last college football game at the University of Colorado but less than a month since he earned his degree.

When he left school after his senior season in 2001, he was the sixth unanimous All-American in school history, the John Mackey Award winner as the nation's best tight end, a key member of the Big 12 Conference championship team and on his way to being a first-round pick of the New England Patriots. The only thing missing was the ethnic studies degree he had spent all those hours working toward during his four years in Boulder.

While his mother, Marilyn Graham, was proud of her son's achievements on the football field, she reminded him that he needed to finish what he started in the classroom at some point.

"When I left school, I promised my mom that I would go back and finish," Graham said.

He was always a solid student throughout his CU career and was only three classes shy of earning his degree when the Patriots made him the No. 21 overall pick in the first round of the 2002 draft.

Graham went on the win two Super Bowl rings with the Patriots in 2003 and 2004 and he eventually returned to Denver to play for his hometown Denver Broncos. He ultimately played for four teams in the league in a professional career that spanned 11 seasons. He also made millions of dollars and wasn't necessarily in need of a degree to help him get a job and provide for his family.

Advertisement

But last fall his promise to his mother tugged him back to Boulder, where he found himself sitting in a classroom at night each week learning about Greek art with fellow students, many of whom were in kindergarten the last time he was a student on campus.

"I think one of the most unique things in my situation was people look at it and say, 'You know, you really don't have to go to school,' " Graham said. "I was successful in my career and people just saying, 'Why did you go back?' It was a personal thing for me just keeping my promise to my mom to go back and get it.

"It was the hardest thing I've ever had to do going back 14 years later. School has changed so much. ... I'm just proud that I finally finished it and got it done."

Marilyn Graham understands exactly how difficult it was for her son to return to school. It took her 17 years to finish her degree while raising her five children. She said she commended her son for finishing his degree in a shorter amount of tim

"I am very proud of him for completing that especially after putting in 11 years in professional ball," she said. "Again, it's just one more time when he proves to be a man of his word. When he says he's going to do something, he does his best to do it. The completion of this has made me proud."

Other former pro players have returned to CU to earn their degrees after their time on the field came to and end, but no one at CU can remember more time passing between a player leaving CU and eventually earning their degree than the 14 years for Graham. Former CU running back and assistant coach Eric Bieniemy earned his degree 10 years after playing his final game.

Graham said Bieniemy was an inspiration to him and someone he occasionally thought of during the process of trying to follow through and finish. He said he was in a class with Bieniemy in 2001 when he was a senior and Bieniemy was a CU assistant coach and the old man in the room trying to wrap up his degree.

He said he was never concerned about how he might be viewed or accepted returning to school.

"It was never really a concern of mine at all," Graham said. "As far as the regular students go right now, I don't think any of them really recognized me. They just saw an old man walking on campus.

"I think with me sharing the story with the current football team and the athletes there, I think for them it was good to see and hear me tell them that it was much harder coming back 15 years later to get your degree. So get it done the first time."

Graham actually went back to CU the first time while he was still playing in the NFL for the Broncos in 2008. He completed one of the three classes he needed at that time, but found it difficult to find the time to fit in the final two classes while also juggling the demands of his career and helping his wife care for their two children, a daughter and son.

"I do want to give a lot of thanks to Kris Livingston, the academic adviser up there for just working with me for all these years," Graham said. "I signed up for classes, dropped classes, didn't finish classes. I mean, it was a long process for me."

Graham said another issue that derailed him a few times was the motivation and discipline to do online classes. He said he eventually determined that he needed to force himself to drive to campus from his home in Denver several times a week and attend classes in person in order to finish them.

He completed his final class in criminology earlier this summer by writing a paper on injustice in American society today for people of color. It was a particularly poignant topic for him considering recent events around the nation involving unarmed black men being killed by police. He said he felt a connection to the topic which made his last class interesting and rewarding.

Graham stopped by Livingston's office when he received his final grade to celebrate. She took a picture of him holding his final paper while standing next to the Mackey Award he won 14 years ago, which is on display in the Dal Ward Center.

Keeping his promise to his mom was really just one of three primary motivations behind Graham's return to school. Being a father, he emphasizes the importance of education all the time to his children and he felt like he needed to follow through to be an example to them as well.

"It was also just important for me when my kids grow older that they see I finished school so there can be no excuses for them, saying I didn't do it," Graham said. "It was important for me to get that for them as well."

Graham not only wanted to serve as an example to his children but also to the young people he works with in the Heart Power Inc. foundation (heartpowerinc.org). The organization provides mentoring, motivational speakers and ACT prep for students at Aurora Central High School and also conducts sports camps.

"When I speak to the kids and tell them the importance of education, I can always say to them that I graduated, and, not only did I graduate, I went back to school to get my degree," Graham said. "That's just another way of showing them the importance of education."

Graham was recruited by former CU coach Rick Neuheisel from Thomas Jefferson High School in the late-1990s and played for Neuheisel and Gary Barnett, who watched him develop from a fullback into the best tight end in college football.

"I am just really proud of him for keeping his promise to his family to finish school," Barnett said last week. "I know it sends a great message to the young people he mentors. A great Buff and an even better person."

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @kyleringo