Former Del. Johnny Joannou, D-Portsmouth, a lawyer who served in the General Assembly for 34 years and lost his seat in a June 2015 Democratic primary, died Friday at 76.

Joannou lost to fellow Democrat Steve Heretick, who now holds the seat representing Portsmouth and Norfolk.

Gov. Terry McAuliffe backed Heretick in the primary. Joannou had opposed the expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, the governor’s top priority.

“I am saddened by the passing of former Senator and Delegate Johnny Joannou,” McAuliffe said in a statement.

“Johnny will be remembered for his decades of devoted service to his community and his commonwealth as a member of the General Assembly. My thoughts and prayers are with the family and friends who are grieving this loss today.”

Speaker of the House Bill Howell, R-Stafford, said: “Party labels were always an afterthought to Johnny; he did what he thought was right, and he wasn’t afraid to tell you about it, either. The entire House of Delegates mourns the loss of a friend. Cessie and I are keeping Johnny’s wife, Chris, and their family in our prayers.”

Del. Chris Jones, R-Suffolk, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, said Joannou was one of his closest friends.

“Johnny was a man of great character,” Jones said. “I trusted and respected him deeply. His experience and understanding of state government made him an invaluable member of our committee. On behalf of the committee and its staff, I offer my deepest condolences to the Joannou family.”

Senate Majority Leader Thomas Norment, R-James City, also mourned Joannou’s loss.

“Having first been elected to the House during Mills Godwin’s second term as governor, Delegate Joannou retained the dedication and pragmatism of the elected officials of his era,” Norment said.

“As a native son of Portsmouth, he proved to be an effective advocate and champion for the city he loved. Throughout his 13 terms in the House and two in the Senate, he placed principle and the interests of his district ahead of partisanship.

“He was fiercely devoted to the people of Portsmouth and never shied away from reaching across the aisle to achieve positive results for the people who elected him to serve.”

Rep. Robert “Bobby” Scott, D-Newport News, called Joannou a friend and former colleague in the legislature.

“He was well-known for being a talented lawyer and for his independence,” Scott said.

“Johnny was always willing to work with both sides of the aisle and he fought hard to achieve results for his constituents, regardless of the political consequences,” Scott said. Funeral arrangements were incomplete Friday afternoon.