It’s been 50 years since the Surgeon General’s first report on smoking opened America’s eyes to the dangers of tobacco, concluding that smoking causes lung cancer. Cigarette consumption fell 15 percent within 3 months; smoking physicians decreased from 50 percent to 1 percent over five years.

Since then, the United States and Ohio have made incredible progress: tobacco taxes now pay for up to 20 percent of direct costs for tobacco-related diseases and disabilities compared to less than 5 percent in 1964. That increase has discouraged tobacco usage, and the health effects are substantial, contributing to a 30 percent increase in U.S. life expectancy.

As evidence accumulated about secondhand smoke hazards, as many as 25 percent of all cardiac events (in nonsmokers) decreased in areas that ban all public smoking. Since that 1964 report and subsequent editions (we’re now on number 10), the public has allowed regulation of tobacco marketing.

That report fundamentally changed public attitudes about tobacco.

But Ohio has now sullied itself by being one of the few states -- if not the only state -- with increased tobacco use since 2009.

Why?

There’s a logical reason -- and logical way of changing this if leaders in Columbus are truly serious about tax reductions and job competitiveness. The absolute increase in smoking rates of 4 percent since 2009 (when -- not coincidentally -- Ohio eliminated tobacco-prevention funding) will cost fellow citizens the biggest tax increase and our corporations an extra $800 million a year for tobacco-related disease and disability costs. That makes Ohio less competitive for jobs.

Even if we were an average state, the job the Surgeon General’s report of 1964 started is not finished. Every year, smoking kills over 18,000 Ohioans; tobacco companies spend over $1 million a day marketing products just in Ohio. Each family still pays $612 a year in taxes for direct smoking-caused costs.

We have cigars flavored as sour apple, grape and Dreamsicle, clearly appealing to children. In Cleveland schools, one in five students smoke cigars -- twice the rate of cigarette smoking. Besides ice cream flavoring, there’s a tax loophole that allows such cigars to be taxed at about a third that of cigarettes. With severe funding cuts of tobacco prevention (to zero) and blockage by a few downstate senators who would apparently have Ohioans pay taxes for tobacco treatment rather than provide 1/20th those funds for prevention, few teens receive the messages they need.

E-cigarettes seem a new method of addicting children, with the fastest growing user group being 12-to-16-year-olds. Slick marketing of these products threatens to re-glamorize smoking, as does the increasing legalization of marijuana. (For those in Colorado, consider that one joint has the toxicity of smoking four cigarettes).

Fortunately, we know what works to combat the terrible toll that tobacco causes. Strong smoke-free, public-places laws, raising prices by tax increases, and funding comprehensive tobacco prevention and cessation programs repeatedly are shown to drastically reduce smoking. Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, insurance policies must cover tobacco-cessation treatment. However, our state must ensure such coverage is comprehensive and based on best practices.

Last year the Ohio legislature admirably equalized the tax on little cigars with cigarettes. Now they need to finish their job and equalize other forms of tobacco with cigarette taxes, closing this loophole, making them less appealing to kids. The legislature also increased funding so that a few counties in Ohio now can offer prevention programs to their residents.

Our state ranks 40th in the country for its smoking rate of 23 percent. Medical costs (the largest cost for care and for disability payments is for tobacco-related diseases) now crowd out social programs, defense spending and education we all care about -- and make Ohio less competitive for jobs. We need leadership in Columbus; we in the United States, and in Ohio especially, can’t afford for additional progress to take 50 more years.

Toby Cosgrove, M.D., is the Cleveland Clinic president and CEO. Michael F. Roizen, M.D., is the Cleveland Clinic’s chief wellness officer.