I’m proud to say that AARP’s efforts to understand and respond to the special needs of America’s veterans and their families have moved forward in leaps and bounds in recent years.

Included in our commitment is this AARP Veterans web page specifically designed to bring together all our efforts to make life easier and more affordable for veterans and their families.

Already, we closely and continuously monitor the regulatory and legislative affairs affecting America’s 22 million-plus veterans and their families. In 2012, AARP began to assemble an advocacy coalition of some 20 groups to work together on matters of common interest. These groups represent nearly all veterans — about 8 million — who belong to veteran service organizations (VSOs) and about 1 million active-duty military personnel.

Get the latest tips on protecting your money and saving for retirement — AARP Money newsletter »

Among other victories, our coalition’s combined efforts killed the proposed “chained CPI” method of calculating Social Security and veterans benefit cost-of-living increases which, over 10 years, would have cost veterans $17 billion in lost income.

We have striven to understand and address the special challenges faced by military and veteran caregivers by joining the National Coalition for Military Caregivers, a broad coalition of leading public, private, nonprofit, labor and faith organizations being assembled by the Elizabeth Dole Foundation to address the gaps in support.

The AARP Veterans web page offers a new and useful experience for veterans and their loved ones that helps inform them about our advocacy work, along with the resources we offer in such critical matters as caregiving and job searching. We also feature terrific personal stories about the unique challenges veterans and their families face in so many areas. Stories like mine.

After serving as an officer in the Air Force for 21 years, I decided to change my career path. I was accepted into Duke’s MBA program, but as I got closer and closer to graduation in 2009, I became less and less certain about what I wanted to do in my second career. The more I examined companies and careers, the more uncertain I felt. In the military, my responsibilities included logistics and political work for defense. But I was unsure of how that experience and my MBA would translate into the civilian world.

I wasn’t alone. It is hard for many veterans to pinpoint their transferrable skills and to clarify their values and priorities to position themselves for satisfaction in both their new careers and their personal lives. Nearly two-thirds of veterans said in a recent survey that they were dissatisfied with their transition a year after leaving the military. And the transfer from the military to a civilian career is only one of many special challenges facing today’s veterans and their families.

Get discounts on health exams, prescriptions and more — AARP Member Advantages. »

I was one of the lucky ones. I got some great coaching. Now, through the AARP Veterans web page, millions of veterans and their families will have access to great coaching, too.

An example is Life Reimagined, a personal guidance system developed by AARP and some of the world’s leading experts in life coaching and counseling to help adults of all ages navigate transitions and live their lives to the fullest. It offers an easy-to-use, step-by-step diagnostic tool to help people understand themselves and clarify for themselves what they’re really good at.

Please check it out along with other resources at the AARP Veterans page.

Doug Dickerson is the AARP North Carolina state director.

Photos: Can Dickerson © Freelightphoto (top); courtesy of Doug Dickerson (bottom)

Also of Interest

See the AARP home page for deals, savings tips, trivia and more