MASON CITY, Iowa — By now, Sen. Ted Cruz’s tea party credentials are unassailable. But as he mulls a presidential run, he’s reaching out to other key parts of the Republican base, including Christian conservatives who dominate the Iowa GOP caucuses every four years.

With enduring friction between grass-roots activists and the “establishment” that Cruz so often denounces, a candidate who can appeal across several factions would have an edge. That was a subtext for his latest visit, with a side trip last week to a corner of Iowa where no Texas politician pops up by accident.

After an introduction that mentioned Obamacare protests at the U.S. Capitol, Cruz drew an allusion to a biblical battle.

“I was just waiting for you to say they circled it seven times and then they blew their trumpets,” he quipped. “I look forward to being there next time when the walls of Jericho come to the ground.”

This was Cruz’s fourth Iowa visit in eight months. He’s scheduled to be in New Hampshire twice in April. The only mystery isn’t whether he’s testing the waters for a presidential run, but how far he can go.

“I love the guy,” said Brenda Muth, a farmer with 3,600 hogs on 1,700 acres. “He’s just strong in his faith and beliefs. He doesn’t waver at all. … I am like, happy, happy, happy. He, to me, is the one.”

Muth was one of 200 or so Republicans gathered Tuesday night from all corners of Cerro Gordo County, and all wings of the party — tea partiers and libertarians, evangelicals and business owners. Cruz offered something for all of them.

One minute he played the populist, railing against the political establishment and big business. The problem, he said, is “entrenched politicians in both parties. … They get there, and they stop listening to us.”

Moments later he was the tea party rabble-rouser.

“We are going to repeal every word of Obamacare,” he said, and the pressure won’t come from anyone who’s run for office. “It has to come from the American people.”

And then he was wrapping himself in the Reagan mantle, drawing parallels between his own alienation from the establishment and the Gipper’s.

“Let me remind you in 1980, Washington, D.C., despised Ronald Reagan,” said Cruz. “And what happened was the American people rose up and brought the Republican Party back to our core principles. And once they swept into office, then suddenly everybody became a Reagan Republican.”

About 200 people paid as little as $25 for coffee, cupcakes and some time with Cruz at Music Man Square, a mock-up of River City, the setting of The Music Man by hometown composer Meredith Willson.

Among those on hand was Dave Dirksen, 50, who farms a modest plot and works in customer service for Winnebago, the RV maker. He supported Rick Santorum in the presidential caucuses of 2012 and Mike Huckabee four years before that — marking him as a religious conservative.

“In Iowa, [Cruz] would do fairly well,” Dirksen said. “I don’t know how well he’d do in some of the other states. He’s not the establishment pick, shall we say.”

Gabriel Haugland, the county GOP chairman, led Gov. Rick Perry’s effort in 20 surrounding counties last time around. Like Cruz, he said it’s vital for the next nominee to reconvene the old winning GOP coalition — social and fiscal conservatives, and national security hawks.

Mitt Romney couldn’t pull that off.

“We do have a little bit of a schism,” Haugland said.

Earlier in the day, Cruz spoke to a conference of Christian home-schoolers in Des Moines. There, the religiosity was even more overt.

In a hotel ballroom filled with about 800 parents and children, he boasted of his role as a legal advocate defending a Ten Commandments display at the Texas Capitol, and ensuring that “one nation, under God” remained in the Pledge of Allegiance. Cruz is a Southern Baptist whose father, Rafael Cruz, is a pastor.

He then launched a lengthy indictment of the Obama administration, over IRS hassles for religious and tea party groups to the Obamacare mandate for employers to provide contraceptive coverage.

“Right now, the Obama administration is litigating against the Little Sisters of the Poor,” he said, referring to an order of Catholic nuns that joined the push-back against the law. “We have never seen an administration with such hostility to religious faith.”

Most dramatically, he invoked last weekend’s Jewish celebration of Purim, a festival that commemorates a failed plot to kill the Jews of Persia. The king halts the plot when his queen, an assimilated Jew, intercedes.

“When she opened her mouth, she put herself at considerable risk,” Cruz said. “The story of Purim is a story of action, of ... acting on your faith.”

In his retelling, it sounded like an allegory not just for religious freedom but for the slings and arrows he’s taken in Washington the last 15 months.

Faith, he said, “is stepping forward with everything you have and saying, just like Esther, ‘I am here for a time such as this.’”

The ovation was powerful. Such popularity among evangelicals has a very practical side in Iowa — a devoted following can make a huge difference on caucus day, when organization and persuading your neighbors helps win votes.

“These are your grass roots,” said Tamara Scott, Iowa director of Concerned Women for America and a member of the Republican National Committee. “These are your house sign locations, your parade walkers. This is your fervor, and fervor can do a lot that money can’t.”

Cruz’s potential for checking so many boxes would set him apart from most of the field.

“Imagine what would happen in the Republican Party if you brought together the evangelicals, the tea partiers, the fiscal conservatives,” Scott said. “It would be exciting. Exciting to watch.”

One huge obstacle for Cruz, though, could be resistance from the business community, which remains a force even in the Iowa caucuses. His willingness to force a government shutdown last fall, and brinkmanship over the debt ceiling, alarmed traditional chamber-of-commerce Republicans.

Cruz hasn’t hired staff yet, unlike Sen. Rand Paul, another potential contender who recently put the outgoing state GOP chairman on his payroll.

Cruz met privately, though, throughout a long day Tuesday with potential backers. And he eagerly posed for photos and worked the crowd after each stop, creating the sort of memories that can pay dividends in 22 months.

Iowans who backed Perry in 2012 — or Santorum, Michele Bachmann or Herman Cain — are giving Cruz admiring glances. Those who supported Ron Paul are predisposed to support his son, but many see Cruz as a strong alternative.

The Mitt Romney middle remains elusive. But unless New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie or former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush jumps in, those voters have no natural home at the moment.

Cruz is “doing the things in Iowa that are necessary to run, if he wants to do that,” said David Fischer, co-chairman of Ron Paul’s campaign in 2012 and, until recently, co-chairman of the Iowa GOP. “People are enthused. People are curious.”

One of Iowa’s most influential religious conservatives, Bob Vander Plaats of the group the Family Leader, views Cruz as the current front-runner.

“If the caucuses were held today he would probably lap the field,” unless Huckabee runs again, said Vander Plaats, whose group hosted Cruz last summer at an evangelical summit in Ames. “He does check a lot of boxes.”

Iowa Republican U.S. Rep. Steve King — who took Cruz pheasant hunting after that summit and has been serving as his political Sherpa in the state — called the senator a “full-spectrum conservative.”

For a constitutionalist or a voter who prizes religious freedom or any other flavor of conservative, King said, “each note has been on key. … He seems to resonate.”

On Twitter:

@toddgillman