Health Insurance Insights

Rates are rising for 2016...

With Halloween just around the corner, you can expect to get spooked. If you’ve recently received a letter or email from your health insurance company, you probably already are.On the eve of Open Enrollment, three of the four insurance companies offering coverage in Moab have pulled out of the Health Insurance Marketplace. Bridgespan and Altius will still be offering plans off the marketplace, while Arches was told by the Utah State Department of Insurance to close down effective Dec. 31, 2016.Let’s take a look at what’s going on behind the scenes — and what you can do about it.Basically, the insurance companies seriously miscalculated the cost of pent-up demand for health care unleashed by the Affordable Care Act. For every premium dollar they received, insurance companies paid out $1.37 in claims, which put all of them underwater. The ACA had risk corridors in place to reimburse insurance companies for these expected losses — but in the end, there was only enough money to reimburse losses at 12 cents on the dollar. And due to the political deadlock in Congress, alternative funding for this huge shortfall could not be found.Having been informed that the promised funds would not be forthcoming, two insurance companies — Bridgespan and Aetna/Altius — decided at the last minute to pull their plans from the Health Insurance Marketplace, though at last word they will still be offering plans off the marketplace. Unfortunately, subsidies and cost-sharing deductions are not allowed unless you purchase a plan on the marketplace.As for Arches, the company seemed to be on firm financial footing, as it had twice the Utah state requirement for risk-based capital safely tucked away. Nonetheless, due to the risk corridor shortfall, the State Department of Insurance intervened and forced Arches to “wind down” operations. All members of Arches will continue to have coverage through Dec. 31, 2015, but will need to transition to a new health insurance provider for 2016.While Bridgespan and Altius are talking about getting back onto the marketplace sometime in the future, for now, it looks like SelectHealth is going to be the only game in town for 2016, at least for anyone who qualifies for a subsidy. On a positive note, SelectHealth is offering a full assortment of plans at varying prices, and they offer a pretty robust network.Fallout from this turmoil has been felt off the marketplace as well. Here in Moab, Regence Blue Cross Blue Shield is discontinuing all but two of the 12 individual plans it rolled out at the beginning of the year. Humana and United Healthcare haven’t released their 2016 plans yet.And to make matters worse, anyone earning below 100 percent of the 2015 Federal Poverty Level ($11,770 individual, $24,250 family of four) will continue to fall into Utah’s coverage gap. The latest incarnation of Medicaid Expansion — Utah Access Plus — only got seven votes in a closed-door meeting of House Republicans, killing hopes of Medicaid Expansion for 2016.Silver Lining: Anyone qualifying for the Advanced Premium Tax Credit — and that’s the majority of people on the Health Insurance Marketplace here in Moab — will find that their subsidies will help offset the 2016 rate increases. The subsidy is benchmarked to the second-lowest silver plan in our region. Since we lack the cheaper silver plans with limited networks offered along the Wasatch Front, our subsidy rates are considerably higher. For 2016, a 62 year-old making $45,000 a year will get a $131 per month subsidy if living in Salt Lake City, but will receive a $313 per month subsidy here in Moab. A family of three (age 45, 45, 15) making $28,000 would qualify for a $491 subsidy in Salt Lake, but will get a $702 per month subsidy in Grand County.Bottom line: If you make above 400 percent of the Federal Poverty Level ($47,080 for an individual, $63,720 for a couple, $97,000 for a family of four), you will want to look for an insurance policy off the Marketplace. If you are under that amount, you will have to choose a new plan unless you already are covered by SelectHealth. By being proactive and re-applying (either on your own or with the help of a broker), you’ll have the chance to revisit your income information to make sure you are receiving the correct subsidy. Even if your income stays the same, your subsidy will increase for 2016, helping to offset 2016 rate increases.Charles Kulander, a Moab-based health insurance broker, can be reached at 435-260-2147 or by email at ckulander@utahhealthdecisions.com.