Washington Times columnist Charles Hurt wrote a piece Tuesday claiming that cancer survivor Edie Littlefield Sundby losing her health insurance as a result of ObamaCare proved former Alaska governor Sarah Palin’s point regarding death panels.

Hurt took this position further with Newsmax TV’s Steve Malzberg Wednesday saying that President Obama and the media think “government should be God” (video follows with transcript and commentary):

CHARLES HURT, WASHINGTON TIMES: I’m not making a religious argument here. You know, people can be atheists or Christian or Jewish or whatever they want to be. You know, that’s fine. But the thing here is – and I’m not saying that we need to insert God in all of this, or insert religion into any of this – but the bottom line here is that President Obama thinks the government should be God, should make those decisions. And that, and you don’t have to be a religious person for that to scare the living daylights out of you. People of every stripe should be running for the exits. STEVE MALZBERG, HOST: Now Charlie, let me ask you, we’ve got over a minute. What’s the chance the media will ever say what you just said? What’s the chance the media will ever say what Sarah Palin said? HURT: Because media believes that government is God. They believe that your rights, all the rights that you are granted are somehow granted from the government. They don’t believe that there is a natural, you know, granting of rights to people, and that this compact that we have with government. They don’t believe in any of that, partly, of course, because none of them studied any of it in school. They’ve never studied history. All they know is sort of conventional wisdom which is that, you know, “Oh, well you have a problem up there? Well the government needs to do something about that. There really should be a law about that.” That’s what the media does.

It sure is safe to say that secular liberals by and large do see government as there to bestow rights and liberties and take them away when it sees fit to do so.

With ObamaCare this has now extended to the government not only telling you you have to buy health insurance, but also what such insurance must cover whether it benefits you or not.

And, in the case of Littlefield Sundby, she has now lost the very insurance that has kept her alive as a result of government defacto acting as God.

Where will it end?