Open to 'different ways of doing things'

Standing in front of University of Colorado as students rush by on their way to class, Jan Burton says Boulder needs to have a way for CU graduates and other entrepreneurial young people to find their place in Boulder. That means looking for ways to increase density and add housing while preserving community character.

"We need diversity," she says. "We have to protect certain things that are really valuable, and we can't let growth be run-away. But I don't subscribe to the idea of 'when I come in, the walls go up.'"

Burton, 59, a former high-tech executive turned entrepreneur, is seeking her first term on Boulder City Council.

The Daily Camera asked each of the 17 candidates to take a reporter on a short tour of the city that highlights their personal and policy relationship to the community they seek to serve.

Jan Burton Website: www.janforboulder.com Age: 59 Family: Two daughters, two grandchildren How long in Boulder: 6.5 years Professional background: High-tech executive, co-founder of tiny house start-up

Meet the Candidates The Daily Camera is profiling each of Boulder's 17 candidates for City Council. The stories will be published each day through Oct. 10.

Burton starts at Chautauqua Park, where she lived in a cottage for three weeks when she was new in Boulder. Burton moved to Boulder seeking healing after the unexpected death of her husband seven years ago.

"Nature to me is very healing," she says.

Chautauqua is also a place that brings together her passion for the outdoors (Burton volunteers as a raptor monitor with Open Space and Mountain Parks) and for the arts and music.

Burton was amazed at the opportunity to see world-renowned artists for modest ticket prices at Chautauqua's auditorium and dismayed at the empty seats and lack of younger people in the audience.

Burton was the main driver of the Music Mash-up Series, a concert series that sought to bring new audiences to the Colorado Music Festival by pairing contemporary artists and classical composers. The concerts are preceded by a guided hike at Chautauqua Park and a mixer with food and drink donated by local restaurants and breweries.

Burton says she was able to build connections between the arts world and the small business world, and the city needs to do more to support both for Boulder to preserve its unique character.

Letting creative people be creative

From Chautauqua, Burton walks through University Hill, passing the infamous bungalow at 747 12th St. She thinks pushing the landmarking of that property was a mistake. Burton says she wants to preserve Boulder's history, but not every structure is worth saving.

She wants to see more room for "creativity" in Boulder's planning and land use decisions. That means allowing architects to blend old and new, as a previous owner did at her own home, a block over, and looking for ways to increase density while protecting neighborhood character.

"Architects can solve problems," she says. "I want to give creative people the opportunity to be creative."

Burton started Rhino Cubed last year with architect Sam Austin. The company converts shipping containers into distinctive tiny homes. Burton waxes enthusiastic about the potential of the tiny home movement to transform how Americans live and reduce our carbon footprint. But in Boulder, as in many communities, there is nowhere to put them, in part because of restrictions on second dwelling units in most residential areas.

"We have all these people who want to live small, but they can't," she says.

Burton says Boulder needs to be more open to density if it's going to house the students and workers who are an integral part of the community, but it doesn't have to mean big apartment buildings dropped into residential areas. Boulder should try different types of small-scale density in appropriate neighborhoods, Burton says, and expand on solutions that work.

"Density scares people because they think it means you're going to build a four-plex and have four students per unit in the middle of their residential neighborhood, and they think it will be a disaster," she says. "Density doesn't have to mean that. It can be neighbors building density. But we can't just continue this thing where we say our workers can just live out in Longmont."

Burton's route takes us along Broadway past the campus of the University of Colorado, where she serves on the Women's Council for the Leeds School of Business and on the board of the College of Music. She says Boulder should embrace its position as a college town and make sure there is room for students to live and work here as they graduate.

"I care passionately about that," she says. "We can't just be an old, retired community."

City needs more focus on basic services

Burton says her business background includes a focus on customer service, and she's concerned that the City Council isn't paying attention to what its customers — the residents of Boulder — have told them in the most recent community survey. Almost half of respondents gave the city poor ratings on many basic services, from managing traffic to snow and ice removal, from expansion and retention of jobs to flood education. While more people felt the city was generally going in the right direction than they did two decades ago, many respondents did not agree that the council implements policies that reflect the values of the community.

Burton says the city is spending too much time and energy on grand projects and not enough on basic services. Burton says she's not necessarily against the idea of a municipal electric utility, but she wants the city to be "realistic" about the financial feasibility of the project and make sure Boulder is taking care of business at home.

"You're not fixing my potholes, and you're off trying to put Boulder on the global map," she says, summarizing the view she saw represented in the survey.

Burton ends her tour on the east end of Pearl Street, at Cured, where she has worked closely with owner Will Frischkorn on the Mash-up Series.

Rising rents, stringent regulations and lack of parking are threatening local businesses downtown, Burton says.

"I would hate to see downtown Boulder become nothing but chains," she says.

Burton wants the city to look for ways to support small businesses, including what zoning changes might help more local businesses stay downtown, and balance the city's transportation goals with the reality that many customers will still want to drive and need parking.

Burton says she would bring a new perspective and responsiveness to city government.

"I'm open to collaboration and different ways of doing things," she says. "I'm always open to new ideas for attacking a problem, but you also have to have your finger on the pulse and be willing to change directions if it's not working."

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere