For Jade Thompson and thousands of her fellow educators, working in a public school means funding Ohio’s biggest left-wing advocacy group.

Thompson, a high school Spanish teacher in Marietta, has to pay the Ohio Education Association and its affiliates $600 per year to teach. Almost $200 of that goes to the Washington, D.C., headquarters of the National Education Association.

She isn’t required to join the union, but because of Ohio public employee law — and because Ohio isn’t a right-to-work state — OEA can take mandatory “fair share” fees from Thompson and other teachers.

As one of 1,370 fair share payers in schools in which OEA takes mandatory fees from nonmembers, Thompson would have to pay $800 per year if she failed to take advantage of a brief mid-December to mid-January period when fair share payers can request a partial refund.

The teachers union must refund the cost of its political spending to fair share payers who formally object, but the union itself determines what spending is — or isn’t — political.

Just last year, OEA settled a lawsuit filed by fair share payers who disputed the way OEA and its affiliates calculated refunds for political spending.

On top of that, OEA is “very sneaky” about notifying nonmembers of their rights, Thompson said. Teachers have only a month to respond to a notification easily overlooked during the holidays, and they must submit a new objection letter every year.

Calling the union “100 percent political” and complaining that OEA’s politics skew sharply left, Thompson told Ohio Watchdog many of the groups OEA funds “have nothing to do with education.”

She believes pressure exerted by union leaders keeps many of her peers from opting out of OEA membership. OEA had 120,255 members as of Aug. 31.

“It’s easier to just kind of look the other way” instead of leaving the union, Thompson said. She speaks from experience.

“The consequences at school are that once people figure out you are not a union person, they try to freeze you out,” she said. “They try to act like you don’t belong; they don’t talk to you.”

“For me it became personal because I realized I was paying for them to slander my husband,” Thompson said. Her husband, State Rep. Andy Thompson, is one of the Ohio General Assembly’s more conservative Republicans.

Year in and year out, OEA is a top donor to the Ohio Democratic Party and its candidates. Direct campaign contributions are only the beginning of OEA political spending and activism.

During the union’s 2015 fiscal year ending Aug. 31, OEA donated $112,000 to leftist think tank Innovation Ohio and $20,000 to leftist think tank Policy Matters Ohio — two nonprofits that fight for higher taxes, more government spending and less school choice.

The union gave $47,000 to left-wing activist group ProgressOhio, $35,000 to tax-hike consulting group Support Ohio Schools, $10,000 to union coalition One Ohio Now and $6,500 to Plunderbund, a left-wing political blog.

RELATED: Here’s why union bosses hate California teacher Rebecca Friedrichs

“There are a lot of conservative teachers, but OEA doesn’t seem to represent conservative teachers,” said Thompson, expressing particular concern over OEA’s support for Planned Parenthood and its promotion of abortion as “reproductive rights.”

Thompson doesn’t mind paying for the local Marietta Education Association’s representation in contract negotiations, but she resents the steep cost of OEA’s forced fees.

“Does it cost $600 per teacher to collectively bargain? That’s outrageous,” Thompson said. “It doesn’t matter whether you’re fair share or a full member — they’re very creative about their accounting.”

She pointed to the union’s Ohio Schools magazine as one example of politics veiled as “member communications.” Ohio Schools election guides tell teachers who to vote for, and the magazine routinely features glossy cover stories about Democratic politicians.

When the union began sending campaign mailers attacking her husband, “that’s when I got mad,” Thompson explained. As a result, she became a fair share payer and joined the non-union Association of American Educators for professional development and extra liability insurance.

“AAE really came to my rescue and gave me moral support,” she told Ohio Watchdog. And she’s happy with the price tag —$200 a year for membership she chose, compared to the $600 yearly tribute she’s forced to pay OEA.

Contacted for comment, OEA failed to respond to questions about its spending.