Re: “Think traffic is bad around the Denver area? Just wait a decade or two,” Dec. 20 news story.

Thanks for the informative article on the state of metro Denver’s efforts to keep up with the estimated growth in population. As a former Lakewood City Council member, I have frequently heard complaints from residents about the density around RTD’s W light rail line. This article highlights why we worked so hard to create the opportunity for sustainable, high-density housing around the light rail stations. People are moving to Colorado because it is a great place to live and we have good employment opportunities. Hiding our heads in the sand and wishing we would not grow more will not deter people from moving here, it will only further increase the cost of housing and make it more difficult for people find affordable housing in the metro area.

Whether we want the additional growth, or not, our leaders need to plan for this influx of people into our state. Higher density, multi-family housing around light rail makes the most sense for both our current residents and the next generation of residents. By bringing more density via infill development, we can avoid sprawl and preserve that open space that Coloradans value. By placing it near our existing transit infrastructure we give residents the opportunity to avoid sitting in traffic and improve the quality of life for all residents.

Karen Kellen, Lakewood

This letter was published in the Dec. 27 edition.

We have homes both here and in Portland, Ore. While it may be true that Interstate 5, the main artery for West Coast travel, can at times be congested even during off-peak hours, Interstate 84, Portland’s only other major interstate, is much less impacted with off-peak traffic than any of the interstates which surround metro Denver.

And though your article concentrates on the city’s interstate traffic woes, driving the inner city of Portland is a relief when compared to driving in Denver. Why? Unlike Denver, Portland and its surrounding suburbs make a concerted effort to facilitate the flow of traffic by synchronizing the street lights on all major thoroughfares. Denver’s traffic engineers, on the other hand and against all common sense, do not synchronize the street lights, and worse, they install lights in the middle of blocks to impede the flow of traffic. This keeps commuters in their cars longer, causing more pollution, and wasting both time and money. Consequently, driving in Denver and around Denver can be a nightmare no matter what route you choose.

Brian and Nanette Jones, Denver

This letter was published in the Dec. 27 edition.

Remember: Those experiencing traffic in a car are always contributing to it. If you don’t like traffic, drive less.

Richard Replin, Denver

This letter was published in the Dec. 27 edition.

Submit a letter to the editor via this form or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.