Health Center Partners recently welcomed Community Health Systems, Inc. of Moreno Valley as a consortium member and convened collaborative planning charrettes designed to engage community leaders and stakeholders in regional strategic planning. HCP has taken tangible steps to reaffirm and to demonstrate its commitment to improving health services in Riverside by appointing Guillermo Gonzalez as the regional director for member services.

Gonzalez, who grew up in Riverside, joins Health Center Partners with nearly 20 years of proven expertise in leading government relations, external affairs and community outreach efforts for public and corporate entities. As the former director of government relations, communication and external affairs for Gold Coast Health Plan, Gonzalez spearheaded public and legislative policy issues for the plan which serves Medi-Cal beneficiaries. He held previous roles with the U.S. Government Accountability Office, U.S. Senator Dianne Feinstein and the Office of the Speaker of the California State Assembly.

"I'm thrilled to return to my hometown of Riverside to help steer the efforts of Health Center Partners, its subsidiaries and the seven member health centers located here to better meet the health care needs of the underserved in our community," stated Gonzalez. "Today, Health Center Partners and our member health centers provide integrated primary care to more than 160,000 people in the County each year; our aim is to extend the reach of quality primary care services to the most vulnerable, many of whom are uninsured or underinsured."

In partnership with Kaiser Foundation Hospitals and the California Wellness Foundation, Health Center Partners recently convened a series of charrettes—structured collaborative sessions for eliciting diverse perspectives—in Riverside County as a foundational element of its ongoing strategic planning. These insights will support the continued refinement of innovative localized approaches to primary care delivery. The appointment of Gonzalez is a direct response to residents' desire for a physical presence in the area to coordinate unique needs of organizations and residents of Riverside County.

"Our member health centers already serve two-thirds of patients seen by federally qualified health centers in Riverside County. We will continue to partner with them in seeking innovative and effective ways to transition from volume-based to value-based health care," added Tuttle.

About Health Center Partners

Health Center Partners (formerly Council of Community Clinics) and its subsidiaries serve as the nexus for its members and partners to transform primary care through the power of innovation and collaboration. Our health policy, public affairs and advocacy efforts enhance the development of and recognition for our members who enrich the patient experience and improve the human condition through access to quality health care and related services for their diverse communities, with an emphasis on low-income and uninsured populations. For more information, visit www.hcpsocal.org.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160319/345991LOGO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/health-center-partners-expands-presence-and-focus-in-riverside-county-300238531.html

SOURCE Health Center Partners

Related Links

http://www.hcpsocal.org