ELK GROVE - Del Oro took the CIF San-Joaquin Section Division II title for the second year in a row Saturday with their 3-1 win over Rocklin in penalty kicks.

It was a back and forth nail-bitter through two halves of regulation and two 10-minute overtime periods on a hot afternoon at Cosumnes Oaks High School. In the end the number 1 seeded team beat out the number 6.

“We played well, as well as we could play and we’re very, very young and so it’s a great experience for the future and we’re really happy with where we’re at,” Del Oro head coach Ron Benjamin said. “We knew it was going to be close.”

Rocklin could thank junior goalkeeper Jaime Goodwin for keeping the match close as Del Oro dominated the shots on goal category, 9-3.

During the final overtime’s last two minutes, Goodwin came up big on two occasions. The first was when she jumped high to grab a ball coming into the box just before Del Oro striker Sylvia Sloss could get a foot on it. The second time was a few moments later as she dove to the right corner and stopped a game winner with only seconds left of injury time.

Either way, for this one to come down to penalty kicks just upped the drama for this final between rivals.

Del Oro’s freshman goalkeeper Ailey Collins made a strong mark in penalty kicks as she blocked three out of four.

“I felt I performed pretty well,” Collins said. “I kind of like doing PK’s and I felt for the most part it was a pretty good run for me. I just react, I wait for the shot and react to it.”

Sloss put Del Oro on the board first and Collins caught Rocklin captain Lindsay Erl’s kick to put the Golden Eagles up, 1-0.

After Goodwin stood in and blocked Del Oro’s next shot, Thunder teammate Faith Halloway found the corner to tie it,1-1.

Del Oro’s Rachel Gensch gave her teammates the big go-ahead goal at 2-1 and Emily Curry sealed the game with a PK to the top right corner and the Golden Eagles rushed the field.

“They put on some pressure and our defense held tough but to get through the whole 100 minutes against those guys that was the goal,” Rocklin head coach Paul Morrison said. “We held the shut-out the whole time, but kudos to them.”

Indeed it was time for Del Oro to celebrate.

“It was really exciting especially because I’m a freshman, getting to being shown the ropes right here and coming into this, it’s an amazing experience,” Collins said.

For the Thunder there wasn’t much to regret as they played as well as could have been expected with their key injuries.

“Even though we didn’t win we played our hardest, definitely did our best and I’m very happy with it,” Goodwin said.

For Benjamin it was never about repeating, each game was the single focus.

“Having back to back section championships is great but really I just tried to keep in mind that we always take one game at a time and (we) didn’t talk about repeating,” Benjamin said.

They sure can talk about it now.