Gordon D. Christensen, M.D. former MU hospital chief of staff, medical professor and practicing physician addresses the Democratic Party rally on Thursday at the Moore-Few community room. Johannes Brann/Daily Mail [Order this photo]

Nevada Daily Mail

"The health of any area is measured by how its people are doing financially, physically and socially," said Gordon D. Christensen, M.D., Democratic candidate for the fourth district seat of the U.S. House of Representatives.

"And after three terms of Vicki Hartzler as your representative, I ask you, is the fourth district and are you personally better off today than six years ago?"

"No!" responded the over two dozen on hand at Thursday evening's rally of the Vernon County Democratic party.

Meeting at the community room of Moore-Few care center, the assembled began with food and socializing. County chair, Paul Sprenkle welcomed those present, led them in the pledge of allegiance and introduced the featured speaker.

Dr. Christensen is professor emeritus of medicine at the University of Missouri, Columbia.

"I have been a professor of medicine, a doctor who serves patients, former chief of staff at Columbia's MU Hospital, vice-chief of staff at the VA hospital, a leader of medical missions, someone who has conducted world class research, and a whistleblower at the VA," said Christensen. I know about sickness and health and I'm telling you, the fourth district needs a doctor in the House!"

"My work in medical missions in many countries and several continents has taught me the biggest needs of people across the globe and right here in Missouri," said Christensen."

"People need shelter, security, nutrition, access to clean water, sanitation and healthcare," he said. "But the needs of people the world over comes down to one thing, income."

"Don't let anyone fool you, a job is a healthcare issue," said Christensen. "And here in the fourth district, if you don't have a job with a living wage and benefits you are going to struggle and struggle mightily."

Once a doctor, always a doctor! Gordon D. Christensen M.D., Democratic candidate for the 4th district House seat and former professor of medicine at MU and practicing physician explains the cause of a woman's hand problem who attended Thursday's Democratic Party rally. Johannes Brann/Daily Mail [Order this photo]

In an interview, Christensen was pressed for specifics.

"I challenge current House and Senate members to live for six months on a minimum wage job which has no benefits and do so without resorting to personal savings," said Christensen.

Asked about the minimum wage, the doctor said, "I would support an increase to $10 an hour."

Christensen added, "When you combine the income I had and that of my wife, who is a clinical psychologist with Columbia's VA hospital, I'm in the top tier of income. And let me tell you, my accountant has described the many things we could legally do to get around paying income taxes. We've said no a lot of times to our accountant but my point is this, low income folks have only two choices, pay up or else. Our system needs to be overhauled now."

In a separate interview, Christensen was asked about his views on the Affordable Care Act.

"First, let me make two observations," began Christensen. "If I am elected, and I was able to work on one legislative bill a week, I could get some 50 bills done a year. But Rep. Hartzler has proudly voted against the Affordable Care Act not once or twice or 10 or 20 but a total of 50 times and counting. Now I get it that she does not like the ACA but 50 times? It's not like we don't have any problems that need solving. Fifty times, really?"

"Second, in my opinion, the ACA helped but there are still 30 million Americans without health insurance and I know we [can] improve efficiency and lower costs," he said.

"A lot of people don't realize it but the Veterans Administration is allowed to negotiate with pharmaceutical companies to get lower prices for bulk purchases. "When enacted, that saved the VA a lot of money," he said when asked what specific reform he would propose to lower costs.

Christensen said that when the ACA was enacted, private insurance companies made sure that the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services is not permitted to do this.

"Think about it, the United States government is the single greatest consumer, provider and purchaser of medicine in this country. If anyone should get a bulk discount it is we the people and this would save patients and the government an awful lot of money. In turn, people would be able to afford and receive the medicine they need," he said.

"Rep. Hartzler sits on the House Budget Committee," noted Christensen, "and she had a hand in the five-year farm bill passed in 2014. She personally advocated for a cut in SNAP benefits while supporting tax cuts and other subsidies that supported those well off."

The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program was formerly known as the Food Stamp Program and in 2014, SNAP assisted more than 46 million-low income Americans in the purchase of food.

"If welfare is wrong for the needy, why do we give it to the well off? The reason our state and federal tax codes are impossibly long is due to the tax breaks that have been given primarily to those who are well off, very well off," he said.

"I am reminded of a quote by William F. Buckley," said Christensen, "'My secretary paid more in income tax than I did.' Now don't tell me our tax code is fair."

A question and answer period followed with the first being from a Vietnam veteran questioning the high cost of weapon systems such as he had recently seen on a visit to Whiteman Air Force base.

Dr. Christensen said, "Let's talk about Whiteman and what makes a military truly strong."

He asked the group if anyone knew how the base received its name.

"Our Air Force base -- yours and mine -- is named in honor of 2nd Lt. George Allison Whiteman. And what did he do?"

No one knew and so he answered his own question.

"Like firemen who are trained to run towards a fire while everyone else is fleeing, on Dec. 7, 1941, during the attack on Pearl Harbor, Lt. Whiteman ran to his plane. He was trained to fight, and despite being under fierce attack, he was determined to try," Christensen said. "As he took off from Bellows Field in his P-40 Warhawk, his plane was hit by enemy fire making Lieutenant Whiteman the first member of the United States armed forces to die in aerial combat in World War II."

Christensen insisted this base, as well as Fort Leonard Wood, play a vital role in our nation's defense and must be supported.

"But the most potent weapon in our nation's arsenal is not some billion dollar piece of hardware it's the men and women who serve and protect you and me and make our military the envy of the world," he said.

"We have given quite a few of our so-called allies some of the best military equipment we have. But before you know it, they've crashed the planes, the tanks are broken down and the guns sit rusting. Why? Because they don't have what we have, the world's best soldiers, bar none! And that sir, is where we need to put our money. No more soldiers on food stamps. Yes, technology has its role but people come first and they make the biggest difference."

When asked about his position on gun control Christensen said, "I fully support second amendment rights but we must address the twin issues of gun safety and suicide. Gun locks, training classes, and getting help for depressed people must be pressed vigorously."

Christensen related his experiences with medical missions in Peru, Nicaragua, Jamaica, Panama, South Africa and elsewhere.

"One of the things I've learned by spending so much of my own time and money being a doctor in other parts of world is I've learned this great truth," said Christensen. "America's strength is seen, not in technology or might or even money but in the way it treats people. We care about people."

The candidate was asked to be more specific.

"In other parts of the world," said Christensen, if you are unable to get the help you need for say, your children, the doctors will say, 'Go home and talk to your friends and family. Maybe they will lend what you need. Come back when you have the money or else don't come back again.'"

"But we are a mindful people, a kind and generous people," said Christensen. "Mission trips have shown me the true greatness of our people which happens to be our greatest power. Other nations think only of themselves and in the end, they are small and puny for it."

The candidate and physician returned to his opening theme.

"As I said before," said Christensen, "the health of any area is measured by how its people are doing financially, physically and socially. Something needs to done and after six years in Washington, Rep. Hartzler has accomplished, she has done surprisingly little."

"It's time to put a doctor in the House!" he said.