In what appeared to be another of his jaw-droppers, Donald Trump, who has vowed to kill ObamaCare and replace it with “something terrific,” seemingly embraced the law’s most-detested part: the individual mandate to get coverage or pay a fine.

“Well I like the mandate. OK. So here’s where I’m a little bit different: I don’t want people dying on the streets,” he told a CNN town hall on Feb. 18.

As outraged conservative editorials flooded the Internet the following day, Trump clarified in a tweet that he was referring to the law’s requirement that insurers offer people with pre-existing conditions coverage on the same terms offered to people in robust health.

Yet, even though his clarification was logical enough based on the wording of the question he was asked, it’s safe to say that most of the Republican Party’s influential policymakers were hardly assuaged. In their view — much like the view of the Obama administration — the individual mandate and coverage guarantee are a package deal: You can’t have the latter without the former, or else people will wait until they are sick to get covered. That would leave the insurance market prone to adverse selection, yielding excessive premiums and the risk of a death spiral.

Trump has eschewed wonkery and position papers, making a pitch that aims for the gut, backed by the candidate’s bravado and little depth of thought. Yet in this case, there’s little doubt that Trump is right, that you can have the coverage guarantee without the mandate, and that the solution could be pretty terrific relative to the ObamaCare status quo.

ObamaCare’s Sustainability Problem

It’s clear that the individual insurance market is not functioning well even with an individual mandate. UnitedHealth (UNH) and Aetna (AET), facing financial losses, have both questioned whether the exchanges are sustainable under current rules.

The problem with ObamaCare isn’t that insurers participating on the exchanges are making money hand over fist: many are losing large sums. While more competition is a good thing, Trump’s idea of selling insurance across state lines has little or no potential to change ObamaCare’s dynamics because doing so won’t have a major effect on provider costs or on the population that signs up.

The problem is simple: ObamaCare offers such an unattractive deal to so many millions of people that the exchanges are attracting a pool of customers which is too small, too old and too costly. The logical way to fix the individual insurance market is to start by offering people a deal that makes a lot more sense for their finances.

To understand how this could work, first consider the example of a couple, age 30, in St. Louis, Mo., with pre-tax income of $40,000 (200% of the poverty level) and a child covered by Medicaid. For this couple, the cheapest silver plan under ObamaCare from Cigna (CI) this year costs about $2,200, which may not be financially feasible, even before their $1,000 deductible and maximum cost-sharing of $4,500.

The couple could instead buy the cheapest bronze plan for $1,260, but it carries a $13,700 deductible, which means that a trip to the hospital could be financially devastating. Since that’s just the situation that ObamaCare was supposed to fix, it seems beyond the pale to force a couple in this situation to buy coverage or pay a fine of $1,390 — 3.5% of their income. In other words, it’s likely that all the options for this couple are bad, unless they happen to be desperate for health coverage, perhaps because they’re trying to have a second child.

Once you factor in the threat of a tax penalty for those who go uncovered, the reality is that ObamaCare, which was supposed to be an antidote for inequality, turns out in far too many cases to make inequality worse.

The chasm between silver and bronze deductibles — $1,000 vs. $13,700 — is by design, though clearly a poor one. The architects of ObamaCare decided to attach extra cost-sharing support to silver plans, effectively turning the plans to platinum for low-income beneficiaries. The cost-sharing subsidies work exactly like premium subsidies, paid directly from the government to insurers on a monthly basis, whether or not the policy holder gets medical care.

No Mandate Required

Simply getting rid of the individual mandate could lead millions of people to drop coverage, sending rates through the roof. But what if, for starters, the government offered that cost-sharing support directly to individuals, instead of paying it out to insurers? If this were done while easing ObamaCare’s age-rating restriction (for bronze plans only) that artificially inflates the cost of coverage for young adults — a bronze plan costs $1,000 more for a 30-year-old than for a 60-year-old if each earn $25,000 — the deal offered to this 30-year-old couple would be transformed. They could still get the same level of coverage offered by silver, but if they opted for bronze-level coverage, their policy would cost nothing (vs. $1,260 under ObamaCare today), and they’d have $800 in a Health Savings Account to put toward medical bills (assuming a 4:1 age-rating for bronze). Clearly, no mandate would be needed to get modest-income households to sign up for this kind of coverage.

This approach resembles the Republican idea of giving people a subsidy and, if they choose catastrophic coverage that costs less, letting them keep what is left over. The problem with GOP plans offered to date is that they make comprehensive coverage a whole lot less affordable for people who really need it — dramatically so for older people with modest incomes.

Killing ObamaCare Softly

The potential fallout from taking away coverage that millions are depending on explains why a who’s who of GOP policy wonks has come up with the idea of killing ObamaCare softly — letting people opt into a Republican vision of health reform and leaving the exchanges to gradually fade away. The only problem is that their idea of a gradual phase-out has zero chance of working.

What’s needed is an approach that offers a good deal to the millions who don’t get one under ObamaCare, while continuing to meet the needs of the millions who are happy with their deal. There’s no reason it can’t work and there’s no reason it can’t be done without a heavy-handed mandate.

The keys are giving people much more flexibility over how they use their subsidies; easing age-rating for high-deductible and catastrophic coverage; broadening eligibility to include millions of low-wage, full-time workers that ObamaCare threw under the bus; and creating a level playing field between the middle class who get no help to buy individual market coverage and their peers who get government tax subsidies to buy employer coverage. Lastly, instead of penalizing for not buying coverage, the government could very gradually reduce the level of future health insurance tax subsidies for those who go uninsured, making it a no-win proposition for young invincibles to gamble that they won’t get sick.