OKLAHOMA CITY- As many of our readers may know, 2016 is shaping up to be an interesting election year, thanks to an oversaturated field of hopeful presidential candidates who seem to continually be visiting Oklahoma.

During these stops, hot button discussions have included gun control, Obamacare, immigration reform, and common core.

However, one topic always failed to be mentioned, is agriculture. This may seem like a small or even archaic issue to most, but reality says differently. Agriculture holds an importance in how not only Americans, but the entire world, plans to feed our estimated 9 billion inhabitants by the year 2050.

Additionally, we saw a $1 billion decrease in the United State Department of Agriculture’s 2015 fiscal budget which is used to run 17 agencies and 18 offices nationally, whose vast works include the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Office Tribal Relations respectively.

Fortunately, Oklahomans will have the opportunity to vote on agricultural matters this November, by voting on State Question 777, or “Right-to-Farm.”

Written by Oklahoma’s Attorney General Scott Pruitt, SQ 777 is a constitutional amendment; if passed, would establish a guarantee for Oklahomans to engage in agricultural practices. It would additionally prohibit the Oklahoma Legislature from passing laws “to employ agricultural technology and livestock production and ranching practices” without compelling state interest.

So far it has garnered support from many agricultural organizations in the state. However, several organizations are opposed to the amendment; they claim 777 would actually be “legal immunity” for foreign corporations, pollution, and unethical practices.

No matter where you stand on 777, it’s easy to understand that this historical piece of legislation will define Oklahoma’s future. Additionally, proponents argue that its passage would be beneficial to the future of Oklahomans, and agriculture in Oklahoma alike.

In fact, without this “Right-to-Farm," there is a chance Oklahoma’s economic state will be damaged more than it already has been, as agriculture contributes over $8 billion to our economy every year.

After learning some of these facts, Red Dirt Report has decided to learn why agricultural interests are urging Oklahomans should say “Yes to 777.”

Meet Tom

Tom Buchanan is the president of Oklahoma Farm Bureau. He’s a lifelong resident of the southwestern region of Oklahoma. In addition to farming and ranching, Buchanan is active on the Oklahoma Water Resources Board, which regulates the state’s water supply. He has also been a Farm Bureau member for more than three decades.

“I bought my first policy for a pickup from Farm Bureau around 16. From there I’ve been involved at the county board level for more than 30 years, and have served at the state level for six years,” said Buchanan.

He is currently serving his second term as president for Oklahoma Farm Bureau, after realizing that in order to advocate on behalf of rural Oklahoma, it was important to be involved past the county level.

“Going to Oklahoma City on a statewide basis has given me the opportunity to work for and with the people I truly love and respect deeply. That’s why I’m here; I hope that I’m effective at what I’m doing, and making a positive change.”

And it’s clear to see how Buchanan has made an impact; his positive influence is influenced by his no-nonsense attitude. In the past he has been known to comment that “the regulatory environment is becoming more restrictive on a daily basis. What we’ve seen, even in the Oklahoma Legislature every year, is legislation that is not friendly to agriculture.”

Which is why most Oklahomans who have met OKFB’s president will say he’s been a leader and frontrunner in terms of “agvocacy;” his life story above can only confirm that. Buchanan understands these rural and agricultural communities, and their unique lifestyle. He knows how that lifestyle truly is the heart and soul of a town’s economy.

Why is Oklahoma Farm Bureau saying yes to State Question 777?

When asked why exactly OKFB is in support of such a monumental bill, Buchanan put it simply.

“The number one reason Oklahoma Farm Bureau supports right-to-farm is because in Oklahoma, agriculture is the number two economic industry in the state as a whole, and with what we have seen from the oil and gas industry today, we very well could rival them for number one. So we’re very important to the economy of the state of Oklahoma.”

Buchanan feels AG Scott Pruitt has made the amendment easy to understand for anybody who looks at it, and thinks the language used in 777 is superior to other states who have worked on similar legislation. He noted that this was accomplished with the help of constitutional lawyers, who made sure it complied with Oklahoma’s constitution, and was in the correct constitutional language.

“We want Oklahomans to have the authority, opportunity, and ability to say what Oklahoma agriculture looks like, not only today, but in the future. So we believe that’s the compelling state interest, we believe that’s the reason to have it constitutional, therefore Oklahomans will decided what their state agriculture will look like now, and in the future,” Buchanan noted.

He also feels the state’s agricultural future will see a positive reaction, thanks to the concept of compelling state interest because, “future legislative bodies will have the opportunity to further regulate, if need be, if it’s in the compelling interest and in the best interest in the state of Oklahoma, and Oklahoma citizens.”

How is this a consumer choice issue?

OKFB wants Oklahomans to know that SQ 777 encompasses more than just the future of Oklahoma agriculture or compelling interest.

“Even though people may think the focus is on agriculture and farming and ranching, and the protection that it will receive, the reality is this is a consumer choice issue,” Buchanan said, going on to explain this legislation will provide adequate for producers, consumers, and the state of Oklahoma alike.

“Basically, as long as agriculture is successful and continues to produce an abundant and a very safe food supply, then the consumer is the ultimate winner in this.”

Buchanan also noted that modern agricultural practices have been just as good at producing food as ever before. However, he is also aware that not every individual agrees with these traditional practices, and understands why they have voiced their wishes to see production agriculture done differently.

Luckily, 777 will act as a fair balance for all parties, by giving agriculture the opportunity and ability to provide consumers a chance to voice their opinions. In exchange, it allows consumers who prefer to purchase organic, natural production, or traditional production agriculture, to do so, at a safe and affordable price.

What perks will “Big Ag” receive from SQ 777?

“The first thing I would want Oklahomans to know is that current Oklahoma statute prohibits the ownership of agricultural land by foreign corporations. Additionally, this will not give additional protection or expand the authority of corporations doing business in the state of Oklahoma.”

Current laws on the books show this includes not only foreign businesses, but any American company not domiciled in the state of Oklahoma. Meaning the claims of “Big Ag” pushing family farmers and ranchers off their land are false.

The reality is, more farmers are retiring and selling their operations to others in agriculture.

Others are utilizing advances in technology, which allow a farm or ranch to operate more acreage on a larger scale. Additionally, many farmers and ranchers are creating corporations, which are used for tax purposes. At the end of the day, they’re still family farmers.

However, it’s not exactly a secret that big business is interested in agriculture. In fact, opportunities for farmers and ranchers to enter a contractual agreement are not uncommon.

“I would hope that most people realize that a family farmer today, while many are taking the opportunity to sell directly to the consumer, the vast majority of our products are sold to the consumers through middlemen, through corporations,” said Buchanan.

These middlemen are generally brands we trust and purchase; such as Ocean Spray, Del Monte, Campbell’s, and Tyson.

Does this mean bureaucrats in D.C. will have power to pollute?

Concerns regarding bureaucrats holding all the power to make decisions are also false, and the pollution claims additionally don’t hold true merit, especially when it comes to water. That’s because Buchanan knows water conservation and regulation better than just about anyone else, thanks to a front row seat that allows him to see, understand and watch the water quality in Oklahoma.

“The state of Oklahoma has a track record to show that the rules and regulations we have on the books today at the Department of Environmental Quality, Oklahoma Water Resources Board, and Environmental Protection Agency are successful, and are productive at cleaning up the waters in our great state,” he says.

Buchanan believes that Oklahoma Farm Bureau, along with farmers, care about water quality because clean water is vital for the income of families active in agriculture.

“I will tell you today that the water qualities across the state of Oklahoma are being cleaned up, and are a higher quality than they were yesterday, a year ago, and even 10 years ago.”

Outreach continuing

Currently, information is available online through a website and social media platforms, which have proven to be helpful tools in their campaign, especially as a dual promotion and education process is just taking off.

Farm Bureau has begun these more grassroots-based approaches with less than a year to go until election day, in an effort to educate and inform audiences who may not normally be active in agriculture. And like his organization, Buchanan is doing whatever it takes to get the word out.

An example of his commitment was shown last August, when he travelled 3,200 miles in five days for monthly area meetings alone.

Still, Buchanan is not showing any signs of slowing down, and is more than willing to travel for his fellow Okies. His personal outreach plans are simple- to talk to communities, members of both Rotary Club and Kiwanis Club, churches, and anybody else who is willing to listen.

“I would personally offer to be anywhere at any time that my calendar would allow across Oklahoma to have a discussion with any individual, whether they’re rural folks, ag folks, energy people, urban folks that work downtown in Tulsa or Oklahoma City, whatever that may be, I welcome the opportunity and think that it would be a great thing, and the right thing, to do in the future to educate themselves on the issue and make the correct decision to protect Oklahoma agriculture, which ends up allowing the consumers who follow us, the opportunity to continue to have viable, affordable, abundant foods to feed their families.”

His response when Red Dirt Report asked just how dedicated he was to meeting every person he could?

“I’m willing to talk to anyone, just so long as my schedule allows it.”

More information can be found here.

You can also follow OKFB on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and YouTube.