Growth in employers' health costs slows; workers' share rises

As businesses look for ways to cut costs, burden shifts to employees

But their employees shouldered a much larger portion of their health care costs, a trend that's expected to continue in the years ahead as companies seek ways to rein in ever-rising expenses related to offering benefits.

Health insurance costs for large employers in Chicago rose 3 percent in 2013, the lowest increase in at least 11 years, according to data released Thursday by benefits consultant Aon Hewitt.

Employees' share of health care expenses, which includes contributions to pay for premiums and out-of-pocket costs, including copayments and coinsurance, jumped 9 percent in 2013 to $5,135, up from $4,715 last year.

In 2014, employee costs are expected to rise another 9 percent to $5,613.

"I think what's happening is that employers say they can only afford so much of an increase per year, and that's what they build into their budgets," said Tim Nimmer, the chief health care actuary at Aon Hewitt. "We're finding that employees continue to bear a larger portion of the total cost; they're the ones picking up the difference."

Seeking to protect their bottom lines, companies have been shifting more of the burden to workers over the last decade, a period of spiraling costs in the nation's health care system. For workers, that means higher premiums, deductibles or other cost-sharing in the form of copayments or coinsurance.

Workers' share of the overall health care premium now stands at 22 percent, up from 18.6 percent 10 years ago, according to Aon Hewitt research.

Within the past year alone, nearly half of employers have raised deductibles and other out-of-pocket responsibilities for employees. Another 43 percent are considering doing so in the next three to five years.

"The trend the last few years has been for employers to raise deductibles, and I think that trend will continue," said Sarah Millar, a Chicago-based health care attorney at Drinker Biddle & Reath. "Many employers are finding that their plans provide richer benefits than the minimum required under (the Affordable Care Act), and as a result, they are beginning to offer less rich benefits."

While new fees and taxes levied on employers and insurance companies starting next year as part of the new federal law are among the drivers for projected health care increases, the law also has a provision that caps the amount workers pay each year for coverage as a percentage of their income.

Starting in January, employers that offer insurance face fines if they don't contribute enough to make their least-expensive plan "affordable" to workers, meaning health insurance premiums cannot cost more than 9.5 percent of an employee's annual income.

As a result, many large employers have tinkered with plan designs and employee contributions to ensure most of them fall below that line, Nimmer said.

But that does little to stem the rising costs of overall coverage.

The cost of providing coverage per employee this year in Chicago was $10,753, up from $10,434 in 2012 and $9,871 in 2011, Lincolnshire-based Aon Hewitt found in its latest analysis, which compares cost and benefit data for 516 large U.S. employers that account for $61.2 billion in annual health care spending.