WASHINGTON, Feb. 2, 2016 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), better known as Obamacare and the topic of the latest from the National Council on Disability (NCD), remains one of the most sweeping and significant pieces of domestic legislation enacted in generations.

Released today, "Monitoring and Enforcing the Affordable Care Act (ACA) for People with Disabilities" is the final report in a three-part series on ACA that NCD —an independent federal agency— has released in the last month, each considering a different aspect of ACA's implementation, impact, or ongoing enforcement. The first report in the series was released January 19, and the second on January 26. All reports are available on the NCD website.

In the third and final installment in the series, the "Monitoring and Enforcing" report, NCD examines key legal safeguards in ACA implementation regulations that can help people with disabilities secure essential care and supports. The report also outlines legal duties; identifies the parties responsible for fulfilling those duties; and in some instances, explores potential avenues for redress where applicable.

"By identifying issues for monitoring by the disability community nationally and in individual states, our goal is to ensure that Americans with disabilities fully share in ACA's promised benefits while avoiding potential risks ACA poses, "said Clyde Terry, NCD Chair. "We saw a need to provide people with disabilities, their families, and advocates with a road map to identify areas or issues that warrant additional attention as ACA implementation goes forward."

NCD appreciates the assistance of the Urban Institute's Health Policy Center, who worked collaboratively with NCD in preparing this series of reports.

"Monitoring and Enforcing the Affordable Care Act for People with Disabilities" and the other reports in the ACA series are all available on NCD's website. Full report available at: http://www.ncd.gov/publications/2016/monitoring-and-enforcing-affordable-care-act-people-disabilities

About the National Council on Disability (NCD): First established as an advisory body within the Department of Education in 1978, NCD became an independent federal agency in 1984. In 1986, NCD recommended enactment of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and drafted the first version of the bill which was introduced in the House and Senate in 1988. Since enactment of the ADA in 1990, NCD has continued to play a leading role in crafting disability policy, and advising the President, Congress and other federal agencies on disability policies, programs, and practices.

A photo accompanying this release is available at: http://www.globenewswire.com/newsroom/prs/?pkgid=38739

Lawrence Carter-Long Public Affairs Specialist National Council on Disability Phone: 202-272-2112 Email: