Phil Bradley was a three-sport athlete at Macomb High in the mid-1970s and a standout in both football and baseball at the University of Missouri through the early 1980s. He was drafted by baseball's Seattle Mariners in the third round of the '81 amateur draft and went on to play eight Major League seasons for four teams. The 54-year old resides in Columbia, Mo., where he works as a special assistant for the MLB Players Association, and as a volunteer softball assistant for the U of M.

AT MACOMB: A two-year starting quarterback under coach Charlie Sides for teams that went a combined 13-7 in '75 and '76 and qualified for the playoffs both seasons. Bradley established school records with 323 yards passing in a game, 1,789 yards passing in a season (1976) and 3,052 career passing yards.

He was a pitcher/shortstop on Bombers baseball teams that went a combined 46-9 and won Class A regional titles in '76 and '77 under coach Wayne Steward. Bradley's .550 batting average as a junior and 43 steals as a senior were school records.

"I also played basketball, but for me that was just something to do between baseball and football."

AT MIZZOU: Bradley went to Missouri primarily as a football recruit, and flourished. He quarterbacked the Tigers from '78 through '80 and was the Big Eight Conference's Offensive Player of the Year in all three seasons. His career 6,459 yards of total offense was a Big Eight record.

A three-year letter winning outfielder in baseball, he batted .457 as a senior and played for Missouri teams that qualified for the NCAA tournament his junior and senior seasons.

"My best sport coming out of high school was baseball," he said. "That all got flipped around while I was at Missouri, and after that it was baseball again."

IN THE PROS: An option QB in college, Bradley wasn't an NFL prospect and wasn't drafted.

"If I wanted to play quarterback I could have gone to the Canadian Football League," he said.

Bradley was drafted as a baseball outfielder by Seattle in June of '81, and made his MLB debut on Sept. 2, 1983. Primary a left fielder, he batted .300 and was an American League All-Star in '85, and in just over four seasons with the Mariners had 107 stolen bases. Via trades he played for the Phillies in '88, the Orioles in '89 and '90, and for the White Sox later in '90.

In eight MLB seasons he had a career batting average of .286 with 78 home runs and 376 RBIs.

STILL NOT RETIRED: Much like in high school and college, Bradley today is involved in two sports.

As a special assistant for the MLB's Players Association he serves the Cubs, Cardinals, Brewers, Pirates, Reds, Nationals, Braves, Marlins and Rays.

"I'm basically a union rep," he said. "I visit the teams every few weeks during the season to keep in touch with the players and see what's going on."

Bradley also is a part-time volunteer assistant softball coach for Missouri, under head coach Ehren Earleywine.

THESE DAYS: Phil and wife Ramona live in Columbia and have been married 32 years. They have grown children Megan, living in St. Petersburg, Fla., and son Curt, a high school football head coach in Bradenton, Fla.

Phil's parents, Pearle, and William, a retired professor at Western Illinois, continue to reside in Macomb.

Click here to check out Phil Bradley's top three MLB memories on the Preps Plus blog at www.pjstar.com.

— Lonnie Schwindenhammer (@Schwinlo)

WHERE ARE THEY NOW is published each Monday. Recommend a subject via email to sports@pjstar.com. Include "WATN" in the subject line.