European Pressphoto Agency U.S. Vice President Joe Biden shakes hands with South Korean President Park Geun-hye in Seoul on Dec. 6.

During his recent Asia tour, U.S. Vice President Joe Biden pleaded with the leaders of South Korea and Japan to get along with each other so the three allies can work together at a time of rising regional tensions. He even made sure the message had sunk in with a follow-up phone call to Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on Thursday.

The response in Seoul has been less than enthusiastic.“Frankly speaking, there seems to be no easy way out of the present situation,” a senior South Korean government official said in a blunt speech Tuesday to a group of American academics visiting Seoul — four days after Mr. Biden had visited the city.

Relations between the two countries are “at an all-time low” since the two countries normalized diplomatic ties in 1965, said the official, according to the text of his prepared remarks at the private event, shown to The Wall Street Journal on condition that he not be identified.

The official blamed the predicament in part on Mr. Abe’s “assertive policy of historical revisionism,” in the remarks delivered to explain the thinking behind South Korean President Park Geun-hye’s stand-offish stance toward Japan. As the two neighbors have wrangled over the interpretation of Japan’s wartime aggression and an island dispute, their leaders haven’t met bilaterally for two years.

To break the impasse, the South Korean official urged the U.S. to play intermediary, noting that the disputes are deeply rooted in the incomplete settlement of various issues after World War II.

“It is indeed time for the U.S. to play a more active role in addressing the disputes in the region,” he said. “In my observation, the U.S. is the only country that Japan would ever listen to.”

It is a role that Mr. Biden has suggested that Washington would rather avoid. While the U.S. seems eager to urge Tokyo and Seoul to improve ties, the vice president has also expressed reluctance to try and broker some kind of compromise over historical tensions.

“We welcome mutually acceptable solutions to historical and territorial disputes and support dialogue and diplomacy that can lead to such solutions,” Mr. Biden said in a written interview with South Korea’s Chosun Ilbo newspaper published Dec. 5. “But let me be clear: The United States does not intend to act as a mediator,” he added.

Masaru Sato, a Japanese foreign ministry spokesman, said he was not in a position to comment on the South Korean official’s speech, as the Japanese government wasn’t aware of its contents. “What we can say is Japan will continue to work on our relationship with South Korea based on a broad perspective.”

Much of Mr. Biden’s visit to China, Japan and South Korea was focused on trying to lower tensions raised by Beijing’s recent announcement of a new air-defense identification zone that included expansive areas of overlap with existing Japanese and South Korean zones. The vice president urged Ms. Park to reconsider her cold shoulder against Mr. Abe, while calling on Mr. Abe to make greater efforts to reach out.

Mr. Biden made a follow-up call to Mr. Abe Thursday, and reinforced “the importance of trilateral security cooperation among the United States, Japan, and the Republic of Korea” and pledged continued support for improved relations between Tokyo and Seoul, according to a White House press release.

In the Tuesday speech, the South Korean official mounted a scathing attack on Mr. Abe as he alleged that Japan has become assertive on history issues under the prime minister and that it appears to be “attempting a diplomatic isolation of Korea in this region and behind.”

“Japan’s historical perception is not just a bilateral issue between Korea and Japan or Japan and China,” the aide said. “It is a common issue which threatens the peace and stability of the region.”

Such comments from Seoul have spawned resentment in Tokyo. “The current government in South Korea has completely shifted its focus from Japan-Korea relations to China-Korea relations,” said Nobutaka Machimura, a former foreign minister and veteran lawmaker of Mr. Abe’s conservative party, who has long been known for his moderate foreign policy views. “It puzzles us why they have to get so completely absorbed in China. In a situation like this, it is very difficult to improve Japan-Korea ties,” he added in an interview Friday.

Asked about Mr. Biden’s call for closer ties, Mr. Machimura said there wasn’t anything Japan could do. “It’s just too bad, frankly,” he said.

Follow Yuka Hayashi on Twitter @TokyoWoods