Business provides non-medical home care to seniors

Started by the founder of Merry Maids, Touching Hearts at Home is bringing the maid-for-hire model to home care, providing non-medical services to seniors and the disabled.

Touching Hearts franchise owners screen and hire care givers, who are then hired by clients for help with tasks such as grocery shopping and transport to doctor appointments. In Colorado, the company has four independently owned offices along the Front Range.

We sat down with 2010 University of Colorado grad Chris Greene, owner of a Touching Hearts franchise that serves Boulder, Weld, Larimer and Adams counties, to learn more about the growing business.

You're 27, and you've been at this for a few years. What motivated you to work in senior care at such a young age?

My grandfather had Alzheimer's. When he was sick, everyone pitched in, but my aunt was doing the majority of the care giving, and it was hard on her.

Then, I got some literature in the mail (about Touching Hearts) and had the experience with my grandfather in the back of my mind, of how hard it was on the family, and that's where I saw the greatest need.

Touching Hearts is there to relieve that family pressure.

How is the business going?

We're booming like crazy. We've already doubled our revenue figures for 2014 at this point, so we are on pace to double last year's revenue.

With the surge in the amount of services needed, care giver shortages are going to be a problem. It is a problem now.

Advertisement

So you're hiring?

We're always hiring.

We have 15 care givers in Boulder and Broomfield counties, and we have 15 clients in those areas as well, so right now we're 1-to-1.

We can only grow as fast as we get care givers.

Who is your typical care giver and what sort of services do they provide?

Some of them are empty nesters. A lot are aspiring nurses. We just look for good people, people that love giving back.

We provide non-medical home care, so light housekeeping, cooking, driving, running errands. We can be there once a month or 24/7 — whatever the client needs.

What's the most rewarding part of your job?

Filling an incredible need.

With the surge in the amount of services needed, care giver shortages are going to be a problem. It is a problem.

When it comes to Alzheimer's, millions of Americans have it or will get it. My family's story is not one of a kind. And I think that awareness it still not there of just how great a need we have for care givers.

Getting in this business was a great decision. I really like it.

You can look at the morbid side of death and dying, but the things we hear back from families — it's those days you kind of live for.

Shay Castle: 303-473-1626, castles@dailycamera.com, @shayshinecastle