Republican front-runner Donald Trump surprised many when he endorsed a proposal that has been on President Barack Obama's wish list for years: allowing government-run Medicare to set drug prices to reduce the growth in healthcare costs.

"When it comes time to negotiate the cost of drugs, we are going to negotiate like crazy," Trump said at a campaign event in New Hampshire earlier this month.

[READ: Expensive Drugs a Drag on Consumers and Government]

This straightforward-sounding proposal has also been endorsed by Democratic candidates Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders.

A Kaiser Family Foundation poll shows that 93 percent of Democrats and 74 percent of Republicans support the idea. But like a lot of promises candidates make during campaigns, this one will be difficult to keep. For one, it would require an act of Congress. The pharmaceutical industry, which has a strong lobbying presence, opposes the idea of government-set prices.

Trump brought attention to campaign donations and lobbying during the New Hampshire event. "They get the politicians, and every single one of them is getting money from them," he said of the drug companies. Sanders echoed the sentiment during one of the Democratic debates, asking voters to consider why the price of medication could double, and the government could do nothing to stop it. "There is a reason why these people are putting huge amounts of money into our political system," he said.

In 2014, Medicare spent $143 billion on drugs, and total sales for the pharmaceutical industry surpassed $317 billion. Though prescription drugs have historically made up only 10 percent of federal health care spending, the growth in prescription costs in 2014 was more than double that of other health care sectors – including doctors and hospitals.

Recent headlines are also making voters take notice, even if they're highlighting a somewhat separate issue. Last May, a small company called Turing Pharmaceuticals announced plans to hike the price of Daraprim – a drug developed six decades ago that fights parasitic infection mostly in HIV patients – by 5,000 percent. The company, and its now infamous former CEO Martin Shkreli, faced public outcry and a congressional investigation.

"It may be mean and nasty and immoral – but it's legal," says Len Nichols, director of the Center for Health Policy Research and Ethics and professor of health policy at George Mason University.

[RELATED: Martin Shkreli Controversy Reflects Health Care's Other Problems]

Nichols notes that policies for new drugs are a big part of the problem.

One reason drug prices can be high is that pharmaceutical companies have several years of patent exclusivity to medicines before other companies are allowed to develop generics, which use the same drug recipe but are marketed at a cheaper price. This is meant to incentivize drug companies to invest in developing new medicines, but it also limits negotiators' power.

"In the real world, saying no is a tactic that leads to price negotiations," says John Rother, president of the National Coalition on Health Care, which runs a project called the Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing. "You have to have the ability to say no and mean it to have power." That power is greatly reduced without competition.

But even if the government could negotiate drug prices, officials would likely focus only on the most expensive medications covered by Medicare rather than all or any new drug that hits the market, Rother says.

Medicare is required to cover medications that help people who have had an organ transplant or suffer from depression, schizophrenia and epilepsy, for example. Drugs to fight viruses like HIV and those that fight tumor growth also fall under these so-called "protected classes," which were lobbied for by patient advocates. While the requirement protects those who need these medicines, it also limits the government's bargaining power because there's no option to refuse coverage for certain medications.

In 2014, the Obama administration suggested removing some categories of drugs to save Medicare $1.3 billion from 2015 to 2019, but protesters said the proposal would harm patients, and the administration quickly backed off.

The Department of Health and Human Services held a summit in November on health care prices and publicly listed the drugs Medicare spends the most money on, while Congress held a hearing earlier this month with drug company CEOs and is considering a set of proposals that would help speed the development of new drugs.

[MORE: America's Most Expensive Medicare Presciption Drugs]

Presidential candidates, meanwhile, are betting on Medicare. If the government negotiates lower prices, that could lower costs for people with private insurance. "When Medicare sets a price for a medical service, the private industry typically follows," explains Dominick Esposito, deputy director of the Center on Health Care Effectiveness at Mathematica Policy Research. "A large insurer would likely say it wants the same price Medicare receives."

Under the 2003 law that established the prescription drug benefit portion of Medicare, called Part D, the government is banned from directly negotiating prices with industry. Instead, private health insurance companies negotiate prices. The drug program, which beneficiaries can choose to add on to traditional Medicare, covers 39 million seniors and younger people with disabilities.

The drug program was passed by the Republican-controlled Congress at the time, and signed into law by President George W. Bush. Drug companies had lobbied to include the ban and some lawmakers later unsuccessfully tried to lift it.

It's unclear that there would be enough political will in Congress to lift the ban after the election. According to the Center for Responsive Politics, the trade group Pharmaceutical and Research Manufacturers of America, or PhRMA, spent more than $18 million lobbying Congress in 2015, and bills that have been introduced to allow Medicare to negotiate drug prices – including one sponsored by Sanders in September – have received little traction. Allowing Medicare negotiation could happen, experts say, but would not be a solution on its own.

Because the U.S. doesn't have a single-payer system it can't be compared with governments in other countries that cover all citizens and negotiate drug prices. The American health care system is a patchwork of private and public entities; heavily regulated yet subject to market pricing.

The drug industry says Medicare's partnership with private insurance allows the system to operate as it should with the use of free-market principles that encourage competition – resulting in spending that is $346 billion beneath budget projections. "What's commonly missed in the debate is that there is already substantial negotiation," says Ally Funk, a spokeswoman for PhRMA.

Without changes to other parts of the system, allowing the federal government to negotiate prices may not result in significant savings, studies show. The Congressional Budget Office has highlighted the restrictions several times, concluding that allowing Medicare to negotiate drug prices would have a "negligible effect" on federal spending. But the agency has also found that if drug companies give rebates to states and the federal government for 9 million beneficiaries who are eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid, that could save $103 billion over a decade, and both Clinton and Sanders support this move.

[PHOTOS: The Big Picture – February 2016]

But they and other politicians support investing in targeted medical research, like finding cures for cancer and Alzheimer's disease.

The drug industry says the pressure on prices conflicts with realizing these goals. "We want to be part of that, we want to continue finding cures and treatments faster," Funk says. "We can't have policies and regulatory barriers that actually prevent us from doing that."

Most drugs under development never make it to market, PhRMA points out, and therefore in setting prices companies take into account the costs associated with failed attempts and future attempts at potentially lifesaving treatments.

But Nichols says this argument is difficult to digest because drug companies often spend more on marketing than they do on research and development. "I'm not sure you're going to get a lot of sympathy out there," he says.

In some other countries, such as those in the European Union, drug companies aren't allowed to advertise directly to consumers. Clinton has proposed removing tax breaks that drug companies get when they do so in the U.S.

What happened under the current administration illustrates some of the difficulties the next president would face. Obama vowed to let Medicare negotiate cheaper drug prices when he was running for the Oval Office in 2008. After being sworn in, he allowed pharmaceutical companies a seat at the table to finalize the details of his health care reform bill, the Affordable Care Act.