The Avery House, at 328 W. Mountain Ave., is one of the most iconic homes in Fort Collins. It is on the National Register of Historic Places, and is operated by the Poudre Landmarks Foundation open to the public on a regular basis. ( Kenneth Jessen / For the Reporter-Herald )

Franklin Avery hailed from New York State and as part of the Union Colony, came to Greeley.

His group was led by Nathan Meeker and for two years, Avery worked as the surveyor establishing the Greeley street system.

Fort Collins was established in 1864 after a June flood destroyed Camp Collins in LaPorte. It functioned as a military fort, and in 1872, an agricultural colony was established next to the fort.

The following year, a town government was formed. This was the perfect opportunity for Avery to move to the new town. He was hired to plat the town and to give street names that survive to this day.

Avery also surveyed irrigation canals in the Fort Collins area and was involved in building the Avery Block at Mountain and Linden in Old Town.

Avery purchased an entire block on Mountain Avenue not far downtown Fort Collins.

From 1879 to 1880, Avery built a stone cottage on the southwest corner of his property. It was modest in its proportions with an entry, dining room, stairway and two bedrooms. Soon a kitchen was added along with a front parlor, a couple of more bedrooms and the iconic curving veranda. A rear parlor was added in 1893 along with the two story Queen Anne style turret and the south bedroom.

Even with detailed investigations, the dates on some of the additions remain a mystery.

The Avery family lived on the property until 1962 when it was sold as rental property. To preserve this historic home, it was purchased by the city of Fort Collins in 1974.

Advertisement

A one cent sales tax was approved for capital improvements that included the Avery House. The Poudre Landmarks Foundation took over its interior restoration and is charged with keeping it open to the public.

The interior restoration began with the formation of a committee to solicit volunteer involvement.

The work started with research into what might have been in the home during the late 19th century. Hundreds of small details were documented in the process.

Structural repairs were also necessary including heating and electrical wiring. After the repairs, the house was furnished according to how it might have looked when Franklin Avery and his family lived in the home.

It is like stepping into the past as though Avery had just stepped out for a Sunday drive.

The house, gazebo, fountain and carriage house are part of the Avery House Historic District listed in the National Register of Historic Places. The address is 328 W. Mountain Ave., and the telephone number is 221-0533.

Docents are available during open house events.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.