In January, David Pable received some unsettling news from the pharmacy that handles his mail-order prescriptions: The out-of-pocket cost for a month’s supply of Prezista, one of his HIV medications, was now $395.

Previously, he had been charged a flat monthly co-pay of $24.

And that wasn’t the only worrying news for Pable, 44, a former restaurant manager from South Carolina, who is on long-term disability and receives his medications through a plan from UnitedHealthcare, obtained under Medicare Part D. He also faced a sharp price spike for another of the drugs he takes, Viread, from $42 to $295, as well as smaller increases for two other drugs.

“I was shocked,” he said. “That’s a significant amount of money for anyone to come up with.”

Pable was able to get his medications covered by the AIDS Drug Assistance Program, a federally funded but state-administered program that had already been covering his smaller co-pays. When his pharmacy benefits changed in January, he was able to arrange expanded assistance for the increased expenses.

But others less integrated into the HIV community might have more difficulty accessing such resources and be forced instead to pay for other necessities, Pable said.

“Say somebody had $56 co-pays and then all of a sudden it went up to $1,256,” he said. “What are you going to choose, paying for medicine or your place to live? My concern is that someone wouldn’t know to ask for help, wouldn’t know that there are assistance programs out there.”

According to a UnitedHealthcare spokeswoman, Pable was sent a letter in September informing him of changes to his Medicare Part D drug benefits plan. Pable said he does not recall receiving or reading such a letter.

Since the start of this year, many people with HIV have experienced steep increases in the costs of their antiretroviral medications. This isn’t just price-gouging, some public health advocates say — arguing it’s also a blatant attempt to discriminate against patients who need expensive treatments. The goal, according to these advocates, is to force people with HIV to choose other health plans or force their doctors to prescribe less expensive, and perhaps less effective, medications.

Until this year and the full implementation of the Affordable Care Act — which required the creation of online health insurance exchanges in every state — insurance companies could reject anyone with HIV, or other pre-existing medical conditions, who was applying for an individual plan. That’s no longer legal, but public health advocates say that hasn’t stopped companies from trying to weed out applicants who might consume more health care resources.

“It’s naïve to think that the insurance industry, having spent tens of billions of dollars to keep unhealthy people off their plans, is going to stop trying to figure out ways to maximize the number of healthy people,” said Robert Greenwald, a professor at Harvard Law School and a member of the HIV Health Care Access Working Group, a coalition of organizations involved in HIV policy issues.

Soaring pharmaceutical costs are not limited to HIV medications — many people with cancer, hepatitis C, and other complex and expensive illnesses have been facing similar increases. But the problem can be acute for people with HIV, who must take daily antiretrovirals to prevent the virus from replicating. If patients can’t pay for medications and therefore miss even a few doses, the potential consequences are dire: increased drug resistance, a greater risk of transmitting the virus to others, and other serious and sometimes fatal medical complications.