This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... I believe he knew ... I believe in the power of millions of courageous conservative ... riding on ... to reignite the promise of America ... and that is why ... today ... I am announcing that I'm running for president of unite the the ... in with their speed Senator Ted Cruz the Cruz of Texas becomes the first official candidate for president in twenty sixteen ... welcome to your Monday lunch break I'm Lee Hawkins in for Tanya Rivero ... joining me now with analysis of Senator Cruz's speeches WS J politics reporter Janet Hook ... Jana welcome to you ... high ... what are your first impressions of Senator Cruz's speech ... well I was a classic text Christie check on ... long ... Island Quinn's filled with rhetorical flourishes ... he wasn't that a champ when he was in college and it shows okay so I was grateful and see no doubts ... aam but he and he knows his audience his audience was conservative and he really pitched himself to that ... the religious conservative students and faculty of Liberty University which is where he was speaking ... the senator made an appeal to the far right including strong pitches and getting rid of the IRS and the affordable health care ... imagine in twenty seventeen ... a new president ... signing legislation appealing to every word of Obama the the the imagine abolishing ... the IRS the the ... does the far right even have enough numbers to elect a president ... well that's a good question and it's the question facing I take cruises candidacy ... aam on the far right has enough votes to competing in the Republican primary ... and and the main thing that Chris has to do was to figure out a way to ... hold onto ... his conservative base while reaching be on that and on that speech was not the speech that did it ... this was the place where he was just trying to kiss ... Kinder consolidates his face ... and fire up the people who are its most dedicated supporters ... he was born in Canada but he says he's eligible to be president as a natural born citizen could this be a problem ... I think there are people who think it's a travel but legal legally it's not I mean he is an American citizen ... okay so it's been a real contender is expected to be more centrist to win what's the strategy here ... for candidates who appear ... to the extremes of either parties ... what a good thing going for cruises even if he only app that tracks a fraction of the Republican primary there are so many people thinking about running for ... president among the Republicans that being the primary field will be splitting many many ways ... on a new thing is that he is making the case that actually a centrist candidate is is not the party's week at the strongest week ago he looks to ... candidates like John McCain and Mitt Romney and bring back in the nineties Bob Dole ... police said at Appeals had more of a centrist appeal rather than a conservative appeal ... and they all lost ... Janet who would you expect to see joined Senator Cruz next in announcing their candidacy ... well one person we know it's just about to step up to Senator Rand Paul the Kentucky senator ... he's expected to make his announcement has ... as an official candidate April seventh ... as just a few weeks away ... aam it's also thought that Senator Marco Rubio of Florida might be announcing in the month of April ... I aam and there's lots of people waiting in the wings and down some of the mill will take longer than others I think better known candidates like Jeb Bush ... Chris Christie feel little bit less pressure to announce early ... then Senator Chris was still in the business of getting