His message, to Obamacare’s supporters and critics: Enough with the repeal votes. Obama embraces Obamacare

President Barack Obama left no doubt Tuesday night what his Obamacare sales technique will be: loud voice, lots of confidence and no apologies.

Don’t dwell on the scratches on the hood. Just tell the customer how good it will feel to rev the engine and drive the car off the lot.

Story Continued Below

Obamacare didn’t show up in the State of the Union address until over halfway through, and it encompassed all of nine paragraphs in an hour-plus stemwinder. But this was very much a hard sell by the president for Americans to sign up for his signature health care law, the biggest sales pitch Obama has made in a State of the Union address since the law passed. His pitch was a lengthy tour of all the success stories he could find: the Arizona woman with a health condition who got health coverage just in time, the Kentucky governor who built one of the best working enrollment websites in the country and the millions of Americans who have already signed up for coverage.

( Also on POLITICO: Full health care policy coverage)

His message to Obamacare’s supporters and critics: Enough with the repeal votes. Time to sign up — especially the young adults.

“That’s why, tonight, I ask every American who knows someone without health insurance to help them get covered by March 31st,” Obama said. “Moms, get on your kids to sign up. Kids, call your mom and walk her through the application. It will give her some peace of mind — plus, she’ll appreciate hearing from you.”

The one part Obama didn’t mention: that rocky rollout everyone heard so much about.

In Obama’s world on Tuesday night, there was no such thing as a broken federal website or canceled health insurance policies. It wasn’t even a call to sign up now that things are working better. It was as if Obamacare has been working well all along.

In fact, in Obama’s world, the only repairs that were needed were for the “broken health care system” that Obamacare was supposed to replace.

“In case you haven’t heard, we’re in the process of fixing that,” Obama said — as House Speaker John Boehner shot him a skeptical look.

( Full coverage of the 2014 State of the Union)

Obama declared that more than 9 million Americans have signed up for private health insurance or Medicaid coverage — a statement that was technically true but glossed over the uncertainty about whether all of those people really gained new health coverage because of the law.

That statement, however, made it easier for Obama to make his case against more votes to wipe the law off the books — as did his declaration to the country that, because of the law, “no American can ever again be dropped or denied coverage for a preexisting condition like asthma, back pain or cancer” and that “no woman can ever be charged more just because she’s a woman.”

Obama used his time to shine a powerful spotlight on Amanda Shelley, one of first lady Michelle Obama’s guests. Shelley is a physician assistant from Arizona with a pre-existing condition who got health insurance on Jan. 1 — and then had emergency abdominal surgery a few days later.

It was a success story that contained just about all the elements he needed: a sick person who was locked out of the health insurance system, got her coverage and then suddenly had a medical emergency that could have been financially devastating without insurance.

“That’s what health insurance reform is all about — the peace of mind that if misfortune strikes, you don’t have to lose everything,” Obama said.

“Now I don’t expect to convince my Republican friends on the merits of this law. But I know that the American people aren’t interested in refighting old battles,” Obama said. “So again, if you have specific plans to cut costs, cover more people, and increase choice — tell America what you’d do differently. Let’s see if the numbers add up.”

“But let’s not have another forty-something votes to repeal a law that’s already helping millions of Americans like Amanda. The first forty were plenty,” he said. “We all owe it to the American people to say what we’re for, not just what we’re against.”