James Laughlin (left) relaxes with poet Ezra Pound circa 1934 in Rapallo, Italy. Credit: New Directions Publishing Corp.

SHARE Literchoor Is My Beat: A Life of James Laughlin, Publisher of New Directions. By Ian S. MacNiven. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 592 pages. $37.50.

By of the

James Laughlin lobbied and schemed to keep Ezra Pound from being put to death for treason, saw the opening night of Tennessee Williams' "The Glass Menagerie," and drank bourbon with Thomas Merton in Kentucky roadside bars — then helped the Trappist climb over the wall and back into the monastery after curfew.

Laughlin also went to the morgue to identify the body of Dylan Thomas.

In between such adventures, Laughlin (1914-'97), founder and first publisher of New Directions, found time to publish a remarkable line of books by those men and dozens of other writers, including William Carlos Williams. New Directions specialized in — and continues to publish — poetry, criticism, works in translation and books too experimental or difficult for big publishers to risk putting out.

"Literchoor Is My Beat" is something of an authorized biography — Laughlin's literary executors selected Ian S. MacNiven, author of a Lawrence Durrell biography, to write it. Nonetheless, MacNiven delivers a smart, fair-minded, thoughtful and entertaining book about this striking man of letters.

I am not sure that I agree with MacNiven's introductory assessment that Laughlin, "more than any other man of the twentieth century, directed the course of American writing...." I still think I'd rank Scribner editor Maxwell Perkins higher (for details, see A. Scott Berg's biography, "Max Perkins: Editor of Genius). But MacNiven makes a compelling case for Laughlin's importance and the quality of his legacy.

Born into a wealthy Pittsburgh steel family, Laughlin grew up tall and handsome. He developed a passion for languages and literature, writing poetry throughout his life. During a trip abroad, the young McLaughlin served as an unofficial intern for Gertrude Stein, who told him that the test for good books is that "they must make the bell ring," MacNiven reports.

"This intuitive, inner bell note became J's standard for judgment, rather than a book's adherence to any particular philosophy, style, mode, or ism."

Laughlin also met Ezra Pound and fell under his spell, even affecting for a time Pound's obnoxious fake hillbilly patois — i.e., "Literchoor."

While still a Harvard student, Laughlin published the first of the New Directions in Prose and Poetry anthologies that would grow into his publishing house. Laughlin was not famous for offering writers big advances or spending lavishly on them.

"From the author's perspective, there was an important trade-off to accepting a low advance from New Directions: a virtual guarantee that titles would be kept in print until the public caught on to them, and almost from the first firm, had a reputation that drew buyers and bookstores toward the titles on the backlist," MacNiven writes.

As a young man, Laughlin developed a passion for Alpine skiing that continued throughout his life. He and a partner acquired Alta, a small ski resort in Utah. A veteran of skiing in Europe, Laughlin emphasized conservation and maintaining a rustic but comfortable environment for skiers, in contrast to the luxury ski resorts growing elsewhere. Circa 1945, MacNiven writes, Laughlin faced the decision of whether Alta or New Directions would be his primary interest. He chose publishing, with skiing becoming a valued and sometimes profitable hobby.

MacNiven does not shy away from Laughlin's shaky marriages and womanizing, or the bipolar disorder the publisher was diagnosed with later in life. Laughlin's father also suffered from mental illness; his son Robert committed suicide. Laughlin wrote about discovering his body in the poem "Experience of Blood."

MacNiven quotes Laughlin's poetry throughout the book. These excerpts provide biographical context, but with a few exceptions don't entice me to dig into the publisher's poetry. But readers can judge for themselves: In conjunction with this biography, New Directions has published "The Collected Poems of James Laughlin."

12 KEY NEW DIRECTIONS BOOKS

"In Dreams Begin Responsibilities" (1938), Delmore Schwartz

"The Real Life of Sebastian Knight" (1941), Vladimir Nabokov

"Paterson, Book I" (1946), William Carlos Williams

"A Streetcar Named Desire" (1947), Tennessee Williams

"The Pisan Cantos" (1948), Ezra Pound

"Seeds of Contemplation" (1948), Thomas Merton

"A Coney Island of the Mind" (1958), Lawrence Ferlinghetti

"Exercises in Style" (1958), Raymond Queneau

"Labyrinths" (1962), Jorge Luis Borges

"Turtle Island" (1974), Gary Snyder

"The Rings of Saturn" (1999), W.G. Sebald

"By Night in Chile" (2003), Roberto Bolaño