EUGENE — Liz Brenner has played for a national championship in volleyball, participated in the Women’s College World Series with the Ducks’ softball team and celebrated Oregon’s first NCAA women’s track and field title in three decades.

Now the multisport star wants to experience March Madness.

Brenner is focused solely on basketball this season. The versatile 6-foot-1 senior forward from Portland’s Jesuit High School has been an influential role player for the 2015-16 Ducks, who are 7-0 entering this afternoon’s game against Portland.

“I don’t want to jinx us,” Brenner said when asked if this group reminded her of any of the championship-caliber teams she has played on at Oregon.

“But the year we went to the national championship for volleyball, we were undefeated through preseason also.

“It’s just a great way to start.”

Brenner is coming off the bench for second-year coach Kelly Graves, averaging 5.7 points and 2.4 rebounds per game in a deeper rotation. Her leadership in the locker room is invaluable for a transitioning program seeking its first NCAA Tournament appearance since 2005.

“She’s on a level of her own,” standout Ducks forward Jillian Alleyne said of Brenner’s impact at Oregon. “She’s competed at the highest level in every sport. She’s confident, she knows what she can do and what she can’t do, and she never goes outside of herself.

“As a team we want to get where she’s been in those sports.”

Alleyne, on the watch lists for the Naismith Trophy and Wooden Award, is averaging 17.7 points and 14 rebounds. The senior has more help in the paint this season playing alongside 6-5 forward Jacinta Vandenburg (7.1 ppg, 5.3 rpg).

Brenner and true freshman Oti Gildon have also been giving the team quality minutes. The improved depth in the post frees Lexi Bando (13.7 ppg), Lexi Petersen (12.7 ppg) and the other guards up for open perimeter shots.

“How many sports has she played here? Liz is such a beast,” Bando said after scoring a career-high 35 points on 12-for-17 shooting during a recent win over San Jose State. “She’s not afraid to go up with it, she’s an amazing passer and it’s so fun to play with her. She plays with so much poise and confidence. Our posts are all different, so it’s super cool what they all bring.”

True freshman point guard Maite Cazorla has 46 assists and only 14 turnovers through seven games. Graves compared Brenner’s outlet passes to how Kevin Love throws them in the NBA.

“Every day I’m more and more impressed with Liz,” Graves said after Thursday’s practice. “She has a high basketball IQ; she just understands sports.”

Brenner played for previous Ducks coach Paul Westhead but left the program in January 2014 and did not rejoin the team until this past June when Graves offered her a chance to exhaust her eligibility on the hardwood.

“I definitely knew over the summer when I was training with the basketball team for the first time that this was different than it had been before,” Brenner said. “Different in a good way. So that was exciting to see and be a part of.”

Oregon has four nonconference games remaining, all at home, before beginning Pac-12 play on Jan. 2 at UCLA.

Even if the Ducks get to 11-0, and perhaps into the national rankings this month, Brenner understands there is still a lot of work to do for the program to reach its postseason goals.

So far, the march to March is off to a promising start.

“I think we are working really well together,” Brenner said. “The coaches know exactly what we need to do, when we need to do it, and everyone is just playing so well together. I think it’s going to be a really fun year.”