ApexNetwork, Inspire Health host monthly Chamber gathering

Dr. Paula Frantz of Inspire Health Direct Primary Care, left, talks about her new subscription-based primary care practice during the Business After Hours she co-hosted with Apex Network Physical Therapy Friday. ( Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

The Logan County Chamber of Commerce's monthly networking and socializing event offered guests a chance to learn about some new health care options in Sterling Friday.

Dr. Paula Frantz, who recently opened her own direct primary care clinic in Sterling, co-hosted the Business After Hours with ApexNetwork Physical Therapy.

Dr. Frantz explained the subscription model behind her new practice, Inspire Health Direct Primary Care. Patients pay a monthly fee for their comprehensive care, which includes services such as office visits, flu shots and basic lab tests. She noted that her patients will have her cell phone number to call her if they are needing care at any time.

Dr. Pete Stucchi of ApexNetwork Physical Therapy draws the winning honeypot ticket from the glass held by Logan County Chamber of Commerce Executive Director Kim Sellers at the Business After Hours Friday. (Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

The practice also offers a small medication dispensary with many generic prescriptions at a low cost; Dr. Frantz said she will work with her patients to offer the medications they need if possible. She can also help ensure that any tests not included in the service are offered at the lowest cost.

The subscription model means the practice does not accept any insurance; Frantz described it as being "divorced" from Medicaid. She said subscription models are a growing trend for health care providers, with about 20 percent of specialists and 15 percent of primary care providers adopting it nationwide. While a subscription health service doesn't meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act, she said it can be combined with a high-deductible plan that can be used for hospital care or other non-included services to save patients money.

Advertisement

Frantz, a Kansas native, has been providing health care in Sterling since 1995. She worked for eight years in the emergency room at Sterling Regional MedCenter, then spent almost nine years with the Colorado Department of Corrections, holding the position of Chief Medical Officer for the last half of her tenure there. Most recently, she spent three years with Colorado Plains Physicians Practices before founding Inspire Health.

Guests at the Business After Hours Friday at Apex Network Physical Therapy chat and enjoy refreshments. (Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Dr. Pete Stucchi, the clinic manager for ApexNetwork Physical Therapy, spoke about the new Sterling location. ApexNetwork is a franchise of physical therapy clinics that continues to grow, with 40 locations expected to open this year. The clinic aims to provide a state-of-the-art facility and equipment in a warm and inviting atmosphere.

Stucchi said they want to see more people receive physical therapy to "make their lives better." He noted that Colorado is a direct access state, meaning patients don't have to have a doctor's referral to access physical therapy, and can visit the physical therapist of their choosing.

Guests at the event, held at ApexNetwork's clinic on N. Second Street, had the chance to win one of several door prizes and enjoy refreshments, along with touring the facility and networking with other Chamber members.

For more information about Inspire Health, call 970-526-6131, or visit www.inspirehealthdpc.com. For more on ApexNetwork, call 970-425-7272, or visit www.apexnetworkpt.com.

Sara Waite: 970-526-9310, swaite@journal-advocate.com