Name: Kelli Prather

City of Residence: Cincinnati, OH

Party Affiliation: Democratic

Office Desired: U.S. Senate

Facebook: Kelli Prather For U.S. Senate 2016

Twitter: Kelli For Senate

Why should you be elected

The United States Senate needs to be balanced. I believe the House is ready for a civil rights and social justice activist who will advocate for all people.

If elected as the next U.S. Senator I will not shy anyway for controversy. I will work tirelessly to show integrity in the seat that I am elected to and represent the highest and best interest of all people.

Top three priorities

My platform is centered around:

1) Healthcare – Protecting the Affordable Care Act and ensuring that All citizens have access to quality healthcare services

2) Education – Working to establish Universal Preschool, adjusting the curriculum to ensure that its geared toward providing individualized learning and academic success

3) Public Safety – Improving safety, better police and community relationship and accountability across citizens, police officers. I will also focus on criminal justice reform and prosecutor misconduct

Biography

Kelli Prather is a Cincinnati, OH social justice activist who has worked behind the scenes of politics for the last twenty-five years. Her work is centralized around healthcare, public safety, education, racial equity, and economic inclusion.

By trade, Kelli is a licensed Occupational Therapist who has successfully owned healthcare businesses that grossed more than $1 million dollars when she resided in the State of New York for several years. In New York, Kelli also worked closely with issues related to poverty, healthcare services, and survivors of sexual and physical abuse.

As the youngest of 12 children, Kelli came from humble beginnings and learned the value of a shared economy at an early age. She is a native of Cincinnati, OH and is a product of the Cincinnati Public School system. Kelli took a non-traditional route to higher education, and has earned her associate’s degree from Cincinnati State Technical and Community College and bachelor’s degree and master’s degree from the University of Findlay. Currently, Kelli is a doctoral student at the University of Indianapolis pursuing a Doctorate of Health Science with an emphasis in Occupational Therapy.

As an active community member, Kelli is a member of the NAACP, the Chair of the Cincinnati Black Teen Ambassadors and a supporter of the Urban League of Greater Cincinnati, the Alzheimer’s Association, the Susan B. Koman Breast Cancer Awareness Center, the Justice for Judge Tracie Hunter Campaign, the Black Lives Matter Movement, and the Justice for Sam Dubose Campaign.

Currently, Kelli is running to be a United States Senator in the State of Ohio and will face two other candidates in the Democratic Primary on March 15th, 2016. If Prather wins the Primary and General Election on November 8, 2016, she will become the first African-american woman to become a United States Senator on behalf of the State of Ohio.

Notable Achievements

* Listed as one of the World’s Emerging Leaders by President Bill Clinton. (1994)

* Served as a member of the Cincinnati Charter Committee. (1990s)

* Listed as the one of the most “Powerful and Influential Black People in Cincinnati” by the Cincinnati Herald news publication. (1997)

* Worked with the Cincinnati State Board of Trustees to elect the college’s First African-American president, Dr. Ron Wright. (1998)

* Earned namesake award, “The Kelli Prather Courage Award” at the Health and Technologies Division at Cincinnati State Technical and Community College.