Voters could be asked to approve extending lodging tax

Boulder voters might be asked to approve a lodging tax on vacation rentals this November, though so far the practice remains illegal in all residential zones in the city.

Boulder officials have been vexed for years by the practice of renting homes out for a few days or a week on websites such as Airbnb.com and VRBO.com.

An informal survey of Boulder homes and condos listed for rent online by the Convention and Visitors Bureau back in 2010 found about 200 of them, and many people believe the practice has only increased since then.

But with no licensing of the homes and apartments and with the exact addresses often available only to customers who have booked a room, officials don't have a good sense of how many vacation rentals there are in the city, and the city doesn't do much in the way of enforcement.

City Council members, though, are paying close attention to the efforts of mountain towns to get a handle on their vacation rentals.

An article in the Aspen Daily News about that city's efforts was widely circulated last week among city officials. In March 2012, the city council there changed its policies to allow short-term rentals — defined as rentals of less than 30 days — for any property owner who got a license, paid taxes on rental revenues and designated a local representative to deal with problems such as noise and trash, according the Daily News.

Advertisement

The city also brought in a company called VR Compliance to scour the Internet for Aspen vacation rentals and compare them to local licenses.

Since then, an additional 30 property owners have registered with the city — 15 as a result of identification by VR Compliance — bringing the total to 61. Those 30 additional rentals brought in $73,000 in 2013.

Aspen Finance Director Don Taylor said the costs to the city of the contract with VR Compliance is "nominal," and while the extra revenue might not be much in Boulder, it's a lot to Aspen.

However, he noted that some Aspen vacation rentals go for substantial sums, meaning the tax revenue off a small number of properties is also significant.

The issue of compliance was also an important one, he said.

"We had a long public process about whether to enforce zoning or loosen standards, and a decision was made to allow the rentals with some compliance overlay," he said. "People were doing it in a bandit kind of way, and once that was out of the way, we got a lot of voluntary compliance."

At the same time, Taylor said Boulder might not want to take Aspen's liberal approach to vacation rentals.

"We are a resort town," he said. "We live this every day. I'm not sure how a residential neighborhood in a city like Boulder might feel about this."

In the past, Boulder Finance Director Bob Eichem has said the cost of identifying vacation rentals would cancel out any additional revenue raised by taxing them, though he agrees their open operation in residential zones raises compliance questions.

Aspen's experience raises the possibility of identifying more vacation rentals for a relatively small cost, but the question of how to tax something that is illegal remains.

Several Boulder City Council members said at a study session this week that they would like the city to look at requiring registration and then taxing vacation rentals.

City Manager Jane Brautigam said she will include a tax on vacation rentals on a list of possible November ballot measures she'll present to the council in April.

The city already has a lodging tax of 7.5 percent on hotel and motel room rentals that theoretically could apply to vacation rentals, but to avoid any possibility of a challenge under Colorado's Taxpayer Bill of Rights, Brautigam said she would recommend asking voters to approve a new tax.

City officials could then consider whether to allow vacation rentals in some areas.

Boulder Mayor Matt Appelbaum said it's a difficult question, but the city can't keep ignoring widespread violations of its rules.

"A pretty significant amount of this is going on already, legal or not," he said. "At a certain point, you either have to accept that something is going on and crack down on it, or you manage it the best you can and make sure it's licensed and deal with nuisance factors."

City Councilman Macon Cowles, who has frequently raised the matter of unlicensed vacation rentals, said there are numerous issues, starting with the safety of guests staying in homes that have never been inspected the way that hotels and motels are inspected.

There's also an equity issue with Boulder's hotels, which have to pay the lodging tax, and a question of neighborhood impact, whether from parking, noise or a constant influx of strangers.

Cowles said vacation rentals may also be inflating home prices and taking homes out of the general rental market because vacation rentals that are consistently rented generate a lot more revenue.

Cowles said he would like the city to study the impacts.

Mary Ann Mahoney, executive director of the Boulder Convention and Visitors Bureau, said her organization has been concerned about vacation rentals for a long time and would like the city to take the matter on.

"Hotels have to pay taxes and be inspected by their insurance adjuster for safety, and there are a lot of costs associated with that that the vacation rentals don't have to take on," she said. "There is also the residents' sensitivity. They might want to know if there is a nightly rental down the street."

Appelbaum said he doesn't know what the right policy is yet, but the issue isn't going away.

"Whatever we end up doing has to better reflect reality," he said.