Community gardens across the Topeka area got a little greener Saturday when they received 1,000 vegetable plants from the Washburn Institute of Technology, 5724 S.W. Huntoon.

The distribution got underway around 11 a.m., and by noon nearly every plant had been picked up.

Pam Manning, a graphics technology instructor at Washburn Tech, said community volunteers in February started the plants as seedlings in a greenhouse on the west side of the Washburn Tech campus that no longer was being used.

“We just wanted to put the greenhouses here at Washburn Tech into operation and do something for the community,” Manning said. “We ran across Topeka Common Ground, which ties in with all the community gardens, and we partnered with them and got the names of all these community gardens.”

Manning said enough plants were grown for two distributions this spring.

The first, on Saturday, provided broccoli, cauliflower, cabbage and kale.

The second giveaway, set for May 10, will provide community gardens with around 2,000 tomato, cucumber, pepper, squash, watermelon and cantaloupe plants.

Manning said after the plants are picked in the summer, the produce will be taken to various organizations in Topeka to help feed an estimated 3,500 community members.

Manning said the plants that are being donated were started by volunteers in February inside the Washburn Tech greenhouse.

In early March, volunteers contacted 14 local community gardens to see if they would be interested in receiving the plants.

Manning said the offer was met with a resounding “yes,” and representatives from each garden indicated how many plants they would like to receive. By 11:50 a.m. Saturday, all but one of the 14 groups had come by to pick up their plants.

Manning said the giveaway was the first of its kind at Washburn Tech, and said she hoped many more would follow in coming springs.

Community gardens receiving plants included: Hi-Crest, Kent Robinson Memorial Community Garden, KNI Community Garden, Hillcrest Community Garden, VIDA Community Garden, Highland Park High School Community Garden and Community Garden North in Wamego.

Also, Historic Old Town Community Garden, Oakland Youth Garden, Net Reach Youth Garden, YWCA Youth Community Garden, Topeka High School Student Community Garden, Sheldon School Head Start and First Lutheran Service Garden.