Cape Cod Events this week

SATURDAY, FEB. 28, 2015

CAPE WIND RALLY ON COMMON: Organizers say hundreds of people will gather on Boston Common, calling on National Grid Massachusetts President Marcy Reed to reinstate an agreement to purchase 50 percent of the power produced by the planned Cape Wind project. The future of project was thrown into serious doubt when National Grid and Eversource Energy moved to terminate their power-purchase agreement after Cape Wind failed to meet benchmarks. The activists will also call for National Grid not to invest in natural gas pipelines. Eversource Energy and Spectra Energy announced on Wednesday that National Grid was joining a $3 billion natural gas expansion project called Access Northeast that would follow an existing route to potentially boost New England's natural gas supply by 20 percent. Gov. Charlie Baker said he was pleased by the announcement. Activists will plant 130 pinwheels in the snow to represent Cape Wind's planned 130 turbines. Better Future Project is organizing the rally, with Mothers Out Front, Climate Action Business Association, Jewish Climate Action Network, Healthlink, UU Mass Action, and the Massachusetts Climate Action Network, plus sponsor Clean Water Action and endorsers Commit2Respond and Environment Massachusetts. (Saturday, 1 p.m., Boston Common)

Friday, Feb. 27, 2015

BEATON TOURS SANDWICH BEACHES, OTHERS: Energy and Environmental Affairs Secretary Matthew Beaton will tour three eroded beaches and survey storm damage in Sandwich. Beaton is also set to discuss possible solutions to prevent erosion. Sen. Vinny deMacedo and Rep. Randy Hunt will join the tour of East Sandwich Beach, Town Neck Beach and Spring Hill Beach. (Friday, 10:30 a.m., Sandwich)

PLYMOUTH WETLANDS RESTORATION: Energy and Environmental Affairs Secretary Matthew Beaton will announce that the Department of Fish and Game's Division of Ecological Restoration has received a grant to restore 250 acres of coastal freshwater wetlands in the Manomet Village of Plymouth. "The funding is for the Tidmarsh Farms restoration project, the largest freshwater wetlands restoration effort to date in Massachusetts," EEA said. (Friday, 9 a.m., Plymouth)

The week of Feb. 21-28, 2015

RECORD-BREAKING SNOW, MBTA WOES:

Buried in snow, Massachusetts residents, businesses and the government itself are struggling to regain their form and will attempt to make progress on Monday, when most K-12 students are due back in classrooms and the MBTA hopes to make some noticeable gains in its recently dismal service levels.

The focus so far during this record-setting winter of snow has been on clearing paths for people, vehicles and trains to move around, but snow packs are now posing a threat from above. Roof collapses are occurring with increasing frequency and government officials heading into a weekend with rain in the forecast are strongly urging everyone to clear snow from rooftops to prevent even more property damage. Snow cleanup costs are far exceeding government budgets, officials are fully immersed in getting the T running to both help the economy and provide relief from what's been a difficult stretch as far as quality of life goes. The inevitable snow melt will pose another set of challenges and expose a network of roads likely to be in poor condition from the beating they've taken over the past weeks. The seemingly perpetual state of winter misery in Massachusetts has forced Baker and his team to devote as much time to emergency management as they have to the usual business of governing. Though it says it doesn't have easy access to historic operation statistics, MEMA counts the recent stretch as the longest period "in a while" they've been activated consecutively since Feb. 9. Baker plans to spend this weekend in Washington D.C. at a meeting of the National Governors Association and when he return will only have another week before facing his March 4 deadline to file his fiscal 2016 budget proposal. The governor's budget is usually filed in late January but new governors are afforded more time. This year's late filing means Rep. Brian Dempsey and the House Ways and Means Committee will have significantly less time to hold hearings on Baker's plan while reviewing and redrafting it. The House usually debates its budget in April and the Senate considers its plan in May.

On Beacon Hill, lawmakers plan to gather to hold an informational hearing about the MBTA as a group named Friday by Gov. Charlie Baker begins an expedited look at the troubled transit authority. The wait continues among House Democrats for word from above - Speaker Robert DeLeo's office - about House leadership and committee assignments that are a necessary precursor for the the most basic activities of a Legislature that convened its session more than six weeks ago. Democrats will caucus on Thursday afternoon, when appointments could be doled out. So far this year the only major action that's occurred in the Legislature was last week's approval of legislation aimed at closing a deficit of more than three quarters of a billion dollars in the budget passed by the Legislature last summer and signed by former Gov. Deval Patrick. DeLeo and Senate President Stanley Rosenberg have broadly outlined areas of policy interest but no major bills have advanced to the floors of either branch.

DIGGING INTO THE MBTA

As shivering commuters stood in lines stretching into MBTA parking lots, waiting for shuttle buses, the hobbled transit agency rode to the top of Beacon Hill's list of priorities for this legislative session. Talk turned to what happens after the snow melts, and what lies ahead for the MBTA and its miles of track. Aside from getting the system back up and running, the search for a new general manager, the Legislature likely revisiting a transportation financing debate, and wrestling with possible costly solutions will dominate conversations. But Beacon Hill leaders are also interested in, as Gov. Charlie Baker put it, diagnosing what caused the crippling of the MBTA during the winter storms. "We haven't yet dug out from the storm but it's time to dig into why this happened," Transportation Secretary Stephanie Pollack said at a Friday press conference announcing a seven-member commission that will dive into the operations, finances and governance of the MBTA. Sen. John Keenan, chair of the Senate Bonding Committee and vice chair of the Transportation Committee, is looking to do the same. He's convening an informational hearing and has invited top officials from the nascent Baker administration and the MBTA. Testimony is by invitation-only, so riders won't get a chance to speak.

The rest of the state events, meetings

SATURDAY, FEB. 21, 2015

CENTRAL LIBRARY RENOVATION: Mayor Walsh and the Boston Public Library will be celebrating the opening of the renovated second floor, featuring the new Children's Library, Teen Central, Community Reading Area, and the Nonfiction Collections. (Saturday, 11 a.m., Central Library, Copley Square, 700 Boylston St.)

GRAND OPENING OF ALLSTON ED PORTAL: Harvard will host the grand opening of its new Ed Portal in Allston. According to an advisory released by Harvard, the portal is the "result of a comprehensive and collaborative process between Harvard, the city of Boston, the Allston-Brighton community, and local schools and businesses." Slated to attend are Boston Mayor Martin Walsh and Harvard President Drew Gilpin Faust. (Saturday, 1 p.m., 224 Western Ave., Allston)

ROSENBERG CELEBRATES ROYALSTON: Senate President Stanley Rosenberg attends Royalston's 250th Anniversary Dinner Dance. (Saturday, 5:30 p.m., Athol-Orange Elks Lodge, 92 New Athol Rd, Orange)

SUNDAY, FEB. 22, 2015

MOULTON, STAFF IN LYNN: Congressman Seth Moulton plans to will hold office hours. (Sunday, noon to 1 p.m., Brother's Deli in Lynn)

DeLEO ON KELLER: Jon Keller's interview with House Speaker Robert DeLeo is set to air this weekend. Keller and DeLeo discuss the MBTA's hardships dealing with winter weather and DeLeo's interest in knowing what exactly went wrong with the transit system and how the T is spending money. DeLeo also talks about his pledge to keep new taxes and fees out of the fiscal year 2016 budget. The interview was preempted last week by storm coverage. (Sunday, 8:30 a.m., WBZ-TV)

MONDAY, FEB. 23, 2015

HOUSE AND SENATE: Both branches plan to meet in informal sessions at 11 a.m.

BAKER MEETS OBAMA: Gov. Charlie Baker will meet with President Barack Obama amid National Governor's Association events in the nation's capital. The event is closed press. (Monday, 10 a.m., The White House, 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington D.C.)

NGA PRESS CONFERENCE: Gov. Charlie Baker will attend a National Governors Association press conference. (Monday, 12:30 p.m., The White House, 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington D.C.)

BAKER AT ABUSE OF MEDS FORUM: Gov. Charlie Baker participates in an Alliance to Prevent the Abuse of Medicines Forum. (Monday, 1:30 p.m., Hall of Flags, U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 1615 H Street NW, Washington D.C.)

CHIA MEETING: The Center for Health Information and Analysis holds a meeting of the Statewide Quality Advisory Committee to discuss its work for the coming year. Items on the agenda include strategic outreach and planning. (Monday, 3 p.m., 501 Boylston St., 5th floor, Boston)

RALLY FOR RARE DISEASE DAY: Patients, industry leaders and legislators will participate in an event where individuals can share stories of living with rare diseases, and advocate for policies to help patients. According to a media advisory, rare diseases affect one in 10 Americans. There will also be a panel discussion titled "State of Rare: Taking Stock of Rare Disease Research Today & Tomorrow" featuring Norman Barton, Vice President of Clinical Development at Shire; Ed Kaye, Senior Vice President and Chief Medical Officer at Sarepta Therapeutics; Karen Peluso, Executive Director of Neurofibromatosis Northeast; Steve Uden, Senior Vice President of Research, Alexion Pharmaceuticals; and Ken Dhimitri, Vice President of Operations at Boston Biomedical Associates as Moderator. (Monday, 9 a.m., State House, Great Hall)

BOSTON 2024 COMMUNITY MEETING: The first of 20 statewide community meetings over 20 weeks will take place in Boston, to give the public a chance to ask questions, offer ideas, and help shape the 2024 Boston Olympics and Paralympics Games. (Monday, 6 p.m., Yawkey Club of Roxbury, 115 Warren St.)

BOARD OF EDUCATION - SPECIAL MEETING: The state Board of Elementary and Secondary Education meets, with charter schools on the agenda. Education Commissioner Mitchell Chester is recommending requests from four existing schools to change their grades served and maximum enrollment, including the UP Academy Charter School in Boston, Salem Academy Charter School, Hampden Charter School of Science and KIPP Academy Lynn Charter School. Discussions about new charter applicants, which could be voted on during the board meeting set for Tuesday, are also on the agenda. Chester is also recommending putting the Martin Luther King Jr. Charter School of Excellence in Springfield on probation, while calling for the Boston Renaissance Charter Public School to be removed from probation and its charter renewed. The board sports two new members: Edward Doherty, who was appointed by Gov. Deval Patrick to a labor seat that had been held by Harneen Chernow, and James Peyser, who was appointed as Gov. Baker's education secretary. (Monday, 5 p.m., 75 Pleasant St., Malden)

BEYOND OBAMACARE: Barbara Anthony, former Undersecretary of Consumer Affairs and senior fellow at the Harvard Kennedy School, and David Seltz, executive director of the Health Policy Commission, will present a program titled: Beyond Obamacare: New Lessons From Massachusetts in the Federalist Tradition. The program will cover the powers and mandates of the HPC, its goal to limit overall health care spending in the private market and whether such far-ranging oversight of a private market is sound public policy. (Monday, 11:45 a.m. - 1 p.m., Harvard Kennedy School, Center for Business and Government, 79 JFK St., Cambridge)

NYPD CELEBRATES BOSTON COPS: New York Police Department officers originally from Boston will gather to raise money for the MIT Officer Sean Collier memorial fund and mark the release of the new book "Boston Strong: A City's Triumph Over Tragedy," by authors Casey Sherman and Dave Wedge. The event will features the writers discussing their book on the Boston Marathon bombing, a raffle and a screening of video, "Collier Strong," narrated by Donnie Wahlberg. (Monday, 7 p.m., Professor Thom's, 219 2nd Ave., New York City, NY)

SENATE "COMMONWEALTH CONVERSATIONS" | A series of regional events organized by Senate President Stanley Rosenberg (D-Amherst) and Senate Minority Leader Bruce Tarr (R-Gloucester) dubbed Commonwealth Conversations comes to Burlington, Melrose and Lynn this week. Senate President Stanley Rosenberg will be joined by Sen. Kenneth Donnelly for a meeting with a hospital association, Eastern Bank and a public meeting at Melrose Memorial Hall at 10 a.m. After Rosenberg departs for a State House meeting, the tour group will go to North Shore Agricultural and Technical High School in Danvers at 2 p.m. before Sen. Kathleen O'Connor Ives and Tarr host a small business roundtable at the Good Day Café in North Andover. Another public forum will be held at 7 p.m., at Salvatore's in Lawrence with Rosenberg attending. (Monday)

STEM DIVERSITY ROUNDTABLE: On Monday, Congressman Joe Kennedy III will join the Latino STEM Alliance to host a roundtable discussion focused on expanding access to STEM education for women, minorities and low-income communities. (Monday, 2:30 p.m., Anything Workspace, 76 Summer Street, 3rd Floor, Boston)

DPU HEARING: The Department of Public Utilities will consider a petition from Boston Gas Company and Colonial Gas Company, doing business as National Grid, for a gas system enhancement plan and for rates effective May 1. (Monday, 10 a.m., One South Station, Boston - 5th Floor, Hearing Room A)

TUESDAY, FEB. 24, 2015

RUBIO IN NH: U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio, a Florida Republican, will speak at the next installment of "Politics & Eggs," the forum for presidential candidates and other political leaders in the run-up to the New Hampshire presidential primary next year. Rubio is serving his first term in the Senate and was previously the Florida House Speaker. (Tuesday, 8 a.m., New Hampshire Institute of Politics, Saint Anselm College, 100 Saint Anselm Drive, Manchester, N.H.)

WALKER SPEAKS AT WORKFORCE CONFERENCE: Labor and Workforce Development Secretary Ronald Walker is scheduled to deliver remarks Tuesday at the Massachusetts Workforce Professional Association conference "Linkages: Connecting People with Disabilities With the Workforce." (Tuesday, 9:30a.m., JFK Building Room 900A, Boston)

METCO BREAKFAST: Backers of the program that brings city students to schools in the suburbs will be able to pitch lawmakers on a $21 million budget request at the METCO Legislative breakfast. The METCO line-item (7010-0012) received $19.1 million in the fiscal year 2015 budget. According to organizers the event will include parents, superintendents and others from all METCO districts. A group photo will be taken at 11 a.m. (Tuesday, 10 a.m., Nurses Hall)

DeLEO PRESENTS BOSTON MAYOR WITH AWARD: House Speaker Robert DeLeo presents Boston Mayor Marty Walsh with the Massachusetts Cultural Council's Commonwealth Award for Leadership. (Tuesday, 3:30 p.m., Great Hall)

2015 COMMONWEALTH AWARDS: Touted as Massachusetts' highest honors in the arts, humanities, and sciences, Commonwealth Awards are distributed to individuals who have contributed to education, economic vitality, and quality of life in communities across the state. The event will also feature performances by the Handel and Haydn Society, among other artists. According to the Mass. Cultural Council, award recipients include Plymouth and Gloucester, WBUR-Boston and WGBY-Springfield, and Malcolm Rogers of the Museum of Fine Arts and Beverly Morgan-Welch of the Museum of African American History, Boston and Nantucket. (Tuesday, 1 p.m., State House)

OFFSHORE WIND PANEL: Assistant Secretary for Energy Ron Gerwatowski will participate in an offshore wind panel. The future of Cape Wind has been called into question after utilities terminated their contracts to purchase power, saying the project had failed to meet deadlines. (Tuesday, 9 a.m., Fairmount Copley Plaza Hotel)

COASTAL EROSION: The Coastal Erosion Commission will hold a public meeting on its draft report and recommendations. For more information visit www.mass.gov/eea/erosion-commission. (Tuesday, 5 p.m., Executive Office of Energy and Environmental Affairs, 100 Cambridge Street, 2nd Floor Rooms C and D, Boston)

DPU HEARING: The Department of Public Utilities will consider a petition by Liberty Utilities for approval of its gas system enhancement program and for rates effective May 1. (Tuesday, 10 a.m., One South Station, Boston - 5th Floor, Hearing Room A)

FORMER FINNISH PRESIDENT: Tarja Halonen, president of Finland from 2000-2012, speaks at the Harvard Kennedy School. Halonen now serves as an Angelopoulos Global Public Leaders Fellow. (Tuesday, 6 p.m., JFK Jr. Forum, Cambridge)

NARAL "MEN FOR CHOICE" EVENT: NARAL Pro-Choice Massachusetts hosts its second annual "Men for Choice" event Tuesday and plans to honor Rep. Harold Naughton Jr. (D-Worcester) and pro-choice advocate Mac D'Alessandro for "their work to advance reproductive freedom in Massachusetts." (Tuesday, 6 p.m., MAST Restaurant in Boston)

DIEHL VALENTINE FUNDRAISER: Rep. Geoff Diehl (R-Whitman) hosts a Valentine's fundraiser. The suggested donation is $35. (Tuesday, 7 p.m., Cameron's on the Green, 436 Oak St., East Bridgewater)

DeMACEDO FUNDRAISES FOR KANE: Sen. Vinny deMacedo, a Plymouth Republican, hosts a fundraiser for Hannah Kane, a Republican running for former Rep. Matt Beaton's Shrewsbury-based seat. (Tuesday, 7 p.m., Mamma Mia's, 122 Water St., Plymouth)

BOARD OF EDUCATION - REGULAR MEETING: The state Board of Elementary and Secondary Education meets, with state graduation and dropout results from 2013 to 2014 on the agenda. Education Secretary James Peyser will brief the board on Gov. Baker's priorities and other matters, according to the agenda. Board members also plan to discuss a district review and possible next steps for Holyoke Public Schools, which have seen student progress decline despite investments from the department, according to the education commissioner. The agenda also includes discussion of promoting breakfast in the classroom, a vote on proposed new charter schools, amendments to vocational technical education regulations, and an update on the controversial PARCC test, among other items. (Tuesday, 8:30 a.m., 75 Pleasant St., Malden)

WILMINGTON SCHOOL EVENT: Treasurer Deborah Goldberg, chair of the Massachusetts School Building Authority, and MSBA Executive Director Jack McCarthy will attend the Wilmington Public School Procession/Ribbon Cutting Ceremony. (Tuesday, 7:15 a.m., Wilmington High School, 159 Church St., Wilmington)

STATE LOTTERY COMMISSION: Treasurer Deborah Goldberg will chair the Massachusetts State Lottery Commission's monthly meeting. (Tuesday, 10 a.m., One Ashburton Place, 12th floor, Boston)

WEDNESDAY, FEB. 25, 2015

MASS. HIGH TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL MEETING 2015: Gov. Charlie Baker will be the keynote speaker for the Massachusetts High Technology Council annual meeting, which will also feature remarks from council chair Pete Nicholas, co-founder and chairman of Boston Scientific, and from incoming council Chair Bill Achtmeyer, chairman and managing partner of the Parthenon Group. The council will also unveil MATTERS: the Massachusetts Technology, Talent and Economic Reporting System. The council describes MATTERS as "a tool designed to help measure and evaluate Massachusetts' current competitive position among leading technology states while providing policy makers with the information critical to developing public policy that attracts and retains business to the state." (Wednesday, 11:30 a.m., Newton Marriott, 2345 Commonwealth Avenue, Newton)

GOLDBERG MEETS WITH STUDENTS: Treasurer Deborah Goldberg plans to meet with students from Westwood High School and talk to them about the role of the treasurer's office. (Wednesday, 12:15 p.m., Room 348, State House)

AICUM FINANCIAL AID DAY: Organizers of an event Wednesday focused on financial aid are expecting supportive remarks from Speaker Robert DeLeo and Rep. Evandro Carvalho (D-Dorchester). The Association of Independent Colleges and Universities in Massachusetts will host its annual Financial Aid Day and rally for funding in the fiscal 2016 budget. Over 150 students are expected to attend, representing over 30 Massachusetts college and universities. Sen. Michael Moore (D-Millbury) and Rep. Tom Sannicandro (D-Ashland), are also scheduled to speak. (Wednesday, 1 p.m., State House Great Hall)

ROSENBERG IN NORWOOD: Senate President Stanley Rosenberg (D-Amherst) joins Sen. John Keenan, of Quincy, for stops throughout the South Shore as part of a "Commonwealth Conversations Tour." The senators will have breakfast with public safety officials and municipal leaders in Norwood at 8:30 a.m., followed by stops in Canton, Milton, Quincy, South Weymouth and Braintree, where Rosenberg will take part in a Town Hall meeting. (Wednesday, 6:30 p.m., 1 JFK Memorial Drive, Braintree)

TECH HUB CAUCUS: The Tech Hub Caucus, along with co-chairs Sen. Spilka and Rep. Ferrante, will host an event called "Meet, Greet & Ask the Tech Sector." The event is geared towards new and returning legislators and people from the startup and tech community. (Wednesday, 9:30 a.m., Room 222, State House)

SEX OFFENDERS RECIDIVISM COMMISSION: The special commission on recidivism of sex offenders meets. The agenda includes a presentation focused on corrections, programming, supervision, probation and parole. The commission is co-chaired by Sen. William Brownsberger (D-Belmont) and Rep. Paul Brodeur (D-Melrose) and plans to release a report later in 2015. (Wednesday, 9 a.m., One Ashburton Place, 11th floor, Matta Conference Room, Boston)

GOVERNOR'S COUNCIL: The Governor's Council meets Wednesday but has no judicial nominees pending before it. (Wednesday, 12 p.m., Governor's Council Chamber)

HEALTH POLICY COMMISSION: The Health Policy Commission's cost trends and market performance committee meets. The agenda includes a presentation from the Center for Health Information and Analysis's executive director, Aron Boros, on its 2015 strategic plan and "data collection enhancements." The agenda also includes a discussion of the commission's research topics for 2015. (Wednesday, 9:30 a.m., 50 Milk Street, 8 Floor, Boston)

HEALTH POLICY COMMISSION: The Health Policy Commission's community health care investment and consumer involvement committee meets. The agenda includes discussion of new Health Care Innovation Investment Grants and the ongoing CHART Investment Program. (Wednesday, 11 a.m., 50 Milk Street, 8th floor, Boston)

BUMP SPEAKS TO WESTWOOD STUDENTS: Auditor Suzanne Bump speaks to Westwood High School students, who will be guests of Rep. Paul McMurtry. (Wednesday, 2 p.m., Room 348)

PRODUCTION COALITION: The Massachusetts Production Coalition holds its quarterly meeting. The coalition includes film and media production professionals and business leaders. Nam Pham, the assistant secretary of business development, is scheduled to attend. (Wednesday, 5 p.m., WGBH Boston, 1 Guest St., Boston)

DPU HEARING: The Department of Public Utilities will consider NSTAR Gas Company's petition for approval of its 2015 gas enhancement program plan and rates to be effective May 1. (Wednesday, 10 a.m., One South Station, Boston - 5th Floor, Hearing Room A)

DPU HEARING: The Department of Public Utilities will consider a petition from New England Power Co., doing business as National Grid, to replace transmission lines and for exemptions from the zoning bylaws of Greenfield and Montague. (Wednesday, 7 p.m., Greenfield Middle School,141 Davis Street, Greenfield)

PUBLIC HEALTH COUNCIL: Commissioner of Public Health Dr. Monica Bharel will speak at the Public Health Council, and the council will hear presentations on the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children program, the Office of Data Management and Outcomes Assessments, the Home Visiting Initiatives and the Public Health Council Operations. The PHC will also hear a determination of need request from Boston Medical Center. (Wednesday, 9 a.m., 250 Washington Street, Boston)

DA QUINN CEREMONY: Gov. Charlie Baker and Attorney General Maura Healey participate in a swearing-in ceremony for Bristol County District Attorney Thomas Quinn. Quinn was first named interim DA by former Gov. Deval Patrick after Sam Sutter resigned to take over as mayor of Fall River, and was later appointed permanently to the post by Gov. Charlie Baker. (Wednesday, 4 p.m., Bishop Connolly High School, 373 Elsbree St., Fall River)

THURSDAY, FEB. 26, 2015

SENATE INFORMAL: The Senate meets in informal session. (Thursday, 11 a.m., Senate Chamber)

HOUSE INFORMAL: The House meets in informal session. (Thursday, 11 a.m., House Chamber)

HOUSE DEMS CAUCUS: House Democrats will caucus. Speaker Robert DeLeo has yet to assign members to committees. (Thursday, 2 p.m., Room A-1)

TEWKSBURY BIZ VISIT: Gov. Charlie Baker will visit Thermo Fisher Scientific. (Thursday, 11:30 a.m., 2 Radcliff Rd., Tewksbury)

SENATE PANEL TO HOLD MBTA OVERSIGHT HEARING: A Senate committee is planning a hearing next week on the MBTA as the public transit agency struggles to return to a regular service schedule after weeks of substandard performance. The Senate Bonding Committee hearing is set for Thursday and top officials from the Baker administration and the MBTA have been invited to testify, according to Sen. John Keenan's office. Keenan, a Quincy Democrat, has railed against the state of the MBTA, as commuters have stood in long lines for shuttle buses and crammed into commuter rail trains due to snow covering the tracks of the Braintree spur of the Red Line. The MBTA has four Red Line stations located in Quincy, and Keenan's Senate district also includes the Braintree stop and the Holbrook commuter rail station. In an advisory, Keenan's office described the hearing as an "informational hearing on the state of the MBTA, including its current and future debt obligations, asset maintenance and management, and capital planning considerations." Gov. Charlie Baker's budget chief, Kristen Lepore, and his transportation secretary Stephanie Pollack have been invited to testify. MBTA GM Beverly Scott and the agency's board of directors are also invited. Senate Transportation Committee Chair Thomas McGee plans to sit with the committee for the hearing. (Thursday, 1:30 p.m., Room 428)

IG COUNCIL: The Inspector General Council meets. Auditor Suzanne Bump, who chairs the council, is slated to attend. (Thursday, 11 a.m., One Ashburton Place, 13th floor, Room 1311, Boston)

HEALTH POLICY COMMISSION: David Seltz, the Health Policy Commission's executive director, plans a presentation at a Connecticut legislative roundtable on health care on Massachusetts initiatives focused on cost containment, transparency, electronic medical records, hospital consolidations and uncompensated care. (Thursday, 1 p.m., 300 Capitol Avenue, Hartford, Conn.)

COAKLEY AND FRANK ON MARRIAGE EQUALITY: Former Attorney General Martha Coakley continues her Harvard Kennedy School seminar series on "how change is effected." This week's session covers marriage equity and will feature guest speaker former U.S. Rep. Barney Frank. (Thursday, 4 p.m., L166, Harvard Kennedy School)

NAIOP @ NOON SEMINAR: A NAIOP seminar, themed The Latest Green Building Practices, will feature discussion of Boston's sustainability initiatives. The speakers are Austin Blackmon, Chief of Environment, Energy and Space of the City of Boston, and Ben Myers, Sustainability Manager of Boston Properties. (Thursday, 12:15 p.m., Bank of America, 5th Floor, 225 Franklin St.)

WAR ON POVERTY IN REVIEW: Mark Shriver, son of Sargent Shriver, will be joined by Lyndon Johnson scholar and Princeton Professor Julian Zelizer, poverty advocate Melissa Boteach and New Yorker writer Nicolas Lemann for a discussion of LBJ's "War on Poverty" programs. (Thursday, 6 p.m., JFK Library, Columbia Point, Dorchester)

IOC BOARD MEETS: The International Olympic Committee Executive Board will meet in Rio de Janeiro for three days starting Thursday. The meeting will include discussion of the implementation of Olympic Agenda 2020 and other items. Media can cover the meetings if they register with the IOC. IOC communications director Mark Adams will provide press briefings after the meetings on Thursday and Friday and there will be a press conference with IOC President Thomas Bach after the Saturday meeting. Rio will be home to the 2016 Summer Games. Boston is bidding to host the 2024 Summer Games. (Thursday and Friday, Windsor Atlantica Hotel, Copacabana, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil)

DMH NORTHEAST AREA BREAKFAST: "Mental Health Matters - Let's Talk About It" is the theme of Thursday's Department of Mental Health Northeast Area Citizens Legislative Breakfast. Northeast Area Director Sue Wing is scheduled to deliver welcoming folks and introduce DMH Commissioner Marcia Fowler. Sen. Bruce Tarr and Rep. Paul Brodeur are sponsoring the breakfast. (Thursday, 10 a.m., Great Hall, State House)

STATE RETIREMENT BOARD MEETING: Treasurer Deborah Goldberg will chair the Massachusetts Retirement Board's monthly meeting. (Thursday, 10 a.m., One Winter St., 8th floor, Boston)

GOLDBERG DISCUSSES AGENDA: Treasurer Deborah Goldberg plans to meet with members of the ethnic media to discuss her plans in the areas of fiscal responsibility, innovative technology initiatives and advancing economic empowerment. Members of the press wishing to attend should RSVP to [email protected] (Thursday, 2 p.m., Room 227, State House)

GOLDBERG AT JCRC EVENT: Senate President Stanley Rosenberg attends Jewish Community Relations Council awards for outstanding staffers. Treasurer Deborah Goldberg will also deliver remarks at the 2015 legislative reception. (Thursday, 4 p.m., State House location TBD)

PRIVATE RECEPTION FOR PHOTOG BILL BRETT: Suffolk University plans to host a private cocktail reception and photo exhibit on Thursday to honor photographer Bill Brett's collection of black-and-white images from his latest book, "Boston Irish." (Thursday, 5:30 p.m., Suffolk Store, Tremont St., Boston)

MIT INNOVATION FORUM: MIT's Startup Exchange convenes a workshop to discuss advances in biotechnology. The workshop will touch on innovation models and partnerships. Susan Windham-Bannister, president and CEO of the Mass. Life Sciences Center, participates in a panel at the event. (Thursday, 8:45 a.m., MIT, One Main St., Cambridge)

GROWTH CAPITAL CORP: The board of the Massachusetts Growth Capital Corporation meets. The MGCC seeks to provide a central resource offering capital and loan guarantees, along with technical assistance. Assistant Secretary of Business Development Nam Pham plans to attend. (Thursday, 10 a.m., Schrafft Center, 529 Main St., Suite 1M10, Charlestown)

DICERNA OFFICE OPENING: Dicerna Pharmaceuticals Inc. opens a research and development laboratory. Life Sciences Center President Susan Windham-Bannister is scheduled to attend. (Thursday, 3 p.m., 87 Cambridge Park Drive, Cambridge)

CIVIL RIGHTS AND CHARTER SCHOOLS: The Pioneer Institute will host a discussion on the tensions between charter schools and teacher unions with experts on the Civil Rights movement. Former Senate President Thomas Birmingham, who helped write the state's landmark 1993 education reform act, will deliver the welcoming remarks. The event will feature Dr. Sephira Shuttlesworth, director of the mid-Michigan Leadership Academy; Dr. Clayborne Carson, history professor at Stanford University and director of the Martin Luther King, Jr. Research and Education Institute; Dr. Raymond Arsenault, chair of the department of history and politics at the University of South Florida; Gerard Robinson, chair of the Black Alliance for Educational Options Action Fund; Kevin Andrews, senior advisor of the Boston Alliance of Charter School; American Federal of Teachers-Massachusetts President Thomas Gosnell; and Massachusetts Teachers Association President Barbara Madeloni. (Thursday, 8 a.m., Omni Parker House, 60 School St., Boston)

DeLEO RECEIVES 'INSPIRING LEADERSHIP' AWARD: House Speaker Robert DeLeo is slated to receive the Homes for Families' "Inspiring Leadership" Award. (Thursday, 1 p.m., Hall of Flags)

DPU HEARING: The Department of Public Utilities will consider a petition from The Berkshire Gas Company for rates effective May 1. (Thursday, 10 a.m., One South Station, Boston - 5th Floor, Hearing Room A)

FRIDAY, FEB. 27, 2015

EU AMBASSADOR: Gov. Charlie Baker meets with European Union Ambassador David O'Sullivan. (Friday, 10 a.m., Governor's Office, Room 360)

SPRINGFIELD CHAMBER: Gov. Charlie Baker makes remarks at the Affiliated Chamber of Commerce of Greater Springfield. (Friday, 12 p.m., MassMutual Center, 1277 Main Street, Springfield)

GOLDBERG IN EVERETT: Treasurer Deborah Goldberg will read her favorite Dr. Seuss book to students as part of the Read Across America Celebration. (Friday, 10 a.m., Sumner G. Whittier School, 337 Broadway, Everett)

HEALEY READS AT SCHOOL: Attorney General Maura Healey will participate in the National Education Association's "Read Across America" event at Whittier School in Everett. (Friday, 9 a.m., 337 Broadway St., Everett)

17TH ANNUAL AFRICA BUSINESS CONFERENCE: Themed "A More Inclusive Africa: the Pursuit of Progress for All," a conference scheduled for Friday will feature keynote speaker Ken Njoroge, co-founder and CEO of Cellulant, a digital payments service provider. Panels will look at business and geopolitics; education and health care; and infrastructure and resources. (Friday, 2 p.m., Harvard Business School, Boston)

BEATON TOURS BEACHES: Energy and Environmental Affairs Secretary Matthew Beaton will tour three eroded beaches and survey storm damage in Sandwich. Beaton is also set to discuss possible solutions to prevent erosion. Sen. Vinny deMacedo and Rep. Randy Hunt will join the tour of East Sandwich Beach, Town Neck Beach and Spring Hill Beach. (Friday, 10:30 a.m., Sandwich)

AFL-CIO BREAKFAST: Senate President Stanley Rosenberg attends a legislative breakfast put together by the Pioneer Valley Central Labor Council AFL-CIO. (Friday, 8:30 a.m., Castle of Knights, 1599 Memorial Drive, Chicopee)

SPRINGFIELD LUNCHEON: Senate President Stanley Rosenberg attends the Springfield Affiliated Chambers Outlook luncheon. (Friday, noon, MassMutual Center, Springfield)

WETLANDS RESTORATION: Energy and Environmental Affairs Secretary Matthew Beaton will announce that the Department of Fish and Game's Division of Ecological Restoration has received a grant to restore 250 acres of coastal freshwater wetlands in the Manomet Village of Plymouth. "The funding is for the Tidmarsh Farms restoration project, the largest freshwater wetlands restoration effort to date in Massachusetts," EEA said. (Friday, 9 a.m., Plymouth)

DPU HEARING: The Department of Public Utilities will consider the petitions of Unitil, Columbia Gas and NSTAR Gas Company for a gas system enhancement program plan and for rates effective May 1. (Friday, 10 a.m., One South Station, Boston - 5th Floor, Hearing Room A)

ELECTRIC LINES HEARING: NSTAR will seek approval to construct, operate and maintain new 115-kilovolt transmission line segments on existing right of way between Walpole and Holbrook, a new switching station in Sharon and modifications to substations in Walpole and Holbrook. (Friday, 11 a.m., One South Station, Boston - 5th Floor, Hearing Room C)

SATURDAY, FEB. 28, 2015

CAPE WIND RALLY ON COMMON: Organizers say hundreds of people will gather on Boston Common, calling on National Grid Massachusetts President Marcy Reed to reinstate an agreement to purchase 50 percent of the power produced by the planned Cape Wind project. The future of project was thrown into serious doubt when National Grid and Eversource Energy moved to terminate their power-purchase agreement after Cape Wind failed to meet benchmarks. The activists will also call for National Grid not to invest in natural gas pipelines. Eversource Energy and Spectra Energy announced on Wednesday that National Grid was joining a $3 billion natural gas expansion project called Access Northeast that would follow an existing route to potentially boost New England's natural gas supply by 20 percent. Gov. Charlie Baker said he was pleased by the announcement. Activists will plant 130 pinwheels in the snow to represent Cape Wind's planned 130 turbines. Better Future Project is organizing the rally, with Mothers Out Front, Climate Action Business Association, Jewish Climate Action Network, Healthlink, UU Mass Action, and the Massachusetts Climate Action Network, plus sponsor Clean Water Action and endorsers Commit2Respond and Environment Massachusetts. (Saturday, 1 p.m., Boston Common)

IOC PRESS CONFERENCE: International Olympic Committee President Thomas Bach will participate in a press conference following the third day of meetings with the IOC Executive Board. A playback of the event will be available one hour after it has ended and will remain up for 48 hours. To access that dial 44-207-108-6233 and enter 16425 followed by the # sign. (Saturday, 10:30 a.m. Boston time, Dial-in: 1-631-570-5612, code: 5860347 followed by the # sign)