On that note, McCain goes off to be interviewed by Wolf Blitzer of CNN from a remote studio on the Hill.

Blitzer, whose arching dome of white hair rests in perfect symmetry with the anchor desk’s Capitol backdrop, greets McCain off the air. “Woof, woof,” McCain says to the host while someone fastens on a microphone. Then he howls and grins and prepares to discuss the day’s “outright hypocrisy.”

It is well entrenched in the McCain mythology that he finished nearly last (894th out of 900) in his class at the Naval Academy and never set out to be a great American hero, let alone a politician. He fell into the role — out of an airplane. Politics caught him. He ran for the House in 1982 and then the Senate in 1986. Even then, he conveyed a sense that he didn’t need or especially want this job, but over the years he became essential to the scenery: the Sunday shows, the Senate fights, the high-level globe-trotting. The arena suited and needed and defined McCain. He often parks himself in a hallway at the Capitol and waits for reporters to surround him. He is proud to hold the record for most appearances — 69 — in the 66-year history of “Meet the Press” and also to have more Twitter followers than anyone in the Senate (1.85 million badges of his relevance — nearly four times as many as the next Republican colleague, Marco Rubio). You can call this vanity, self-celebration, whatever — if it were a crime, the Capitol would be empty. But in McCain’s case, it’s also proof that he was present and accounted for, which is perhaps no small thing when you spent a good portion of your life expecting to die in a P.O.W. camp. In McCain’s worldview, anonymity equals absence.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I think the biggest fear John has is not being relevant,” Graham told me. “He worried after he lost the election in 2008. He worried, O.K., I’m done, nobody wants to deal with a loser.” McCain has a favorite line, one of his hundreds, which he attributes to the late Texas senator John Tower: “Don’t let your coattails hit you in the ass,” Tower told him once. “Keep moving.” To McCain, “keep moving” is both a credo and a coping strategy, a balm of perpetual motion and high demand. He likes to provide unprompted recitations of his packed schedule. I was sitting with him in his office in October, shortly after the government shutdown ended. He was, as he often is, fresh off a regimen of morning TV interviews — CNN, “Squawk Box.” “I did a bunch last night too,” he volunteered.

Even when sitting still, McCain projects stir-craziness. Lengthy Senate hearings can be a challenge for him. He was recently busted in a photograph playing video poker on his iPhone during a hearing on Syria. (“Scandal!” he tweeted. “Caught playing iPhone game at 3+ hour Senate hearing — worst of all, I lost!”)

Sometimes McCain will express his need to “keep moving” with a more exasperated, even plaintive construction: “Can’t we just move on to something else?” he will say, particularly when people ask him, as they still do, about Sarah Palin’s continued presence on the national stage — or on Facebook. Friends and colleagues who respect him for his many virtues and heroic résumé also acknowledge that his role in the unleashing of Palin is an unfortunate part of his legacy. Surely McCain regrets the association, right? He is a man of seriousness, someone who becomes emotional when talking about the need for a more aggressive United States presence in Syria. And then Palin hops onto Facebook and quips that the U.S. should just stay out of Syria and “Let Allah sort it out.” People close to him say that he bristles at these things and that he wishes Palin had consulted him about some of the endorsements she has made of Republican primary challengers but that he will never go public with any of his regrets. “Good luck trying to get that out of him,” his daughter Meghan McCain told me, laughing.

McCain has always been unrestrained in his expressions of remorse. He spent much of the 1990s doing extravagant penance for his role in the Keating Five savings-and-loan mess. This led to the reformed campaign-finance crusader incarnation, which led to his first presidential campaign. After dropping out of the Republican primaries in 2000, he returned to South Carolina and grandly apologized for not calling for the removal of the Confederate flag from the Statehouse. “I chose to compromise my principles,” he said at the time. “I broke my promise to always tell the truth.” When it comes to Palin, though, he fidgets slightly in his office chair and meets me with a defiant stare. He reaffirms his allegiance to Palin, saying that she was unfairly attacked in 2008 and that “the liberal-left feminists” felt threatened by her. “Look, it’s been five years,” McCain says. “Can’t we move on?”

Sure, except that Ted Cruz, whose upset win in the Texas Republican primary last year was propelled by the former Alaska governor’s endorsement, has not been shy about announcing to the world that “I would not be in the U.S. Senate today if it were not for Sarah Palin.”

McCain is sick of talking about Cruz. “We have a cordial relationship,” he insists, which in the Google translation of political code is something between abject disgust and minimal tolerance. Cruz is an upstart, whose goal seems to be to position himself to run for president in 2016. He appears indifferent to the traditional markers of Senate experience and prestige — passing bills, leading committees, dutifully winning the respect of colleagues. “You know, it’s a funny thing about Cruz,” McCain says, and then stops himself. “No, actually, it’s not funny. It aggravates me more than anything else” — the way Cruz called his fellow Republicans a bunch of wimps and talks about “how we’ve been around too long.” Cruz is the Senate’s modern-day maverick, it would seem, while McCain has become one of the institution’s fiercest traditionalists.

When I read Cruz’s quote about owing his success to Palin, McCain shrugs. Palin has suggested, too, that she might support Tea Party primary challengers to the Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell, in Kentucky and to Lindsey Graham in South Carolina, whom McCain has likened to a son. “Oh, I pray she wouldn’t do that,” he says of Graham. “And you know, I find it hard to believe that she would.” He points out that Palin has never said anything critical about him, that she campaigned in Arizona for him in 2010. And then he adds, again: “I’ve moved on. What’s the statute of limitations on this issue?”

McCain’s cellphone rings, and it’s Joe Lieberman, the former senator from Connecticut who was McCain’s first choice to be his running mate in 2008, until his advisers convinced him that the Republican base would go full wacko bird if he picked a pro-choice Democrat. McCain answers the phone by saying, “I love you, Joey.” He speaks loudly, the way that people tend to on cellphones, or when they might be speaking for the benefit of a third party. “Joey, Joey, where have you been?” After a minute or so, he tells Joey he’s with someone and will call him back.

Photo

“Funny story about Lieberman,” he says to me. The Israeli ambassador in Washington honored him after he left the Senate. “Everyone was saying Joe’s the most wonderful guy, the usual crap you hear,” McCain says. “So I got up, I was the last guy, and I say: ‘I’m here to announce that I’m converting to Judaism. Because for all these years with Joe, I’ve had to eat that crappy salmon. I had to ride the damn Shabbat elevator. I’ve observed Shabbat to a point where I couldn’t even ride in a goddamn car. I’ve had all of the bull associated with this religion, and I’ve gotten not a single benefit. So I’m converting to Judaism.’ ”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Lieberman then stood up and announced that before McCain could convert, he must first have a proper bris. In the retelling, McCain pronounces it “brits” — which is how he pronounced it when he told me this story a week earlier.

A few days later, I join McCain in Arizona, where he is scheduled to host two town meetings and is expecting hostile incoming from the local Tea Party brigades. After missing my flight to Phoenix, I caught the last plane of the night to the general vicinity (Las Vegas), then drove five hours through the pitch-black desert to meet up with McCain at dawn. Those five hours were filled with the sound of incessant grievance across the radio dial — about President Obama and about RINOs (Republicans in Name Only) like McCain, who are just as responsible for the socialist, lawless, porous-bordered dystopia our once-great nation has become. Captive exposure to these voices in the dark, over endless miles, makes you wonder how anyone to the left of Ted Cruz has ever been elected to anything. It also brings into relief how grueling it must be to oppose the most fervent sector of his own party. “I’m really not psyched about going back to Arizona to do another Tea Party election,” Meghan McCain told me. “I honestly don’t know how much more of that I can hear.”

Yet John McCain seems characteristically energized by the prospect — as evidenced by his recent barrages against the Tea Partiers. As disastrous as the shutdown was for their party, many Republicans in the Senate greeted the humiliation with glee, and McCain was a particularly ebullient leader of this “I Told You So” caucus. “It didn’t take a goddamned rocket scientist to see how this was going to turn out,” he said, and then switched metaphors. “When the rainstorm came, we were all wearing cardboard shoes.”

His first stop of the day in Arizona is an early-morning radio interview with a conservative host, Barry Young on KFYI in Phoenix. McCain eats a Sausage McMuffin in the passenger seat of an S.U.V. driven by an aide, Michelle Shipley, who at one point makes a wrong turn and has to spin around in a parking lot. As she gets us headed down the correct street, McCain exhales an exaggerated sigh. “Every once in a while a blind hog will unearth an acorn,” he says. (Shipley giggles and seems not to mind being likened to a blind hog.)

Young’s show is focused heavily on the disastrous rollout of Obamacare. He and his sidekick, Michele Larson, joke about calling the Obamacare 800 number and repeatedly play a busy signal over the air. McCain mentions that help with the law is available in 150 languages. “I would like mine in Urdu,” he says, and then he quotes Dana Milbank of The Washington Post, who compared the president’s pitch for Obamacare with late-night ads for the Ginsu knife. “If you call within the next 20 minutes, you’ll get 50 percent off!” McCain says. “And you’ll lose weight!”

He also has news of his own to make. He mentions to Young that he’s thinking about running for re-election in 2016. This is a different message from the one he sent over the summer, when he said that he didn’t want to be one of those old geezers hanging around the Capitol. He repeats this status update during a commercial to everyone in the studio. “I’m thinking about running again,” he says, and makes eye contact with me to make sure I caught it. “Couldn’t we assume that you were considering this already?” I ask. “Aren’t you also thinking about retiring?” McCain shrugs.

Back on the air, Young asks if McCain has just said that he was considering another run for Senate.

“If some wild-eyed journalist hears this and wants to run with it and says that John McCain has announced on the air that he may run for another term in the Senate — that would not be wrong?”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“That would not be wrong,” McCain says.

I ask McCain if I can tweet the momentous information he has just relayed. He nods.

“Just so I’m clear,” I ask, “are you ‘considering’ running? Or can I say ‘strongly considering’ it?”

“I am very much considering it,” McCain says.

That settled, we get back in the car to cover about two hours of Interstate 10 between Phoenix and Tucson. Shipley is again driving — also texting and emailing, balancing her iPhone against the wheel with her leg at high speeds. This would seem hazardous both from a safety and a public-relations standpoint, but McCain doesn’t seem to care at all. He even tells Shipley to tweet a few things for him while she drives — about how the town meetings would be “spirited” and so forth. He takes a phone call from Meghan and tells her that Jay Leno wants them to come on his show together in January; it will be a blast. He calls “Lindsey, my boy,” and reads him a Wall Street Journal article about Saudi Arabia. Calls Tom Coburn, tells him he did a great job on “Meet the Press” a few days earlier. Calls Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, one of his new favorites. After each call, McCain repeats the name of the person he was just talking to. He likes to advertise his friendships, cataloging the names of colleagues he is close to, whom he has been impressed with and whom “we take traveling with us” — a reference to the Senate delegations he and Graham lead around the world. He prizes his role as ringleader and is fiercely selective about who gets to be part of the bipartisan “gangs” he is always organizing.

Colleagues approach him “pretty much every day,” he says, about joining the gangs. As with many things in politics, there is an element of middle-school cliquishness about this. I ask what happens if he does not want someone in his group. “Sometimes we just get together and don’t tell anybody else,” he says. Or, in the case of an international trip, they won’t publicize it until they land in Ukraine or wherever.

Gestures seem to matter more to him than they used to — things that people say about him, compliments they pay. “For somebody who seems to be gruff, he’s one of the most sensitive people I’ve ever met,” Graham told me of McCain. “In a good way and a bad way.” McCain has many Washington friends — meaning he will promiscuously address people as “my friend” or colleagues as “my good friend from Texas” or whatever. (Cruz, naturally, tells me that he is “proud to count John McCain as a friend.”) But for as social an organism as McCain is, he puts up a forbidding barrier. “There’s no such thing as friends,” he told me. “There’s me and Joe and Lindsey, but it’s rare. I can count on one hand the number of real friends I have, or maybe two hands.”

When he’s not on the phone en route to Tucson, McCain keeps reading news headlines (“Sebelius calling in sick!”) and emails aloud. He reads an item about a poll, just out, about how only 12 percent of Americans believe that the rollout of Obamacare has gone smoothly. “Just goes to show you,” McCain says, “that you can probably get 12 percent of Americans to say pigs can fly.” He learns that Liz Cheney, waging a primary challenge in Wyoming against his colleague Mike Enzi, referred to McCain as a “liberal,” which sparks an animated commentary from McCain — not against Cheney but about Enzi: “Have you seen that Geico ad?” he says. “Mike Enzi looks exactly like the guy in that Geico ad. He talks like him too. It’s the damnedest thing!”

We enter the city limits of Tucson, which McCain notes is the birthplace “of that singer who used to go out with Jerry Brown, ‘Blue Bayou’ ” — Linda Ronstadt. In the parking lot of the community center where the town meeting will be held, Shipley brushes McCain’s hair and sprays on a ton of hair spray. “We might very well have some fireworks in here,” McCain says again on the way into the town meeting. He has been priming me for a raucous assembly all morning. But the crowd inside is small and subdued: 47 people in the room — three of them babies, three cops, 14 staff people and a trickle of media. The questions are pro forma and polite. McCain trots out the paid-staff-and-blood-relatives line. He vows to keep “doing God’s work in the city of Satan.” He is back on the road in less than an hour and appears slightly deflated by the reception. He assures me things will be rowdier in Phoenix.

To pass the time on the drive back, I engage McCain in a game of hypothetical-question roulette: If he were a young man living in Arizona today, not a politician, would he register to vote as an Independent? “I would think about it,” he says, but then catches himself and reasserts his faith in “the party of Lincoln and Ronald Reagan.” Would he consider supporting an Independent presidential candidate if Ted Cruz were the Republican nominee? “No, because I have to respect the process.” Would he support his friend Hillary Clinton in a head to head against Cruz? “I will support the Republican ticket,” he says, then adds: “With all due respect, that is a foolish question, my friend.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Phoenix town meeting is also lightly attended — about 50 people — but does yield fireworks. One Tea Party guy hits McCain on immigration, and a sizable man who claims to have family in the Jordanian Army becomes volcanic on the subject of U.S. policy in Syria, then engages in a shouting match with a man across the room. He keeps accusing McCain of “insulting my intelligence,” and McCain asks the man repeatedly, “Are you done?” He calls the man rude, which really sets him off, and a few security jumbos have to escort the guy out of the room. McCain solicits the next question as if nothing happened, but his face remains bright red, and he looks slightly shaken and very much alive.

He invites me to an actual arena that night: in Glendale, Ariz., where the Calgary Flames of the N.H.L. were in town to play the Phoenix Coyotes. This is not the most fabled rivalry in sports, but McCain says he will watch any sporting event (“I’d pay to see the Bedwetters play the Thumbsuckers”). He is a big fan of the Coyotes. There are supposedly other Phoenix Coyote fans, too, though not many of them come to home games. McCain’s 25-year-old son, Jimmy, drives us to the arena. Cindy McCain is in the front seat, and I’m in back with the senator, who is desperate to hear the pregame show on the radio. Silence makes him nervous. He keeps barking out call numbers to Cindy, but no luck. He checks the Coyotes app to find information about the show (McCain talks incessantly about his new Coyotes app), and Cindy continues to hunt around the radio dial, except when she is bracing herself for a crash, which happens on three separate occasions during Jimmy’s gun-and-slam death ride through the greater Phoenix sprawl. When we arrive, miraculously without incident, the McCains engage in a spirited debate about which parking lot to use. Jimmy takes a few wrong turns; Cindy tells him to slow down and asks why he’s going this way or that way, until finally Jimmy snaps and says, “Mom, you make it seem like which parking-lot entrance is the most important thing in the world!” In fact, it’s not, he tells her. “I had a woman almost OD in front of me at a strip club this afternoon. Now that’s something serious.”

“Why were you in a strip club this afternoon?” Cindy asks. Jimmy says he was making a delivery for the family beer distributorship. The woman will be fine, Jimmy reports. His father chuckles in the back.

The arena is ringed with palm trees popping out of the concrete and named for a company I’ve never heard of. Twenty minutes before face-off, the concourse is as placid as Penn Station on a Sunday morning. The celebrity politician walks a few feet ahead of the rest of us. He carries himself with a full and rightful expectation that people will recognize him, and he greets anyone that meets his glance. “Thank you for your service, senator,” many say. He gets this a lot, he says, “usually right before they unload on me.”

In the elevator, we meet a big, handsome guy in a suit who looks like a hockey player and, sure enough, turns out to be an inactive member of the Flames. McCain asks him where he’s from. Minnesota. “Where are you from?” he asks McCain. “Oh, I’m sort of from all over,” McCain tells him. When the player gets off the elevator and I mention to McCain that the guy had no idea who he was, the senator seems slightly amused and even a bit disoriented. “It happens sometimes,” he says.

The seats are about half filled, and the arena is quiet enough during the game to hear the players shouting to each other. Fans are periodically instructed to howl like Coyotes, which McCain does in the same way he greets Wolf Blitzer. The home-team Bedwetters beat the visiting Thumbsuckers 4-2, and McCain heads home happy, except when Cindy can’t find the postgame show on the radio, and Jimmy is nearly killing us again.

“I’m sure you’ve noticed, I never talk about my experiences in prison,” McCain said to me on the Sunday after Thanksgiving. “I’ve known too many professional heroes in my life.” We were speaking by phone after a weekend he spent at his vacation home in Sedona, and he was getting ready to leave on a weeklong tour of Libya and Saudi Arabia. He would be joined by two staff members but no Lindsey, no entourage and no other members of the Senate.

For as much as McCain’s P.O.W. story has been told, the details never fail to astound: the two badly broken arms, a shattered knee and multiple gashes after parachuting from a shot-down plane into the hands of an enemy mob; how he received no treatment for his wounds for four days, his captors hanging him by his broken limbs and beating him repeatedly; how they offered to release McCain early because of his famous father (who was about to take over as commander of U.S. forces in the Pacific), but he refused to leave, not wanting to give his enemies a propaganda win or risk demoralizing his fellow prisoners.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In his book about five Naval Academy graduates, “The Nightingale’s Song,” the journalist Robert Timberg described what McCain looked like after two months of imprisonment — weighing less than 100 pounds, with collapsed cheeks and atrophied limbs. “His eyes, I’ll never forget,” McCain’s cellmate, Bud Day, told Timberg. “They were bug-eyed like you see in those pictures from the Jewish concentration camps. His eyes were real popeyed like that.”

Day, a decorated fighter pilot, died in July at age 88. “He was the bravest man I ever knew,” McCain said after his death. He and Day had notable disagreements over the years: Day was part of the Swift Boat Veterans for Truth, who campaigned against John Kerry in the 2004 presidential campaign. McCain condemned the group for their attacks against Kerry. “Like a lot of heroes, everything was black and white with Bud,” he told me. “That’s how you survive.”

In captivity, McCain said many of his fellow P.O.W.s would search for omens that their release was imminent. “People would say, ‘Hey, there’s a carrot in my soup, so that must mean we’re going home,’ ” he said. “Bud used to say to them: ‘Right, guys. We’ll be going home one day, but it sure as hell won’t be because we found a carrot in the damn soup.’ ”

McCain says he has learned forgiveness, which is essential to maintaining forward motion. “He seems to be thinking about his life,” Meghan McCain told me. “He just said to me, ‘I watched an interview with myself on CNN and thought, Who is that old man that’s staring back at me on the TV?’ ” McCain agrees that he is in a reflective mode. His friends are dying off and longtime colleagues are retiring, and he himself is weighing whether to run again. He fears growing too old in the Senate, as he believes many of his colleagues did — he mentions Robert Byrd and Strom Thurmond. But he has also spoken about his father and grandfather, decorated Navy men who both died not long after they retired. “My grandfather actually flew home from the peace-signing on the Missouri and died,” McCain says. “I have seen people age dramatically when they go into retirement.” If he seeks re-election and wins, McCain would be 86 at the end of that term. He is in line to become chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee if Republicans win a majority next November.

Last April, Harry Reid convened the Senate for a special lunch in the Kennedy Caucus Room to commemorate the 40th anniversary of McCain’s release from prison. McCain appreciated the gesture immensely, and nearly every one of his colleagues was present. He spoke through tears at times and without notes. He talked about the kindness he encountered in prison as well as the cruelty. That was striking to the people there, but more so that he spoke about his experience at all. “John told a lot of little poignant stories,” Susan Collins of Maine told me. “When John was tied up in such a painful position, he talked about the one guard who would loosen the bonds. He told the story of being out in the yard on Easter, and how one of the guards drew a little cross in the sand, just to acknowledge the holiday, and then rubbed it out so no one would get in trouble.” Collins has spent more than a hundred hours on airplane trips with McCain, she says, and has never heard him tell these stories. “There was not a dry eye in the house,” Ted Cruz told me. “It was extraordinary for everyone in that room, regardless of party or ideology.”

McCain points out that he was 31 when he became a prisoner of war. He was a formed human being, he says, as opposed to someone like Bob Dole, who sustained crippling wounds in World War II at age 21. “That’s obviously going to be a transformational experience,” he said. “For me, prison was obviously a testing period, but certainly not something that changed me.” He also made a point of reminding me that his “performance” in prison was lacking. He did sign a confession, McCain noted. It followed sustained torture. “You think to yourself, If I get into a situation like that, they’ll never get me down,” he said. “And you know, they did. It took a lot of pain, but they did.” He still feels shame over it, he said.

I had a final meeting with McCain in his office last Wednesday. It was the day after Nelson Mandela’s memorial, which McCain said he was invited to but “couldn’t justify” attending because there was too much going on in Washington. This could be construed as a slap at Cruz, who was the only senator who did attend. I asked him what he thought about Cruz going — trying to bait him, yes. (I was a blind hog seeking an acorn.) But McCain wasn’t playing. “Would it help you if I called Cruz a wacko bird again?” he said. As the conversation veered to topics like jail soup, his own mortality and the death of yet another friend, McCain began jiggling his leg. “If you stay really busy, you don’t get nostalgic,” he told me earlier, and it felt as if that was what was happening now, that he was physically willing the introspection away. An aide was waiting with a bunch of logistical questions for McCain about a trip to Kiev he was scheduled to take in a few days. Across the Hill, John Kerry was about to brief a group of senators about Iran. When I asked McCain one final question about the aftermath of 2008, he said, “You find out who your friends are after something like that.” He projected no bitterness, only the restlessness of someone who had another place to get to in a hurry. “Do you mind if we walk?” he asked.