Some are looking for clues in the justices’ careers that could hint a decision. | AP Photos W.H. faces tough contraception fight

As a new round of religion-based challenges to President Barack Obama’s health care law head to the Supreme Court, advocates on both sides of the issue say the administration’s arguments are likely facing a chilly reception.

On Friday, the Obama administration urged the court to reject a plea from an order of nuns who say a provision of Obamacare conflicts with their opposition to birth control.

Story Continued Below

Already, the Supreme Court is preparing to hear two cases filed by private companies who say contraception provisions in the law violate their firms’ rights to religious freedom.

( PHOTOS: 21 landmark SCOTUS rulings)

Together, the cases could recreate a broad left-right coalition on the court that has emerged in the past decade to defend religious rights against alleged government intrusions.

“I wouldn’t be betting on the government winning,” said Michael McConnell, a former federal appeals court judge who favors granting broad religious exemptions. “I would say that the government has an uphill battle.”

A legal expert who has argued for a broad government right to enforce government policies like anti-discrimination laws agrees: the cases — both the immediate battle involving nonprofit nursing homes operated by the Little Sisters of the Poor, and the pending ones featuring for-profit companies Hobby Lobby and Conestoga Wood Specialties — will be tough fights.

“When I look at these cases, I’m not really sure there’s one vote to start with on the side of the government,” said Leslie Griffin, a law professor at the University of Las Vegas.

Experts pointed to two religious freedom cases the court has decided in the past decade, both of which wound up as abject defeats for the government.

( Also on POLITICO: Sonia Sotomayor faces health law contraception decision)

In 2006, the court ruled, 8-0, in favor of a New Mexico based church which wanted to use a sacramental tea containing a banned hallucinogen. And last year, the court ruled 9-0 in the case of a Lutheran Church employee that the Constitution bars the government from enforcing employment laws on behalf of anyone the church considers a minister.

At one time, conservatives on the court tended to side with the government in free-exercise fights. “Some of the conservatives — including, especially Justice Scalia…have not been sympathetic to religious exemptions from general laws,” noted Cornell Law Professor Michael Dorf.

Scalia’s 1990 opinion upholding the government’s power to penalize an individual for using peyote — even when used in a religious ritual — triggered a strongly negative political reaction from the right and the left. That led to the passage in 1993 of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, a federal law that made it tougher for the government to take actions that intrude on religious practice.

( Also on POLITICO: Full health care policy coverage)

The left-right coalition persists to this day and can now be seen from time to time on the high court.

“Democrats like minority religions because they’re minorities and Republicans like them because they’re religions,” Dorf said. “The problem is when you’re not asking for a small exception to a law nobody really cares about anyway, like one forbidding peyote use, but one about people paying their taxes.”

Since the passage of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, Scalia and some of the other conservative justices have seemed more open to religious claims. “He thinks the Constitution doesn’t require a religious exemption of its own force, but all of them seem perfectly happy to find exemptions based on RFRA,” Dorf added.

With scant indications of how relative newcomers to the court like Elena Kagan think about these issues, some are looking for clues earlier in the justices’ lives and careers.

When Kagan worked in the Clinton White House, she wrote an internal memo decrying the California Supreme Court’s narrow interpretation of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. She called “quite outrageous” an opinion denying a landlord’s claim that her religious beliefs were burdened by a state law that forced her to rent apartments to unmarried couples. “Taken seriously, this kind of reasoning could strip RFRA of any real meaning,” she warned.

“It does suggest she is not likely to accept the government’s argument that for-profit businesses are categorically unable to raise a free-exercise claim,” McConnell said, while noting that the 1996 memo might not correctly capture her present views on the subject.

McConnell also remembers Kagan being receptive to religious freedom arguments in her days as lawyer and domestic policy adviser for President Bill Clinton. “I do recall that those of us interested in enforcement of RFRA had reason to believe she was our friend and advocate within the White House,” said McConnell, now a professor at Stanford Law School.

CORRECTION: Corrected by: Kourtney Geers @ 01/04/2014 09:12 AM Correction: A previous version of this story misidentified David Gans.