Advertisement - story continues below

Business tycoon Donald Trump told Western Journalism reporter Norvell Rose at CPAC last weekend that he is seriously considering a run at the presidency in 2016 because the country “is in trouble” and “needs help” due to the current lack of leadership in Washington D.C.

Well, the country needs help. It’s in such trouble. It is in such a mess. We have a leader that doesn’t know how to lead and he doesn’t have the right ideas. And I think he’s got his own ideas, either that or he’s totally incompetent. And we have a country that needs help and it needs help quickly and badly.

In the spirit of his successful NBC show, The Celebrity Apprentice, Mr. Trump made his own pitch about why he should be the next president.

Advertisement – story continues below

It’s a very simple pitch: We want to make America great again. We are losing this country. We are making so many bad decisions, whether it’s ISIS and the way we go about it. Whether it’s Obamacare which is a disaster. Whether it’s social security and other things that are going down the tubes because of what’s going on. Whether it’s our debt, which is at 18 trillion dollars and it’s going to be 24 trillion very quickly and that’s a very important number because that’s a number you’re not going to come back from. There are so many problems with this country – we have such great potential. The way we negotiate with China is a joke. The potential is there, but the country is in trouble. We have no leadership.

The billionaire real estate mogul commented that national security is America’s number one problem, followed closely by the high unemployment rate that Trump insists is much higher than the government’s estimation.

I would right now say security. This has just changed — it used to be jobs, and jobs are certainly a big problem. We have a tremendous unemployment rate, probably 20 percent. It’s not 5.3 or 5.6 percent, because people that give up looking for jobs, they’re considered employed, which is ridiculous. We have a tremendous jobs problem, but right now I’d say security. We have a really big problem with what’s going on around the world. The world hates us. Advertisement – story continues below

Trump said he would like to run against potential presidential candidate Hillary Clinton in the next election because of her lackluster achievements as Secretary of State.

Well, it looks like it’s going to be Hillary Clinton. And she’ll be formidable, but she can absolutely be beaten. Because she’s got a lot of weaknesses. Because if you look at what she did as Secretary of State, it wasn’t so hot.

Mr. Trump concluded the interview with a message for CPAC attendees: “Make America great again.”

Trump announced at CPAC that there is an 80 percent chance he will run for the Republican nomination for president.

Advertisement – story continues below