On March 4, the U.S. Supreme Court heard oral arguments in the case of King v. Burwell, and a ruling should come around June. Ironically a ruling for King would largely demolish the Affordable Care Act by reinforcing the letter of the law itself. Here’s the gist of the case:

The health care law's individual mandate requires almost everyone to have health insurance or else pay a tax. If the law deems health insurance unaffordable for an individual, he may seek premium subsidies, but only on policies purchased through a health insurance exchange “established by the state under [Section] 1311.” If a large employer has any subsidized employees, it must pay an employer mandate penalty. No subsidized employees means no penalty. Section 1311 of the law sets rules for establishing state exchanges. If a state doesn’t meet the guidelines, the federal government follows Section 1321’s rules to establish a federal exchange (aka., healthcare.gov).

The federal government (Burwell) contends that Congress wanted subsidies available in both Section 1311 and Section 1321 exchanges, and some supporters say the case arises from a “drafting error.” Thirty-six states declined to establish Section 1311 exchanges, so the federal government established Section 1321 exchanges in those states. The law states that subsidies are available in Section 1311 exchanges but never says so with respect to Section 1321 exchanges. The plaintiffs (King) ask the Obama administration to follow the letter of the law.



[ALSO: 5 Problems With an Anti-Obamacare Supreme Court Decision]

What if King wins?

A ruling for Burwell maintains the status quo: Subsidies continue everywhere. But if King wins, big dominoes begin falling. Congress and/or states will have to take drastic action, soon.

A ruling for King eliminates subsidies in 36 states. The employer mandate in those states will be moot, since employers will have no subsidized employees. The individual mandate will largely vanish as high out-of-pocket insurance costs trigger individual mandate exemptions for most people. Unsubsidized insurance will become expensive, and insurers will face two restrictions that may rapidly cripple them.

Guaranteed issue means insurers must sell policies to anyone, regardless of health. Community rating means insurers can’t charge higher rates to sicker (higher-cost) subscribers. (Actually, it would be “modified” community rating, since insurers can impose modestly higher premiums on older people and smokers.) The likely scenario is a partial or total market “death spiral” like those, respectively, in New York and Kentucky in the 1990s.

As Clintoncare faded away, several states enacted reforms that looked very much like a post-King Affordable Care Act – guaranteed issue and community rating, but no subsidies or individual and employer mandates. New York experienced a partial death spiral – insurance premiums rose, driving out healthy purchasers, pushing premiums even higher. The percentage of uninsured barely budged, but premiums grew to crushing levels – where they still remain.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

Kentucky experienced a near-total death spiral. In 1994, the state imposed guaranteed issue and modified community rating rules nearly identical to those of the Affordable Care Act. It created Kentucky Kare – a plan for state government employees and poorer Kentuckians not qualified for Medicaid. Insurers by the dozens quickly fled the state, with those remaining suffering big losses. By late 1997, only Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield and Kentucky Kare were selling individual policies. More sick people and fewer healthy people bought insurance. Premiums soared. More Kentuckians than before were uninsured. From 1996 to 2004, the state dismantled the reforms, though the bleeding continued. Eventually, even Kentucky Kare was abandoned.

What will be the options?

If the court rules for King, the threat of death spirals will make fixes essential but politically and economically difficult. Here are four possibilities:

1) Congress extends subsidies to Section 1321 states: This requires a Republican House and Senate to rescue the law they despise and have promised to end.

2) Congress repeals guaranteed issue and community rating: This means Democrats fail to carry a filibuster, and President Barack Obama agrees to eviscerate his signature accomplishment.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

3) Persuade Section 1321 states to establish Section 1311 exchanges: The administration spent four years constructing healthcare.gov. The rollout was a disaster, and much of it remains nonfunctional. Some states had equally disastrous experiences with Section 1311 exchanges. Oregon spent $300 million on its exchange and never managed to construct a working website. Maryland’s exchange saga helped cost Democrats the governorship. Colorado’s exchange proved embarrassing. Vermont’s single-payer experiment went belly up. How many governors and legislators in Section 1321 states want to try pulling off in months what their federal and state peers could not do in four years?

4) Administrative workaround: The law says one thing, and the administration asserts that Congress meant it to say another thing. If the court says, “Administer the law as written, not as intended,” would the administration seek another executive action to negate the court’s ruling? Are any such strategies available?