Two Chicago-area health care companies announced acquisitions totaling more than $30 billion Thursday, but the pace of dealmaking nationwide continues to lag the flurry that occurred last year.

Mergers and acquisitions nationwide have totaled $358 billion year to date, according to Dealogic. That includes the newly struck $25 billion planned purchase of St. Jude Medical by Abbott and the $5.8 billion acquisition of a South San Francisco, Calif.-based cancer drug firm by AbbVie.

At this point last year, $487 billion in mergers and acquisitions had been announced, Dealogic spokesman Edward Jones said.

It has been a record year for corporate deals. Companies made more than $4.7 trillion in deals so far this year, surpassing 2007 as the top year for deals, according to Dealogic. The most recent deal, a tie-up of Dow Chemical and DuPont announced Friday, adds more than $60 billion to the total.

The slower pace in transactions is due largely to a tightening in credit, which makes less debt available for acquisitions, as well as stock market volatility that can make it tougher to value public companies, said Lee Mitchell, managing partner for private equity firm Thoma Bravo in Chicago. He said it was a "normal phenomenon and will pass."

Boding well for the Chicago area is the status of Abbott and AbbVie as the pursuers.

"It's always better to have our local companies be the acquirer rather than the acquired because that's more likely to mean more jobs here — or at least not less," Mitchell said.

Michael Roberts, a Roberts McGivney Zagotta lawyer who has experience in mergers and acquisitions, said it can help the local jobs scene when area companies make acquisitions.

Are Mega-Mergers Good for America? July 24 -- Bloomberg¿s Tom Keene, Michael McKee and Vonnie Quinn look at the Twitter question of the day. They speak on "Bloomberg Surveillance." July 24 -- Bloomberg¿s Tom Keene, Michael McKee and Vonnie Quinn look at the Twitter question of the day. They speak on "Bloomberg Surveillance." See more videos

Also, "the level of transactions in the city, both in mergers and acquisitions and in venture capital transactions, does nothing but increase the business prestige of the city and its attractiveness to other businesses," he said.

The Chicago area has also been on the losing end of mergers and acquisitions recently.

Baxalta was separated from Deerfield-based Baxter International and then agreed to be acquired by Dublin-based Shire.

And last year New York-based Pfizer acquired Lake Forest-based Hospira.

AbbVie spokeswoman Adelle Infante said the deal for Stemcentrx will help the North Chicago-based company expand its pipeline of cancer-fighting drugs in development. The deal is unlikely to create any additional jobs for the Chicago area, and no layoffs are planned at Stemcentrx either, she said.

Christopher Geier, partner-in-charge for the investment banking arm of Sikich in Chicago, said the deals reflect "the effect of aging baby boomers on our health care system both domestically and abroad."

"The need to be more competitive is driving consolidation," he said. "This competitive pressure to deliver quality, innovative products and services is ultimately good for consumers."

Geier said he expects Abbott to continue to make acquisitions.

"Any time a Chicagoland-based company makes an acquisition, it's good for Chicagoland," he said. "Typically a Chicagoland company that is acquired is not usually favorable for Chicagoland."

It wasn't all good news for the Chicago area on Thursday.

California-based Oracle said it plans to buy Deerfield-based Textura for $663 million. Geier said he would expect that deal to result in job losses locally.

Geier also pointed out that deal flow was particularly heavy last year.

"I expect activity will likely not match last year, but the need for growth, and, in particular, earnings growth, will continue to fuel further deals," Geier said. "Strong balance sheets and tepid GDP growth bodes well for further mergers and acquisitions."

In 2015, health care topped the list for biggest deals in a record-breaking year for mergers and acquisitions.

Pharmaceutical companies, device makers and health insurers racked up mergers worth $687.5 billion, according to Dealogic, a financial information firm.

Companies across all industries made $4.6 trillion worth of deals in 2015, surpassing the previous record of $4.3 trillion, set in 2007.

Being an acquirer is a sign of being strong, said Bill Snow, managing director of Chicago-based investment bank Jordan Knauff & Co.

"Given the bad press Illinois has received in recent years with companies fleeing the state for other states, Illinois companies growing through acquisition is a positive thing," he said.

What does it mean for investors?

"For companies that have developed innovative products or are growing, it's an opportunity for them and their investors to realize substantial value in a sale," said Tim Dugan, managing partner for Chicago-based private equity firm Water Street Healthcare Partners.

One dynamic that's driving deals is global competition, which is prompting companies to try to increase their scale and broaden their access to global markets and to more favorable tax rates, he said. The Affordable Care Act also is causing businesses to link up, as are diminishing returns on large research and development investments.

"The combination of these factors is driving more companies to pursue mergers and acquisitions for growth," Dugan said.

byerak@tribpub.com

Twitter @beckyyerak