Offense hits full stride early in victory

Colorado State wide receiver Rashard Higgins (82) is congratulated by teammates Dee Hart (10), Fred Zerblis (54) and Joe Hansley (25) after scoring a touchdown in the second quarter against Tulsa on Saturday at Lubick Field at Hughes Stadium. Higgins scored four touchdowns in the Rams' 42-17 victory. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

FORT COLLINS — The Rams were dressed to honor the past, but they sure didn't play like the Aggies of old.

Thankfully.

Back in the day, Colorado State's football team didn't win all that much. Saturday at Hughes Stadium at Lubick Field, the Rams rolled over Tulsa on their way to a 42-17 victory, moving the team to 4-1 on the season. It is their best record after five games since 2006.

That team finished 4-8, but this version seems far advanced from a collapse of that magnitude — the beginning of a 13-game losing streak. The offense scored a touchdown on its first possession for the first time this season, scored another to open the second half and a whole lot in between and after against an overmatched Tulsa (1-4) squad.

"You know what? That was a very satisfying win," CSU coach Jim McElwain said. "We're getting better as a football team, and we're starting to create an identity for ourselves, and I think that's important as we start to establish this program for years to come."

Most impressive was it came from all angles. CSU receiver Rashard Higgins was on the receiving end of all three of quarterback Garrett Grayson's first-half touchdown passes, set up nicely by the Rams' ability to run the ball. Dee Hart had his third 100-yard rushing day in a CSU uniform, and he notched it by halftime, finishing with a pair of touchdown runs.

Advertisement

"That's a goal obviously," said Grayson, who completed 12-of-18 passes for 236 yards and three touchdowns. "We're not a spread team, and we're not an option team. We like to be as balanced as we can. To come out and throw for 289 and rush for 230-something, I think it's pretty impressive to have that kind of balance."

Hart finished with 143 yards, leaving the game after McElwain said he had the air knocked out of him. Jasen Oden Jr., finished with 90 yards as the Rams rushed for a total of 234. The 532 yards of total offense was the second-best total for the team this season.

Colorado State running back Dee Hart (10) cuts upfield on a carry in the second quarter Saturday at Hughes Stadium. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Colorado State was up 28-0 with 4:54 remaining in the first half, putting the game effectively on ice and erasing that lingering feeling from last year, when Tulsa rallied for 13 fourth-quarter points to steal a win.

It was Higgins who stole the show early, scoring on his first three touches of the game. On the first two, Grayson hit him in stride in the end zone, the second was all Higgins.

He took a short slip screen and broke past the initial wave and put a move on Tulsa safety Demarcus Nelson that left him wide open field for a 73-yard score.

In the fourth, Higgins added his fourth touchdown reception off a pass from backup Nick Stevens.

"It was just clicking on cylinders, I would say," said Higgins, adding he's never scored four touchdowns in a game before. "Everything can't go our way all the time, but when it does, the sky's the limit."

Not to be ignored, the Rams' defense produced two first-half interceptions, one by Trent Matthews in the end zone on a fourth-down play to snuff out a Tulsa scoring opportunity. Tulsa quarterback Dane Evans faced constant pressure, sacked 3.5 times by Joe Kawulok, and the Golden Hurricane passing game which ranked in the top 30 in the nation never took flight.

"It was a lot of fun, but honestly a lot of that was the DBs had great coverage so the quarterback didn't have anywhere to throw," Kawulok said of the team's six sacks. "It gave me some extra time."

Tulsa threw for 263 yards in the game, but Evans was just 16-of-29 passing for 22 yards and a pair of interceptions, 101 of it going to Keevan Lucas on seven catches.

"We did some really good things defensively, trying to create some one-dimensional play out of them, try and stop the run a little bit, get a chance to affect the passer in the pocket, and I thought we did a good job of that," McElwain said.

With the win, the Rams head into the final seven games of the season, all Mountain West contests. Currently 0-1 in conference play, the team heads into a road game at Nevada riding confidence off two impressive victories.

"We had 4-1 in our mind. It's been a while since CSU had been 4-1, and we all talked about it," Grayson said. "The seniors kept bringing it up and bringing it up, because obviously we've been here through the very tough times. So we kept bringing it up to the younger guys, because obviously none of us know what that feeling is like.

"It's a very good feeling to walk out of here with a win.

Contact Sports Editor Mike Brohard at 970-635-3633 or mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard