Data from a just-released government survey shows the number of adults in the country who smoke has hit a new low of 16.8 percent, although the same data show an increase in smoking among certain populations.

Data from the 2014 National Health Interview Survey shows that the prevalence of cigarette smoking among U.S. adults declined from 20.9 percent to 16.8 percent, from 2005 to 2014, including a full percentage-point decline between 2013 and 2014, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The survey also shows that the average number of cigarettes smoked per day among daily smokers declined from 16.7 in 2005 to 13.8 in 2014, which the CDC said is driven by declines in the proportion of smokers with a daily habit of 20 or more cigarettes per day.

However, the data also shows, according to the CDC, that 27.9 percent of uninsured adults and 29.1 percent of Medicaid recipients currently smoke. By contrast, 12.9 percent of adults with private insurance and 12.5 percent of those on Medicare currently smoke.

The data was released yesterday, the same day the federal government proposed a ban (pdf) on smoking in public housing.

This most recent correlation of income with smoking reflects 2013 government studies showing that individuals from families with incomes some 600 percent above the poverty rate have the lowest rate, just over 9 percent, among family groups. By contrast, some 29.5 percent of those with incomes below the poverty level were said to smoke in 2013.

The information is published in the CDC's Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.

In a release, Dr. Tom Frieden, CDC director, heralded the data as showing progress toward "helping American smokers quit and that more progress is possible." The government has set a goal of reducing the overall rate of smoking among adults to 12 percent or lower by 2020.

However, the study found certain population groups to remain at risk as reported by previous studies.

"These findings underscore the importance of ensuring that proven strategies to prevent and reduce tobacco use reach the entire population, particularly vulnerable groups," said Brian King, deputy director for research translation for the CDC's office on smoking and health.

"Comprehensive smoke-free laws, higher prices for tobacco products, high-impact mass media campaigns, and barrier-free access to quitting help are all important. They work to reduce the enormous health and financial burden of tobacco use and secondhand smoke exposure among Americans."

The Affordable Care Act has mandated, since 2010, that private insurers provide access, at no cost, to interventions to help smokers quit, with specific provisions left to the state. The act also requires Medicaid to provide such access to enrolled pregnant women.

In 2015, although all 50 state Medicaid programs covered some tobacco cessation treatments for some Medicaid enrollees, the release states, only a handful covered individual and group counseling and all seven FDA-approved cessation medications for all Medicaid enrollees.

Also, only nine states - Colorado, Illinois, Maryland, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oregon, Rhode Island, and Vermont - are said to have laws or regulations in place requiring at least some private insurance plans to cover certain cessation treatments.

In Massachusetts, Medicaid recipients have access (pdf) to both group and individual counseling, as well as all FDA approved medications.

In 2014, according to the study, the prevalence of cigarette smoking continues to be higher among these groups:





Males (18.8 percent vs. 14.8 percent for females)



Adults ages 25-44 years (20.0 percent)



Multiracial (27.9 percent) or American Indian/Alaska Natives (29.2 percent)



People with a General Education Development certificate (43.0 percent)



People who live below the federal poverty level (26.3 percent)



People who live in the Midwest (20.7 percent)



People who have a disability/limitation (21.9 percent)



People who are lesbian, gay, or bisexual (23.9 percent)