Senator Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, discussed new legislation at Compass Family and Community Services in Warren on Monday morning.

The proposed legislation will help combat opioid abuse, according to Brown.

The Ohio Department of Health reports that 2,482 Ohio residents died from drug overdoses in 2014, the most recent numbers that are available. Opioids — prescription, fentanyl and heroin — accounted for 1,988 of those deaths. That means that more than 80 percent of all overdoses in Ohio were opioid-related.

Last year heroin caused 80 overdoses in Trumbull County alone.

“That’s why I’ve introduced the Heroin and Prescription Drug Abuse Prevention and Reduction Act – a comprehensive solution to address this multifaceted problem,” Brown said in a news release. “It should not be easier for Ohioans to get their hands on opioids than it is for them to get help to treat their addiction.”

Brown joined Linda Spies, a mother from Trumbull County who's son is managing his addiction through medication-assisted treatment, also known as MAT.

Joe Caruso, President and CEO of Compass Family and Community Services, also discussed how Brown’s legislation will help their organizations better serve the residents and communities in the Mahoning Valley.

Brown outlined his legislation, which he says represents a comprehensive approach to address the entire spectrum of addiction, including boosting prevention, improving tools for crisis response, expanding access to treatment – like medication-assisted treatment – and providing support for lifelong recovery.

Brown says his bill will prevent addiction by implementing regular trainings for health care professionals who prescribe opioids and creating a grant program to improve the tracking and reporting of fatal and nonfatal drug overdoses.

The bill would also providing funding for communities to train first responders, physicians, pharmacists, and the public to respond quickly and effectively to prevent overdoses; make naloxone more affordable and accessible; and fund syringe exchange programs, according to the release.

Brown also says the bill will expand access to treatment by focusing medication-assisted treatment on regions experiencing rapid increases in heroin and prescription opioid use; authorizing grants to increase access to residential treatment programs for pregnant and post-partum women; creating a pilot program to allow for outpatient treatment services for pregnant women; expanding the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration’s capacity to award grants; and increasing the pool of trained care providers.

In addition, the release said the bill will support life-long recovery by establishing a new grant program for accredited recovery high schools and higher education to provide substance use recovery support to high school and college students; expanding recovery support services through mentorship, peer support, community education and outreach programs; developing partnerships between recovery support groups and community organizations; and strengthening parity in mental health and substance use disorder health insurance benefits.