Drew Brees’ tablet and Mark Ingram's two touchdowns couldn’t help the Saints overcome a lack of defense and two turnovers.

Atlanta gained 568 total yards, winning the back and forth battle in the Georgia Dome. A Matt Bryant field goal in overtime beat New Orleans, 37-34.

The story of today’s game begins and ends with the Saints lackluster defense. Falcons quarterback Matt Ryan threw for a career high 448 yards, three touchdowns and absolutely shredded the Saints secondary.

Most of that had to do with the Saints getting no pressure from their defensive line. The Saints defense had one sack and gave Ryan lots of time in the pocket.

Perhaps even more amazing, the Falcons had five wide receivers with 50 or more receiving yards.

The game started off on a good note for the Saints. A 32-yard catch for Brandin Cooks, the first of his career, got the Saints into the red zone, but the drive stalled after a Zach Strief penalty and the Saints settled for a 31-yard field goal. They followed it up with a 50-yard kick from Shayne Graham.

The only defensive highlight for the Saints came in the first quarter, when Jairus Byrd stripped Falcons wide receiver Julio Jones of the ball, allowing Corey White to recover it.

The Saints turned that fumble into seven points. A nine play, 80-yard drive was capped off by a two-yard touchdown for Khiry Robinson.

After that, the Saints defense was almost invisible.

The Falcons got on the board after a rough performance from Keenan Lewis. The Saints cornerback was called for a very iffy pass interference penalty, then got trucked by Devonta Freeman on third down.

A Roddy White touchdown got the Falcons's scoring started.

The Saints came right back though.

Jimmy Graham and Pierre Thomas made a few big plays to get the Saints down the field. Then, Drew Brees found Cooks for his first career touchdown to give the Saints a 20-7 lead.

But more lackadaisical Saints defense allowed the Falcons to march 57 yards in twenty seconds to cut the lead to 10.

Leading 20-10, the third quarter was a nightmare for the Saints.

Ryan launched the ball all over the field, hitting Roddy White and Julio Jones, then tight end Levine Toilolo for a touchdown.

The Saints got the ball back, drove down the field, but Drew Brees threw a very unBrees-esque pick when he tried to fit the ball into a tight space.

On the ensuing possession, the Falcons capitalized on the Saints' poor tackling and took their first lead of the game.

A short dump pass to the right from Ryan to Antone Smith baffled the Saints. Smith broke a few tackles and ran 54 yards for a touchdown.

After three quarters, the Saints were down 24-20.

The fourth quarter went back and forth between the two teams. The Saints scored first, driving down the field in 12 plays.

It was capped off by an angry Mark Ingram touchdown run.

The Falcons responded by picking apart the Saints dreadful secondary, then gashed them with a run that made Saints fans feel sick.

Jacquizz Rodgers took the handoff, broke three touchdowns then scampered into the endzone for a 17-yard touchdown.

Once again, the Saints responded. It took a minute and a half for the Saints to get in the end zone.

Ingram gave the team the lead, but there was too much time on the clock for the Saints defense to cough up the game.

A 51-yard field goal from Matt Bryant tied the game with no time remaining and sent the game to overtime.

In overtime, the Saints got the ball first, but Marques Colston uncharacteristically fumbled after catching a pass from Drew Brees.

That set up the Falcons in a perfect way. Bryant booted a 54- yard field goal and the Saints are coming back to New Orleans with their first loss of the year.

Here are some things to look out for as the Saints prepare for next week’s game against the Cleveland Browns:

-Patrick Robinson’s injury and what it means for the Saints defense.

-The Saints defensive line or lack thereof. Rob Ryan’s got a lot of work to do as the Saints prepare for week 2.

-Can the Saints establish their running game like they did against Atlanta? 139 yards is not a bad start to the season.

Player of the game: Brandin Cooks – 7 catches, 77 yards, 1 touchdown. 1 rush, 18 yards.