J.J. Hickson knows his days in Denver are coming to a close. It’s his hope that wherever his next destination is, ample playing time follows.

“I’ll be all right,” he said.

The Nuggets have been trying to trade Hickson for the better part of the past month, attempting to get him into a better situation to continue what should be many more years left in his NBA career. He has been suffering on the bench for most of this season while the Nuggets, stuffed with too many capable players in the frontcourt, go through a youth movement with their bigs.

That pushed Hickson from spot duty to pretty much no duty unless in an emergency. Hickson hasn’t liked it, and coach Michael Malone said on many occasions that he knows not playing has been tough on the veteran. But Hickson has handled the situation in the classiest manner possible — by not making waves, by continuing to be arguably the funniest player in the Nuggets’ locker room and, most important, by keeping himself ready to play.

That’s reflected in his numbers.

With inconsistent playing time, Hickson has averaged 7.2 points and 4.7 rebounds while shooting 50.5 percent from the field. Per 36 minutes, those numbers look like this: robust averages of 16.2 points and 10.3 rebounds. He is contributing a lot of production in a limited amount of court time.

Hickson has made nine starts this season. The Nuggets are 5-4 in those games, and they are 15-26 with any other combination of starters.

Hickson, 27, can play power forward or center at 6-foot-9. But with Kenneth Faried, Darrell Arthur, Joffrey Lauvergne, Nikola Jokic and Jusuf Nurkic also at those positions, and with Danilo Gallinari capable of playing power forward too, there are just too many obstacles to get Hickson on the court.

Some other scuttle concerning the Nuggets that I’ve been hearing as the league approaches the Feb. 18 trade deadline.

Blake Griffin isn’t coming to Denver

A report connecting the Nuggets to the Clippers with interest in the veteran all-star made the rounds late last week.

The Nuggets aren’t the only team that has inquired about what it might take to get Griffin, whose standing in Los Angeles became rocky after his scuffle with a team equipment manager. The Clippers, who are in “win now” mode, still think they are better off with Griffin than without him and aren’t biting on anything for now. But keep an eye on this situation. If the Clippers are eliminated again in the playoffs, they may decide to make significant changes that could include moving Griffin. The Nuggets would be interested then too.

Will Barton is a hot commodity

Teams are knocking on the Nuggets’ door about the 6-6 guard, who is having a breakout season. They have called a lot about Barton, 25, and even offered first-round picks for him, but he’s not going anywhere. The Nuggets know he is a gem, and they’re going to hold on tight.

Interest in Joffrey Lauvergne continues

Malone has said a few times that Lauvergne is part of the Nuggets’ future, but the second-year center knows business can sometimes get in the way. “We’ll see,” he said, when asked if thinks he will be playing for the Nuggets after the trade deadline. Interest in Lauvergne, 24, is nothing new. Calls inquiring about his availability started coming in before the season even started. The Nuggets rebuffed them then and are likely to hold on to him through the trade deadline, but nothing is set in stone.

Kenneth Faried always is on teams’ minds

Faried, 26, quietly has had a solid season, holding down the power forward position without missing much time because of injuries. His effort in the Nuggets’ win over Chicago on Friday earned praise from Malone. With a reasonable contract and a big impact on the court, there continue to be suitors for his services as his value remains high. He isn’t officially on the trade block — never has been, really — but a “too good to be true” offer might entice the Nuggets to pull the trigger on a deal.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@ denverpost.com or @dempseypost

Spotlight on …

Kobe Bryant, F, L.A. Lakers

When: Bet you didn’t see this coming. And yet, here it is: Kobe Bryant caught fire last week and is The Post’s player of the week.

What’s up: In three games Bryant was brilliant, averaging 29.3 points, 8.3 rebounds, 3.3 assists and 2.0 steals. Bryant shot 44 percent from the field and 50 percent from the 3-point line, and he racked up all of these statistics while playing just 29 minutes per game, by far the least time of any of the players among the top 10 scorers during the span. The Lakers won two of the three games.

Background: Anyone who has watched the Lakers knows this has been an up-and-down season for Bryant, who has already announced this would be his last. But there’s always room for more memorable performances, and Kobe put them on the court during this span. He had a season-high 38 points in a win over Minnesota and put 27 points and 12 rebounds on the board in a Lakers’ win over New Orleans.

Dempsey’s take: Bryant’s name on a player-of-the-week list used to be a no-brainer. This season’s struggles have made it very different, but this has been fun having a chance to get him into the award circle one more time. He showed that when he is on and scoring and doing the things that win games, the Lakers do, in fact, win. L.A. is 3-0 when he scores 30 or more and 4-1 when he scores more than 25 points.