Bill Jackson plays Father Christmas in the Milwaukee Entertainment Group’s production of “Upon a Midnight Clear: A Tale of Jack Frost.” Credit: Perry Heideman

By ,

Would you give up immortality for human love?

Tolkien's elfin Arwen did, in "The Lord of the Rings"; ditto Rusalka, in Dvorák's opera.

In Milwaukee playwright Liz Shipe's "Upon a Midnight Clear," which opened Friday in the Brumder Mansion's basement theater, the sprite answering this question is Jack Frost, who has fallen hard for a fetching human named Gwen.

As the play begins shortly before midnight on Christmas Eve, Jack is preparing to propose, which would finish his career as an immortal.

But while Jack has spent a gap year slumming with humans and falling for Gwen, the early moments of this 75-minute play suggest Jack still has a few things to learn about that crazy little thing called love.

The proposal scene Jack imagines in his mind's eye is planned to a T and well-rehearsed; tellingly, he practices his lines before a mirror, reflecting an element of narcissism in his desire to start fresh.

So much for the open-ended spontaneity and unpredictability that comes with being human.

Jack thinks he wants to be one, but he's also a bit of a control freak, as becomes clear when Gwen shows up and suggests a change in plans.

Shipe at this point throws a curve of her own, flipping this coming-of-age story about growing beyond ourselves onto its side, where we see Jack's efforts to grow up from a new angle: Choose self-involved love with the mortal Gwen, or stay immortal to help fellow superheroes save Christmas?

Those superheroes are Father Christmas — Bill Jackson, as a cross between the Ghost of Christmas Present and Santa — and David Franz's mischievous Wodan, cast by Shipe as Jack's randy brother.

Collectively, this trio makes the weather and brings the cheer that protects Christmas from the predatory Krampus, a shape-shifting devil from Germanic folklore who preys on the young, spoiling their Christmas and darkening the world.

Think of the Krampus as Scrooge: a lovelorn, onetime human — Shipe ingeniously grafts another Hans Christian Andersen tale as a backstory — whose hardened heart masks bitter loneliness.

That makes the Krampus (Madison McCarthy) a sort of dark double for Jack himself.

Both are starved for love and warmth, but neither knows how to leave the chilly but clean-lined world they've always known.

Both have yet to fully learn that give-and-take love — imperfect and sure to end, in disunion or death — is what paradoxically allows humans to become immortal.

This clever twist on the Christmas story would be sharper if Gwen — the play's lone human — weren't so underwritten, and if Cory Jefferson Hagen's Jack and Bridget Christine Kelly's Gwen weren't so wooden in their scenes together.

Director Bryan Quinn (who also has a cameo as the Sandman) overcompensates by pumping up the volume in exchanges involving the immortals; Franz in particular needs to dial down.

The plus side includes Jackson's Santa with a 'tude and Shipe's writing, which manages to be both heady and lightly funny.

This script tries to do too much, but it's smart and alive as well as messy and tangled — true to a story that makes clear that perfection is overrated.

IF YOU GO

"Upon a Midnight Clear: A Tale of Jack Frost" continues through Dec. 21 at Brumder Mansion, 3046 W. Wisconsin Ave. For tickets, visit milwaukeeentertainmentgroup.com.