She is one of the fashion world's most enduring stars and has barely changed in the 27 years since she burst onto the scene aged 14 in 1988.

Now Kate Moss has shared some of her beauty secrets - but admits that she still sometimes forgets to take her make-up off.

The mother-of-one also revealed that she felt most beautiful on her wedding day but likes to keep things simple the rest of the time because that way 'there's little room for mistakes, thankfully'.

Scroll down for video

Beauty secrets: Kate Moss, pictured with Cara Delevigne, has revealed the secret of her youthful looks

Other top tips include using a body scrub in the shower every day, patting on face oil at night and keeping sun exposure to a minimum.

'At night, I love the ritual of applying a face oil - they make me feel like my skin has been restored and are just so nourishing,' she said in an interview with the Sunday Telegraph's Stella magazine.

'You feel like you're plumping up your skin and just putting a bit of life back in it.'

Although the 41-year-old says she isn't too keen on pampering, she does indulge in the odd manicure ('my shade of choice is a dark red') and has occasional facials with celebrity favourite Nichola Joss.

Make-up is also kept simple, with Moss revealing that 'a bit of mascara with a stronger lip and a St. Tropez Skin Illuminator for a little extra glow' is all that's needed most days.

Most beautiful: She says she felt most beautiful on her wedding day but usually keeps things simpler

Unchanged: The model, 41, has changed little since bursting onto the scene in 1988

If she wants to emphasise her famous cheekbones, she mixes bronzer and highlighter for contouring and says her favourite is Charlotte Tilbury's Filmstar Killer Cheekbones duo.

Moss, who was last week seen sashaying through Heathrow Airport after returning from a holiday, has been busy of late and has thrown her support behind a campaign to save the Arctic.

She, along with Rita Ora, appears in a new collection of photos shot by Andy Gott and displayed at Waterloo station.

The location is close to the London headquarters of oil company Shell which plans to start drilling for petroleum in the Arctic.

In the photos, Moss and fellow campaigners David Tennant, Poldark star Aidan Turner and Hugh Grant to name but a few, wear Vivienne Westwood-designed t-shirts with the slogan 'Save The Arctic'.

New campaign: Moss is currently starring in a campaign aimed at saving the Arctic from oil drilling

Pamela Anderson – model and Baywatch star, who features in the collection – said of the campaign:

'Some of the most vulnerable potential victims of Big Oil in the Arctic - the whales, walruses, migrating eider ducks, and polar bears - have no voice. But we do. Time to save the Arctic.'

Doctor Who star Peter Capaldi adds: 'We know this planet is a fragile one. Yet we stand and watch as the Arctic shrinks…The time has come to stop watching. We must act.'

The campaign also features the Duchess of York, Jerry Hall, Stella McCartney, Chris Martin and Tom Hiddleston.

Co-star: Poldark hunk Aidan Turner also appears in the campaign and wears a Save The Arctic t-shirt