Sitting on the porch of her Loveland home, Christy Strahan-Ricke, left, and her brother Scott Strahan pose for a photo Thursday holding a shadow box displaying medals that their dad, James Michael Strahan, was given for his service in the Vietnam War as a Marine. After their dad died, he was laid to rest at Arlington National Cemetery this spring. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

For most of his life, James "Johnny" Michael Strahan of Loveland avoided conversations surrounding his wartime service in Vietnam.

Strahan was a member of the 1st Battalion 9th Marines, also known as the "Walking Dead" because of its high casualty rate — which some say was the highest casualty rate in Marine Corps history.

During his service, Strahan suffered two major injuries. He was shot once in the chest and once in the leg.

"His leg pretty much got blown off," his daughter Christy Ricke said, "but they repaired it, and he always walked with a tiny little bit of a limp."

Ricke said he was lucky to have survived those injuries.

When he returned home, however, he rarely spoke of his time in Vietnam — not even to his family, Ricke said.

"I think that he just hated it for a really long time," she said.

"I think that he thought it was a bad thing for so long," she said. "I think he really struggled with that in his soul. He isn't proud that he killed people. He doesn't like that."

A Difficult Homecoming

It wasn't just Strahan, either. Many Vietnam-era veterans found it difficult to return to a country where the war — and its participants — fount varying levels of support.

Ken Curry served in the Air Force during the Vietnam War from 1970 to 1972, and he said he did not speak of his time in war either after returning home.

"I just found it was better not to talk about it. Not to talk about my past," Curry said.

Advertisement

Serving on temporary duty, Curry piloted in Vietnam for less than six months at a time before his brief returns home.

Upon returning home on short notice in 1972, Curry and his crew of six men took a commercial flight to their home base with still wearing their one-piece flight suits. Some in the airport gave them a bitter welcome home by spitting on Curry and his crew.

"I mean when somebody spits on you... can you imagine that?" Curry said. "I mean, today that hardly ever happens."

The family of James Michael Strahan shared this photo of the Vietnam veteran who was buried earlier this year at Arlington National Cemetery. (Special to the Reporter-Herald)

He said many strongly opposed the U.S.'s involvement in Vietnam at that time.

"I think there was an element of dislike about anyone in this country going over to another country and fighting in a war with them," he said, "when a lot of people felt there was no good reason for it. In fact, they probably were right, looking back. Truly."

Ricke said she has difficulty imagining what her father must have experienced after he signed on to the war at 17 years old.

"You go there, and you kill people, and you watch all these people die. It's got to be absolutely horrid," she said. "I mean, you really can't imagine it. You really can't imagine it. You can hear about it, and you can talk about it, and you can see all the movies, but you can not imagine what that must be like."

Ricke said any time they watched war movies, Strahan scoffed at most of them and said: "What a joke. I'm telling you now: it ain't anything like that."

But she said she recalled one movie they watched years ago. Twenty seconds into the film, Strahan promptly left.

"Like 20 seconds into it, he got up, and walked away, and nobody saw him for like 10 days," she said.

Veterans Start to Reconnect

Ricke said Strahan was about 50 before he claimed any veteran benefits.

"I think, in the end — and I can't speak for him, because I don't really know — but I think that he finally took advantage of all that he could because he was a veteran," she said.

Curry said the VA gave him a safe place to talk about his experiences in Vietnam.

"The acceptance has been great," he said, "because we're all brothers and we all did this at the same time."

After Strahan began to open up about his veteran status, he also began to attend and even host reunions with other veterans and men he fought alongside.

"We were just proud of him that he was embracing that, getting all the credit for that, because all this time he hadn't," Ricke said.

Curry said military men and women today are no longer treated disrespectfully.

"People are able to look at it and say: 'They're protecting us. That's worth something,'" Curry said.

A Final Honor

When Strahan died earlier this year, his relationship with the Marine Corps had come full circle. He and his family applied for interment at Arlington National Cemetery outside Washington, D.C., and his request was accepted.

Ricke said the process was long, and he had to qualify early on. Strahan's two Purple Hearts qualified him for burial at the national cemetery — a burial Ricke believes he wanted for his children.

The respect he had earned through his reconnection with the Marines showed, as his brothers in arms came from around the country to mark the occasion.

"He sacrificed a lot, and it's good that America and the Marine Corps honor that and respect that," she said. "And love him. Like, they love him and appreciate him like crazy. It's unbelievable."

Ricke said she was amazed by the service that honored the man she had so often looked to.

"If you could ever just spend some time with him, it was good," she said. "Because he'd always have something to teach you. He's a great conversationalist, and you could talk to him about anything. And, eventually, he would make a joke about, it and you would die laughing."

Forty-five years after his service to his country, his country paid him tribute.

"He thought it would be cool for us, a good legacy for us that grandpa's buried there and dad's buried there," Ricke said. "It really was never about what he did and he thought he was a hero, because he didn't think that. He definitely didn't feel that way. But he is. He's awesome. Two Purple Hearts and a Bronze Star is amazing."

Cassie Maack: 970-635-3691, news@reporter-herald.com