GEORGETOWN, Ky. (AP) - Kentucky Republicans selected six delegates to the Republican National Convention on Saturday who say they are not committed to a particular candidate if the nominating process reaches a second ballot.

Kentucky will send 46 delegates to the Republican National Convention in Cleveland in July. On the first ballot, the delegates will be awarded according to the results of Kentucky’s presidential caucus last month where Donald Trump won 17 delegates, Ted Cruz won 15 delegates and John Kasich and Marco Rubio won seven delegates each.

It takes 1,237 delegates to secure the nomination. If no candidate has enough delegates after the first ballot, Kentucky’s delegates would be free to support any candidate they choose.

“I’m looking forward to it. I think this is going to be one for the history book,” said Brenda Barnett, of Campbellsville, who was elected as a delegate during Kentucky’s 1st Congressional District Convention on Saturday. “I’m … of the opinion that whoever has the most delegates should be the pick, but again I’m waiting to see what how the rest of the election pans out.”

Kentucky’s 6th Congressional Republican Convention chose U.S. Rep. Andy Barr, state Sen. Ralph Alvarado and state Republican Party Treasurer Cathy Bell as delegates. The 1st Congressional Republican Convention chose district chairman Rick Grana, Christian County Republican Party treasurer George Barnett and Campbellsville resident Brenda Barnett.

Barr, who is in his second term in Congress, said he would listen to his constituents when casting his ballot at the convention. He noted a majority of Republican voters in his congressional district supported Cruz in Kentucky’s presidential caucus.

“I give that weight,” Barr said. “I give weight to the fact that Mr. Trump was a close second.”

Alvarado, a medical doctor in his first term in the state Senate, was a delegate in 2012 for Romney and acted as a surrogate for him in some of Florida’s Hispanic communities. This year, he first supported Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, then Florida Sen. Marco Rubio. Now that both have ended their campaigns, Alvarado has not decided on a candidate.

“I’ve had a lot of people here today just ask me to take an approach for what is best for the party, not to ignore what people have voted for thus far,” he said.

Of Kentucky’s 46 delegates, 18 are selected from the congressional district conventions. The state convention will select 25 delegates on April 23. State party chairman Mac Brown, national committeeman Mike Duncan and national committeewoman KC Crosbie have the final three delegate slots.

The 4th Congressional District elected delegates last week. They are U.S. Rep. Thomas Massie, Tea Party activist Garth Kuhnhein and Henry County GOP chairman Jon Park.