By Amy Nolan of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Overtime Exemption

Regulation: U.S. Department of Labor update to Fair Labor Standards Act minimum wage and overtime pay requirements

Who’s affected: Estimated 5 million executive, administrative and professional workers

Last updated: 2004

Current salary minimum for exempt employees: $455 per week or $23,660 a year

Proposed salary minimum: $970 or $50,440 for 2016

Future increases: Automatically adjusts to remain at the 40th percentile of salaried workers

When: Rule is expected to be published in 2016 with employers expected to be given definitive time period to become compliant

East Tennessee employers will have to take a hard look at how they staff their operations as the result of federal actions expected in 2016, local labor law experts say.

New rules — and stricter interpretations and enhanced enforcement — are expected from the Department of Labor, National Labor Relations Board, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and others to push the agenda of President Barack Obama while Congress remains gridlocked along partisan lines.

“In some people’s views, these agencies have greatly expanded their role in legislating the laws rather than enforcing them,” says Tim McConnell, vice chair of the labor and employment practice group at Baker Donelson’s Knoxville office.

The most notable change to hit employers’ bottom line — and, perhaps, employees’ paychecks depending on how employers react — is the Department of Labor’s proposal to nearly double the minimum salary requirement for exempt employees.

The Labor Department is expected to release in 2016 a rule raising the minimum salary threshold for exempt employees from $455 a week ($23,660 a year) to about $970 a week ($50,440 a year).

The most recent report on Knoxville area occupations and wages from the The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports a mean average salary for first-line supervisors as $49,980.

The new rule is also expected to establish a mechanism for automatically updating the salary and compensation levels going forward.

“Employers are really having to rethink how they pay people,” says Melissa Carrasco, an attorney with Egerton McAfee Armistead & Davis. “I have not heard anyone say they think the department is going to back off this.”

Roughly 5 million salaried employees nationwide are expected to fall under the minimum requirement.

Guesses vary on when the final rule will be released next year, and most observers expect regulators to give organizations 90 days to six months to implement it.

Beyond increasing salaries, employers might consider adjusting schedules, lines of authority, duties and other measures.

“Now is the time to be evaluating and thinking through those things,” Carrasco says. “I truly think this rule will go into effect. The place where this comes up most frequently are assistant managers everywhere — convenience stores, restaurants, small businesses — most (general managers) in every industry I work with think this is a really big deal.”

The Labor Department also indicated it would take comments on what professional and administrative duties fall under the exemption. “There is also a very good chance they will update some of those duties,” she says.

Marshall Stair, a lawyer with Lewis Thomason and Knoxville city councilman, says the restaurant industry has been a vocal opponent of the change. In East Tennessee, it’s not unusual for an assistant manager at a convenience store or fast-food restaurant to make between $35,000 and $40,000 and work longer than 40-hour workweeks, he says.

“The industry is going to have to make a decision whether to hire two of those people or to raise their salaries,” he said.

His law firm colleague, Chris McCarty, says the move could also affect some traditional professional jobs — an entry-level accountant or project manager, for example.

Other regulatory issues to watch in 2016 include:

The Affordable Care Act

“2016 is really when it hits the fan, because everybody who has 50 employees or more is required to provide or offer insurance to 95 percent of full-time employees or pay a penalty,” Carrasco says. “The thing most people don’t seem to realize is that if you have fewer than 50 employees there are still parts of the ACA that apply. Starting in 2016, there are new reporting requirements. There are three new forms that no matter how big or small you are you still have to file.”

Background checks

McCarty advises employers to review whether background checks are really necessary for prospective employees.

President Obama in November instructed the Office of Personnel Management to provide guidance to federal agencies about requiring prospective employees to disclose their criminal histories on job applications. He cited the move as one way to help former inmates reenter society.

The president has called on Congress to follow a growing number of states, cities and private companies by requiring all employers to “ban the box” on job applications.

McCarty advises employers to re-evaluate whether the job requires a background check of an employee before or after a conditional offer is made.

“The EEOC has already started calling out employers and hitting them with investigations — it’s sort of already being enforced,” McCarty says.

Family and Medical Leave Act

“One of the huge issues I see, and it’s the most common question I get, is managing leaves of absence,” McConnell says. “We are seeing more and more employers who are struggling with how to manage leaves and keeping the workplace productive in those leave situations.”

He urges supervisors to be “proactive in managing the leave and communicate with the employee regularly. Don’t wait too far down the road before asking questions about the leave.”

He also notes that employees for whom managers are questioning the validity of leave are likely employees who have had attendance issues in the past. “When you see attendance issues start, that’s the time to deal with them, not later on,” he says.

Immigration

Catherine Barnes, director of human resources for Shafer HR Solutions, says employers need to pay close attention filling out paperwork related to hiring immigrants, also known as I-9 employment eligibility verification.

“The government is very much a stickler on how they are completed, and employers aren’t filling it out exactly as they government requires,” Barnes says.

Carrasco encourages employers — who are responsible for ensuring both their and employees’ forms are completed correctly — “to take two minutes and look at each and every square to make sure it’s filled out.”

Prospective employees also have the choice on what to provide among listed documents to prove they can legally work.

“I have some employers who want to say bring me your passport or you drivers license or Social Security card,” Carrasco says. “We have had a huge influx of people in refugee status, temporary protection status claiming asylum and those covered by the DREAM Act. Every one of those people in those categories are not truly in a visa category, but it doesn’t mean they can’t work.”

Independent contractors

The Labor Department’s Wage and Hour Division administrator in July released a detailed “advisory” on independent contractors, which many observers considered a more limited definition and the presumption that more of them should be classified as employees.

“The undertone is we are going to starting investigating and will start fining,” Carrasco says.

Industries that rely heavily on independent contractors — construction, for example — should examine whether they are classified correctly under the new standard.

Don’t panic, she says: Review the definition to determine what other actions can be taken rather than simply reclassifying them all as employees.

Federal officials earlier this year touted that 2014 investigations related to misclassified employees resulted in more than $79 million in back wages to more than 109,000 workers in industries, including the janitorial, temporary help, food service, day care, hospitality and garment industries.

Same-sex marriage

Employers have adapted quickly to the Supreme Court ruling requiring states to legally recognize same-sex marriages, with most updating their policies by discarding domestic partner benefits.

While several lawsuits are pending from employers seeking a religious exemption to the requirement, lawyers said that’s not been an issue locally.

“I predict the vast majority of employers if they grant benefits to married heterosexual couples that they extend them to same-sex couples,” Stair said.

Barnes said employers should review their insurance policies to ensure the language matches their employment policies and vice versa.

Carrasco says the ruling is a relief to the many employers already offering domestic partner benefits.

“I am seeing more companies dialing back their benefits, so they don’t have to monitor who is eligible and who is not. They’re thinking, ‘If it’s recognized we don’t have to get ourselves involved in relationships,’ ” she says.

Social media

Trash talking a government employer has always been protected by the First Amendment, but the NLRB has extended that protection to employees of private companies too by considering social media discussion by unhappy employees “a protected concerted activity” allowed under Section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act. That interpretation can create holes in nondisparagement policies.

The NLRB, McCarty says, “has always had the power to be a referee ... social media has caused them to get more involved with nonunion workplaces but to apply the same principles.”

Barnes says the NLRB also is protecting employees who disclose and discuss wages and benefits among themselves.

Unsafe work environments

OSHA in November was authorized to raise fines beginning in August 2016 by as much as 75 to 80 percent. Fines have not been raised since 1990.

“That is an awful lot of money especially for a one-time issue,” Carrasco says. “Manufacturers, in particular, should take a hard look at their safety plan.”

Amy Nolan is editor of the Greater Knoxville Business Journal.