Thousands of supporters chanting “Trump, Trump, Trump” and “Build the Wall” cheered presidential candidate Donald Trump throughout his 80-minute speech Saturday to a crowd crammed into The Jacksonville Landing’s courtyard.

Coming on the heels of Trump’s campaign stop Friday in Miami, Jacksonville is the second Florida city visited by Trump as polls show him leading two other candidates who are rooted in state politics — former Gov. Jeb Bush and U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio.

Spotted slideshow: Donald Trump at the Jacksonville Landing

Trump said Bush is in the midst of a “failing campaign” that had to cut staff salaries by 40 percent.

“Here’s a guy who wants to run the country and he can’t even run his own campaign,” Trump said.

Trump said Rubio is trailing in the polls, “sweats like a dog” and showed a lack of loyalty to Bush by running for president at the same time as Bush.

“So those two guys are fighting like crazy, and I’m laughing, watching them fighting,” Trump said.

Trump took the stage to the pounding chorus of Twisted Sister’s rock song “We’re Not Gonna Take It” while wearing his campaign’s red baseball cap with the slogan “Make America Great Again.”

Outside the Landing, a group of about 20 people protested Trump by waving hand-made signs such as “Hate Speech Isn’t Presidential,” “A Vote for Trump Is a Vote for Racism” and “We Don’t Need a Whining Buffoon for President.”

“We’re just standing in solidarity against Donald Trump,” said Jacksonville resident Dannelle Howden. “He’s everything America doesn’t stand for.”

During Trump’s speech, a group on the nearby Main Street bridge’s pedestrian walkway unfurled a sign that said “Dump the Trump.”

Inside the Landing, Trump and the crowd fed off each other in what Trump called a “lovefest.”

“This is happening all over,” Trump said of the turnout. “No matter where I go, it’s a message. It’s a movement. This is more than just Donald Trump shows up, he speaks, he leaves. We’re going to do something that is so unbelievable. The whole world is talking about us.”

Trump’s only direct references to Jacksonville came shortly after taking the stage.

“I had a casino boat built here,” Trump said. “It did great. We sold it, made a lot of money, so I love Jacksonville.”

He didn’t mention the recently announced addition of Jacksonville-based political consultant Susie Wiles as Florida co-chair for his campaign. Wiles managed Rick Scott’s campaign when he won the race for governor in 2010.

In terms of a Florida connection, Trump spent the most time recounting the hardball negotiating tactics he used in a South Florida deal for the purchase of a Miami resort now known as Trump National Doral. As both sides convened to close what would have been a $170 million sale, Trump told the sellers’ representatives they had defrauded him with their descriptions of the property and he would only pay $100 million. When the other side balked, Trump said he walked out of the room, and the other side then called him back ready to negotiate a lower price.

Trump said Secretary of State John Kerry would have gotten a better deal with Iran over that country’s nuclear program if Kerry had the “brains to walk out.”

“Why didn’t he do the same thing I did at Doral?” Trump said.

Trump said he will renegotiate the Iran deal, rewrite trade agreements, repeal and replace Obamacare, stop illegal immigration and get the Mexican government to pay “100 percent” of the cost for building about 1,000 miles of wall along the U.S.-Mexico border.

Trump said other candidates have told him the Mexican government would never pay for construction of the wall, but they “know nothing about negotiations — zero.” He then launched into the story of the Doral purchase as an example of how he would convince other countries to meet his terms in foreign policy and on trade deals that he said shortchange the United States.

“I can take anybody in this massive audience and I can say where do you originally come from — your parents, your grandparents — and they’ll give me a name and I’ll say that country is ripping us off,” Trump said. “Everybody is ripping us off. Every country is ripping us off. So we’re not going to let it happen anymore.”

Trump spent a big chunk of his speech talking about polls, which he called his “favorite subject.” He reeled off a list of national and state polls that show him in the lead. The exceptions are two Iowa polls that put him in second place behind Ben Carson. Trump said he doesn’t believe those polls.

When Trump blasted “dishonest media” that he said don’t want to see him win, the crowd joined him with a chorus of boos. At one point, Trump tossed aside a copy of the Wall Street Journal after criticizing its coverage.

The midday sun on a cloudless sky took its toll on several people who had fainting spells. Trump stopped his speech at one point to make sure a woman was all right.

“Take your time,” he said. “Tell her I love her the best. I love the women that faint when I speak.”

Trump’s appearance drew people from outside Northeast Florida.

White Springs resident Arlene Slavik, who made the 70-mile drive to Jacksonville, said after the speech that Trump’s business background is just what the country needs. She said she likes how Trump’s message is based on building the wall to stop illegal immigration, focusing on rebuilding the nation’s infrastructure and creating trade policies “that bring jobs back to America.”

“No other politician has really addressed it,” she said. “They may say it and give you lip service, but when it comes down to it, they don’t do anything. Give the businessman a try. We have nothing to lose. We really don’t.”

Dino Rentos, who drove from Orlando, said his support for Trump isn’t just about the positions Trump takes on issues.

“It’s his attitude,” Rentos said. “We need someone who is willing to get in there and throw some elbows in Washington. It’s broken.”

But Howden, who was part of the anti-Trump protest, said she doubts Trump will get the Republican nomination or have any lasting impact on the nation’s politics.

“He has no policy positions really,” she said. “I don’t think they’re going to get the Mexicans to build the wall.”

David Bauerlein: (904) 359-4581