Entertainment

Derek Huff has been struck by lightning seven times (he finds it erotic), suffered 14 concussions (he loves them) and doesn't vaccinate his kids (they're on their own if they get polio). Huff clearly doesn't need affordable health insurance. Or does he?



Adam Scott resurrected the over-the-top "Step Brothers" villain in another pro-Affordable Health Care Funny or Die video. Not only does this mark the return of the character after six years, Huff directly appeals to the myth of youthful invincibility that Barack Obama's campaign is trying to crack.



Huff hasn't matured much since his last appearance as he's still ridiculously cocky and self-centered. He's also very successful, too. The character starts the video alongside NBA team owner Mark Cuban and television personality Jeff Probst. Frontman Chris Daughtry joins in via the Google Glass Huff is wearing.



After a few laughs, the festivities pause and the American flag appears in front of the island backdrop. Huff has something he wants to get off his chest.



"Hey, I'm Derek and this is my brother Brennan. He sucks," Huff says. "You know what else sucks? Health insurance."



Huff lets out a condescending laugh before continuing.



"Sorry, I just can't say those two words together without cracking up," Huff continues. "Health insurance equals fear, and I'm not afraid of anything, bro."





What follows next is a round of absurd boasts, including not drinking water because it tastes weird and winning season seven of "The Voice."



The kicker is when he's done boasting and the camera pans out to reveal the green screen. Huff walks off the platform, trips and possibly sprains his ankle. He needs an ambulance, but there's a problem.



"We could [get an ambulance], but without health insurance, it's gonna cost a couple of thousand dollars," one crew member says.



"Wait? That's so expensive," Huff says. "Get Mark Cuban now. Cuban!"



Derek Huff's return is the spiritual follow-up to the famous Barack Obama appearance on Zach Galifianakis' parody talk show "Between Two Ferns." The episode was an instant viral hit and increased traffic on the ObamaCare website by 40 percent.