Competitive eater Furious Pete created a 1,000-gram protein bar that you have to see to believe.

Competitive eater Furious Pete created a 1,000-gram protein bar that you have to see to believe. FuriousPete.com

Furious Pete, a competitive eating champion and amateur bodybuilder, created a protein bar with over 1,000 grams of protein and celebrated by eating the entire thing in one go. Even with Pete’s rigorous workout regimen, is 1,000 grams of protein too much for one day?

In the video seen below, Furious Pete, whose real name is Pete Czerwinski, used 24 White Chocolate Raspberry Quest Bars and 25 Chocolate Cookie Dough Quest Bars to make one big protein bar equaling 1,004 grams of protein and 833 grams of fiber.

Health and fitness professionals recommend protein after a workout to help the body recover the energy it burnt while exercising and to build up muscle mass. Foods rich in protein include a glass of milk with 8 grams, a 3-ounce piece of meat with 21 grams, a cup of dry beans with 16 grams, and 8 ounces of yogurt with 11 grams.

Although Pete jokingly claims that he “gained 420 lbs of instant muscle,” that much protein in one sitting could lead to devastating health effects. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 10 to 35 percent of our daily calories should come from protein. A man over the age of 19 is recommended 56 grams of protein each day while a woman over 19 is recommended 46 grams each day.

While protein is a staple of every bodybuilder’s post-workout routine, taking in too much can also wreak havoc on our bodies. For instance, too much protein consumption can tire out our liver, which is tasked with breaking down otherwise harmful toxins — known as ammonia — that are produced when we eat protein. Thus, protein overload can result in significant damage to the body’s liver, brain, and nervous system.

A high-protein diet means a diet high in cholesterol. Even though we need cholesterol, too much can spell trouble for the body’s most important muscle, the heart. Fortunately for humans, it’s our body’s job to produce 75 percent of our cholesterol intake while the other 25 percent comes from the food we eat.

A recent study gauged how much protein was needed to supplement a high-energy workout. Participants were asked to perform intense resistance exercises, and then consume 5, 10, 20, or 40 grams of egg protein. Result showed that participants who consumed 40 grams of protein exhibited the same amount of protein synthesis stimulation as someone who consumed 20 grams of protein.

So, remember to talk to your doctor or a healthcare professional before putting any foreign substance into your body, and that includes whey protein.