SWARTZ CREEK, MI -- A Swartz Creek man has filed a lawsuit claiming that a conservative-leaning political action committee violated federal law by calling him with recordings from high-profile conservatives soliciting money and railing against Obamacare.

Andrew Campbell filed the lawsuit Dec. 6 in Flint U.S. District Court against the Restore America's Voice Foundation and it's political action committee after Campbell alleges he received more than a dozen unsolicited calls on his cellphone from the organization that featured recorded messages from prominent conservatives such as Glenn Beck, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, and former Arkansas Governor and presidential candidate Mike Huckabee.



Beck, Cruz and Huckabee are not named as defendants in the case. They could not be reached for comment.

Infocision, a telemarketing service operating out of Ohio that allegedly made the calls on behalf of Restore America's Voice, is also named as a defendant in the case.

Cleveland-based attorney Terry M. Brennan, who is representing Infocision and Restore America's Voice, could not be reached for comment. An answer to the lawsuit has not yet been filed.

In his lawsuit, Campbell claims that the calls violated the federal Telephone Consumer Protection Act.



The Telephone Consumer Protection Act, signed into law by President George H.W. Bush in 1991, placed limits on telemarketers and prohibits calls being made that include a recorded voice to any cellphone number without the consent of the individual being called.



Campbell claims he never gave any consent for the recorded calls to be placed to his cellphone.

Flint-native Mark A. Dotson, a professor at Cooley Law School in Lansing, said recent changes have strengthened the act, forcing telemarketers to have written consent from individuals prior to placing marketing calls. Dotson said written consent is not needed for political and informative calls, but questioned the legality of political messages that ask an individual for money without written consent.

"It could broach into marketing once they start asking for contributions," Dotson said.

Dotson added that it is up to the telemarketer to prove that they obtained the necessary consent to make the calls.



Campbell's Troy-based attorney, David M. Honigman, said that Infocision knowingly made the calls to Campbell's cellphone despite his client never giving any consent.

"You can identify what's a cellphone just by the number," said Honigman, who previously served as a Republican state senator and representative.



Campbell, a Flint-based attorney whose website advertises that he specializes in ending calls from telemarketers, alleges that he was watching television in late August and early September when he saw a commercial requesting individuals call in to express their support for or against a movement to defund the Affordable Care Act. Campbell claims in the lawsuit that he called the number and voted against any movement to defund the act, also known as Obamacare.

Over the next two months, Campbell claims he received a variety of messages from Restore America's Voice featuring the recordings requesting political action to defund Obamacare and financial contributions.

Campbell claims he saw other commercials sponsored by Restore America's Voice around the same time so he called the number listed on the commercials in an attempt to urge them to change their position and to tell them to stop calling him.

An answering machine fielded each of Campbell's calls and asked him to leave his name and phone number, according to the lawsuit. Campbell claims he hung up each time without leaving a message.

Campbell claims he was called 13 times between Sept. 4 and Nov. 21 by numbers associated with Restore America's Voice -- some of which the lawsuit claims were made by InfoCision on behalf of the political action committee.

The phone calls occurred from 11:48 a.m. to 8:34 p.m., according to the lawsuit.

Dotson said calling a phone number is likely not enough to be considered consent under the recent changes in the act -- particularly in light of Campbell's claims he attempted multiple times to stop the calls.

Campbell declined to comment on the lawsuit, forwarding questions to Honigman.



Federal Election Commission records show that the political action committee brought in nearly $1.78 million dollars in contributions from Jan. 1 to Sept. 30, 2013. Records show that the committee paid Infocision more than $1.33 million for its services during the same timeframe.

Infocision officials could not be reached for comment on the allegations. A phone number listed on the Restore America's Voice Foundation's website forwards callers to a recorded advertisement for fitness guru Richard Simmon's new workout program.

Flint Federal District Judge Terrence G. Berg set a Feb. 6 deadline for Restore America's Voice and Infocision to file a response to the allegations.