Wait time for install crew currently one month

Fiber Optic Technician Wayne Niston pulls fiber optic cable through a conduit while installing NextLight Broadband for a residential customer in Longmont, in November. ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

NextLight is taking measures to speed up the process of connecting homes to the city's fiber-optic broadband Internet service.

Longmont Power & Communications staff started taking calls from homes in the Southmoor Park neighborhood for service Nov. 3 and quickly realized demand for the city-provided Internet service was higher than they thought.

LPC released NextLight to 500 homes in the initial launch area and has been expanding that area out to make it available to roughly 1,413 homes in its Phase 1 area, which is near the LPC building off of South Sherman Street and Ken Pratt Boulevard.

Out of 1,413 homes, roughly 366 people are already customers and another 126 are scheduled for an install, LPC manager Tom Roiniotis said, with the caveat that all three of those numbers are constantly changing and this data is from more than a week ago.

LPC spokesman Scott Rochat added that those 1,413 homes constitute only about 4 percent of a build that will eventually encompass the entire city.

Right now, even if the service is available to a home in Phase 1, the wait time from when a resident calls for service and when an install crew can come hook up the home is about one month, Roiniotis said.

"And we don't want it to get any greater than that," Roiniotis said.

One thing that will save the installation crews time as they connect homes to the network, is an innovation by Neil Shaw, one of the principals of contracted firm Uptown Services.

Shaw, working with vendor companies Clearfield and OFS, came up with a solution to a $1.5 million problem.

The standard technique for connecting fiber-optic cable to a building requires connecting the fibers with an electric arc in a specialized machine, and each building needs roughly two of these connections. Each specialized machine costs between $5,000 and $10,000 and the city only has two of them. Each fusion splice takes about five minutes for an experienced and specially trained technician.

Shaw has come up with a custom "plug-and-play" fiber-optic system for Longmont, reducing the number of expensive and time-consuming connections needed in the city from 90,000 to 5,000 and allowing installation crews to work quicker.

Additionally, LPC is finishing up the hiring process for five additional installation technicians, doubling their ranks from five to 10 and — LPC hopes — reducing the wait time, Roiniotis said.

As the install crews slowly work on connecting all the homes in Phase 1 of construction in groups of 10 or 15 homes at time, Roiniotis said "make-ready" crews are beginning to work in Phase 2, which is roughly bordered by the St. Vrain River, Atwood Street, Francis Street and 17th Ave.

"They're going to be looking at the existing overhead lines and make adjustments to make room for the additional fiber cable," Roiniotis said, adding that while the cables were buried underground in Phase 1, they'll be added to the overhead lines instead in Phase 2.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci