Marking a full recovery from the depths of the Great Recession, Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer today unveiled his proposed $873 million budget for the next fiscal year, touting a return to a structurally balanced budget that increases investments in infrastructure and public safety without raising taxes.

One notable feature of the budget is $13.6 million to repave roads, fix sidewalks and create new bike lanes, doubling the amount from last year’s budget. Fischer’s budget also devotes $14.5 million to construct the new South Central Regional Library in Okolona, which is expected to break ground late this fall.

As was announced two weeks ago, Fischer’s budget devotes $12 million to the Louisville CARES initiative, which will go toward the construction of 1,500 affordable housing units. This marks the largest one-time contribution for affordable housing since the Louisville Affordable Housing Trust Fund was created nearly a decade ago, though the effort to create an annual dedicated revenue stream for the fund remains stalled.

As was also previously announced, the budget allocates $2.8 million for new body cameras for all Louisville Metro Police officers. It also devotes $7.8 million to upgrade Metro’s 911 radio system, which fields 1.5 million calls per year. And $10 million will pay for new police cars, ambulances, fire trucks and snow plows.

An additional $1.6 million will go to Metro Parks for improvements and maintenance, as well as $1 million to continue construction of the Louisville Loop. The budget devotes $275,000 to the planting of trees and a GPS tracking system to expand Louisville’s tree canopy.

TARC will receive $400,000 to purchase five new electric Zero buses, along with help from federal grants. It is not yet known whether these new buses will be devoted to the two current looped routes downtown, or if they will service a new route near downtown.

Fischer noted in his address to Metro Council Thursday afternoon that Metro government has saved millions of dollars due to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act in Kentucky, as University Hospital and Family Health Centers have had dramatic reductions in the need for uncompensated care funding from the city because more patients now have health insurance.

The budget also includes:

$200,000 for a new needle exchange program through the Department of Public Health and Wellness;

additional funding for five new positions to process open records requests: three within LMPD dedicated to new body camera video requests, and two in the Office of Management and Budget;

the previously announced $105 million bond for the construction of the Omni hotel downtown;

$800,000 to build a modern facility for Louisville Metro Animal Services to replace its outdated facility on Manslick Road, to match the same amount expected to be raised privately;

$800,000 for the Louisville Zoo;

a 2 percent raise for all non-union Metro employees;

$800,000 to expand services at community centers and out-of-school programs, as well as $200,000 for SummerWorks, which provides summer jobs and mentorships for teenagers;

$2.5 million for capital improvement at the Kentucky Center;

and an extra $450,000 to the city’s rainy day fund, bringing its total to $63.5 million.

Metro Council will debate the budget and likely offer amendments in the coming weeks, before it is finalized.