On March 1, 2016, the Supreme Court decided the case of Gobeille v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. The matter before the Court involved a Vermont law requiring certain entities, including health insurers, to report payments relating to healthcare claims and other information relating to healthcare services to a state agency for compilation in an all-inclusive healthcare database.

The case was brought by Liberty Mutual Insurance Company’s self-funded, self-insured health plan, which provides benefits in all 50 states and is not subject to regulation by Vermont, and the Court invalidated the statute.

This decision is proving more controversial in health policy circles, where transparency is seen as a public policy attribute that should be expanded, than it is in legal circles where the matter is viewed as one of legislative jurisdiction that potentially is subject to change by uniform federal executive branch action or congressional legislation.

In an important victory for preemption advocates, the Court held that this law was preempted by The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), which expressly preempts “any and all State laws insofar as they may now or hereafter relate to any employee benefit plan.” And that includes any state law that has an impermissible “connection with” ERISA plans, i.e., a law that governs, or interferes with the uniformity of, plan administration.

The court’s stance

In the context of the Gobeille case, preemption is necessary in order to prevent multiple jurisdictions from imposing differing, or even parallel, regulations, creating wasteful administrative costs and threatening to subject plans to wide-ranging liability.

ERISA’s uniform rule design also makes clear that it is the Secretary of Labor, not the separate States, that is authorized to decide whether to exempt plans from ERISA reporting requirements or to require ERISA plans to report data such as that sought by Vermont.

The Court went on to reject Vermont’s arguments about the lack of economic loss by Liberty Mutual or its traditional power to regulate in the area of public health.

Finally, the Court held that ERISA’s pre-existing reporting, disclosure, and record-keeping provisions maintain their preemptive force regardless of whether the newer Affordable Care Act’s reporting obligations also preempt state law. In other words, mandated data collection laws like Vermont’s could be negated on several legislative fronts, but ERISA is the more comprehensive preemptive vehicle.

Next: Public policy questions