Editor’s Note: Last week CDCNPIN (@CDCNPIN), @YouthAIDSDay, Dr. Stephanie Zaza, Director of CDC’s Division of Adolescent & School Health (@DrZazaCDC), AIDS.gov (@AIDSgov) and MAC AIDS Fund (@MACAIDSFund) sponsored a Twitter chat, in advance of the observance of National Youth HIV & AIDS Awareness Day on April 10th. These handles and participants such as @APAPublicInt shared resources related to HIV and youth. Below is one of those resources.

Imagine symptoms of a virus showing up, slowly causing patient deaths, and baffling doctors. Suddenly, this virus mutates and spreads, but remains undetected. More cases develop in many countries, then the world takes notice. Over thirty years later there is still no cure and it is still spreading rapidly in many places across the globe. This is the reality of HIV/AIDS and it’s having a huge impact among teens.

Today, over 1 million people in the United States are living with HIV, and in 2010 U.S. youth aged 13 to 24 accounted for 26% of all new HIV infections.

In fact, over 50% of youth with HIV in U.S. do not know they are infected. Part of the problem is that a great deal of youth don’t think it’s an issue for them.

A 2012 survey of teens in U.S. by Kaiser Family Foundation found that most sexually active teens who have not been tested were not concerned about becoming infected with HIV.

Many sexually active teens in U.S. don’t get tested; only 22% of sexually active high school students have been tested for HIV in their lifetime. Simply put, we see that HIV/AIDS is not on the minds of youth today.

So what can you do?

Know Your Status

Get tested for HIV with your health care provider

Find a testing location by typing in your zip code at: https://locator.aids.gov/

Seek Information

Learn more about how to prevent HIV/AIDS, the latest treatment and how to talk about HIV/AIDS with your friends, parents, guardians and partners.

Share the Facts

Social media is perhaps the most powerful form of media in existence. In the past, it was a stranger on television informing us about HIV/AIDS–now, it’s your best friend via Facebook, Instagram and Twitter.

The power is in people in your everyday life. These people are able to share important information, so it resonates and is more effective than just an article in the paper or even a newscast on television.

As we look towards the future of HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention, be a part of the social media solution; a tweet could save a life!

Here are some easy ways to use social media to spread the word:

Amplify your voice

Use these tips for new media