How will big data, clinical analytics, and population health management impact the healthcare industry in 2015?

Healthcare organizations that spent most of 2014 fighting off a hurricane of reforms, expectations, federal mandates, and new patients can be forgiven for wanting to use the holiday season to take a breather from meaningful use, ICD-10, and quality reporting.

And maybe they should do so, briefly, because 2015 promises to be just as trying – and just as exciting – for hospitals, health systems, and physician providers. 2014 was the year that big data truly burst onto the scene, but 2015 is likely to be the year that healthcare analytics, clinical decision support, and population health management.

What lies in store for the healthcare industry in the next twelve months? Read on to see how many of these predictions you agree with.

Industry leaders will turn analytics pilots and case studies into best practices

The most progressive (and most well-funded) healthcare organizations in the nation have had the opportunity to experiment with all manner of new analytics technologies over the past few years. From sepsis predictions based on missile defense programming to turning vast pools of EHR data into goldmines for pharmaceutical research, disease phenotyping, and genetic exploration, the sheer number of pilots, studies, and grants has been overwhelming.

But as these projects begin to bear fruit, and their results continue to be published in academic journals and presented at conferences, the lessons of these trials and experiments will start to congeal into a core set of best practices that can be applied to existing technologies in more types of healthcare organizations. The next twelve months will provide a critical crucible for researchers to discover what will work for the industry at large as more organizations adopt the technologies that will allow them to participate.

Purchasing of analytics infrastructure will continue to be strong

The analytics infrastructure market has been up and down over the past year as healthcare providers cope with the whiplash of the ICD-10 delay, the difficulty of Stage 2 meaningful use, and the influx of new patients seeking primary care under the Affordable Care Act.

But as providers realize the imminence of financial penalties for poor quality performance, and as accountable care arrangements continue their reach into mainstream, analytics will no longer be a luxury. The ONC has pinpointed clinical analytics and population health management as key pieces of its ten-year plan for healthcare reform, and providers will need to invest in the infrastructure if they wish to keep up with federal ambitions, despite financial worries that have kept purchasing on the back burner.

Providers will pull together to conquer ICD-10

Opinions might be mixed on the value of ICD-10 to the analytics landscape, but there is a growing consensus in the industry that if we are going to do it, we might as well do it now. The turmoil of this April’s surprise delay has impacted budgets and prompted a great deal of griping over broken promises and false starts. As the industry rallies to make October 1, 2015 the real and actual implementation date, providers will need to choose to accelerate their transition activities or stick with the naysayers and risk significant problems in the fall.

ICD-10 promises a higher level of data integrity, better clinical documentation, and more detail and specificity that can apply to much more than billing. Despite the initial outlay in manpower and costs, the new code set will help to bring healthcare into the modern age and allow the United States to catch up with the rest of the world, which has been using ICD-10 for years.

EHR vendors will look to big data as a new source of revenue

EHR adoption has almost hit its peak, and technology vendors will soon be casting around for new ways to keep the dollars rolling in. EHR vendors already make money off of fees for data services. But as interoperability becomes a must-have instead of a nice-to-have, their customers will no longer stand for having to pay extra to talk to their business partners and peers.

Instead, EHR vendors may use the next year or two to continue the development of innovative products and services revolving around population health management and predictive analytics as they start to mine the hidden treasure trove of big data that has already been produced by their customers over the past five years.

Population health management efforts will begin to show their ROI on a larger scale

Many of the providers that have invested in population health management and care coordination programs have seen nearly instantaneous returns on their investment. From patient portals to home monitoring to predictive risk scores that flag expensive patients for more intensive care, population health management is the key to achieving the Triple Aim.

Some aspects of population health might be expensive, and they might be daunting for providers still getting used to their EHRs, but 2015 looks to be the year that patient-centered care supported by big data technologies comes into its own.

Providers can no longer financially sustain themselves simply by treating patients as they come in the door. If they wish to see revenue gains and remain competitive in a rapidly changing landscape, healthcare organizations will need to learn how to be proactive, how to form relationships with their communities, how to cope with skyrocketing levels of chronic disease, and how to leverage the analytics tools at their disposal to transform themselves into a long chain of interconnected partners along a healthy lifestyle continuum.

For their efforts, providers will see a quick return on their investments in 2015 as regulatory requirements and good business sense start to align more closely to produce higher quality care at reduced costs for their patients.