GENESEE COUNTY, MI – Genesee County residents showed up in large numbers to enroll in Michigan's new Medicaid expansion program.

With 21,507 people enrolled, the county has the fourth-highest enrollment in the state for the Healthy Michigan plan as of Monday, July 7, according to the Michigan Department of Community Health's website.

Genesee County falls only below Wayne, Macomb and Oakland counties. Genesee County is the fifth-largest county in the state, trailing behind Wayne, Macomb, Oakland and Kent counties.

On Thursday, July 10, Gov. Rick Snyder's office put out a press release that enrollment for Healthy Michigan had already surpassed its one-year goal after only 14 weeks.

The goal was to reach an enrollment of 322,000 in one year. But as of July 10 Healthy Michigan had 323,022 people enrolled, according to a press release.

Registration for the Medicaid expansion program opened April 1. Enrollment grew to 13,896 people in Genesee County by May 5.

Mark Valacak, Genesee County health officer, said he's not surprised to see so many residents already registered for Medicaid expansion, which raised the income standard so more people would qualify.

"We've been working very actively with our community partners – Genesee Health Plan, Hamilton Community Health Network and Genesee Health System – to ensure that people get the coverage they deserve," Valacak said. "We're excited that we are doing well as a county."

It helped that as people were enrolling in Obamacare or trying to re-enroll in Genesee Health Plan, they were also discussing the option of Healthy Michigan, Valacak said.

The biggest benefit of the Medicaid expansion is that it has an emphasis on preventive and wellness services to try and combat the problems the residents face with increasing chronic disease, Valacak said.

County health plans, such as the Genesee Health Plan, are playing an important role in finding and identifying residents who are eligible for Healthy Michigan, said Genesee Health Plan CEO and President Linda Hamacher.

"Genesee Health Plan alone has screened over 25,000 people for eligibility in the new health care programs and now requires people to apply for Healthy Michigan Plan as a prerequisite to enrolling in Genesee Health Plan's Plan B," Hamacher said in an email. "Genesee Health Plan and its community partners have done an exceptional job enrolling eligible people into Michigan's Healthy Michigan Plan."

Applicants for Healthy Michigan must be between the ages of 19 and 64, not currently eligible for Medicaid, not eligible for or enrolled in Medicare, and earning up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level (approximately $16,000 for a single person and $33,000 for a family of four). The cost of Healthy Michigan coverage of individuals and families ranges from 2 percent to 5 percent of income.

Health coverage under the Healthy Michigan Plan includes both federally and state-mandated Essential Health Benefits such as ambulatory patient services, emergency services, hospitalization, mental health and substance use disorder services.

Healthy Michigan enrollment started just as the enrollment for Obamacare ended on March 31. Open enrollment for Obamacare will start back up in November.

Healthy Michigan enrollment does not have a deadline, so people can enroll at any time.

To get more information about Healthy Michigan, can call Genesee Health Plan at 844-232-7740 to make an appointment or they can enroll over the phone at 855-789-5610 or online at www.michigan.gov/healthymichiganplan.