[This post will be updated throughout the day.]

Staff writer Meredith Shamburger, who rolled through town on a parade float, reports:

Dallas prepared for its annual St. Patrick’s Day Parade by getting up early on Saturday, crowding DART rail lines and letting out hoots and hollers as they arrived on Greenville Avenue.

Floats lined up just north of Northwest Highway before the 11 a.m. kickoff, greeting people walking down the road to nab their spots.

The weather cooperated during the parade, but a few drops had started to fall just as the afternoon approached. Forecasts call for a 30 to 40 percent chance of rain around 3 p.m. Saturday. It is not expected to last long.

Sanitation crews were busy cleaning up tortillas, marshmallows, beads and Jell-o shots from Greenville Avenue after the parade ended. DART light rail continued to see crowded trains along the Red Line, especially those traveling to the Lovers Lane and Mockingbird Stations.

As of 3:35 p.m., Dallas police had issued 58 parking citations and made one arrest for public intoxication.

Lisa Carmen, from The Burlesque Experience in Dallas, was one of the many people riding floats during Saturday’s St. Patrick’s Day Parade. It was her first year not watching from the sidelines.

“We had so much fun,” she said. “The flying tortillas we didn’t like and the flying marshmallows we didn’t like, but other than that it was so much fun. We had a blast.”

The Burlesque Experience’s float was the culmination of several months of fundraisers and help from the community, Carmen said. They plan to do it again next year.

“We felt like superstars,” she said. “There’s this feeling of almost celebrity: being able to wave to people and throw beads and people are so happy to see you.”

Featured events this year include the Mavs Corner at Lovers Lane and Greenville; The Family Place Family Zone, located in the Meadows Building parking lot; and BrewFest in the parking lot of the adjacent Office Depot area for the event space.