Topics: Christmas, Editor's Picks, gift guide, holiday, salon gift guide 2014, Entertainment News

Every fall, you think this is it. This is the year you’re finally going to get it together and start your holiday shopping early. Sure you will — right after you finish binge-watching Season 2 of “House of Cards.” How are you supposed to go shopping on Thursday night when the Shonda-verse is on, anyway? And have you even finished any of the National Book Award finalists? Don’t worry. From the boy-crazy tween in your life to your sorta-still-hip dad, the Salon Gift Guide rounds up the best presents for your friends and family — real and imaginary, human and humanoid, heroes and villains alike.



He’s been carrying those treasured old mix tapes around for years. Upgrade all of his favorite mixes onto one Cassette Tape 8 GB USB Stick ($25).

What overgrown kid doesn’t like a good widget? The Orbotix Ollie ($99.99), a remote app-controlled cylinder on wheels, might not get him out of showdowns with scavengers, but it can do tricks at speeds up to 14 mph.

He’ll find a kindred spirit in eternal poptimist Rob Sheffield, whose sequel to his heartbreaking memoir “Love Is a Mix Tape” embraces the life-changing virtues of barroom belting in “Turn Around Bright Eyes: A Karaoke Journey of Starting Over, Falling in Love, and Finding Your Voice” ($10 paperback).

Even heroes have to have someone to look up to. These Stark Expo replica prints ($59, set of three) — full-scale replicas printed from original Marvel “Iron Man 2” film files — are a retro-chic nod to his favorite fellow superhero.



From advice she needs to hear to encouragement we can all use, Amy Poehler’s “Yes Please” ($17, hardcover) is a simple gift for a complicated girl.

The Ban.do canvas heart tote ($20) is the next best thing to wearing her heart on her sleeve.

When she’s brave, she admits she wants to be a writer. Help her figure out what kind of writing family she wants to create with Lori A. May’s “The Write Crowd: Literary Citizenship and the Writing Life” ($17, paperback), a collection of best practices for connecting with the writing community.

Those A-line retro-chic sundresses she likes never go out of style. The Out on the Veranda teal dress from Modcloth ($54) works for daytime doctor visits or navigating awkward love-triangle moment and increasingly-complex family gatherings.



The skulls and crown gothic microprint on this Diesel Zava button-down shirt ($148) works for long days at the office, relaxing at home, and taking off before tough conversations with his son.

The new paperback edition of the compelling Richard Pryor biography “Furious Cool: Richard Pryor and the World That Made Him” ($13) makes a great stocking stuffer and a handy teaching tool.

Because he loves taking credit for doing basic chores. The Picnic at Ascot BBQ Master Grill Tool Set ($83) includes 20 stainless steel grill tools inside a spy-worthy briefcase.

He has to have all the new toys — we mean tools — to stay current at work. The new Apple iPad Air2 (from $499) is thinner and lighter than his old model with better resolution. Touch ID security technology means the kids can’t take it over.



She’s going to need a drink at the end of a winter finale like that one. The Sparq Home Vodka Shooter set ($34) includes four freezable soapstone 2-ounce glasses so her drink never gets warm.

Does it sometimes seem like she must have eyes in the back of her head? Google Glass Explorer Edition ($1,500) will let her add to her encyclopedic knowledge without even opening a file.

In the courtroom or the classroom, her style is always on point. Don’t let a plastic fitness bracelet ruin her look. The Tory Burch rose metal bracelet ($195) hides a discreet Fitbit Flex tracker ($99) inside.

These Vince Camuto stiletto ankle boots ($139) were made for walking right out of this old fight and into the arms of another man.



If you need her, she’ll be down here on the floor dying. Or losing herself in the latest sexy dance-fighting videos and e-book romances on the new Kindle Fire HDX 8.9 ($379).

It’s not exactly erotic friend fan fiction, but she’ll love Mallory Ortberg’s irreverent literary satire “Texts From Jane Eyre” ($14, hardcover) just the same.

Time for the charm bomb to explode — she’ll be ready with the Lush Bubble Gum Lip Scrub ($22) and Honey Trap Lip Balm ($16), and Jimmy Jr. won’t know what hit him.

One day, she’ll look back at all of this angst, and groan at the memories. Until then, let her record her biggest humiliations in this Letters to My Future Self ($12) set, which functions as diary, keepsake and blackmail material for her little siblings.



Nothing will top his own “Trace Italian,” but the 4-D Cityscape puzzle of Westeros ($37), the imaginary lands of George R.R. Martin’s (and HBO’s) “Game of Thrones” will let him literally build a world out of scattered pieces.

The Rubik’s Futuro Cube ($79) takes the enigmatic puzzle game of his youth and updates it with multi-axis accelerometers, vibration feedback, wireless connectivity, multicolor LED lights and four-channel audio. The cube comes with 12 built-in games, and a customizable software package is coming soon.

The complete set of all 40 of the original Choose Your Own Adventure books ($200) by R.A. Montgomery, where we first learn that you either go forward or you die (and sometimes, if you choose the wrong way out of the shark tank, you still die).

Before there was metal, there was Zeppelin. Like all of Led Zeppelin’s newly remastered Super Deluxe Edition box sets, Led Zeppelin IV ($104) includes the original on CD, digital download and 180-gram vinyl with replicated original packaging, plus bonus tracks like alternate takes, instrumentals and live recordings.



He loves long drives around Detroit and can’t bear to touch too much of the world. Dents of London has made leather gloves since 1777. If anyone can appreciate the long life and high style of a pair of Dent leather driving gloves ($75), he can.

Let him pack a meal of the good Type O-negative for the road in the Woodchuck flask ($39), made of stainless steel with a 100 percent real wood exterior.

He’s been wearing those old aviator shades since the last time you two left London. Carrera Eyewear’s Hots 64mm Aviators ($120) will bring him into the new century.

Exclusively from Jack White’s Third Man Records, “The Rise and Fall of Paramount Records, Volume Two” ($400) is this year’s music fan must-have gift. In six LPs, 800 digital tracks and two large-format books, Paramount’s pioneering Delta blues recordings (1928-32) will scratch his history itch and teach him some new old songs.



He’s going to protect the boss or die trying. And he’s going to need a fresh tie if he’s going to go straight into tomorrow’s meeting. Emma Willis’ refined Leaf-Print Silk Tie ($185) is elegant enough to see him through whatever the next day brings.

You’ve noticed that he’s really into audiobooks these days. Replace his worn-out earbuds with a set of featherweight Polk Audio Nue Era headphones ($79) in stylish tortoiseshell.

Sometimes, for his job, he has to put fear into other people. Make sure he stays hydrated on those cross-country flights with the Define Bottle ($24). The fruit infusions should help him lay off that bad meeting coffee.