MACKINAC ISLAND, MI -- When Warren Evans was preparing to enter office last year, he wasn't sure he'd be able to keep Wayne County out of bankruptcy.

He still isn't, and the numbers are still frightening. But there's been a perceptible change in the county executive's tone when he talks about the task.

After five months on the job, he now sounds confident the county will stay out of bankruptcy court in a way he was not when he first began digging into the books.

"I don't think the numbers changed. I think I understand the options better," Evans said in an interview last week during the Mackinac Policy Conference.

(Roads, race and rubbing elbows: 20 takeaways from the 2015 Mackinac Policy Conference)

"And I think I understand the overall problem better. I'm more confident because of that. There's been no windfall that makes me feel more confident. I just understand it a lot better."

The county faces a $52-million structural deficit, plus about $20 million being taken out of the general fund to make contributions to a troubled pension system that's only 44-percent funded.

Evans eliminated positions and implemented 5-percent, across-the-board pay cuts when he first took office.

And the 15-member Wayne County Commission last month granted unanimous approval of a move to combine three departments and eliminate an economic development agency.

Those moves are expected to make a $5.5-million dent in the deficit, and Evans is, for now, setting aside the county's most visible problem -- the incomplete eyesore that was once a jail project in Downtown Detroit -- until he can manage a balanced budget.

But the most impactful and most difficult move lying ahead will be the pursuit of labor concessions to reduce pension obligations.

"We have a $52 million structural deficit... 70 percent of our costs are health care and retirement," Evans said. "You can get all the low-hanging fruit you want, but if you're going to get to the heart of it, you've got to find a way to cut health care benefits and make sure people still have health services -- Affordable Care Act, stipends. Any number of ways to do it.

"We have over-extended ourselves in benefits to our employees. And the employees make it work. So we're trying to find a way to keep the employees as whole as they can, but also understand that their benefit packages can take us to the poor farm."

Meanwhile, he said he intends to continue chipping away at the deficit.

"If we get rid of the structural deficit, I am optimistic that the state will be elated... It gives us time to pay back long-term liabilities," Evans said. "To say that the pension plan is 44-percent funded is true, but we're sill paying our pension benefits. And to the extent that we start finding ways to put money in there to the upcoming liability and still keep the budget balanced -- nobody expects it to be done overnight, they just don't expect it to go any farther south. It'll start going north pretty soon. I'm comfortable that we can do that...

"We clearly do not need an emergency manager. We don't need to file bankruptcy. If that happens, it's because of a failure to cooperate."

The next step for the slashing away at the deficit will be moves to make more efficient use of county property, Evans said.

"We haven't managed our resources well," he said. "We're fixing roofs and paying light bills in buildings that are half-occupied... Condense them. Sell the other properties. Do something... If there's enough real estate on the market for us to sell, I would expect at least another $10 million from that. But you can't put that in the budget, realistically... Until it's sold, it's not sold."

More news and insights from last week's Mackinac Policy Conference here.