Buy Photo Adriana Herrera, a senior who is undocumented and will not be eligible for Tennessee Promise, walks the hall at Overton High School in Nashville on April 22. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Hundreds of paper stars are hanging from the ceiling of the John Overton High School lobby, bearing the names of graduating seniors and the colleges they will be attending this fall.

Kiara Beard: University of Tennessee-Chattanooga. Catherine English: Vanderbilt University. Michael Nguyen: Nashville State Community College.

But there isn't a star for Adriana Herrera, despite the fact that she desperately wants to go to college. Weeks away from graduation, the 18-year-old is still clamoring to find a school she can afford.

This year, a number of Overton students, and thousands of graduating seniors across the state, will go to community or technical colleges tuition-free, thanks to the pioneering Tennessee Promise scholarship program. Gov. Bill Haslam believes Tennessee Promise will give students the opportunity to harness higher education for a chance at better jobs and brighter futures.

That promise doesn't apply to Adriana, or to the thousands of other high school seniors in the Volunteer State who are undocumented residents. The Migration Policy Institute estimates that there are about 10,000 undocumented immigrants between the ages of 14 and 19 in Tennessee.

To enroll at community college in Tennessee, undocumented students would have to pay out-of-state rates of more than $15,000 a year, more than three times the in-state tuition of about $4,000.

For Adriana, the price tag makes community college seem impossible.

Losing out on Tennessee Promise "is just another barrier to education with these students," said Eben Cathey, advocacy manager for the Tennessee Immigrant and Refugee Rights Coalition. "The pathways are very few and far between."

Wearing many hats

Adriana came to Tennessee from Mexico when she was 5 years old. She calls Music City her hometown.

She grew up along with Nashville, honing her English in Metro schools and watching as Nolensville Road evolved into a haven for the city's rapidly expanding Hispanic community.

She balances her coursework with a crowded slate of extra-curricular activities — she'll be in Overton's production of the musical "In the Heights" later this week. After a rough start during her freshman year, when her father was deported, Adriana has worked hard to improve her grades.

But her work is far from over when she comes home to the two-bedroom apartment in Antioch that she shares with her mother and three brothers.

Her mother works two jobs, often cleaning offices until midnight. So Adriana is in charge of feeding, tutoring and tucking in her brothers Eduardo, 11; Angel, 9, and Carlos, 5.

"I have to step in the role like a mother and try to help them out," she said.

Adriana has qualified for deferred action, a special federal designation for young people with clean criminal records who came to this country as children. Deferred action gives Adriana a Social Security number and allows her to work and pay taxes, but she cannot complete the Federal Application for Free Student Aid, receive government grants for college, which are requirements for Tennessee Promise, or qualify for in-state tuition.

Because Adriana's brothers were born after her family moved to the United States, they automatically became citizens. She knows how much easier enrolling in college would be if Tennessee Promise was an option for her, so she plans to encourage her brothers to take advantage of the program when they're her age.

Story continues below photo

Buy Photo Adriana Herrera, a senior who is undocumented and will not be eligible for Tennessee Promise, poses with her brothers Angel, 9, left, and Eduardo, 11, right, in their Nashville home. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)

"I know that as U.S. citizens, they have more rights than I do, and they have more privileges. And it's not something that I envy, you know, because they're my brothers and I love them," she said. "It just makes me sad and a little angry at myself because I'm supposed to be the oldest sister. I'm supposed to have a better future to be their role model so they can follow in my footsteps. ..."

She stopped in the middle of her thought as tears rolled down her cheeks.

"But it's like, how can I do that? How can I do that when going to college is a struggle for me?"

Last-dollar model

Tennessee Promise is a last-dollar scholarship program, meaning the state only covers the cost of tuition that is left after federal and state aid is applied. Because of this model, sending as many as 16,000 students to school during the program's first year is only expected to cost the state $14 million.

Officials in Haslam's office said the program would be far too costly if it paid the tab for students like Adriana who could not offset their tuition costs with government aid.

"What allows us to offer the Tennessee Promise to high school graduates is really its function as a last-dollar scholarship," said Mike Krause, executive director of Tennessee Promise. Excluding undocumented students "very much ends up being a case of program design and student eligibility to complete a FAFSA, which is of course a federal determination."

Because they cannot qualify for the scholarship, undocumented students also miss out on one of the most celebrated elements of the program: the volunteer mentors who act as cheerleaders and guides for students trying to navigate an unfamiliar college landscape.

The state does not currently have plans to expand mentorship to undocumented students.

"Right now our priority is on administrating the programs at hand," Krause said. "I don't know if we've looked around that corner."

Story continues below video

Adriana Herrera will graduate from Overton High School in May and she is not sure about college. Because she is an undocumented student, she is not eligible for Tennessee Promise. Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean

However, Krause, who leads a number of other efforts to increase access to higher education in Tennessee, said undocumented students should "press forward and see what options are available to them."

"Any student in that position we absolutely encourage to connect with their local colleges, see what financial aid resources are available," Krause said.

Although it can be difficult, there are pathways to more affordable educations for undocumented immigrants.

Many times, students end up leaving the state to go to schools like Western Kentucky University that offer them discounted tuition rates. Local private universities like Lipscomb and Trevecca Nazarene also work with students.

A network of nonprofits in Nashville, including TIRRC, Conexion Americas and YMCA Latino Achievers, work to link students with options that work for them, and with private scholarships that mitigate the cost of attendance.

"You can't give up because that's a lot of what we see," said Bob Obrohta, executive director of Tennessee College Access and Success Network. "There are people out here in our community that clearly understand what types of options you have."

'I will find a way'

Undocumented students had hoped to find relief last week at the hands of the General Assembly, which took up a bill that would have made students like Adriana eligible for in-state tuition at public schools. It wouldn't have had the same impact as Tennessee Promise, but it would have slashed tuition at community colleges by about $11,000 a year.

The bill, which had support from Haslam and the Senate, failed by one vote in the House of Representatives Thursday after more than an hour of debate.

Legislators seem optimistic that the bill could be successful next year. But that still leaves Adriana and thousands like her with an uncertain path after high school graduation in May.

For all of the hurdles in her way, Adriana remains optimistic that she will succeed. She hopes to find a steady job over the summer that will allow her to save up enough to enroll somewhere.

"I know that I am capable of doing a lot of things. I just need to set my mind to it," she said. "I will find a way to go to college."

About the project

This is the fourth installment in The Tennessean's year-long series on Tennessee Promise, the state's ambitious plan to provide community college tuition-free to eligible high school graduates. On the fourth Sunday of every month, The Tennessean will provide an in-depth look at the program's progress and its impact.

Catching up with The Tennessean's five students

In February The Tennessean introduced five students who will be featured throughout the year as they make their way through the Tennessee Promise program. Here's what they've been up to lately.

•Sabrina Cornejo (Gallatin) has been holding down a full-time job at Lowe's, but her top priority is graduating high school. As ready as she is to start studying to become a respiratory therapist, she teared up a little when she took her first picture in a cap and gown. Last week, she picked her first round of classes at Volunteer State Community College

•Jonathan Dyer (Bartlett, a suburb of Memphis) wrapped up his Eagle Scout project this weekend by working with a group of friends to plant trees and flowers around his high school campus. He's also continuing to photograph events and emergency scenes for local fire departments. He has already been accepted to Southwest Tennessee Community College.

•Geraldine Hernandez (Nashville) is busy preparing decorations for her senior prom next month. Next week, she will be trying to get certification to become a clinical medical assistant. She plans to get a job before starting class at Nashville State Community College.

•Justin Short (Kingsport) has been working to complete the community service hours required of all Tennessee Promise students by cleaning up his hometown through the Keep Kingsport Beautiful campaign. He's also stepped up his work schedule to 45 hours a week. He hopes to save the extra money for books this fall at Northeast State Community College.

•Tahj Turnley (Brentwood) starts class at the Tennessee College of Applied Technology in Hohenwald in July. He still plans to use his experience there to get a four-year degree in mechanical engineering. In high school, he's been taking classes on personal finance to prepare himself for financial independence in college.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1GsTSF1