TALLAHASSEE – Gov. Rick Scott isn’t going to take being yelled at lying down.

After being screamed at in a Gainesville Starbucks this week by Cara Jennings, a former Lake Worth city commissioner, Scott’s political committee, Let’s Get to Work, released an ad attacking Jennings for her outburst.

The ad is a short video playing on Let’s Get to Work’s website.

The ad attacks her as a “latte liberal” and a “self-proclaimed anarchist” who wants more government spending. Jennings was blasting Scott for not doing more to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. Scott announced his support for Medicaid expansion in 2013 and said he would continue supporting it during his 2014 reelection campaign, but reversed course last year.

Much of the ad, though, focuses on Scott’s response to Jennings: Florida has added more than 1 million jobs during his tenure.

“A million jobs? Great, who here has a great job?” Jennings said.

“Well, almost everybody. Except those who are sitting around coffee shops demanding public assistance, surfing the internet and cursing at customers who come in,” the ad retorts.

Meanwhile, in a letter to Scott's office, Jennings invited the governor to meet her for coffee on April 20 in Tallahassee at the café of his choice.

She wants to discuss Planned Parenthood, voting disenfranchisement, increasing the minimum wage, climate change and deaths in Florida's prison system.

"I feel that it is important for two Floridians to be able to sit down and discuss civilly what is harming working families and the environment in our state," Jennings wrote.

Jennings said she doesn't understand why the governor would release a video attacking a private citizen.

"So I guess this means that he doesn't want to meet me for coffee?" she asked, when she learned his video had been released.

Let’s Get to Work took in more than $250,000 last month, with $100,000 coming from Floridians for a Stronger Democracy, another political committee that received $150,000 in contributions from HCA, a hospital chain formerly run by Scott.