10-day trip to include Delhi, Mumbai.

By Deepak Chitnis

WASHINGTON, DC: South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley will lead a 10-day expedition to India this November, in order to explore trade opportunities.

The trip, which is expected to cost around $50,000, will take Haley and five employees of the South Carolina Department of Commerce and the Governor’s Office to the cities of New Delhi, Mumbai, and the state of Punjab, where Haley’s parents are originally from. The trip will last fromNovember 12-22, just one week after the 2014 midterm elections, in which Haley is running for re-election.

By exploring trade opportunities with India, Haley, 42, hopes to spur job growth within South Carolina and boost the state’s economy. Haley has made it her mission to decrease unemployment since she took office in 2011, and has received both praise and criticism for her effort. By going to India, the birthplace of her parents, Haley is hoping to flex some cultural muscle and secure some major corporate and political partnerships.

Speaking to the Charlotte Observer, South Carolina Secretary of Commerce Bobby Hitt said that the trip would be “special” for Haley, who will have a tight itinerary to follow as she holds several meetings with the country’s business and political leaders. Names have not yet been disclosed as to who Haley will be meeting, however, nor is it likely that Haley will have time to pay any personal visits to relatives she has in India.

This isn’t the first time in recent months that a US envoy has traveled to India in order to forge ties and build relationships with institutions in the subcontinent. Last month, a delegation of some of the leading universities in the US visited New Delhi to build ties with leaders in the country’s government, education, and technology sectors. Several US lawmakers have also visited the country over the past year, including Ami Bera (D-CA).

Haley’s parents, Ajit Singh Randhawa and Raj Kaur Randhawa, are both from the Amritsar District of Punjab, although Haley herself was born and raised in South Carolina.

A Republican, she will be running against Democrat Vincent Sheheen, who she narrowly defeated at the polls in 2010. The key issues of the campaign this year are likely to be the economy, improving education around the state, as well as the controversial Affordable Care Act, for which Haley has been vocal in her opposition.