The Jewish voice had the rare opportunity to converse with best-selling author, radio personality, and Orthodox Jew Ben Shapiro, who temporarily traded in his native Los Angeles for New York last week. Mr. Shapiro, who, at 17, became the youngest syndicated columnist in US history, and who authored his first book, Porn Generation, at 20, was kind enough to take time out of his schedule to grant an interview.

Shapiro sat down with a member of our editorial staff in the charming Newton Hotel on the Upper West Side to talk about the Syrian conflict, gay marriage and President Obama’s fragile ego.

JV: Most American Jews vote Democrat – 80% voted Obama. Obama is so much farther left than most Jews. Why do you think Jewish support of Democrats continues?

Ben: Actually, I don’t think that’s true. most Jews are pretty far left. Most Jews are secular. Most Jews don’t care about Judaism, they go to shul once a year and abortion ranks higher than Israel in their moral calculus. So when you remove the Jewish modifier of most American Jews what you realize is that demographic describes most mainstream White liberals is what you’re talking about. An upper-middle class group, living in major cities, highly educated, largely suburban, and very removed from religious practice. Now, if I gave you those qualifiers and you put “Jewish” in front of that you would go “OK, automatically a Democratic voter”. So they are typical Democratic voters and they were willing to vote for President Obama, not in spite of the fact that he is anti-Israel but, in part, because of that, in a world that suggests that all conflict can be solved through peaceful negotiations and Israel ought to be making concessions rather than taking measures necessary to protect their population.

JV: By and large, the Democratic party still votes pro-Israel.

Ben: Well, that depends on what you consider pro-Israel – I you’re saying that 75% of the Democratic party votes to fund Israeli aid, that’s true. Everyone votes to continue Israeli aid, which is still a great thing. It’s wonderful that there is bipartisan support for that. But when it comes to supporting Israel’s right to defend itself, Israel has much stronger support amongst Democrats in Congress than it does among Democrats in the Executive Branch ranging from Bill Clinton to President Obama. And the President really makes foreign policy when it comes to that. Congress has had a law on the books for what, the last 10 years, saying the embassy should be moved to Jerusalem? Neither president has done so.

JV: If you were tasked with convincing the Jewish community to bear further to the Right, or the center, how would you go about doing that? Is there even a way of doing that?

Ben: I think the Republican Party should shift slightly on the gay marriage issue, not because I think that gay marriage is right or that I think the government ought to approve it but because the government ought to get out of the business of marriage entirely.

JV: I’m glad you brought up gay marriage because it’s obviously a huge issue today. A lot of Orthodox Jews, particularly young people our age struggle with that because, on the one hand, they believe in separation of Church and State, but on the other hand they do not believe in gay marriage from a religious standpoint. Is there a logical argument that the government should continue to recognize traditional marriage without recognizing gay marriage?

Ben: Of course. The state has an interest in the bearing and the raising of children. If there are not enough children born, the entire state collapses, and if those children are raised in either single-parent homes or non-traditional homes then society collapses. So the state clearly has an interest in children being born into their biological families and raised in their biological families. Every social science study ever done has shown that that’s the case. When it comes to the separation of Church and State, it was to protect church from the state. Not the other way around. The goal was to prevent the state government or federal government from cracking down on your private exercise of religion. That’s been completely overthrown. The secular Left uses the power of the state to club religion into submission.

JV: Like Obamacare.

Ben: Even beyond Obamacare. The gay marriage debate was never about who is getting married. What the gay marriage debate was always about from the beginning was using the state to crack down on traditional religious institutions. That’s what you’re seeing in California where there is a bill that is going to pass through the California assembly that would remove not-profit status from every religious youth group in the state, that discriminates based on religion, sexual orientation, and gender – Boy Scouts, Little League, and every shul group loses its non-profit status immediately. The secular left does not acknowledge that there is any good to be done by religious non-profit groups that they disagree with on gay marriage. The conservatives lost the culture and then they lost the law. So now we have to win back the culture. Start by removing the whole thing from the purview of the state. The only way they can hurt religious folk at this point is to leverage the power of the state against the power of religion.

JV: I would like to touch upon something you mentioned a few minutes earlier about how non-traditional homes raising kids is detrimental to society. How would you respond to people that say that recognizing gay marriage would allow kids who would otherwise live horrible lives in 3rd world countries will instead find loving homes?

Ben: if the question is if it’s better to be raised in a gay home than in China or something, the answer is of course. But we are not talking about the lesser of two evils – we are talking about what the societal standards should be. The bottom line is when you subsidize something you make it more common. You’re going to see more gay people getting married and you’re going to gay people not only adopting kids but an increasing number if gay folks using surrogate mothers to create fetuses in vitro. And now you’re not talking about the lesser of two evils – now you’re talking about production of a child specifically to be brought into a gay home instead of a traditional one, and that’s a problem. But the power of the gay movement to leverage the state to shut down churches, that’s the real danger, beyond the fact that it isn’t good for any kid to be raised in environment that’s not a solid mother-father home.

JV: You tend to focus on domestic policy issues, but I wanted to know what you think the appropriate response to Syria is from the US and Israel.

Ben: As far as Israel, I’m not sure there is a good solution for them in any case. Syria is a proxy state for Iran, so in that sense I suppose it would be good if Assad were to go. But if we knock off Assad all it would do would be to encourage Iran to redouble its nuclear efforts because now they will fear more isolated than they already are. They feel scared of Turkey, they feel scared of Israel, so they are going to push they nuclear weapons development, which they have been doing anyway, but they also know that the Obama administration is not going to do anything about it. The Obama administration has made it clear that eventually Israel is going to have to deal with the Iranian threat on its own, without any sort of help. Which is very troublesome, because the United States can finish this thing within a couple of months. All they would have to do is blockade the oil shipments out of Iran and this whole thing would come to a crashing halt. As far as Syria, I do not understand why from the US’ perspective why we would want any piece of that at all. I’m still confused what America’s interests are in Syria.

JV: it’s more of a humanitarian response.

Ben: Lots of bad things happen in the world every single day. You’d actually have to have American interests other than humanitarian response because Sudan has been a significantly more difficult humanitarian crisis for a significantly longer time.

JV: It just hasn’t been as significantly splashed across the headlines.

Ben: that’s true, but the reason it has been splashed across the headlines is because Obama, like an idiot, made his red line statement. Sources from the LA Times have said that Obama plans to use just enough force so that people don’t mock him. That was literally from someone inside the administration.

JV: he is so terrified of being mocked. Remember that rodeo clown in Missouri?

Ben: Yeah, it’s a national issue because a rodeo clown made fun of him. He’s such a thin-skinned dude.

JV: Moving on to a different topic, you’ve written extensively about college campuses in both Porn Generation and Brainwashed. You’ve spent time at UCLA and Harvard and you successfully resisted the culture there. So what advice would you offer our younger readers?

Ben: Liberal college can be a tremendous opportunity but it has to be you making it an opportunity. In other words, don’t go there for the life experience. If you’re going there just because you want to party and find yourself you’re going for the wrong reason. The reason you should go to college is to find out about the different perspectives and then solidify your own perspective. Sometimes you’ll be convinced, but read all sides of the aisle and then figure out what you think instead of taking the path of least resistance, which is to listen to the professor and spit back out on the test what the professor wants to hear because it makes you popular at parties.