Californians bombarded the state insurance exchange’s website Monday to beat a deadline to sign up for Obamacare. In response, Covered California offered a grace period for more people.

The six-month enrollment period technically ended at midnight Monday, but those who started their applications by then have until April 15 to finish.

Late in the day, Covered California announced that the two-week extension would also apply to anyone who says they were unable to create an account. They can sign up for insurance between now and April 15. However, they won’t be able use the website, and instead must receive assistance at an enrollment center or from Covered California’s toll-free number.

“By doing the right thing for consumers there will be tens of thousands of consumers that we will get across the finish line between now and April 15,” said Peter Lee, executive director of Covered California.

Insurance companies now say they plan to focus on premium collection and educating new beneficiaries about their coverage. They said it’s too early to determine how often and for what reasons the newly insured are using their benefits, but some local health providers are seeing an influx of patients.

As of 2 a.m. Monday, Covered California said 1,209,791 people had signed up, with 155,988 enrolling since last Monday. Lee said as of 5 p.m. Monday, there had been a record 7.7 million page views at coveredca.com.

As in late December, ahead of the deadline for coverage that started Jan. 1, procrastinators paralyzed the state website. Over the weekend, wait times for telephone enrollment averaged 70 minutes.

Earlier Monday, with the final deadline looming for 2014 coverage, Covered California took the unusual step of preventing some from completing their enrollment so others could start and also qualify for an extension.

“We’ve tried to do it ourselves for the past two days,” said Kendrick Kim, a 36-year-old Fullerton real estate agent featured in a Register series on people who were undecided about signing up. “I plan to do it again tonight to see if the systems are working. I feel like I should get that insurance. Anything could happen in life.”

Gary Mann, a certified agent with an Obamacare office set up inside the Laguna Hills Mall, said he accepted paper applications from the line of people who showed up Monday because the exchange website was too slow to process while they waited.

“That could be good news,” Mann said of the extension. “It gives these people a little bit of a reprieve then. Our thought was we’re going to be here until midnight entering in the applications, but we can do it tomorrow.”

Nationwide, more than 6 million Americans have enrolled in plans on state exchanges or the federal government’s healthcare.gov. By Monday afternoon, the website had stopped accepting applications twice, once because of a software malfunction and again because of a surge in demand.

Orange County’s most recent enrollment figures, through the end of the February, showed that among 72,906 people enrolled, 86.5 percent were eligible for subsidies. Covered California has not yet released updated data on how many have paid their premiums, but a spokesman said insurers have reported that on average 85 percent have done so.

Brad Kieffer, a spokesman for Health Net, which has had 27,519 Orange County sign-ups, said the company was “extremely pleased” with the state and local figures.

“We continue efforts to educate new enrollees about their need to pay their first month's premium,” Kieffer said via email. “We're conducting outbound email and telephone campaigns to encourage payment and educate on payment options. And we’re partnering with brokers to do outreach to their clients who have yet to pay.”

Kaiser Permanente said that 87 percent of Californians who have signed up have paid. Those who haven’t are receiving phone calls and reminders in the mail. The most recent state enrollment figures show that 7,459 Orange County residents selected Kaiser on the exchange.

Blue Shield of California, which has the largest share of the Orange County market with 33,207 enrollees, said 85 percent have paid.

Increased coverage has brought increased demand for care.

“We’ve been seeing new patients that are coming through Covered California,” said Juana Rodriguez, community relations manager for AltaMed, a chain of nonprofit clinics in Orange County.

“You get obviously the ones that might have a pre-exisiting condition that are coming in for the first time in so long and you get the mix of people who are younger and healthier and come in for the first time to get checked. People are taking advantage of their coverage.”

Contact the writer: cperkes@ocregister.com 714-796-3686