HEAD COACH GARY KUBIAK

Denver Broncos coach Gary Kubiak and his players spoke to the media on Friday. Here’s some of what they said:

On game statuses:

“Out: [QB] Peyton [Manning], [S] T.J. [Ward] and [ILB] Danny Trevathan are out. Guys that are questionable: [S David] Bruton [Jr.], [TE] Vernon Davis, [RB] C.J. Anderson, [RB] Ronnie Hillman, [S] Omar Bolden, and [WR Andre] Bubba Caldwell. They’re all questionable. I’m missing one here, [WR] Bennie [Fowler] is questionable, too. Probable: [NT Sylvester] Sly [Williams] is probable. I don’t think I’ve missed anybody did I, [Vice President of Public Relations] Patrick [Smyth]? If you want to ask about anybody in particular go ahead. It’s so long I’m not going to sit here and read off of it.”

On the running backs for Sunday

“Ronnie is good. Ronnie practiced today. C.J. did not. He’s still sore, still very sore. I think that we still have a chance of getting him to game day and being available for us, but [RB] Juwan [Thompson] has had a good week. Ronnie looks fine. We’ll see. We’ll go from there, but I think C.J. still has a shot.”

On if the goal is to have three running backs in uniform on Sunday

“Yeah, obviously you want that. I’ve played with two before. On a given day, you kind of have some emergency ways that you could go about it. We just kind of have to look at the big picture right now. We have through tomorrow to make some of those decisions, look at the big picture and see what we think gives us the best chance this weekend.”

On Bruton’s participation in practice

“Brute [Bruton] actually came out to do just a little bit today. He’s still really, really sore. We thought between him and Omar that he may have the better chance of the two to maybe give us a little help this weekend, but we’ll have to see where he is. He’s pretty sore today.”

On if Thompson will start at running back

“No, Ronnie is ready to go. Ronnie will start. Ronnie is ready to go. He practiced well today. I think he’ll be fine.”

On his confidence in S Josh Bush

“The good news is that he was with us throughout the course of the offseason and played a little bit last week, so I’m comfortable. I think that getting [S] Shiloh [Keo] here, knowing our defense and the situation that we’re in that he can go in there and know exactly what’s going on, which is really important to us right now. Probably the biggest thing is that it’s filtered through special teams and those types of things have some big concerns. We just have to muster it up and find a way. That’s part of what we do.”

On if he has concerns with the special teams because of all of the injuries

“That’s probably been the biggest challenge right now because some of those guys have moved up in what they’re doing. It stretches you a little bit. David does a lot for us special teams-wise as the punt protect and those type of things. Yeah, that’s been a big challenge.”

On if Manning will be on the sideline for Sunday’s game

“You know what, I don’t know. I’m going to talk to him. He could definitely, but if he wants to do it exactly like we did against New England—if he wants to do it there and is more comfortable doing that, that’s fine. I’ll have to visit with him, but he worked out this morning and worked out well.”

On Davis and Trevathan’s status in the concussion protocol

“Vernon is expected to clear this afternoon and be fine. He still, obviously, hasn’t passed the final test, but he has practiced well and has done well. Obviously, Danny is out.”

On if ILB Todd Davis would start in place of Trevathan

“Yeah, Todd is going to start. We’re actually sliding [ILB] Brandon [Marshall] over and Todd will start, so those two will work inside.”

On what he likes about Todd Davis

“I like him a lot. He’s very detailed. I’ll say this, no player has had a better week of practice than that guy from me watching practice. I’m excited to see him play. There’s a lot on his plate. He still does special teams stuff and those types of things, but he’s worked really hard for this opportunity, so I’m excited to watch him play.”

On OLB DeMarcus Ware’s status

“I don’t know. Probable. He has a good chance. Put him in that category.”

INSIDE LINEBACKER TODD DAVIS

On starting on Sunday

“It feels great. It’s a great opportunity for me. The defense is playing so well, so it’s just a tremendous blessing to be able to come in and be able to play on a defense that’s doing so well. I know that [ILB] Danny [Trevathan] is going to get back healthy, but in the meantime, I’m going to take full advantage of the opportunity.”

On how prepared he is for the opportunity to start

“I feel really prepared, now. It’s definitely better being here the full time instead of the two weeks before. It’s definitely great going in and then having the team chemistry that I have now. It’s a lot different going into a game knowing everybody that you’re playing with and having such a close bond with everybody.”

On extra work this summer with injuries to Trevathan and ILB Brandon Marshall

“It helped me a lot. It was a lot of time for me to grow as a player coming from my rookie year to my sophomore, it definitely helped a lot. It helped me grow taking reps with the ones a lot. It was a great time for me to grow as a player.”

On his excitement to start

“I’m very excited. I can’t wait to get out there and play. One of the very first games that I started last year was against the Raiders. It feels good.”

On if he doesn’t expect a drop-off in defensive performance despite injuries

“You’ve seen a lot of guys come in when people have been injured. [OLB Shaquil] Shaq [Barrett] and different players have come in and played tremendously. I think, defense as a whole, we can still play tremendously. We do have some adversity to face right now, but I think that we’re still going to play at the same high level.”

On if he’ll continue to have his special teams duties

“Yeah, pretty much. They don’t shy away from that. It’ll be fun playing both. I love special teams and I love defense, so it will be fun doing both.”

On being a leader on special teams

“For me, I would love to play defense, but right now being a backup to Danny and Brandon, with my role on special teams I want to take full advantage and give everything I have to it. I definitely love playing it. This week I’ll be playing both, so it’s going to be fun for me.”

INSIDE LINEBACKER BRANDON MARSHALL

On if he sees himself in ILB Todd Davis

“Yeah. Heck yeah, man. I told Todd before, ‘You’re going to be a starter this week. You’re going to be a starter. You just have to bide your time.’ It took me three years to start. Everybody’s time comes at a different time. He’s going to be a starter. He’s going to be good.”

On how his role is changed on Sunday

“I’ll be playing the ‘MO’ position. Todd will move into my position and I will move into [ILB] Danny’s [Trevathan] position, so I’ll just playing the weakside inside linebacker. My responsibilities will change. How I play the defense will change a little bit, but it’s almost all relative, but it’s really not. It’s kind of different. It’s a little different.”

On the challenge of switching to Trevathan’s position

“It was a challenge for me because I have to be on point with almost forgetting everything that I’ve been doing the last 14 or 15 weeks and stepping into a new role. It’s really different how you fit the run, your pass responsibilities and how you play a slot formation. It’s really all different, so I just try to throw everything out the window.”