Sinead has a point about Miley

Brooklyn: In your coverage of the advice Sinead O’Connor gave Miley Cyrus, not a word has been said about the larger issue. Sinead is absolutely correct that women in the industry “prostitute” themselves — to make money for themselves and a lot more for those who pay them. Unfortunately, in this male-dominated industry, talent takes second place to headlines and the wrong kind of competition. Look at all the women on hit shows who only wear low-cut, form-fitting clothes. Women who have talent should not allow themselves to be used. If they don’t have talent, well, we don’t need any more Kardashians to watch. Miley, unfortunately, has had no parental guidance on how not to be used by pimps. Or is she like Lindsay Lohan, who was pimped out by her own parents? The casting couch has been around for decades, but the likes of Shirley Temple didn’t need to use it because she had both talent and a protective parent. Where are the parents? Women have stepped so far back in time, it’s pathetic. Shelley Mitchell

A tale of biker terror

Staten Island: Voicer Helen Borenstein writes that her blood runs cold when she finds herself in the midst of bikers. I agree, having had the same experience as Alexian Lien did. When I was driving home from work on Hylan Blvd., a bus pulled out from a stop and I used the left lane to pass it. But there were bikers riding the yellow line. They surrounded me and got off their bikes, forcing me to stop. Before I could close my window, a female rider proceeded to pummel me in the face. Then she grabbed my car keys and threw them into the wooded area by the curb. They were never found. I did not have my cell phone with me to call for help. I am a 68-year-old grandmother, and this woman was half my age. The so-called men with her did nothing. I had to leave my car in the middle of the road and walk a great distance to get help, since the area is mostly wooded parkland. Anna Hall

On Voicers and bikers

Brooklyn: To Voicer Barb Russo: I drive on the Belt Pkwy. every day and have been cut off many times. That doesn’t give me the right to ram into the back of the vehicle cutting me off. Once the bikers tried to attack Alexian Lien, he had no choice but to run over the bikes to escape. But the situation would not have escalated to that point had he not intentionally hit the initial biker. The bikers antagonized him and he took the bait, but they were not physically threatening him at that point. I agree with you on one thing, though: I, too, am relieved that I am not your husband. Andrew Feinstein

A terrible toll

Nanuet, N.Y.: Re “A national disgrace” (editorial, Oct. 9): Yes, the denial of benefits to the families of slain service members is a disgrace. Even more disgraceful is that after all this time, it took a government shutdown to finally see — on the front page of a major newspaper, with our own eyes — the actual cost of these wars. Heroes carrying a hero off an aircraft is something that’s rarely shown. That in itself is another disgrace, and all of the news media are guilty. Arthur Banks

Keystone Kongress

Bergenfield, N.J.: The federal government had budget surpluses from 1997 to 2000. Along came the Republicans, who proceeded to destroy the budget. Now, they are concerned about the debt ceiling. What a bunch of clowns. Al Schwarzler

Governing for dummies

Rockport, Tex.: I do not want the government shutdown to continue. I want Obamacare to be debated as a totally separate matter. Congress is hurting everyday constituents (including me) with this continued shutdown. I also want the debt ceiling raised to pay existing U.S. government obligations. I do not want the economy or the stock market (which is critical for my continued financial success) to slide. I want the Congress to make a budget for future spending, as it is supposed to do. Pay the bills we have in the meantime. My vote is going to the candidate who supports me on these matters. Samantha Rospo

Does not compute

Brooklyn: In answer to several Voicers: Whether you agree with the Affordable Care Act or not, the Supreme Court said it is constitutional because it is a “tax.” This makes me wonder what’s happening in this country. Oh, I remember — all Republicans are crazy. I’m glad I’m not one of them. Adelaide Verponi

Get the facts

Brooklyn: To Voicer Carol Courtien: In the time since the Affordable Care Act was passed, have you tried looking up what is in the law? Apparently not. All information about the law, as well as how it will be paid for, is online. It has been talked about a lot on reputable programs and written about in print. It seems you have been listening to the Republicans who say it is garbage and cannot be paid for. Delaying its implementation will cost you more, because you will be paying for those who cannot afford emergency medical treatment. Ronald Cohen

The Unaffordable Care Act

Valley Stream, L.I.: To all you Republican-haters out there: They are trying to stop Obamacare not because a Democratic President pushed it into law, but because it is a very bad law for most Americans. Just yesterday on CBS News, they had a woman signing up for the this “affordable” care. It will cost her $186 per month, which comes out to more than $2,000 a year, but her deductible will be $13,000 per year. Someone please tell me how this is affordable. Larry Bernard

The party of no

Brooklyn: President Obama has tried to implement positive change in America. From Day One, he has received constant resistance and disrespect from the Republicans. He has inherited the fall of America as a great nation. Its education institutions are falling apart, its politics and economy are in shambles. The Republicans are telling the entire nation that they want to see the Obama administration fail. They want to see the American economy and people suffer, or even die, as a result of the effects of a recession or, worse, a depression. I believe the Republican Party is a source or the source of American racism, bigotry, capitalistic exploitation and human insensitivity. Jerome Livingston

Check your math

Manhattan: How can pensions be factored into a comparison of conventional schools and charter schools when the charters have not been in existence long enough for teachers to be eligible for pensions (“A walk on the child’s side,” editorial, Oct. 7)? Also, if graduates of the academy for principals rid the system of senior teachers, pension costs will be even higher. Marilyn Levin

Competing for classrooms

Manhattan: Re “Lhota marches with charter folks” (Oct. 9): As the husband of a hardworking special education teacher in the public schools, the gall of the charter schools makes me sick. At my wife’s school, the charter schools have taken over more territory every year. Next year, they want to steal away another five classrooms. For charter school advocates to whine about having to — God forbid — pay rent is absolutely ridiculous. They should be thankful for what they already have and stop encroaching on public school real estate, of which there is not enough to begin with. Trey Rosier

Get serious about housing

Manhattan: Shola Olatoye’s Oct. 6 Op-Ed, “Our plan to end homelessness,” did an excellent job bringing forward the primary culprit for the city’s unprecedented spike in homelessness — a shortage of housing that’s affordable for the lowest-income New Yorkers. Solving the affordability crisis requires a major infusion of subsidies, not only to finance the production of affordable units, but to preserve existing housing stock that’s at risk of losing its affordability. The United for Homes campaign proposes to modify the current mortgage interest deduction to raise $196 billion for the National Housing Trust Fund over 10 years. Under the current formula, New York State would be the second-largest recipient of funding. Oksana Mironova, Tenants & Neighbors

Riddle me this

Wilmington, Del.: What’s the difference between President Obama and Bill Belichick? Belichick only spied on football teams. David Saraga

When you’re a Jet ...

South Amboy, N.J.: Re “Rex throws Green party” (Oct. 9): Who would have thunk it, Mike Lupica? I would have thunk it! And all other true and loyal Jets fans! I believe in my team and will continue to. I will scream at the top of my lungs, “Are you kidding me?” but I will always have their backs. Lorraine Dietz