2 years ago

(CNN) - Four potential Republican presidential candidates stand out above the rest of the possible field, according to new national poll.

A Gallup survey released Friday indicates that former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky, Texas Gov. Rick Perry, and Rep. Paul Ryan of Wisconsin are best known and most liked by Republicans right now.

Follow @politicalticker

According to the poll, the four potential 2016 White House contenders are all familiar to more than 60 of Republicans and Republican-leaning independents and have net favorable ratings of at least 43-percentage points.

Huckabee, who ran for the GOP nomination in 2008 and hosts a program on the Fox News Channel, has a 48% net favorable rating. Paul, the son of former longtime Rep. Ron Paul, who ran three times for the White House, and who is well known and well respected by the libertarian and grassroots conservative wings of the party, is at 47%. Perry, the longtime Texas governor and a veteran of the 2012 Republican presidential nomination fight, is at 46%, with Paul, the House Budget Committee chairman and the GOP's vice presidential nominee in the 2012 election, has a 43% net favorable rating.

The poll indicates that two other possible Republican presidential candidates, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, are just as familiar to Republicans as Huckabee, Paul, Perry and Ryan, but they have lower net favorable scores. Bush is at plus 30%, with Christie, who's dealing with the George Washington Bridge controversy back in the Garden State, is at plus 10%.

Five other potential White House hopefuls, Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida, former Sen. Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania, a 2012 Republican presidential candidate, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, are less familiar to Republicans.

The Gallup poll was conducted July 7-10, with 1,013 adults nationwide questioned by telephone. The survey's overall sampling error is plus or minus four percentage points.

CNN Political Editor Paul Steinhauser contributed to this report