Former CNBC anchor Melissa Francis dropped a bit of a bombshell on the air when she accused her former boss of silencing her for questioning the math behind the Affordable Car Act. As reported on Fox News on Nov. 16, 2015, Francis appeared on the Fox News program "Media Buzz" with host Howard Kurtz in which she revealed that roughly four years ago when she hosted an economy oriented program at the economy oriented CNBC news network, she found herself called on the mat for questioning Barack Obama during a live broadcast.

Currently employed by the Fox Business Network as the host of the "Money with Melissa Francis" program, she detailed last Friday that during the height of the debate of passing the Affordable Care Act, popularly known as Obama Care, she questioned the basic math behind the massivly taxpayer subsidized insurance plan. According to Francis, that didn't exactly go over well with the honchos upstairs.

As she stated on her Fox Business program, "When I was at CNBC, I pointed out to my viewers that the math of ObamaCare simply didn't work, not the politics, by the way, just the basic math. And when I did that, I was silenced. I said on the air that you couldn't add millions of people to the system and force insurance companies to cover their preexisting conditions without raising the price on everyone else. I pointed out that it couldn't possibly be true that if you like your plan, you can keep it," Francis said. "That was a lie. And in fact, millions of people had their insurance canceled."

It was then that Francis dropped a bombshell that's still sending reverberations through social media. Possibly more befitting the Third Reich's Reichsministerium für Volksaufklärung und Propaganda (Reichs Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda) than the American press, Francis accused her former boss of rank censorship: "As a result of what I said at CNBC, I was called into management where I was told that I was 'disrespecting the office of the president' by telling what turned out to be the absolute truth."

Appearing today on "Media Buzz" Francis intimated to Kurtz a more detailed picture of what when she was read the riot act at MSNBC, "Look, this is math, not politics. I'm talking about dollars and cents. We're a money channel." Not done yet, she further accused the rival network of dressing her down more than once, accusing her of being "too political."

Quick to react to the Francis accusations, an anonymous CNBC representative gave the following statement to the Page Six gossip column of the New York Post on Nov. 14, 2014: "That’s laughable, but we take notice, because as the fastest-growing network in prime time, we’re always on the lookout for high quality comedy writers and actresses." When asked by Kurtz if she understood the somewhat curious response, Francis openly questioned why CNBC would hire actresses instead of economists to anchor their network.

Francis graduated in 1995 from Harvard University with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics. While matriculating at the Ivy League school, the native Los Angelina served as the executive editor of The Harvard College Economist magazine.

According to recent TV ratings, Fox cable networks (Fox News, Fox Business) draw slightly over 2.5 million viewers in prime time. Meanwhile, the NBC cable networks (CNBC, MSNBC) attract slightly more than 950 thousand viewers during the same time frames.

Despite being a colleague of Francis at Fox, Kurtz queried her as to why she "protect the executives involved and not name names?" According to Francis, "It was pervasive across the network, and there was more than one person who told me to stop. So to pin it on an individual would allow them to scapegoat one or two people in particular, and I think it was pervasive across the network and that people should know about it. The point of business journalism is to illuminate the economic facts.

Not done yet, Francis also said, "I think the American public deserves to know that the reason why Jonathan Gruber and others like him are able to get away with this is because there are networks out there and management at CNBC who are complicit in this cover-up and keeping people ignorant. Francis further stated, "You may decide that ObamaCare makes sense, but you need to do it based on the facts. You need to understand the real math, then decide."