A look at proposed health insurance to be sold on the exchanges starting Nov. 15 under the Affordable Care Act in three Alabama metro areas shows little price change from last year.

Why?

In a word: Competition.

UnitedHealthcare is entering the exchange market this year in all of Alabama's 67 counties eliminating Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama's solitary status in 64 counties. Humana was and still is in three counties -- Jefferson, Shelby and Madison.

The United move has had an effect.

"United held out last year, and we are seeing them coming into the market and premiums are going down or staying flat," said Cynthia Cox, a Kaiser Family Foundation senior policy analyst for health reform.

Cox helped AL.com look at three metro areas in Alabama as a snapshot of the proposed 2015 insurance plans for the state. She used the most frequently chosen Silver Plan as her benchmark.

In Birmingham increases in the plans examined were 3 percent; Huntsville under 2 percent; and Mobile there were actually decreases from last year.

In Birmingham the lowest Silver plan for a 40-year-old nonsmoker is Humana Silver 4600 with a base rate of $262 per month, up 3 percent from last year's lowest Silver plan. The second lowest Silver plan in the region including Birmingham is the UnitedHealthcare Silver Compass 3600 which had a price of $264. That was a 3 percent increase over last year's lowest Silver plan, which was Blue Cross' Blue Saver. The Blue Saver is now priced at $279.

the lowest Silver plan for a 40-year-old nonsmoker is Humana Silver 4600 with a base rate of $262 per month, up 3 percent from last year's lowest Silver plan. The second lowest Silver plan in the region including Birmingham is the UnitedHealthcare Silver Compass 3600 which had a price of $264. That was a 3 percent increase over last year's lowest Silver plan, which was Blue Cross' Blue Saver. The Blue Saver is now priced at $279. In Huntsville , the lowest priced Silver plan is UnitedHealthcare Silver Compass 3600 at $254 per month, a 1 percent increase from the previous year's lowest price. The second lowest Silver is Humana Silver 4600/PPO, a premium which also saw a 1 percent increase from last year's second lowest Silver.

, the lowest priced Silver plan is UnitedHealthcare Silver Compass 3600 at $254 per month, a 1 percent increase from the previous year's lowest price. The second lowest Silver is Humana Silver 4600/PPO, a premium which also saw a 1 percent increase from last year's second lowest Silver. In Mobile, the lowest priced Silver plan is the UnitedHealthcare Silver Compass 3600 at $242, a 2 percent drop from last year's lowest priced Silver. The second lowest Silver is United Healthcare Silver Compass 5000 at $255 per month, a 3 percent drop.

Cox said it's a trend across the nation; more insurers entering the market and flattening premium prices.

[ MORE: How Alabama insurance agents are profiting in new Obamacare economy ]

A study of 15 cities plus Washington D.C. showed that the premium for the second lowest cost Silver is decreasing by an average of -.08 percent, according to the Kaiser study in September.

A Health and Human Services analysis found that consumers shopping the exchange have on average five insurers and 47 Marketplace plans from which to choose.

"This analysis finds that each additional issuer is associated with a 4 percent decline in the second-lowest cost silver plan premium."

PwC, an audit, tax and consulting firm, researched premium data in 38 states and the District of Columbia, and found that the average increase across states was 6 percent.

BCBS of Alabama and UnitedHealthCare couldn't be reached Thursday or Friday to discuss the rates.

[ SHARE YOUR STORY: What's your experience with Obamacare? Tell us what you think of first year ]

In Alabama, nearly 100,000 people signed up for private plans during enrollment for 2014. Some 85 percent of the enrollees in Alabama received a subsidy, or tax credit, to lower their premiums - so the rates you see quoted are not necessarily the rate you will pay.

For the Alabama insurance snapshots of metro areas in Alabama, Cox used data recently posted at the SERFF website from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. Though open to the public here, it is a cumbersome and difficult website to navigate and extract information from.

"It is very difficult," said Alabama Department of Insurance spokesman Mark Fowler. However, it appears to be the only method the public and media have of obtaining information about Alabama rate filings.

Cheryl Fish-Parcham, private insurance program director at Families USA weighed in:

"Many states have developed consumer-friendly websites that let consumers see proposed health insurance premium rates, comment on those rates, and then see the rates that were approved and why any increases occurred. Alabama has not developed such a website and we encourage it to do so in the future. Remember that if you are shopping for a plan in the marketplace, the healthcare.gov website does offer an easy way for consumers to compare plans and their premiums."