WASHINGTON, D.C. – Forty hours a week is the American standard for full-time work. But the Affordable Care Act made that standard 30 hours when considering whether employers must provide a particular workplace benefit: health coverage.

How significant is that 10-hour difference?

It's the difference between people getting coverage they deserve and being shorted out of it, the White House and "Obamacare" supporters say. Or, say Republicans and other critics, it's enough of a burden to kill jobs and add unaffordable costs on employers.

One thing for sure: That 10-hour difference is significant enough for the White House to warn today that President Barack Obama will veto a bill that the new, Republican-led Congress wants to pass to assure that employers aren't fined if they fail to offer health insurance to employees working fewer than 40 hours. This comes on the second day of the 114th Congress – and it is the second White House veto warning in as many days, setting up a level of hostility that may have been inevitable anyway.

Here's what the newest controversy is about.

1. The 30-hour mandate only became enforceable this year

The Affordable Care Act, or ACA, passed in 2010, but its requirements had staggered starting dates. The requirement to provide health coverage for employees who worked at least 30 hours a week, on a monthly average, was supposed to begin in 2014. But Obama pushed that back to 2015 for companies with 100 or more full-time workers (using the 30-hour threshold), and 2016 for companies with 50 or more. Penalties range from $2,000 to $3,000 per employee, although there are some exemptions to the fines. Employers with fewer than 50 full-time workers are entirely exempt.

2. Definitions of "full-time" vary

Employers often provide benefits to full-time workers – but what is full-time? The Fair Labor Standards Act, which sets the requirement for overtime pay, puts it at 40 hours. When measuring full-time employment for statistical and economic purposes, however, the Bureau of Labor Statistics uses 35 hours. But if you consider certain benefits essential – and Obama and many congressional Democrats consider health coverage essential – this gets trickier, because where do you draw the line on full-time? The ACA used 30 hours as the threshold, assuring that people who spend most of their work week with a single employer get that benefit. The threshold also was intended to keep employers from cutting full-time hours – for example, to keep an employer from cutting his 40-hour-a-week shifts to 38 or 35 hours just to get out of the requirement.

3. Restaurant and business groups see that as an unfair burden

Employer groups, especially in the retail and restaurant industries, say their members must comply with new record-keeping rules just to document which workers are on the job 29 or 28 hours, or 31 hours. They say this makes it tougher to ask an employee to work an extra hour or two during busy seasons or weeks, because that could trigger the health-insurance requirement. Some small businesses say they cannot afford to provide healthcare benefits. Some colleges and universities complained it meant they might have to offer health benefits to adjunct faculty.

4. They say a 40-hour standard is sensible and will protect jobs

Ask most people about full-time work and they say 40 hours, Republicans and some economists say. There is little ambiguity about that, whether from a business owner, a corporate board member or a labor union -- unlike a 30-hour schedule. "The 30-hour rule is particularly damaging because it impacts the economic incentives that employers have to hire and/or retain labor," Lanhee J. Chen, a research fellow at the Hoover Institution, a conservative think tank, and a lecturer at Stanford University, said in prepared testimony to a House of Representatives committee last year. "Since full-time work is defined in the ACA as work for an average at least 30 hours per week, employers might have an incentive to reduce the hours of some workers who are close to the 30-hour threshold."

5. But a 40-hour standard would have other effects

The Congressional Budget Office said today that under the Republicans' bill, called the Save American Workers Act of 2015, about 1 million people who would have employer-provided insurance coverage under the 30-hour standard would lose it. Between 500,000 and 1 million people would pick up coverage instead through Medicaid or the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), depending on their incomes, or through plans on the ACA marketplace, in some cases with taxpayer subsidies. Some would go uninsured; the CBO put the number at less than 500,000.

6. It would increase budget deficits, the CBO says

Remember the part about employer penalties? Since fewer companies would get penalized under the higher hours-per-week threshold, the government would collect less money. But more people would rely on the government for insurance – through Medicaid, CHIP and taxpayer subsidies with which to buy private policies – and that would come with a cost. Put these aspects together and the CBO and congressional Joint Committee on Taxation say the 40-hour threshold in the Save American Workers Act would increase deficits by $18.1 billion between 2015 and 2020 and $53.2 billion between 2020 and 2025.

7. The fight is on

Obama's Office of Management and Budget said today that while the administration welcomes ideas to improve the law, the Republican bill "would shift costs to taxpayers, put workers' hours at risk, and disrupt health insurance coverage." Democrats see the bill as the latest attempt to chip away at Obamacare piece by piece, although some Democrats, too, criticize the 30-hour threshold.

Brendan Buck, communications director for House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, a Republican, said in a statement, "There is bipartisan recognition that Obamacare will reduce take-home pay, but the president is showing once again that protecting his law is a higher priority than protecting these workers' wages."

The House is expected to pass the bill Thursday, just as it passed a similar measures last April. But what is different now is that the Senate is in Republican hands, too, for the first time since Obamacare's passage. That improves the bill's odds of coming to the floor in that chamber, although getting it to become law is much tougher. At least two Democrats, Sens. Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Joe Donnelly of Indiana, back the 40-hour bill. Whether Republican Senate leaders can get the 67 votes to overcome a presidential veto, however, is uncertain.

Obama on Tuesday issued a similar challenge when he said he would veto a bill authorizing the controversial Keystone XL pipeline through Nebraska.