Project will improve the streetscape at the heart of the county seat's downtown

Buy Photo Pedestrians walk along Bloomfield Avenue in Flemington. It is one of the streets to be improved. Officials in Flemington are hoping to revitalize the downtown area, including new street scapes, sidewalks, and a new plaza on Main Street. (Photo: Kathy Johnson/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo Story Highlights Mayor: 'It's the right project at the right time at the right place.'

Officials hope project willy sew the seeds for a more comprehensive revitalization program.

Mayor Phil Greiner wants Main Street to be more than just the downtown for the county seat.

He wants Main Street to be the downtown for the region.

"They need a downtown area," Greiner said.

Thanks to an $1 million grant, the borough is taking a big step toward achieving that ambitious vision.

"We're fortunate," the mayor said. "It's the right project at the right time at the right place."

The North Jersey Transportation Planning Authority awarded the grant earlier this month to improve the streetscape at the heart of Main Street from Bloomfield Avenue to Mine Street, a stretch that includes the historic courthouse, the county Hall of Records and the Union Hotel.

The centerpiece of the project will be the creation of a community plaza between Bloomfield Avenue and Court Street, which will become the setting for community events, said Megan Jones-Holt, executive director of the Flemington Business Improvement District (BID).

The project also will include new sidewalks, curbing, trees, benches, bike racks, lighting and fencing. In addition there will be safety upgrades to the Bloomfield Avenue and Court Street intersections.

Borough officials hope the streetscape improvements may sew the seeds for a more comprehensive revitalization program for Flemington.

"If we show we are willing to make an investment in our downtown, others will come here and make an investment," said Robert Shore, former chairman of the BID.

Only one area of downtown — the Union Hotel — has been designated as a redevelopment area, but Greiner said that the borough's planning board is undertaking a re-examination of Flemington's master plan and that may lead to the designation of other redevelopment areas.

A downtown strategic plan prepared for the BID in 2014 outlined six areas in the downtown area that could be redeveloped, including the Turntable Junction shopping area that recently was sold to a New York investment group, Turntable and Fulper LLC, for more than $3 million.

Greiner said he does not know the new owner's plans for the property, but said it serves as an important link between Main Street and the Liberty Village outlet center.

Buy Photo A pedestrian walks past the closed Union Hotel on Main Street in Flemington. The colorful panels were positioned there to beautify the area. (Photo: Kathy Johnson/Staff Photographer)

The strategic plan envisioned the Turntable Junction area as an "entertainment and cultural destination," including a "boutique cinema," art galleries, a civic plaza and market-race housing.

Bringing revitalized housing to the downtown area is also a priority, Greiner said. The housing could attract millennials seeking their first apartments or retirees who no longer want to stay in suburban homes but want to live near urban amenities, he said.

Officials hope the streetscape project will be a positive step in making Main Street a more attractive place for both businesses and residents.

"Flemington is delighted to receive this grant," Greiner said. "We look forward to the safety and circulation improvements, which will support our efforts at revitalization."

The mayor said the receipt of the grant demonstrates the positive results from a close working relationship between the borough and the Flemington Business Improvement District.

Greiner also thanked the freeholders, the state Department of Transportation and District 16 state legislators for supporting Flemington's efforts to secure the grant.

"Establishing safe, walkable downtowns and neighborhoods are important aspects of having a thriving community," State Sen. Kip Bateman, R-16th District, said. "This project will help to draw more visitors to Flemington's Main Street."

Buy Photo Officials in Flemington are hoping to revitalize the downtown area, including new streetscapes and a new plaza in this area in front of the Records building on Main Street. (Photo: Kathy Johnson/Staff Photographer)

Revitalization of the downtown is also a key component of Hunterdon County's first Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy.

Holt-Jones said the borough has two years to develop a plan for the streetscape project. No time line has been established for construction.

"These improvements will make it safer and easier for people to get around downtown Flemington," said Phil Velella, chairman of the BID. "thousands come to our community for music festivals and other special events and this will enhance their experience and draw even more visitors to our downtown. This is a really exciting opportunity."

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1AcZQDV