Cover Oregon, reeling from heavier-than-expected personnel departures, will pay its remaining employees bonuses worth at least two week's pay if they remain with the controversy-mired operation through the next nine months.

Thirty-eight employees with skills considered "critical," will get bonuses worth one to three months' pay.

Cover Oregon, which was in charge of the state's disastrous health care exchange development effort, has lost 27 employees since April, said Clyde Hamstreet, interim CEO in a recent letter to the board of directors. Some of those reductions came as a result of layoffs. But many left on their accord as Cover Oregon's flagship project – the state's ambitious heath insurance exchange website – became a full-fledged technological and political disaster.

Cover Oregon and its partner state agency, the Oregon Health Authority, spent upwards to $250 million and never produced a fully functional website. The debacle led to intense media scrutiny and withering criticism.

"Many of the employees who voluntarily left Cover Oregon had key skills that are not easily replaced both in IT and in health care laws and regulations," Hamstreet said in the letter. "We cannot afford to keep losing valuable employees if we are to complete the workload for the remainder of 2014 and the IT transition project."

Cover Oregon's in-house exchange has been killed and it has shifted its attention to adopting the federal exchange. To make that happen, Hamstreet decided he needed to sweeten the deal for the organization's remaining employees.

Hence, the bonus plan. Most of Cover Oregon's remaining 163 employees will be eligible for a bonus equal to two weeks pay if they stick around through March 15, 2015. Another 21 "core" employees will be eligible for bonuses equal to a month's pay, 15 will get two months of pay while two will get three months.

Retention bonuses are a routine fact of life in the private sector, where Hamstreet comes from. The prominent local business turnaround consultant commonly deals with companies in bankruptcy or other crises. Paying bonuses to key employees to lock up their services is an accepted part of the business.

In the partisan political hothouse of Cover Oregon, it may be a different matter altogether. Using taxpayer dollars to pay bonuses to employees simply for not leaving will be more grist for critics of Cover Oregon, Gov. John Kitzhaber and the Affordable Care Act.

Hamstreet pointed out the bonuses won't cost more than $650,000 total, a paltry sum in the world of Cover Oregon.

Strangely, Cover Oregon's offer of retention bonuses comes on the heels of a layoff last week. Between the layoffs and voluntary departures, 27 employees left the organization.

Since April, Cover Oregon's total workforce has declined from 190 to 163.

While Cover Oregon now moves to adopt the federal exchange, the war of words between the state and Oracle Corp., the lead technology contractor on Oregon's exchange, continues to heat up.

In an informal briefing to U.S. House of Representatives staff last week, Oracle representatives claimed the Oregon exchange actually worked in February for individual consumers to access. But state leaders chose not to release it, Oracle told staffers of the House Energy Committee.

"Oracle can only conclude that the Governor's unwillingness to release the website is because doing so doesn't fit with his re-election strategy of blaming Oracle for his own mistakes," Oracle stated in a PowerPoint presentation.

"Cover Oregon executives have stated to Oracle that the application functionality is sufficient to support individual enrollment," Oracle president Safra Catz wrote in a letter addressed to Hamstreet and state CIO Alex Pettit. "However, Cover Oregon has not agreed to give individuals direct access to the application. Thus Cover Oregon, not Oracle, made the decision to keep the exchange closed to individuals even though the functionality has been delivered by Oracle."

State officials say that Oracle's position is untrue. Insurance agents and other insiders given access to the site during this spring's open-enrollment period would agree it remained a glitchy work in progress.

In any case, Oracle doesn't explain how Kitzhaber would benefit from declaring Oregon's exchange a failure if it actually worked. But the congressional briefing provides a preview of Oracle's likely arguments if the two sides battle it out in court.

Kitzhaber has asked Oregon Attorney General Ellen Rosenblum to investigate the state's legal claims against Oracle.

-- Jeff Manning