Cigna is one of Visalia's largest private employers with employment estimated at about 700 people. The insurance powerhouse once had as many as 1,400 employees here when it added 300 jobs in 2001 and built their headquarters on Akers Street. The company has had some presence in Visalia since around 1991. Some still work in the Akers building, but the 150,000-square-foot office has been sold and divided since Cigna occupies only about 50,000 sq. ft. The current call center operation takes calls for overseas clients that include expatriate members. (Photo: Steve R. Fujimoto)

By voting Thursday night to approve a $1.1 trillion omnibus spending bill intended to avoid another federal shutdown, members of Congress also kept alive legislation that could save about 700 jobs in Visalia.

Now it's up to the Senate to pass it, too.

While the majority of the more than 1,600-page bill actually has to do with what the government can spend, other pieces of legislation were tacked onto it, which include spending $479 million to buy four more F-35 Joint Strike Fighters; a $93 million cut from the federal Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC) program; and essentially revoking a law that would allow legalizing marijuana in Washington, D.C., despite voters there having approved it.

The budget packet also includes provisions from House Resolution 4414, a bill passed by Congress in April that basically makes healthcare insurance plans sold to expatriates — Americans living in other countries — exempt from provisions of the Affordable Care Act.

Without the exemptions healthcare provider Cigna had announced that it might have to relocate about 700 jobs in Visalia — along with 500 more in Delaware — overseas in order to stay competitive with less-expensive foreign insurance plans.

Cigna is one of Visalia's largest employers.

With so many jobs at stake, representatives Devin Nunes, R-Visalia, and John Carney, D-Delaware, crossed party lines to develop HR 4414 and rallied cross-party support for it, despite concerns by some Democrats that it was part of an effort by Republicans to dilute the ACA.

It then went to the Senate but languished there for months, even though Cigna officials had told lawmakers that if the resolution wasn't passed by the end of the current Senate session — which had been scheduled to end Thursday — then the company would have to terminate services to expatriate clients conducted at its facility on Akers Street in Visalia as well as at its Wilmington, Del. facility.

Whether that would have meant moving the operations overseas or ending insurance services to expatriates entirely wasn't clear Friday.

"I can't speculate on that," was all Jon Sandberg, a spokesman for Cigna, would say on the matter.

Members of the California and Delaware coalitions in the Senate had been trying this week to get HR 4414 up for vote, but with no success.

So some members of Congress decided on a different move — having the legislation rolled into the omnibus package passed late Thursday night with a 219 to 206 vote.

It was a rare case of GOP leaders in Congress and the White House both backing the same bill, while left-wing Democrats didn't, claiming that some of those provisions in the omnibus are handouts to special interests.

Wording on the portions of the Senate omnibus affecting expatriate health insurance is slightly different from HR 4414's wording, said Jack Langer, a spokesman for Nunes' office.

He noted that the changes were needed because "Some in the Senate were concerned it was too broad and it might apply to other people other than expats."

So omnibus language is more specific, Langer said.

Congress' top Republicans, Speaker John Boehner of Ohio and Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy of Bakersfield, both approved adding the HR 4414 provisions to the omnibus.

As of Friday, it seemed that the insurance exemptions was likely to become law, as there seemed little doubt that the Senate would pass the budget legislation and avoid a government shutdown, Langer said.

"I'm hearing the same thing," Sandberg said Friday.

In written statement, Cigna officials said they were pleased by the House's actions, adding that "If this legislation is enacted, companies will continue offering high-quality expatriate health care coverage from our offices located in the United States — a crucial benefit for every American who relies on this coverage when they travel or work overseas.

The senators extended their session to Friday and were expected to work into the night.

Read or Share this story: http://vtd-tar.co/1DqRlg4