Woman found dead in Wilkins identified

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Delicious Jones, a mother of two, was as unique as her first name, a longtime friend said on Saturday.

“She was the greatest. She was wonderful,” Marcus Roach, 39, of Clairton said about his friend of 18 years. “She was my go-out-and-eat buddy, my Applebee's buddy.”

Jones' relationship with the man whom police identified as the main suspect in her death, William Arrington, 36, of Turtle Creek, got serious in April, Roach said. It soured recently, however, and Jones, 32, told Roach that she was going to end it, he said.

Roach led police to Jones' house along McMasters Avenue in Wilkins about 12:30 a.m. Saturday, and police found her cellphone in the toilet and evidence of a struggle. They found her body in woods across the street. An autopsy is pending.

Arrington was “most likely responsible” for Jones' death, Homicide Unit Lt. Andrew Schurman said. Arrington had not been charged as of 9 p.m. Saturday.

Arrington shot himself and was in critical condition in a local hospital, Schurman said. He was transported there from a family member's house in Wilkinsburg on Saturday afternoon, the lieutenant said.

Roach said Arrington, whom he also knew, was originally from Philadelphia.

Jones' children are 16 and 10, Roach said. She worked as a tax preparer for Jackson Hewitt and in the housing department of the Urban League of Greater Pittsburgh, said the Downtown nonprofit's president, Esther Bush, who recalled teasing Jones about her first name when they met.

“We smiled about it, and I told her I appreciated having somebody with a name that sweet working at the Urban League,” Bush said.

In November 2010, Arrington pleaded guilty to two counts each of terroristic threats and simple assault. He was sentenced to three to six months in jail and two years of probation.

He pleaded guilty in May 2008 to robbery, aggravated assault and intimidating a witness or victim. Common Pleas Judge Donald E. Machen sentenced him to 11½ to 23 months in the Allegheny County Jail.

Monday will be a difficult day at work, Bush said.

“The Urban League is very much involved in trying to stop the violence in the community working with different coalitions and on a national level,” Bush said. “When something like this happens, and it hits very close to home, the message is just too clear how we need to stop this violence in our neighborhood.”

Staff writer Natasha Lindstrom contributed to this report. Adam Brandolph is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-391-0927 or abrandolph@tribweb.com.