Cathy Buck, president of Froedtert Hospital, and Gary Seabrook, senior medical director of surgical services for Froedtert Hospital and chief of the division of vascular surgery at the Medical College of Wisconsin, view the new Center for Advanced Care, set to open Oct. 26. Credit: Rick Wood

By of the

Froedtert Hospital has completed the first phase of an expansion and renovation project expected to cost $240 million when completed by 2020.

The Froedtert & the Medical College of Wisconsin Center for Advanced Care — a $140 million, 12-story building, including three floors of underground parking — is scheduled to open on Oct. 26.

Froedtert Hospital has seen a steady and sharp increase in the number of patients over the past decade.

"We are very thoughtful about adding space," said Cathy Buck, president of Froedtert Hospital.

Outpatient visits increased to 762,977 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2015, up almost 7% from the 2013 fiscal year. The number of inpatient admissions — 26,752 in the last fiscal year — also has increased, though at a much slower pace.

The hospital — the academic medical center of the Medical College of Wisconsin — had operating income of $119 million on revenue of $1.3 billion in its latest fiscal year.

Planning for the project began in 2009, and construction began in 2013.

The new building will house the hospital's heart and vascular center, transplant center and surgical specialties clinic.

That will free up space for Froedtert Hospital to begin work this spring on the second phase — renovating its operating rooms and consolidating them in one area in the hospital.

In some ways, that will complete the integration of Froedtert Memorial Lutheran Hospital and John L. Doyne Hospital run by Milwaukee County that began when the hospitals were combined in 1995.

The hospital now has 16 operating rooms in the part of the hospital that was Froedtert Memorial and 13 in what was Doyne Hospital.

Most of the operating rooms also were built in the 1970s, when much of the equipment that now fills operating rooms did not exist. The operating rooms, with a few exceptions, average about 435 square feet, while new operating rooms are about 700 square feet.

This phase is projected to cost $100 million and to be completed in 2020.

"Replacing ORs is the most expensive thing a hospital can do," Buck said.

Froedtert Hospital also will consolidate its cardiac catheterization and interventional radiology labs in one part of the hospital. Both will be a logistical challenge because the hospital will have to continue performing surgeries and doing procedures during the construction.

"It's kind of like fixing your car while not turning your motor off," said Gary Seabrook, senior medical director of surgical services for Froedtert Hospital and chief of the division of vascular surgery at the Medical College of Wisconsin.

In the long term, though, the project should lower costs.

"When you pull them all together, you gain tremendous efficiencies," said Buck, who began her career as a trauma nurse in an emergency department and then worked as a transplant nurse.

The Center for Advanced Care is Froedtert Hospital's largest project since it completed its $95 million cancer center in 2008.

It also is being completed at a time when Froedtert Health, the corporate parent, has seen a sharp increase in its operating income.

The health system had operating income of $149 million in its fiscal year ended June 30 compared with $83.4 million in its 2014 fiscal year.

Revenue increased to $1.9 billion, up from $1.7 billion the previous fiscal year.

Froedtert Health reported net income — which includes investment income and gains — of $160.5 million for its 2015 fiscal year compared with $210.3 million in its 2014 fiscal year. The health system has roughly $1.5 billion in reserves, and its net income can fluctuate with the performance of the stock market from year to year.

Froedtert Health attributed the 78% increase in operating revenue primarily to cost cutting and the increase in people with health insurance because of the Affordable Care Act and the state's partial expansion of BadgerCare Plus, its largest Medicaid program.

Other health systems in the metropolitan area also have benefited from the expansion in insurance coverage.

Froedtert Hospital's expansion is one of several recently completed or planned construction projects in the region. They include:

■Froedtert Health opened a $45 million medical office building in New Berlin in 2013.

■ProHealth Care opened a $70 million cancer center in Pewaukee this year. The health system also reportedly spent $30 million on other projects tied to the cancer center.

■Aurora Health Care plans to spend an estimated $81.3 million to build an outpatient surgery center and medical office building in Sheboygan.

■Aurora plans to invest $100 million in western Racine and Walworth counties, including building an ambulatory surgical center and clinic just outside Burlington and spending $30 million on renovations for its hospitals in Burlington and Elkhorn.

■Aurora plans to spend $35 million to expand and renovate the Aurora Psychiatric Hospital Campus in Wauwatosa.

The Froedtert & the Medical College of Wisconsin Center for Advanced Care will be where patients arriving for surgery, cardiac catheterization and interventional radiology procedures register. That now takes place at nine different sites throughout the hospital.

One design feature — "fins" on the front of the building — was put in place to distinguish the building and make it easier for patients to find.

The building has 102 exam rooms and 56 pre-operation and recovery rooms.

One floor will be "shell space" for future growth.

Froedtert Hospital had the advantage of starting from scratch, and Seabrook worked with the architects and others on the design.

"We had physician input for every detail," he said.

Almost every room is similar. That's the norm for new hospitals as standardization and checklists have become key parts of initiatives to improve the quality of health care.

"We were obsessed with standardization," Seabrook said.

"It just came to the point where the facilities are so aged and outdated that we have to replace them," Buck said.