Each fall, Coloradans share experiences of the season: beautiful, clear, crisp days; yellow-gold aspen in the high country; and ballot measures intended to enshrine special-interest ideas in constitutional law.

This year, Colorado voters have two constitutional measures to consider. The first, Amendment 67, relates to “personhood”; and the second, Amendment 68, would allow casino gambling at the Arapahoe Park horse-racing track near Aurora.

Voters would be well-advised to look askance at both of these amendments. The reasons have nothing to do with the merits of the proposals or the right of voters to amend their constitution. It has everything to do with Colorado’s seriously flawed amendment process and the inability to revise or rationalize the constitution in any practical way.

Crippled process

In Colorado, instead of being able to build public policy on a solid foundation, we struggle with an accidental constitution. Colorado’s crippled constitutional process begins with the ease of amendment, where the basic requirement is money. In Colorado, as in other states, it is perfectly legal to hire individuals to collect the relatively small number of signatures needed to get a proposed constitutional measure placed on the ballot. All this makes Colorado a perfect place for well-funded special interests, sometimes from out of state, to experiment with their latest ideas.

As a proposed amendment is developed and then brought to the ballot, there is no process for relating the measure to existing provisions already contained in the constitution. The result is a document characterized by internal conflicts and unintended consequences. For example, it is not likely that supporters of constitutional Amendment 23 intended that additional funding for K-12 education should come at the expense of higher education. However, that’s essentially what happened when Amendment 23, the TABOR amendment and an economic downturn came together.

Similarly, the Gallagher amendment, which was referred to voters by the legislature after public discussion, was not intended to disadvantage the very businesses that create Colorado’s jobs. But that has been one of the unanticipated outcomes as the interaction between Gallagher and other constitutional provisions has shifted the property tax burden to nonresidential property.

Too easy to amend

The ease of amending Colorado’s constitution and the resulting internal conflicts might be rationalized as the inevitable outcome of the disorderly process of democracy. Such a sanguine view would be understandable if there were an orderly way to revise the constitution and rectify problems. Unfortunately, it doesn’t work that way. In the 138 years since the Colorado Constitution was adopted, almost none of the more than 150 amendments enacted has been removed or realigned to improve the functioning or effectiveness of the document. Yet new amendments continue to be stuffed into the constitution. Consequently, Colorado now has one of the nation’s longest constitutions.

Colorado’s constitution is replete with policy matters that would be far better expressed in statute rather than chiseled, virtually forever, into the constitution. Unlike basic constitutional principles — foundational matters that should change only slowly — operating policies need to respond to the times. When detailed, statutory-like provisions are frozen in the constitution and impervious to change, it can become difficult or impossible for public officials to make timely and effective policy decisions.

Colorado does not need more amendments clogging the state’s constitution. And there is, of course, an alternative. Statutory citizen initiatives or referenda — actions intended to amend Colorado statutes, not the constitution — can address nearly any topic that one might imagine.

More fundamentally, developing effective processes for amending, revising and updating Colorado’s constitution should be addressed by the legislature and governor as matters of urgent concern. Recommendations from the University of Denver’s Strategic Issues Panel on the Colorado Constitution (www.du.edu/issues) can serve as a point of departure for discussion. Until such reforms are undertaken, citizens would be wise to carefully examine statutory proposals while just saying “no” to constitutional amendments.

Jim Griesemer is a professor at the University of Denver, where he directs DU’s Strategic Issues Program.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.