MONTCLAIR, NJ - The following positions are available in Montclair Township:

Job Title: Human Resources Generalist

Summary: The Human Resources Generalist is responsible for performing HR-related duties on a professional level and works closely with senior HR management. This position carries out responsibilities in the following functional areas: benefits administration processes e.g. health care, dental, prescription, workmen’s compensation, FMLA, and ACA compliance; employee relations, training and performance management, on boarding, policy implementation and recruitment/employment and benefit administration. This position requires liaison with payroll/pension for salary updates, incremental salary increases and health care updates. The Human Resource Generalist will be the point of contact/liaison for benefit third parties. Work is performed under general direction from the Director of Human Resources.

Sign Up for E-News

Duties: Performs benefits administration to include enrollment, claims resolution, change reporting, approving invoices for payment and communicating benefit information to employees. Responsible for processing personnel actions (hires, terminations, pay, title changes, promotions, healthcare etc.) in Talent Management system. Conducts recruitment effort for all exempt and nonexempt personnel, students and temporary employees; conducts new-employee orientations; monitors career-pathing program and writes and places advertisements. Administers various human resource plans and procedures for all company personnel; assists in the development and implementation of personnel policies and procedures; prepares and maintains employee handbook and policies and procedures manual. Participates in developing department goals, objectives and systems, administrative staff meetings and attends other meetings and seminars. Assists in evaluation of reports, decisions and results of department in relation to established goals; recommends new approaches, policies and procedures to effect continual improvements in efficiency of the department and services performed. Maintains human resource information system records and compiles reports from the database; maintains compliance with federal and state regulations concerning employment; receives and reviews source documents for accuracy and completeness; researches and resolves inconsistent/incorrect data by working with appropriate departments. Performs administration, compilation and processes of compliance for the Affordable Care Act; develops, generates, and distributes a variety of standard reports and summaries; surfaces process issues or concerns and recommends appropriate improvements/solutions; coordinates HR team and vendor teams to ensure accuracy of data across multiple platforms. Performs other related duties as required and assigned.

Requirements: Bachelor’s degree highly preferred; applicable experience may be considered in lieu of degree. Municipal experience preferred; two years (2) years’ experience with HR systems such as ADP Workforce Now, PeopleSoft, or Prime Point; two years (2) experience as Human Resources Generalist; PHR or SPHR preferred. Successful candidate will be extremely detail oriented and able to process sensitive information in a timely manner, plus have thorough knowledge of MS Excel, Word and PowerPoint.

Salary: DOQ, includes health benefits

Apply: Send cover letter, resume and salary history to: Ms. Braedon Gregory, Human Resources Generalist, Township of Montclair, 205 Claremont Avenue, Montclair, New Jersey 07042 or emailbgregory@montclairnjusa.org

Closing Date: January 14, 2016