Chapter offers corn maze, pumpkins and more

Members of the Fleming FFA chapter are ready to give those who dare enter their corn maze at Stahley Farms a fright. ( Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

If you go What: Fleming FFA Corn Maze and Pumpkin Patch When: 9 a.m. to 10 p.m. Saturday, 4 to 8 p.m. Monday-Friday Where: Stahley Farms, 19356 C.R. 26 Cost: $6, $1 goes to flood relief More info: Visit the Fleming FFA Chapter page on Facebook

The fun begins today at Stahley Farms, where the Fleming FFA chapter is putting on a corn maze and pumpkin sales, along with other family activities.

Thursday night, students gathered at the site to discuss their plans for haunting the maze as well as their other assignments.

But the work didn't begin then. Pumpkins were planted in two fields, one in Merino and the other in Fleming, over the summer, and students have been helping out at the patches, learning about the production side of agriculture. Growing the pumpkins wasn't a new experience for all the students — chapter president McCall Etl said she's done it before. But she's never played the role of a ghoul before, and said she'll have to find some inspiration before heading into the corn to scare visitors.

Starting at 9 a.m. today, visitors are welcome to pick out a pumpkin from the hundreds available and ride the bucket train. While the corn maze is prepared, the ground was still pretty wet Thursday night from recent rains, so its opening may be delayed. Updates on closures will be posted on the Fleming FFA Chapter Facebook page, Etl said, as well as shared with local media.

Advertisement

In addition to the entertainment aspect, Tim Stahley, Colorado FFA president and son of Fleming FFA adviser Randy Stahley, said it's also an opportunity to educate people outside of agriculture about the industry. Less than 2 percent of the U.S. population is involved in agricultural production, he said.

Tim Stahley said the activities will give "a taste of life on the farm."

The maze will feature 11 stations where there will be ag-related facts and figures. Visitors will receive a punch card so they can show that they've made it all the way through the field.

It's also an educational opportunity for the students. In addition to the hands-on experience of growing the pumpkins, they also will learn about the business aspect of agriculture, Stahley said.

The activities run from 9 a.m. to about 10 p.m. Saturdays, with the haunting of the corn maze beginning at dark, around 7:30 p.m. Monday through Friday the farm is open from 4 to 8 p.m. Stahley Farms is located 19356 C.R. 26, across the railroad tracks from Iris Drive. Admission is $6 per person; $1 of that price will go to Colorado flood relief through the Colorado FFA.

Contact Journal-Advocate managing editorSara Waite at 970-526-9310 or swaite@journal-advocate.com