“This is a good day,” Obama tells the nation in rare Sunday morning address

President Obama praised the release of Americans held prisoner in Iran on Sunday, and the lifting of billions of dollars in international sanctions on the Islamic Republic as part of a landmark nuclear accord.

Citing both developments as victories of “smart” diplomacy, Obama hailed the U.S. government for working with Iran to resolve the issues.

“This is a good day because once again we’re seeing what is possible with strong American diplomacy,” Obama said. “America can do — and has done — big things when we work together.”

Also Read: Iran Releases Jason Rezaian, Jailed Washington Post Reporter

The four U.S. citizens were exchanged for seven Iranians imprisoned or charged in the United States. Among the Americans freed were Washington Post reporter Jason Rezaian, Saeed Abedini, a pastor from Idaho, Amir Hekmati, a former Marine from Flint, Michigan and Nosratollah Khosravi-Roodsari. A fifth prisoner, American student Matthew Trevithick, was released separately on Saturday, a U.S. official said.

A Swiss plane carrying Rezaian, Abedini and Hekmati left Tehran on Sunday, Reuters reported. “We can confirm that our detained U.S. citizens have been released and that those who wished to depart Iran have left,” a senior Obama administration official told Reuters.

Rezaian, 39, a dual citizen of the United States and Iran, was arrested in July 2014. Iran convicted him of espionage last year.

Also Read: Washington Post Reporter Blasts Obama Administration Over His Iran Imprisonment

“Several Americans unjustly detained by Iran are finally coming home,” Obama said Sunday. “I gave these families my word.”

In his address, the President also spoke about the nuclear accord with Iran.

“Yesterday marked a milestone in preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon,” he said. “Most of important of all, we achieved this historic progress through diplomacy, without resorting to another war in the Middle East.”

He went on to insist that “Iran will not get its hands on a nuclear bomb.”

9 Most Memorable Political Ads of the 2016 Presidential Race, So Far (Video) After GOP frontrunner Donald Trump mocked a reporter with a disability, Ohio Gov. John Kasich shot back with an ad titled "Is He Worthy?" Kasich, who's been hovering in the single digits in national polls, may not win the 2016 race, but he definitely scored some points with one of the best attack ads of the 2016 presidential election.

Gov. Kasich also had one of the best biographical ads of the season. The spot produced by New Day for America, the Super PAC supporting Kasich, has the Ohio governor speaking directly to the camera, beginning his story by talking about his late father, a mailman.

Sen. Bernie Sanders impressed pundits and voters alike when he launched his biographical ad earlier this year. The spot quickly goes through Sanders’ life introducing him as an “honest leader.”

In an interview with Rolling Stone magazine published in September, Trump made disparaging remarks about former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina, the only woman in the Republican field. "Look at that face!" the real estate mogul said. "Would anyone vote for that?" Fiorina hit back with a sleek ad, paid for by the Carly for America Committee. "This is the face of a 61-year-old woman. I am proud of every year and every wrinkle," Fiorina said.

Hillary Clinton ended years of speculation on whether she would run for president a second time with this political ad in April. The former secretary of state was praised for not focusing on herself but rather on the people she's hoping to help. Clinton appears in the last 17 seconds of the 2:18 minute video that has garnered close to 5 million views. It also made history as the first official presidential announcement video to feature a same-sex couple.

Clinton's scored even more points when she aired four TV ads in Iowa and New Hampshire during the GOP debate in Boulder, Colorado, in October. Simple and to the point, the spots focused on four different women, using their stories to make the case for equal pay, higher wages and affordable college.

Just one day after Trump famously announced Lindsey Graham's cell phone number during a televised campaign rally in July, the South Carolina senator found the perfect way to respond. In a short video produced by IJReview titled “How to Destroy Your Cell Phone With Lindsey Graham,” the 2016 candidate could be seen testing a myriad of ways to obliterate his mobile device. The video not only managed to show the senator's lighter side, it clocked an eye-popping 2 million views.

You don't have to like Ben Carson to appreciate this spot. Titled, "These Hands," the ad features people from all walks of life with the two-word phrase printed on their palms. As they look straight into the camera, the ad lists their individual accomplishments and occupations, with an inspirational soundtrack to strike just the right note.

Perhaps one of the best political ads of the year was one that never aired. Laid to a voiceover from Biden’s commencement speech at Yale University Class Day earlier this year, "My Redemption" was produced by the Draft Biden Super PAC. It was supposed to air during the first Democratic debate in Las Vegas in October but was pulled after Biden said it treaded on "sacred ground." The spot opens with the story of the 1972 car accident that killed Biden's first wife, Neilia, and their 13-month-old daughter, Naomi. Previous ; Next 1 of 9 TheWrap Rewind 2015: From Hillary Clinton’s “Getting Started” to Ben Carson’s “These Hands,” here are the best campaign ads candidates have put out since the race for the Oval Office began this year After GOP frontrunner Donald Trump mocked a reporter with a disability, Ohio Gov. John Kasich shot back with an ad titled "Is He Worthy?" Kasich, who's been hovering in the single digits in national polls, may not win the 2016 race, but he definitely scored some points with one of the best attack ads of the 2016 presidential election.