The knives are out for John Kasich as he prepares for his second Republican debate. Read on in today's Ohio Politics Roundup.

Targeting John Kasich: Sen. Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire "appeared to take a swipe at ... Kasich by posting an open letter to all presidential candidates advising them to avoid doing exactly what the Ohio governor had just done," reports Politico's Eliza Collins. "Ayotte reminded candidates that she was a strong opponent of the congressionally authorized base re-alignment and closure process, known as BRAC. ...

"Her comments come just a week after Kasich, stood at [the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard] and praised the BRAC process, saying it kept people 'on their toes.' ... Ayotte has not formally endorsed a candidate, but she has close ties to Jeb Bush and Lindsey Graham."

Fight night? Kasich "is bracing for an attack," at tonight's second Republican debate in California. His chief strategist, John Weaver, tells me to expect some sharp elbows.

The sharpest might come from Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, once one of Kasich's three main rivals and now a candidate on a downward slope. He could hit Kasich on Medicaid expansion – a key component of Obamacare that Walker has rejected and Kasich has embraced. Yet Walker's health care agenda in Wisconsin has relied on Obamacare – a point not lost on a spokeswoman for the pro-Kasich New Day for America.

"As with almost every other issue he's been asked about during this campaign, Scott Walker can't seem to get his record straight on Obamacare," said Connie Wehrkamp.

Who's the boss? Every month I compile what list-lovers know as "power rankings" – a stab in the dark at who will be the last presidential candidate standing at next summer's Republican National Convention in Cleveland. And every month my boss, Chris Quinn, wonders what on earth I am thinking. So I decided to let him grill me on camera.

Courting young professionals: Kasich is "slightly ahead of where we thought we would be money-wise," Bob Rusbuldt, Kasich's Washington steering committee chairman, tells Alexandra Jaffe of NBC News. Jaffe also reports that Team Kasich is "planning a major fundraising swing through D.C. in early October. One fundraising event will take place in Virginia on Oct. 5, and two more – one focused on young professionals that will cost only $25 to attend – will take place the next day in Washington, D.C."

Coffin ad stirs controversy: "Democratic-leaning veterans are criticizing GOP Sen. Rob Portman for using a photo of flag-draped coffins in an online ad that bashes former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland" – a probable Portman challenger next year – "for backing the pending nuclear deal with Iran," reports Sabrina Eaton of the Northeast Ohio Media Group. "Portman's campaign defends the ad and accuses Democrats of playing politics."

Not quite an undisclosed location: Former Vice President Dick Cheney headlined an Ohio Republican Party fundraiser Tuesday night in Columbus that was closed to reporters. Here's a tweet from GOP Chairman Matt Borges:

What an honor to have Dick Cheney here with us tonight to support the Ohio Republican Party. pic.twitter.com/hdgjlqU2u1 — Matt Borges (@ChairmanBorges) September 15, 2015

Democrats need not apply: Kasich-backed Superintendent Richard Ross "told the state school board [Tuesday] that he is 'angry' and 'disappointed' by the charter school data 'rigging' that went on at the Ohio Department of Education," reports The Plain Dealer's Patrick O'Donnell, "but resisted any suggestion that an investigation is needed, other than by other state officials."

All of those officials are Republicans.

Fall preview: "Ohio lawmakers will return this month with a few significant issues left over from the spring, such as a charter-school overhaul bill and some new efforts on unemployment benefits and Planned Parenthood funding," reports Jim Siegel of the Columbus Dispatch. "Senate President Keith Faber, R-Celina, will soon introduce a bill that diverts public funding from any entity associated with performing abortions."

More on the charter school front: The Ohio Supreme Court ruled Tuesday that a charter school operator "was justified in charging 10 Northeast Ohio charter schools to keep computers, desks, and other property bought with taxpayer dollars," reports NEOMG's Jeremy Pelzer. "In a split decision, Ohio's highest court upheld contracts between the schools and their operator, White Hat Management."

More on GE, a story that has spilled onto the Ohio political scene this week: "We were told of GE's strong displeasure with Ohio elected officials' opposition to the Export-Import Bank," Johnna Reeder, president and chief executive of Cincinnati's job-creation agency, tells the Cincinnati Enquirer. "I cannot speculate on the company's reasons to ultimately not consider Greater Cincinnati for their headquarters."

U.S. Rep. Jim Jordan of Urbana "has led the GOP's crusade against the Ex-Im Bank in Washington." Kasich also has expressed opposition to the bank.

GE "will move about 500 U.S. jobs overseas to avoid losing business to foreign rivals, a decision the company said was prompted by the lapse of the U.S. Export-Import Bank's charter earlier this summer," reports Nick Timiraos of the Wall Street Journal.

Subscribe to our daily National Politics newsletter, which includes Ohio Politics Roundup, here. Bookmark the Roundup: Find each morning's roundup and past editions here. Tips or links? Send here. Follow along on Twitter: @henryjgomez.