As Donald Trump and his loyal base of voters rattle the Republican establishment, Texans in Congress are mostly unscathed by grass-roots activists pushing for sweeping change in Washington.

In the March 1 Texas primaries, every U.S. representative was renominated, and just one faces a serious challenge in the fall. It’s a curious contrast from the mood reflected in the presidential contest and recent midterm elections, where some lawmakers have fallen.

Members of Congress are extremely unpopular, serving as punching bags for Republican and Democratic activists.

“The old saying is that everyone hates Congress but loves their congressman,” said Republican political consultant Vinny Minchillo.

But Minchillo and others concede there’s not a lot of love lost for anybody on Capitol Hill. The failure of tea party activists and other conservatives to dislodge members of Congress stems from their lack of resources and inability to slate formidable challengers.

“In Texas, none of the challengers had the one ingredient absolutely necessary for success in Texas politics — money,” Minchillo said.

In one of the most-watched local congressional races, Dallas Republican Pete Sessions beat back a challenge from several challengers, including tea party-backed Russell Ramsland. Two years earlier, Sessions was targeted by tea party activists for what they described as not doing enough to derail the Affordable Care Act. He beat Garland tea party leader Katrina Pierson, who is now the national spokeswoman for GOP presidential front-runner Donald Trump.

“Pete Sessions, perceived as not conservative enough, allegedly had a target on his back,” Minchillo said. “Pete was able to swat away the opponents just as easily as he knocked off Katrina Pierson. Maybe even more easily.’’

Federal lawmakers in Texas have also learned lessons from their fallen counterparts in other places, including the Legislature. In 2014 well-funded challengers shocked local incumbents in the state Senate, including John Carona of Dallas. In that race, businessman Don Huffines had plenty of campaign cash and the backing of a coalition of tea party and libertarian activists.

Members of the Texas GOP delegation to Congress watched in horror but were able to prepare for challengers to their own seats.

A similar warning shot came in 2012, when Ted Cruz beat establishment stalwart David Dewhurst for the Senate seat once held by Republican Kay Bailey Hutchison. John Cornyn, now the state’s senior senator, left nothing to chance. He raised tens of millions and made the proper overtures to grass-roots voters.

Not all congressional incumbents have escaped voters looking for change. Ralph Hall, the long-serving congressman from the Rockwall-based 4th District, was ousted by former Heath Mayor John Ratcliffe in 2014.

But unlike other challengers, Ratcliffe, a former U.S. attorney, had an impressive résumé and solid enough fundraising. Even so, it was probably Hall’s age (He was 90 at the time) that most contributed to his loss.

Activists looking to shake up Congress need better candidates with more resources, but they won’t quit. Though staunch Texas conservatives don’t have many victories at the federal level, they have certainly gotten the attention of incumbents, who are now making sure their conservative credentials are intact.

Cruz gets unlikely support

First, Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina. Now, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush.

Presidential contender Ted Cruz is finding support in unlikely places. The senator from Texas, known for his push to shut down the government to defund the Affordable Care Act, is generally disliked by his peers in Washington and in the GOP establishment.

But in his uphill battle against New York businessman Donald Trump, his old enemies are now friends of sort. They see him as their last chance to wrestle the GOP presidential nomination from Trump, who has a solid delegate lead.

Cruz has welcomed the support. But will it hurt him with voters who have disdain for the establishment and are looking for an outsider?

Maybe, but he’ll need a united front to have any chance to catch Trump now.

Twitter: @gromerjeffers