Fred Palombi, 66, 'took the initiative'

The floor of the historic, 110-year-old U.S. Post Office building in downtown Boulder is an elegant mix of white terrazzo tile and pink marble, but one would never have known that as of about a month ago.

A century of wear dirtied the floor so thoroughly that it's held a grubby, dark brown shade for so long that none of the post office's current employees could recall its actual colors.

As a custodian for 16 years at the USPS branch along Valmont Road in east Boulder, Fred Palombi was aware of the floor's filthy state, but when he transferred to the downtown location, the grime's days were officially numbered.

"I always knew what the floors looked like, and I never agreed with the maintenance manager that they should be like that. I had no ability to change it, though," says Palombi, a scrappy 66-year-old who talks fast and with an unmistakable Jersey accent. "Once I got over here, I really took it upon myself."

And so he has, almost every morning, starting sometimes as early as 4 a.m., for the last month or so.

First he cleaned off the foyer, just to prove to his boss, Postmaster Nancy Solano, that it could be done.

"He took the initiative and I've just kind of let him roll with it," Solano says.

Advertisement

He's been slowly clearing off the rest of the first floor, alone at sunrise before the customers roll in to track mud. Thirty-four hours so far, he says, with another three or four months of work left. His plan is to clear off all the dirt and then polish the entire surface.

It's a project to which he is deeply committed, often researching online about different products and techniques for hours on end. And, to the extent that it's possible to get people riled up about clean floors, he's done it.

"I think he has an amazing idea," says custodian Patricia Alvarez, a colleague on the maintenance staff for seven years, and now an on-and-off aide in the floor project. "I actually thought that what he was doing was impossible."

Customers, evidently, also thought so.

"'Good gravy,' they tell me. 'I didn't even know the floor looked like that,'" he beams. "I've actually had older women give me fist bumps."

On another occasion, Palombi recalls, he was working outside of the building when a regular noticed him, and applauded his work with the floors.

"That guy tried to give me a fist bump, too," he says.

Watching his eyes, it's obvious that he's proud, and that feeling is obviously well earned.

"It's a historic building and I'd just like to see it restored as best I'm capable," he says. "I get a lot of satisfaction from seeing what I've done, from that dark floor to that nice pink and white. It makes me feel good to see the improvement."

He plans to retire next December, and has vowed to polish all floors and baseboards, plus the brass panels on every door, by the time he leaves.

Palombi isn't worried about keeping busy in retirement; he's put in close to 50,000 hours hiking in Utah, and he'll move there from his northeast Boulder home as soon as he gets the chance.

But for now, he's not quitting until the floors sparkle. And to him, that's a matter of principle more than anything else.

"If you can have a job — any job — and have that feeling that you've achieved something, that you've made something better than it was before you started, I think that's a good job to do."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness