Wellness programs can help employers offset the expense of healthcare. Uncertainty over the impact of health care reform on their businesses has created plenty of anxiety among HR managers and those in the C-Suite. A recent survey by ADP found almost half of large-company finance managers aren’t fully confident that they understand their responsibilities under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. At small companies, the study found, just 28 percent of those surveyed have developed any sort of plan for controlling their health benefits costs in the wake of health care reform. At large companies, that percent rose to 40 percent — still not very confidence-inspiring. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

EVALUATE 1. Know the requirements and deadlines: Don’t wallow in fears that are groundless with respect to your company. ADP says you should “invest the time and resources needed to clearly comprehend the act’s legal requirements and time frames in order to accommodate its tax implications and avoid penalties for non-compliance.” Establish a timeline with key milestones to help guide your process. 2. Determine administrative impact on your company: How will oversight of changes mandated by the PPACA increase administrative burden? “A prime example of an ACA provision with potentially large administrative impact is Shared Responsibility. Beginning in 2015, it requires tracking each employee’s full-time or part-time status every month, and maintaining that information as part of employee tax records.” Those kinds of requirements will clearly add to HR’s tasks, and may require additional manpower, at least while systems are being set up.

EDUCATE 4. Create a written summary of benefits and coverage for employees: This is a four-page (or less) summary of your plan you must provide your employees with. It must be clearly written. Make sure you obtain acknowledgement of receipt of the SBC from employees. 5. Notify your employees of public exchanges: This is the notification of insurance options due Oct. 1. Is this required? Yes. Will you be fined if you don’t do it? Maybe not. Do it anyway. It’s a great way to communicate with your workers.

ENROLL



Sign ’em up: If you have at least 50 full-time employees, you have to offer them affordable health coverage. Make sure you offer the opportunity to enroll to all eligibles. Then develop a system to track, update and report on employee eligibility and enrollment to maintain ongoing compliance. If you have at least 50 full-time employees, you have to offer them affordable health coverage. Make sure you offer the opportunity to enroll to all eligibles. Then develop a system to track, update and report on employee eligibility and enrollment to maintain ongoing compliance. 7. Enroll employees’ dependents: The law requires employers to offer coverage to qualifying dependent children of full-time employees up to age 26. You may also want to consider conducting a dependent eligibility audit, which typically show as many as 15 percent of dependents claimed by employees are not qualified for benefits.