I first learned about the challenge Americans face in obtaining access to healthcare in my early 20s, when I worked with community leaders in the public housing community. They were trying to bring health care into public housing to help residents avoid using emergency rooms for routine care. With a local funder, the Independence Foundation, we created nurse-managed health clinics in four housing developments, which are still in operation today.

While we improved access to care for public housing residents, we still did not solve the other part of the equation - access to health insurance. At least not until we got Obamacare, 20 years later.

One of the major coverage provisions of the law is the expansion of Medicaid eligibility for low-income individuals. In 2015, Governor Wolf implemented the Medicaid expansion in Pennsylvania, which helped low income and near-poor residents across the Philadelphia region and throughout Pennsylvania to obtain health coverage.

The Public Health Management Corporation’s 2015 Household Health Survey recently revealed the Medicaid expansion’s effect. The number of near-poor adults with coverage increased significantly. In the 2012 survey, 27.8% of the adult near-poor population (35,000) was uninsured, but in the recent survey, the percentage had dropped to 9.4%. This dramatic decrease underscores how important the Affordable Care Act is in improving access to insurance for at-risk and vulnerable individuals and families.

But has access to health insurance through the Medicaid expansion translated into improved access to primary and preventive care for the near-poor? The answer is a resounding yes. The recent survey revealed that almost 90% of Philadelphia’s near-poor adults have been to see a primary care provider, which is a significant increase since the last survey in 2013. The survey also revealed that routine preventive health screenings have gone up significantly in the last year for blood pressure, PAP smears and mammograms.

Through the expansion of Medicaid, President Obama and Governor Wolf have positively impacted the near-poor population in Philadelphia by providing increased access to health insurance coverage and enhanced access to preventive health care services.

-----

Have a health care question or frustration? Share your story »

Read more of Health Cents »