In November, Montana became the 30th state to extend health care coverage to low-income, working uninsured people. Last week, Michigan and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services entered into an agreement to continue its program that insures over 600,000 people. Both states are led by Republicans. Medicaid expansion is not a partisan issue. Governors and state legislatures on both sides of the aisle have concluded that there is no policy-related or economic reason to say no.

When the Affordable Care Act was signed into law, the American health care landscape changed dramatically. It has affected everyone — from individuals to families to businesses.

More than 1 million Floridians signed up for coverage through the ACA's insurance exchange, and communities such as Hialeah led the nation in enrollment. But many in Florida have fallen into a "coverage gap" — they earn too much to qualify for traditional Medicaid, but not enough to qualify for subsidies in the Health Insurance Marketplace.

According to recent reports, Florida has the third highest rate of uninsured people in the nation. When uninsured individuals get sick and aren't able to access primary care, they often wait until the very last minute when they are at their sickest and end up in the emergency room unable to pay for their care.

In 2013, the cost of uncompensated care totaled nearly $3 billion in Florida. Those costs are borne by insured families and businesses as a "hidden tax" in the form of rising health insurance premiums. This growing financial burden needs our attention.

Earlier this year, the debate on coverage between the Florida Senate and House of Representatives brought the 2015 Legislative session to an impasse. Lawmakers have yet to agree on solution, but Florida's health care challenges aren't going away any time soon.

Right now, businesses are paying for uncompensated care costs through increased health insurance premiums for their employees. This is a growing financial burden that needs our attention. In order to make health care more cost-effective, we must address the critical problem of uncompensated care.

When people have health care coverage, they stay healthier longer. With regular access to primary care, patients have a better chance of identifying and treating an undetected illness. From a business perspective, healthy employees equal a healthy business.

There are also major economic benefits for Florida if it chooses to extend health care coverage. Our state would save billions in general revenue, more than 121,000 jobs would be created and millions of dollars a year would be pumped into local economies.

Our tax dollars have already paid for the extension of health care coverage in our state. The funding has been made available through taxes on health insurers and durable medical equipment, as well as reductions in Medicaid and Medicare payments to Florida's hospitals. Turning down the federal funding means our state is not receiving health care coverage that our tax dollars are already paying for.

Research has shown that extending health care coverage will save money and alleviate the pressure of rising health care costs on business owners and most importantly, provide millions of people with the health care they need to be well. Other states have chosen to do the right thing, and it's time for Florida to do the same.

Julio Fuentes is president and CEO of the Florida State Hispanic Chamber of Commerce.